ABSTRACTS COLLECTION
Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics
(ESHG) Conference: e-Posters
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human Genetics 2022
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88–608; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-01026-1
Volume 30 | Supplement 1
Virtual ConferenceAugust 28-31, 2021
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was reviewed and
approved by the ESHG Scienti ﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract selections.
Disclosure Information: In order to help readers, form their own judgments of potential bias in published abstracts, authors are asked to
declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year
per company are considered "Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Signi ﬁcant".
Presenting author names are bolded in the contributor lists.
E-POSTERS
P01 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics
P01.001.A Frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions in
Turkish infertile men: Single Center Experience
Aysel KalayciYigin, Gizem Erdogan , Deniz Agirbasli, Mehmet Seven
Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty,
Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Fatih, Turkey.
Objective: Y chromosome microdeletions are the leading genetic
cause of male infertility and their detection is clinically relevant for
appropriate genetic counseling. Y chromosome includes genes for
testicular development and spermatogenesis. The aim of thisstudy was to establish the frequency of the Y chromosomemicrodeletions in Turkish infertile men who referred to our center
with severe oligozoospermia and azoospermia.
Materials and Methods: In our study, 396 infertile men referred
toİstanbul University- Cerrahpa şa, Cerrahpa şa Medical Faculty
Department of Medical Genetics (GETAM) between 2016 to 2020
with azoospermia/severe oligospermia. We evaluated microdele-
tions of the Y-chromosome STS markers AZFa, AZFb and AZFc,ZFX/ZFY, terminal sY160 regions by using DNA Fragment analysis.
Results: Among the 396 infertile men, we determined 30 cases
of Y chromosome micro- deletions (7.57%). Among 30 cases, AZFcmicrodeletions were found in 18 cases (60%), AZFa microdeletionsin 4 cases (13.3%), AZFb microdeletions in 1 case (3.3%), AZFa,b,c
in 4 cases (13.3%), AZFb,c in 3 cases (10%). Our ﬁndings are
consistent with the literature.Conclusion: Our results are similar to the previous studies
which have mostly reported a frequency of less than 10% for Y
chromosome microdeletions. The etiology of infertility remains
unknown and novel genes other than y chromosome microdele-tions should be identi ﬁed with high throughput techniques.
A. KalayciYigin: None. G. Erdogan: None. D. Agirbasli: None.
M. Seven: None.
P01.002.B Serotonin transporter 5-HTTLPR genotypes and
trinucleotide repeats of androgen receptor exert a combina-torial effect on hormonal milieu in patients with lifelongpremature ejaculation
Shahzad Bhatti , Haroon Latif Khan, Sana Abbas, Yousuf Latif Khan
Lahore Institute of Fertility and Endocrinology, Hameed Latif
Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan.
Premature ejaculation is one of the most common sexual
disorders in men due to the uncontrolled modulation of spinal
reﬂexes. In this study, we investigate the combinatorial effects of
trinucleotide repeats of androgen receptor and allelic variants ofthe 5-HTTLPR gene on sex steroids, hypophyseal hormones, sexual
performance, and premature ejaculation assessment parameters
among evidence-based lifelong premature ejaculation subjects. Atotal of 271 patients consulting for evidence-based lifelongpremature ejaculatory dysfunction were selected in this study.
The control group consists of 155 men with normal IELT (>4 min).
The study revealed that the subjects who have the highest ( ≥26)
CAG stretch depicted signi ﬁcantly higher serum oxytocin levelswww.nature.com/ejhg
1234567890();,:(102.1 pg/ml; n =126, p < 0.001) compared with the control group
(71.2 pg/ml; n =75, p=<0.001). Almost 33 (26.1%) lifelong
premature ejaculatory patients had AR variant of longer ( ≥26)
CAG repeats was homozygous for S alleles (SS), 45 (35.7%) washomozygous for L allele (LL), and 48 (38%) had the L/S or S/Lgenotype of 5-HTTLPR gene. Homozygous (SS) alleles have a
signi ﬁcant positive correlation (r =0.44, p < 0.0001) with the high
score of BDI-II (39.1, n =126, p < 0.001). However, LL alleles have
shown a signi ﬁcant positive correlation with PEDT (r =0.46, p <
0.001) and a negative correlation with self-estimated IELT. The
study design elaborates that androgen receptor trinucleotide
repeats and 5-HTTLPR genotypes have a combinatorial impact onhormonal milieu and sexual function regarding evidence-basedlifelong premature ejaculatory dysfunction patients.
S. Bhatti: None. H. Latif Khan: None. S. Abbas: None. Y. Latif
Khan: None.
P01.003.C Challenge in prenatal diagnostics of severe skeletal
dysplasias: a case of Achondrogenesis type 2
Natalija Krasovskaja
1,2,A u šra Matulevi čienė1,2, Kamil ėŠiauryt ė1,2,
Gabriel ėŽukauskait ė2, Algirdas Utkus1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros
Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Achondrogenesis type 2 (ACG2) belongs to a group
of most severe type 2 collagen related skeletal dysplasias withautosomal dominant inheritance. Characteristic phenotype fea-tures include short stature, extreme micromelia, narrow chest,
pulmonary hypoplasia, edema. The condition can be diagnosed
prenatally.
Materials and methods: Primegravida, 23 years of age, was
referred at 21st week of gestation due to asymmetrical fetal
growth restriction. Fetal ultrasound revealed micromelia, narrowchest, prominent abdomen, brachydactyly, talipes, polyhydram-nios. Pedigree was uninformative. Sanger sequencing of DNA from
amniotic ﬂuid identi ﬁed no pathogenic changes in the FGFR3
gene. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of skeletal dysplasiagene panel was performed.
Results: NGS skeletal dysplasia gene panel identi ﬁed variant
NM_001844.5:c.[4387_4389del] ;[4387=] (rs527236145) in exon 54
ofCOL2A1 gene of uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance ( in silico analysis:
Provean: deleterious, Varsome: likely pathogenic). Segregation
analysis in the family showed de novo origin. Several therapeutic
amniocentesis were done to reduce severe polyhydramnios.Pregnancy was carried to 37 gestational weeks. Male newbornwas delivered by Caesarean section, birth weight - 2050 g, height -
33 cm, Apgar score - 5/8. Condition quickly derteriorated due to
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. Palliative care was administered.Baby died in 11 days.
Conclusions: Precise fetal ultrasound is essential for early
suspicion of ACG2. Clinical diagnosis enables advanced diagnostic
methods to be applied in timely manner and informed decisionson prenatal and postnatal care to be made.
N. Krasovskaja: None. A. Matulevi čienė:None. K.Šiauryt ė:
None. G.Žukauskait ė:None. A. Utkus: None.
P01.004.D The impact of FMR1 allelic score in infertile females
with preferential X-chromosome inactivation
Bárbara Rodrigues
1,2, Emídio Vale-Fernandes2,3, Daniela Sousa3,
Raquel Brandão3, Nuno Maia1,2, Isabel Marques1,2, Rosário Santos1,2,Carla Leal3, Márcia Barreiro3, António José Arsénia Nogueira4, Paula
Jorge1,2
1Molecular Genetics Unit, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto
Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto(CHUP), Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,2Unit for Multidisciplinary
Research in Biomedicine (UMIB), Institute of Biomedical Sciences
Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto,
Portugal,3Centre for Medically Assisted Procreation/PublicGame-
teBank, Centro Materno-Infantil do Norte Dr. Albino Aroso (CMIN),
Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP), Porto, Portugal,
Porto, Portugal,4Center for Environmental and Marine Studies
(CESAM), Department of Biology, University of Aveiro, Aveiro,Portugal, Aveiro, Portugal.
Introduction: X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) occurs ran-
domly; however, skewing can occur in 3.2-3.5% of females.T h ea s s o c i a t i o no fX C Is k e w i n gw i t hp r e m a t u r eo v a r i a nf a i l u r e
and implication of a low FMR1 gene CGG number (CGGs < 26) in
ovarian dysfunction are still controversial. Aiming to test theeffect of the AGG interspers ions, our group developed a
mathematical model that combines the AGG interspersion
number and pattern as well as the FMR1 total repeat length.
We then tested if the FMR1 allelic score obtained correlates with
XCI pattern in females with idiopathic infertility.
Material and Methods: Blood samples from females at
reproductive age, in an infertility clinic setting: 40 infertile and27 potentially fertile females. Allelic score of each FMR1 allele was
determined using our mathematical model, as was XCI pattern
using HUMARA.
Results: No signi ﬁcant difference was observed between the
proportion of infertile cases in each equivalent and dissimilar allelic
combinations, respectively 25/41 and 15/26. In the equivalent
group one sample carried a 56 CGG premutated allele with two
AGG interspersions. The dissimilar group was enriched with low
FMR1 CGG genotypes (16/26; 62%), 63% being infertile females as
opposed to 39% (16/41) and 50% respectively in the equivalent
group.
Conclusions: The incidence of highly-skewed XCI (>90:10) was
statistically higher in the dissimilar group (80% versus 50%),
suggesting an association between allelic score and preferential
XCI. Although exploratory, this study suggests that such associa-tion may result from a protective FMR1 AGG interspersion pattern-
related effect or unknown X-chromosome-linked anomaly that
likely correlates with female infertility.
B. Rodrigues: None. E. Vale-Fernandes: None. D. Sousa: None.
R. Brandão: None. N. Maia: None. I. Marques: None. R. Santos:
None. C. Leal: None. M. Barreiro: None. A.J.A. Nogueira: None. P.
Jorge: None.
P01.006.B How simple is a simple genetic counseling?
Moran Echar
1, Amir Peleg1, Amalia Harari-Shacham1, Shirley
Modan1, Lena Sagi-Dain1,2
1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,2The Ruth and Bruce
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute ofTechnology, Haifa, Israel.
Introduction: Prenatal genetic counseling before amniocentesis
in uneventful pregnancies is considered to be a "simple"counseling. In some medical centers the duration of such
consultations is limited (to 15 minutes or less), to provide only
the basic explanation. The purpose of this study was to evaluatethe time required for such supposedly "simple" geneticconsultations.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
89
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Material and Methods: Data was collected from January 2018
until August 2020 of all patients undergoing genetic counseling
before amniocentesis in uneventful pregnancies, and were given
by four genetic counselors and two medical geneticists. We haveestimated the time required for each consultation.
Results: Of the 1085 consultations, 60.5% required additional
explanation. The reasons for extended counseling included
medical disorders of the woman or spouse (21.2%), carrier statefor autosomal recessive diseases (18.6%), genetic conditions of achild or previous pregnancy (9.6%), or medical disorders in the
extended family (79.1%). In 31.0% of patients, carrier screening
tests were recommended or added. The additional explanationswere estimated as short (up to 5 minutes) in 36.9% of the cases,intermediate (5 to 15 minutes) in 59.9%, and long (over 15
minutes) in 2.6% of cases. The consultation ’s length was not
affected from it being a ﬁrst or a recurrent consultation.
Discussion: This study re ﬂects the need for a proper genetic
consultation for all seemingly simple indications, with an
emphasis on detailed personal and family history. As over halfof the consultees required extended counseling beyond the basicexplanation, assigning suf ﬁcient time for the consultation is
important.
M. Echar: None. A. Peleg: None. A. Harari-Shacham: None. S.
Modan: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None.
P01.009.A Genetic analysis of azoospermic men by an
integrated NGS panel
Monika Logara Klari ć
1, Lovro Trgovec-Greif1, Lucija Žunić2, Filip
Roki ć1, Ana Vi čić3, Tihana Mari ć4, Ana Merkler5, Ana Katu šić
Bojanac4, Robert Belu žić1, Feodora Stipoljev3, Oliver Vugrek1, Maja
Barbali ć2,6
1Ruđer Bo škovic Institut, Zagreb, Croatia,2Genom Ltd., Zagreb,
Croatia,3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Clinical Hospital
"Sveti Duh", Zagreb, Croatia,4Department of Medical Biology,
University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,5Depart-
ment of Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb,Zagreb, Croatia,6Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Split, Split, Croatia.
Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletions, Klinefelter syn-
drome and CFTR mutations are the leading genetic causes of
azoospermia and are all analyzed by different molecular methods.
In addition, a number of candidate genes were related to infertilityin the last two decades.
Materials/Methods: We designed an NGS amplicon-based
panel that simultaneously analyzes all the known above-mentioned genetic variants as well as 11 additional genes recentlybeing associated with azoospermia and ran the analysis on 44
azoospermic men. Twelve samples with known genetic aetiology
were used to evaluate the performance of the NGS amplicon-based test. Remaining thirty-two samples consisted of azoosper-mic men with no de ﬁned cause of infertility. The panel consisted
of 393 amplicons covering regions of interest. In house bioinfor-
matic pipeline was developed to analyse the raw data.
Results: We correctly detected all genetic variants in men with
known genetic aetiology. In 32 samples with no de ﬁned cause of
infertility, we detected three Y chromosome microdeletions and 6
variants in selected genes that passed our ﬁltering criteria for
functional impact (in CFTR ,SYCE1L ,TEX15 and AR). Altogether, we
detected a genetic cause of azoospermia in 4 individuals and likely
causative variants in another 4 out of 32 individuals by runningour NGS amplicon-based panel.
Conclusions: This work showed that genetic variants associated
with male infertility could be detected by running only one assay.Moreover, customization of the panel with newly discovered
genes increases the chance of ﬁnding the genetic cause of male
patient infertility. Funding: The European Regional Development
Fund (KK.01.2.1.01.0113).
M. Logara Klari ć:None. L. Trgovec-Greif: None. L.Žunić:A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genom Ltd.. F. Roki ć:
None. A. Vi čić:None. T. Mari ć:None. A. Merkler: None. A.
Katu šićBojanac: None. R. Belu žić:None. F. Stipoljev: None. O.
Vugrek: None. M. Barbali ć:
A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Genom Ltd.
P01.010.B Molecular genetic carrier screening of in the
Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) (Russia)
Aitalina Sukhomyasova1,2, Anastasia Danilova1, Tatyana Grigor-
ieva1,2, Lutcia Gotovtseva1,2, Polina Golikova1, Nadezhda
Maksimova1
1North-Eastern Federal University named after M.K. Ammosov,
Medical Institute, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2"Republican Hospital
No. 1-National Center of Medicine", Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) is a region of
Russia with a high prevalence of some hereditary diseases
among the indigenous population, due to genetic and popula-
tion reasons and the founder effect.With the Medical GeneticCenter of the National Center of Medicine for people of Yakutnationality, molecular genetic carrier screening of major muta-
tions with 7 frequent autosomal recessive diseases is carried out:
Three M-syndrome, SOPH-syndrome, tyrosinemia type 1, neuro-nal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 6, non-syndromic type 1 Adeafness, type 1 methemoglobinemia, mucopolysaccharidosis-
plus syndrome.
Materials and Methods: peripheral blood samples with free
informed consent were taken from 404 pregnant women at early
prenatal screening and 341 women consulted for pregnancy
planning using in vitro fertilization. To detect mutations in 7diseases all 745 samples were analyzed by real-time PCR.
Results: out of 404 pregnant women examined, 105 (26%) were
heterozygous carriers of at least 1 hereditary disease, and 3
pregnant women were carriers of 3 diseases. 3 couples were carriersof the same disease as mucopolysaccharidosis-plus syndrome andSOPH syndrome. They were offered prenatal diagnosis.
Conclusions: a high frequency of mutation carriers is revealed
in the Yakut population, which is important both for familyplanning, as well as for the provision of medical and genetic
assistance and the expansion of molecular genetic screening
among the population of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). Thework was carried out within the framework of the state assign-ment of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
Russian Federation (project FSRG-2020-0 №14).
A. Sukhomyasova: None. A. Danilova: None. T. Grigorieva:
None. L. Gotovtseva: None. P. Golikova: None. N. Maksimova:
None.
P01.012.D Personalised non-invasive prenatal diagnosis
(NIPD) for maternally inherited variants in rare conditions
using droplet digital PCR
Joe Shaw
1,Ben Paternoster1, Maureen Ramos1, Sarah Nesbitt1,
Sophie Sheppard1, Lyn S. Chitty1,2, Natalie Chandler1
1NHS North Thames Genomic Laboratory Hub, London, United
Kingdom,2UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,
London, United Kingdom.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
90
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: NIPD for maternally-inherited variants is challen-
ging due to the high background of the maternal variant in cell
free DNA. Relative haplotype dosage is used clinically for commonX-linked and recessive conditions, but is not suitable forconsanguineous couples or those where there is no proband
DNA available, and is too expensive to permit validation for rare
disorders. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) offers the potential fordevelopment of NIPD assays personalised to maternal variants,
regardless of inheritance type, through relative mutation dosage.
Methods: ddPCR assays were designed for 24 pregnancies at
risk of X-linked recessive (14), X-linked dominant (1), autosomaldominant (7) and autosomal recessive (2) conditions. Assays were
optimised using maternal genomic DNA, before testing cfDNA
extracted from stored maternal plasma obtained from 10 weeksgestation. Fetal fraction was determined using ZFYor a paternally
inherited SNP for pregnancies bearing male and female fetuses,
respectively.
Results: ddPCR testing was concordant with fetal genotype
determined following invasive testing in 20 cases. Four cases, all
with fetal fractions <4%, were inconclusive. The analysis was
modi ﬁed to re ﬂect the different inheritance patterns, including a
case where both parents were affected with the commonachondroplasia variant, FGFR3 c.1138G>A. In this scenario, ddPCR
correctly predicted the fetus to be homozygous for the reference
allele with a fetal fraction of 2.6%.
Conclusion: ddPCR offers personalised NIPD for maternally
inherited variants, using only maternal samples regardless of
inheritance pattern. Funding was from the GOSH NIHR Biomedical
Research Centre. Samples were obtained from the RAPID samplebank.
J. Shaw: None. B. Paternoster: None. M. Ramos: None. S.
Nesbitt: None. S. Sheppard: None. L.S. Chitty: None. N.
Chandler: None.
P01.015.C Chromosomal abnormalities in prenataly identi ﬁed
cases with amniocentesis from south of Turkey
Ayfer Pazarbasi
1, Davut Alptekin1, Sabriye Kocaturk-Sel1, Inayet N.
Uslu1, Nermin S. Ilgaz1, Gulsevinc Ay-Aksoy1, Osman Demirhan1, Umit
Luleyap1, Mehmet B. Yilmaz1, Selim Buyukkurt2
1Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey,
2Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana,
Turkey.
Amniocentesis is a medical procedure used in prenatal diagnosis
of chromosomal abnormalities and very crucial for preventing thebirth of genetically defective fetuses in order to decrease theprevalence of genetic diseases in populations. A retrospective
review of our amniocentesis database for the period from January
2000 to February 2021 was carried out. The karyotyping of 8635fetuses was carried out in Department of Medical Biology from thesamples of amniotic ﬂuids which were sent from Department of
Gynecology and Obstetrics of Balcali Hospital. A standart
nomenclature has been developed to describe each of types ofabnormality found in human chromosomes. A total of 8635amniocentesis specimens were processed during the study period.
638 fetuses (7.38%) had various chromosomal abnormalities.
54.23% of abnormal karyotypes (346 cases) were numerical and43.57% (278 cases) were structural. Both numerical and structural
chromosomal aberrations were observed in 14 cases (2.19%). The
ratios were as: trisomy 21 (49.42%), trisomy 18 (18.49%),monosomy X (9.24%), trisomy 13 (6.64%), Triploidy (4.62%),Klinefelter Syndrome (3.46%), Trisomy X (1. 15%), XYY Syndrome
(0.86%), and the others in all numerical abnormalities. Thefrequent structural abnormalities were as: 46,XX/XY, inv(9) (p11;
q12)/(p11;q13)(27.69 %), 46,XX/XY, 1qh( +)(12.58%), 46,XY, Yqh(-)
(7.19%), 46,XX/XY, 16qh( +)(6.83%), 46,XX/XY, 9qh( +)(4.31%) and
46,XY, Yqh( +)(4.31%). Balanced and unbalanced translocations,
deletions and duplications were also found in less ratio. Accordingto the literature and our results, advanced maternal age is the
main cause of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Fetal chromoso-
mal abnormality ratio that we found was 7.38%. This ratioemphasize the importance of prenatal diagnosis.
A. Pazarbasi: None. D. Alptekin: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None.
I.N. Uslu: None. N.S. Ilgaz: None. G. Ay-Aksoy: None. O.
Demirhan: None. U. Luleyap: None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S.
Buyukkurt: None.
P01.016.D Is it time to report carrier state for recessive
disorders in every microarray analysis? - A pilot model based
on hearing loss genes deletions
Lena Sagi-Dain
1,Idit Maya2, Lina Basel2
1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,2Rabin Medical Center, Petach
Tikva, Israel.
Purpose: To examine the implications of reporting heterozy-
gous losses of recessive genes in Chromosomal Microarray
Analysis (CMA), based on the incidence of microdeletions ofthree common hearing impairment genes in the local cohortand the prevalence of sequence variants in these genes in
worldwide databases.
Methods: Prevalence of heterozygous microdeletions in OTOA
and STRC genes, as well as deletions in the DFNB1 locus
encompassing GJB6 gene, was determined using electronic database
of Rabin Medical Center. ClinVar archive and Deafness Variation
Database were used to generate a list of clinically signi ﬁcant
sequence variants in these three genes, as well as GJB2 gene, and
estimation of the frequency of sequence variants was performed.
Results: Of the 19,189 CMA tests were performed in our
laboratory, 107 STRC microdeletions were found (0.56%), followed
in frequency by OTOA deletions (39, 0.2%), and DFNB1 locus
deletions (10, 0.05%). The estimated risk for a hearing loss in the
examined individual carrying the microdeletion was estimated as0.11-0.67% for STRC , 0.016-0.13% for OTOA , and 1.9-7.5% in the
DFNB1 locus (including double heterozygocity with GJB2 clinically
signi ﬁcant sequence variants). The risks were higher in speci ﬁc
populations.
Conclusions: We believe that that general decision whether to
report or to disregard such incidental ﬁndings cannot be part of a
uniform policy, but rather based on a detailed evaluation of origin-speci ﬁc variants for each gene, with a careful consideration and
discussion whether to include the microdeletion in the ﬁnal report
for each patient.
L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Maya: None. L. Basel: None.
P01.018.B Prenatal craniofacial malformations should be
analysed by whole exome sequencing in addition to chromo-somal microarray analysis
Rachel Michaelson-Cohen
1, Amihood Singer2, Lena Sagi-Dain3,
Reeval Segel1
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem Israel,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Department of Community Genetics, Public Health
Services, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel,3Genetics Institute,
Carmel Medical Center, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, TechnionInstitute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
91
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Craniofacial malformations (CFMs) account for
approximately 15% of congenital malformations. Genetic evalua-
tion is important for decision-making processes in couples dealingwith fetal CFMs, yet previous assessments are limited. Ourobjective was to examine the detection rate of clinically signi ﬁcant
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) ﬁndings in pregnancies
with CFMs.
Methods: Data from all CMA tests in pregnancies with
sonographic diagnosis of CFMs (cleft lip and/or palate, malforma-
tions of eyes, nose or ears, micro-retrognathia etc) performed
between January 2016 and April 2020 were retrospectivelyobtained from the Israeli Ministry of Health computerizeddatabase. Rates of clinically signi ﬁcant CMA results in fetuses with
CFMs were compared to baseline risk, based on a local cohort of
pregnancies with no major sonographic anomalies.
Results: A total of 111 CMA tests were performed due to fetal
CFMs. In the 18 pregnancies with non-isolated CFMs, three (16.7%)
clinically signi ﬁcant CMA results were detected, a signi ﬁcantly
higher frequency compared to the control cohort, for whom therate of pathogenic CMA is 1.4% (RR 14.1 (95% CI 3.7-54.2)). Of the
93 cases with isolated CFMs, four (4.3%) clinically signi ﬁcant
pathogenic CMA results were detected, a rate slightly increasedcompared to the control population (RR 3.17 (95% CI 1.02-9.83)).
Discussion: Fetal CFMs diagnosed by sonogram, whether
isolated or associated with additional sonographic defects, are
associated with abnormal CMA ﬁndings. However, when isolated,
abnormal CMA rate is only slightly higher than the background
risk. Therefore, combining CMA and whole exome sequencing
should be considered for optimizing genetic evaluation of CFMs.
R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. A. Singer: None. L. Sagi-Dain:
None. R. Segel: None.
P01.019.C Web-based interactive educational tool to prepare
couples for prenatal chromosomal-microarray-analysis (CMA)
Hagit Hochner
1, Talya Millo2, Gil Siegal3,Shiri Shkedi-Ra ﬁd4
1Braun School of Public Health, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel,3Ono
Academic Center, Center for Health Law, Bioethics and Health Policy,Kiryat Ono, Israel,4Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
Introduction: Results from prenatal Chromosomal-microarray-
analysis (CMA) include variants with uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance
(VUS), low-penetrance susceptibility-loci (SL) and risks for late-
onset conditions. Some medical centers offer parents the choice ifto be informed about these ﬁndings. We set-out to design and
implement a web-based interactive educational tool for women/
couples undergoing prenatal CMA aimed to assist in making
informed decisions and improve their preparation for potentialﬁndings.
Methods: Development of the tool was based on interviews
with women/their partners (N =42) following prenatal CMA to
explore their experience with parental choice. Knowledge andfeedback questions were incorporated into the web-based tool,that was offered to women/couples prior to the CMA-test. Uptake,
knowledge and satisfaction were evaluated on the ﬁrst 180 users.
Results: About 80% of the women who logged into the system
completed the process. Distribution of choices made using the
educational tool was 88.9%, 63.6%, and 57.6% for disclosure of
late-onset, SL and VUS ﬁndings, respectively, similar to distribution
of choices published prior the tool ’s implementation. The majority
of respondents answered the knowledge questions correctly
(range 88.8% to 98.7%). Reported satisfaction was highest for theuse of animated videos (85.1%), 76.0% of the respondents felt
they were better prepared for CMA testing and 78.1% indicated
that they would recommend the tool to others. Decision-aid based
on interviews data was reported helpful by 63.4% of respondents.
Conclusions: A pre-CMA test interactive web-based educational
tool is well received and valued by women/couples and assists in
making informed decisions regarding the disclosure of complex
genomic-results.
H. Hochner: None. T. Millo: None. G. Siegal: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; This author is the founder and CEO of
Consent MD. S. Shkedi-Ra ﬁd:None.
P01.020.D Prenatal ﬁndings of cataract and arthrogryposis:
recurrence of cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome and
review of differential diagnosis
Fabio Sirchia
1, Ilaria Fantasia2, Agnese Feresin3, Elisa Giorgio1,
Moira Barbieri3, Valentina Guida4, Alessandro De Luca4, Tamara
Stampalija3,2
1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,2Burlo Garofolo Hospital, Trieste,
Italy,3University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,4Division of Medical Genetics,
Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San GiovanniRotondo, Italy.
Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome (COFS) is a severe and
progressive neurologic condition characterized by prenatal onsetof arthrogryposis, cataract, microcephaly and growth failure. The
aim of this study was to present a case of recurrence of the COFS
syndrome and to propose a differential diagnosis ﬂow-chart in
case of prenatal ﬁndings of arthrogryposis and cataract.
We report a case of recurrence of COFS3 syndrome within the
same family, with similar diagnostic features. In the ﬁrst case the
COFS syndrome remainedundiagnosed, while in the second case,due to prenatal ﬁndings of arthrogryposis and cataract, genetic
investigation focusing on responsible genes of COFS (ERCC5,
ERCC6 and FKTN genes) was carried out. The fetus was found tobe compound heterozygous for two different ERCC5 mutations,conﬁrming the clinical suspect of COFS syndrome. A review of the
literature on possible causative genes of prenatal cataract and
arthrogryposis was performed and we present a ﬂow-chart to
guide differential diagnosis and possible genetic testing in case ofthese ﬁndings.
COFS syndrome is a rare autosomic recessive condition.
However, it can besuspected and diagnosed prenatally. Theﬂow-chart illustrates a pathway to guide differential diagnosis
according to the prenatal ﬁndings. Main syndromes, key testing
and speci ﬁc genes are included. Targeted molecular testing
should be offered to the couple in order to reach a diagnosis andassess the recurrence risk for future pregnancies.
F. Sirchia: None. I. Fantasia: None. A. Feresin: None. E.
Giorgio: None. M. Barbieri: None. V. Guida: None. A. De Luca:
None. T. Stampalija: None.
P01.021.A Hypomorphic variants in FLNA cause isolated
congenital anomalies of kidney and urinary tract in a largefamily
Shalini S. Nayak , Shravya MS, Katta M. Girisha
Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal, India.
Introduction: FLNA encodes ﬁlamin A, an actin binding protein
that regulates the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton byinteracting with integrins, transmembrane receptor complexesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
92
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608and secondary messengers. FLNA is known to cause several
X-linked allelic diseases. Recently unrelated four individuals
were noted to have isolated congenital anomalies of the kidney
and urinary tract (CAKUT) and hypomorphic variants in FLNA .
We hereby report a family with six affected offspring ’s with
CACUT.
Methods: We evaluated a consanguineous family with three-
years-old male living child and ﬁve abortions. We performed
chromosomal microarray followed by duo exome sequencing forthe living proband and sixth abortuses.
Results: The family had bilateral renal pyelectasis in ﬁrst
pregnancy, gross ascites in second conceptus and cardiacanomalies in ﬁfth pregnancy. However, a detailed postnatal
examination was not possible. Autopsy from third pregnancy
revealed bladder outlet obstruction whereas the sixth pregnancy
had bilateral tortuous ureters. The living child has hydroureter-onephrosis, mildly impaired functioning of left kidney and
preserved functioning of right kidney with non-obstructive
clearance. Exome sequencing identi ﬁed a novel hemizygous
variant, c.7282G>A; p. (Gly2428Arg) in exon 44 of FLNA , mother
is a carrier and father has wild type allele.
Conclusion: The hypomorphic variant c.7282G>A in FLNA is the
likely genetic cause responsible for CAKUT seen in this family.However, the segregation analysis in other affected fetuses wasnot possible due to unavailability of DNA. Also, there was limited
phenotypic data in ﬁfth pregnancy to explain the cardiac anomaly.
S.S. Nayak: None. S. Ms: None. K.M. Girisha: None.
P01.022.B Two prenatal cases with a variant of loss in
homozygosity involving the CRPPA (ISPD ) gene
Cíntia Ventura
1, Raquel Lemos1, Patríca Costa1, Marisa Teixeira1,
Joaquim Sá1, Gabriela Soares1, Martin Mistrík2, Rita Cerqueira1
1CGC Genetics UNILABS Portugal, Porto, Portugal,2Alpha Medical
UNILABS Eslováquia, Zilinsky, Slovakia.
Introduction: Homozygous mutations of the CRPPA gene [MIM
614631] are associated with congenital muscular dystrophy-
dystroglycanopathy with brain and eye anomalies (type A7)
described by OMIM [MIM 614643] including features such ashydrocephalus and being the cause of the most severe phenotypeof Walker-Warburg syndrome. We present, in the context of
prenatal diagnosis, two cases with aCGH results involving a
homozygous deletion that includes the CRPPA gene. The fetus in
case 1 presented hydrocephalus and abnormal morphology -
Dandy Walker malformation. The fetus in case 2 presented
hydrocephalus.
Methodology: The aCGH was performed using Affymetrix
Cytoscan 750K. PCR ampli ﬁcation of exons 1 and 9 of the CRPPA
gene (chromosome 7) was performed.
Results: Case1 - A female genomic pro ﬁle was detected with a
loss in homozygosity (zero copies) in 7p21.2p21.1 of 360 Kbpinvolving the CRPPA, CRPPA-AS1 and SOSTDC1 genes. No
ampli ﬁcation of exons 1 and 9 of the CRPPA gene was observed,
conﬁrming the ﬁndings of aCGH. Case 2 - A female genomic
proﬁle was detected with a loss in homozygosity (zero copies) in
7p21.2p21.1 of 360 Kbp involving the CRPPA, CRPPA-AS1 and
SOSTDC1 genes. These variants are classi ﬁed as pathogenic and
may correspond to these fetuses ’phenotypes.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings reinforce the importance of aCGH
as aﬁrst-line diagnostic test in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies.
Genetic Counseling is imperative to guide the couple in the bestdecision as well as to warn of the need for further analysis in thefamily.C. Ventura: None. R. Lemos: None. P. Costa: None. M.
Teixeira: None. J. Sá: None. G. Soares: None. M. Mistrík: None.
R. Cerqueira: None.
P01.023.C Three foetuses with Cornelia de Lange diagnosis:
prenatal ﬁndings and genetic diagnosis
Fe Amalia García Santiago
1,2, Elena Mansilla1,2, Eugenia Antolin3,
Fernando Santos Simarro1,2, Roberto Rodriguez3, Julian Nevado4,2,
Maria Palomares-Bralo4,2, Karen Heath1,2, Rita Maria Regojo5,
Carmen Rodriguez-Jimenez6, Isabel Vallcorba6, Angela del Pozo4,
Pablo Lapunzina4,2
1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, UMDE, Ciberer,
Madrid, Spain,2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, U753), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid,Spain., Madrid, Spain,3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, UMDE, Madrid, Spain,
4INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, Ciberer, Madrid,
Spain,5Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
UMDE, Madrid, Spain,6INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM #12270,
300590, 610759, 614701, 300882) is a rare and clinically variable
disorder that affects multiple organs. Ultrasound ﬁndings are
highly variable and include distinctive facial features, prenatalgrowth retardation (FGR), malformations of the upper limbs,
diaphragmatic hernia, heart defects and genitourinary malforma-
tions. To date, ﬁve genes (NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21 and
HDAC8) have been associated with CdLS. We report 3 foetuseswith ultrasound characteristics and pathology examination with
abnormalities associated with CdLS.
Materials and Methods: an NGS custom panel containing 1663
genes involved in common genetic disorders (RD seq (R) v6.0),
exome trio and MLPA (multiplex-ligation dependent probe
ampli ﬁcation) P141 (MRC-Holland) were performed after a CMA
normal result.
Results: foetus 1 (23 weeks): severe FGR, ulnar hypoplasia and
oligodactyly of right hand, hypospadias, left diaphragmatic hernia,
prefrontal edema, retrognathia. Genetic analysis: a loss of dosagein heterozygosity is detected in the probe hybridising to exon 43of the NIPBL gene by MLPA thecnique. Foetus 2: (21 weeks): severe
FGR, micromelia, congenital heart, prefrontal edema, microcepha-
lia, short corpus callosum. Genetic analysis: NIPBL NM_133433.3:
c.5639_5642del, p.Pro1880Hisfs*10 heterocygosis. Foetus 3: (17
weeks): severe FRG, radius hypoplasia and oligodactyly of left
hand, left diaphragmatic hernia, micrognathia. Genetic analysis:NIPBL NM_133433.3:c.598C>T;p./Gln200*) heterocygosis.
Conclusions: CdLS is a heterogeneous clinical and genetic
condition. It is essential to have a thorough ultrasound examina-
tion and to perform this genetic study in cases of FGR that cannotbe explained by chromosomal or vascular alterations.
F.A. García Santiago: None. E. Mansilla: None. E. Antolin:
None. F. Santos Simarro: None. R. Rodriguez: None. J. Nevado:
None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. K. Heath: None. R.M. Regojo:
None. C. Rodriguez-Jimenez: None. I. Vallcorba: None. A. del
Pozo: None. P. Lapunzina: None.
P01.024.D Transcriptome landscape of the human decidual
cells
Anastasia A. Babovskaya , Ekaterina Trifonova, Maria Swarovskaya,
Viktoria Serebrova, Alexei Zarubin, Vadim StepanovAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
93
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian
Federation.
Human reproductive success depends on a properly decidualized
uterine endometrium that allows implantation and the formation
of the placenta. At the core of the decidualization process are
endometrial ﬁbroblasts that differentiate to decidual stromal cells
(DSCs). Characterizing transcriptome of DSC, which is crucial for apregnancy ’s outcome, can serve as a basis for identifying the
mechanisms underlying physiological and pathological preg-
nancy. In our study for the ﬁrst time for native cells high-
throughput sequencing (RNA-seq) was applied to analyze theglobal transcriptome of the human DSCs during uncomplicated
pregnancies. DSCs were obtained by Laser capture microdissec-
tion. During analyses we obtained 17960 transcripts expressedwith CPM >1 in each sample. Most of the analyzed transcripts
corresponded to protein coding regions of the human genome
(13683). Antisense RNAs, long noncoding RNAs, and processedpseudogenes predominated in the remaining cluster. To gain abetter understanding of the biological implications, the assembled
transcripts were annotated using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources.
The top 5 represented GO terms for the biological process werecell-cell adhesion, transcription, protein transport, rRNA processingand proteasome-mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic
process. The ﬁndings suggest that human DSCs play a key role in
the induction of maternal-fetal communication. We applied anupstream analysis approach implemented in geneXplain platform
and identi ﬁed top 10 master regulators (DUSP10, MOS, ROCK2,
MAPK6, HTT, SGK1, PRKCI, PASK, DUSP22, and CUX1). These keygenes may be potential biomarkers of diagnosis or newtherapeutic targets for pregnancy complications.The reported
study was funded by RFBR №20-34-90128, №18-29-13045.
A.A. Babovskaya: None. E. Trifonova: None. M. Swarovskaya:
None. V. Serebrova: None. A. Zarubin: None. V. Stepanov: None.
P01.025.A Novel pathogenic c.34G>C mutation in GATA4 gene
detected in 46,XY DSD patient from Ukraine. The evidence forautosomal dominant DSD inheritance with incomplete pene-
trance in women
Ludmila Livshits
1, Dmytro Sirokha1, Olexandra Gorodna1, Kamila
Kusz-Zamelczyk2, Patrick Sproll3, Anna Lauber Biason3, Serge Nef4,
Nataliya Zelinska5
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of
Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine,2Institute of Human Genetics,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Pozna ń, Poland,3Section of Medicine,
University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland,4Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,5Ukrainian Scienti ﬁc and
Practical Center for Endocrine Surgery, Transplantation of Endocrine
Organs and Tissues, Ministry of Health of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Disorders of sexual development (DSD) are an important group of
rare human diseases. To date there are more than 150 known
genes involved in DSD and up to 1000 candidates possiblyimplicated in gonadal development. The aim of the research wasto identify novel DSD genetic variants using whole exome
sequencing (WES). The WES was performed for a 46,XY SRY
positive patient with gonadal dysgenesis. A c.34G>C(rs750597721) mutation in GATA4 gene was identi ﬁed and
conﬁrmed as pathogenic using bioinformatic tools. This is a
heterozygous missense substitution that leads to Gly12Alamutation in a protein sequence that corresponds to transactiva-tion domain 1. Sanger sequencing analysis conducted in familymembers revealed that healthy mother and healthy maternal
grandmother are heterozygous carriers of c.34G>C mutation as
well. Previously, another heterozygous mutations in GATA4 were
detected in 46,XY DSD patients. Interestingly, the same mutationwas previously shown in patient with Atrioventricular septal defect4. Obtained data are the evidence of phenotypic variation and
incomplete penetrance in women. It is in line with previously
obtained explanation for possible molecular mechanisms of suchinheritance in mice (Bouma et. al., 2007). To our knowledge, this istheﬁrst report on c.34G>C in patient with 46,XY DSD and the
results of family member analysis support the hypothesis that this
variant is causative for 46,XY DSD with autosomal dominantinheritance and incomplete penetrance in women. Study wasperformed as a part of SCOPES 2013-2017: Joint Research Projects
- Genetics of Human Disorders of Sexual Development.
L. Livshits: None. D. Sirokha: None. O. Gorodna: None. K.
Kusz-Zamelczyk: None. P. Sproll: None. A. Lauber Biason: None.
S. Nef: None. N. Zelinska: None.
P01.026.B Prenatal detection of a familial 640 kb microdele-
tion in chromosomal region 6q27 in a fetus with isolated
severe bilateral ventriculomegaly
Yvonne Stratis
1, Cornelie Müller-Hofstede1, Malvina Kuschmann1,
Matthias Meyer-Wittkopf2, Axel Bohring1, Albrecht Röpke1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany,2Department of
Gynecology and Obstetrics at the Health Center Rheine, Mathias
Spital, Rheine, Germany.
The phenotype associated with terminal deletions of the
chromosome 6q27 region includes intellectual disability, seizures
and multiple brain malformations. The most common brain
malformations are corpus callosum abnormalities, periventricularnodular heterotopia, polymicrogyria, hydrocephalus, ventriculo-
megaly and cerebellar malformations. The smallest region of
overlap for the phenotype of brain malformations and intellectualdisability is re ﬁned to a segment of 325 kb in 6q27, comprising the
protein coding genes DLL1, PSMB1 ,TBP and PDCD2 . Haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency of DLL1, which is a NOTCH ligand, causes a neurodevelop-
mental disorder with nonspeci ﬁc brain abnormalities with or
without seizures. TBP is a candidate gene for ID and is linked to
PDCD2 and PSMB1 in a conserved manner, suggesting a potential
interaction between these genes. Here we report on an inherited
640 kb terminal 6q27 deletion in a 29-week fetus with isolatedsevere bilateral ventriculomegaly detected by SNP-array on
uncultured amniocytes. The deletion comprises six genes, includ-
ing the aforementioned protein coding genes DLL1 ,PSMB1 ,TBP
and PDCD2 which de ﬁne the minimal critical region. FISH-analysis
of cultured amniocytes con ﬁrmed the deletion on metaphase
cells. SNP-array and FISH analysis showed that the mildly affected
mother harbors the same 6q27 deletion. Prenatal diagnosis of6q27 deletion is extremely rare and to the best of our knowledgeonly nine patients have been reported yet. Of these, only four
cases had isolated ventriculomegaly, whereas ﬁve cases had
additional malformations. Our case clearly demonstrates theimportance of performing prenatal array analysis also in cases ofisolated bilateral ventriculomegaly.
Y. Stratis: None. C. Müller-Hofstede: None. M. Kuschmann:
None. M. Meyer-Wittkopf: None. A. Bohring: None. A. Röpke:
None.
P01.027.C Telomere length in individuals with early preg-
nancy lossesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
94
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Nataliya Huleyuk1, Danuta Zastavna1, Iryna Tkach1, Ivanna
Haiboniuk1, Miroslaw Tyrka2
1Institute of Hereditary Pathology of AMS Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine,
2Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of
Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszow, Poland.
Introduction: Over the past decade, telomere biology has
become an important topic in the ﬁeld of human reproduction.
Early pregnancy loss (EPL) occurs in ~ 15% of clinically-recognized
pregnancies and is the most common complication of pregnancy.
Spontaneously lost pregnancies are characterized by shortenedtelomeres. We focused on the relationship between relativetelomere length (RTL) and tendency to EPL in humans.
Material and Methods: Relative telomere length was measured
in DNA isolated from the blood samples using a real-timepolymerase chain reaction approach. RTL was examined in controlgroup (C) (N =209) - women (CW) (N =107) and men (CM) (N =
102) who had healthy pregnancies with no history of infertility or
miscarriage, and in group with EPL (N =445) - women (EPLW) (N
=223) and men (EPLM) (N =212) who had single or more EPL.
RTL data were analysed by gender and reproductive history.
Results: Women (CW +EPLW) have signi ﬁcantly higher RTL that
men (CM +EPLM) (1.74 ± 0.06 in women and 1.40 ± 0.05 in men, Р
=0.000053). Average RTL were signi ﬁcantly lower in CM
compared to CW (CW:2.27 ± 0.12 versus CM: 1.15 ± 0.08, Р=
0.0000001), and were similar in EPLW and EPLM (1.50 ± 0.06 inEPLW and 1.53 ± 0.06 in EPLM, Р=0.47). The EPLW group had
signi ﬁcantly lower RTL than control (EPLW:1.50 ± 0.06 versus
CW:2.27 ± 0.12, P =0.0000001). Average RTL were signi ﬁcantly
lower in CM compared to EPLM (1.15 ± 0.08 in CM and 1.53 ± 0.06in EPLM, P =0.00006).
Conclusions: Women with no history of EPL have longer
telomere that men. Woman with EPL have shorter telomere that
women without miscarriage. In EPL group women and men havesimilar telomere length.
N. Huleyuk: None. D. Zastavna: None. I. Tkach: None. I.
Haiboniuk: None. M. Tyrka: None.
P01.028.D Genetic basis of endometriosis in the susceptibility
of developing gynecological cancers
Aintzane Rueda-Martínez
1,2, Bárbara Paola González-García1,2, Aiara
Garitazelaia1,2, Ariadna Cilleros-Portet1,2, Sergi Marí1,2, Rebeca
Arauzo1,2, Jokin de Miguel1,2, Nora Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, Jose
Ramon Bilbao1,2,3,Iraia García-Santisteban1,2
1University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain,
2Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain,
3Spanish Biomedical Research Center in Diabetes and associated
Metabolic Disorders, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Endometriosis is a common gynecological disorder
in which the endometrium grows outside of the uterus. Despite
being considered a benign condition, epidemiological evidence
shows that women with endometriosis develop more frequentlycertain types of gynecological cancers, including endometrial,breast and ovarian carcinomas. However, the mechanisms under-
lying this relationship remain uncertain. Since genetic factors play
a key role in these complex gynecological diseases, wehypothesized that the biological mechanisms behind thiscomorbidity could be mediated, at least in part, by shared genetic
predisposition factors.
Materials and Methods : To test this hypothesis, we undertook
a Bioinformatics approach that consisted of a cross-disordermeta-analysis and a Two-Sample Mendelian Randomization
(2SMR) analysis of results from public GWASs on endometriosis
and the abovementioned gynecological cancers.
Results: Firstly, our meta-analysis revealed novel susceptibility loci
shared between endometriosis and endometrial, breast, and ovariancancers, although the input of endometriosis was minor when
compared to the cancer studies. Secondly, our 2SMR analysis
conﬁrmed previously reported genetic pleiotropy between endome-
triosis and endometrial cancer but gave inconclusive results aboutbreast cancer, also in line with previous reports. Our research
provides, for the ﬁrst time, solid evidence of a causal genetic
association between endometriosis and ovarian cancer, particularlyclear cell type, and endometroid subtypes. Furthermore, we also
identi ﬁed genetic variants that could mediate in those associations,
allowing future functional experiments.
Conclusions: This study represents the ﬁrst Bioinformatics
approach to elucidate the causal genetic relationship between
endometriosis and gynecological cancers. Funding: GVSAN2020/
111043, GVSAN2018/111086, and GVSAN2019/111085 to I.G.-S., J.R.B., and N.F.-J., respectively.
A. Rueda-Martínez: None. B.P. González-García: None. A.
Garitazelaia: None. A. Cilleros-Portet: None. S. Marí: None. R.
Arauzo: None. J. de Miguel: None. N. Fernandez-Jimenez: None.
J. Bilbao: None. I. García-Santisteban: None.
P01.029.A Assisted reproductive technology can be a risk for
epimutation-mediated imprinting disorders for mothers over
30 years
Kaori Hara-Isono
1, Keiko Matsubara1, Masashi Mikami2, Takahiro
Arima3, Tsutomu Ogata4, Maki Fukami1, Masayo Kagami1
1National Research Institute for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan,2National Center for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan,3Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan,4Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hama-
matsu, Japan.
Backgrounds: The proportion of assisted reproductive technology
(ART)-conceived livebirths of patients with imprinting disorders
(IDs) is higher than that of the general population. Whether this isdue to ART or confounding effects of advanced parental age wasunknown. The aims of this study are 1) to clarify whether ART or
maternal ages facilitates development of epimutation-mediated
IDs (epi-IDs), and 2) to identify the differentially methylated region(DMR) that is vulnerable to the effect of ART and parental ages.
Results: We enrolled 136 patients with epi-IDs and obtained
general population ART data from the Japanese robust nationwideregistry. We compared the proportion of ART-conceived livebirthsand maternal childbearing ages between patients with epi-IDs and
the general population. The proportion of ART-conceived live-
births in patients with epi-IDs was higher than that in mothersaged ≥30 years, the age group in which more than 90% of ART
procedures performed. The maternal childbearing ages of patients
with epi-IDs were widely distributed from 19 to 45 (median: 32). In
addition, we compared the proportion of ART-conceived livebirthsand parental ages at childbirth across patients with eight epi-IDs.We demonstrated that most ART-conceived patients with epi-IDs
were found in Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) and Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) patients, and parental ages werealmost consistent in patients with eight epi-IDs.
Conclusions: ART can be a risk factor for the development of
epi-IDs for mothers aged ≥30 years. In addition, methylation
status of SRS- and BWS- related DMRs may be vulnerable to theeffects of ART.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
95
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608K. Hara-Isono: None. K. Matsubara: None. M. Mikami: None.
T. Arima: None. T. Ogata: None. M. Fukami: None. M. Kagami:
None.
P01.030.B Analyzing the effects of ETV5 and CXCL12 genes in
patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome
O. Sena AYDOS1, Dunya AYDOS2, Yunus YUKSELTEN3, Asuman
SUNGUROGLU1, Kaan AYDOS4
1Department of Medical Biology, Ankara University School of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey,2Ankara University Stem Cell Institute,
Ankara, Turkey,3Research Laboratories for Health Science, Y Gen
Biotechnology Company Ltd., Ankara, Turkey,4Department of
Urology, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Ets variant gene 5 ( ETV5 ), belongs to a family of
transcription factors, regulates several genes essential for sperma-
togonial stem cells (SSCs) self-renewal. Silencing of ETV5 in mice
led to total loss of stem/progenitor spermatogonia, resulting inSertoli cell-only (SCO) phenotype. ETV5-de ﬁcient Sertoli cells were
also found to have decreased CXCL12 levels. In embryonic mouse
gonads, CXCL12 was shown to direct the migration of primordialgerm cells (PGCs) to the gonadal ridges. We aimed to investigate
the role of interaction between ETV5 and CXCL12 genes in humans
with SCO syndrome.
Materials and methods: Fold changes in expression levels of
CXCL12 and ETV5 were determined by quantitative PCR in non-
obstructive azoospermia (NOA) (n =10) patients with SCOS and
obstructive azoospermia (OA) (n =2) as control cases. Testicular
tissue samples were taken during microTESE attempt andtesticular biopsy was performed for histopathological evaluation.
Results: Fold decreases in CXCL12 and ETV5 expression levels
were found as 0.44 ± 0.1 and 0.27 ± 0.11, respectively, and thedifferences were signi ﬁcant compared to controls ( p< 0.001).
Conclusions: According to our results, the decrease in CXCL12
and ETV5 expression levels in patients with SCOS indicated that
CXCL12 and ETV5 work together in harmony to regulate the
presence and maintenance of SSCs in humans. Whether the germ
cell loss is due to inhibition of PGCs migration or impaired
differentiation of SSCs needs further investigation.
O.S. Aydos: None. D. Aydos: None. Y. Yukselten: None. A.
Sunguroglu: None. K. Aydos: None.
P01.031.C Exome sequencing in structurally normal fetuses -
yield and dilemmas
Hagit Daum , Tamar Harel, Shiri Gershon-Naamat, Adily Basal, Orly
Elpeleg, Vardiella Meiner, Hagar Mor-Shaked
Hadassah, Jerusalem, Israel.
Abstract Introduction: Although there is a growing body of
literature regarding the yield of chromosomal microarray analysis
for structurally normal fetuses, there is no data regarding the yieldof exome sequencing in this population. Exome sequencing (ES) isa powerful tool for identifying disease-causing single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and small indels. In the prenatal setup, when the
clinical phenotyping of the fetus is frequently vague and non-speci ﬁc, the contribution of exome sequencing to the diagnostic
procedure is invaluable.
Material and methods: From February 2017 to February 2021,
a total of 635 fetal exomes were analyzed at our center. Amongthese were 119 structurally normal fetuses. Analysis included
SNVs, copy number variants and uniparental disomy. Reports
included pathogenic and likely pathogenic ﬁndings, including
ACMG secondary ﬁndings that are relevant during childhood.
Results: Two fetuses (1.7%) had molecular diagnoses of
moderate to severe disease severity. Pathogenic compound
heterozygous variants were identi ﬁed in
ATP7B gene and NR2E3 ,
responsible for Wilson disease and for Enhanced S-conesyndrome, respectively. Notably, Wilson disease is a potentiallytreatable disease and early diagnosis is critical to postnatal
management.
Conclusions: With careful management and restrictive analysis,
prenatal ES should be considered as an adjunct to chromosomalmicroarray in sonographically normal fetuses. Further studies are
called for in order to determine the yield of prenatal ES in this
setting.
H. Daum: None. T. Harel: None. S. Gershon-Naamat: None. A.
Basal: None. O. Elpeleg: None. V. Meiner: None. H. Mor-Shaked:
None.
P01.032.D Genetic variants of MTHFR and TNF- αin fetal
growth restriction
dema alset
1, Elena Butenko1, Ekaterina Zabanova2, Natalia
Kuznetsova2
1southern federal university, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,
2Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR) is a multifactorial
condition in which fetus cannot reach its genetically deter-mined potential size. This s yndrome is considered as an
important cause of fetal morbidity and mortality and affects
5-10% of all pregnancies worldwide and 5-17.6% in Russia.Clinician trials are concerning maternal, fetal and placental
p o l y m o r p h i s m sa sp o s s i b l ep r e natal FGR-markers. This study
aimed to investigate associations of two polymorphisms:5,10 –Methylenetetrahydrofolat e reductase/ MTHFR(677T) and
T u m o rn e c r o s i sf a c t o ra l p h a / T N F - α(G308A) with FGR risk.
Material and methods: Using PRISMA statement, 20 studies were
included in meta-analysis of MTHFR (C677T) and TNF- α(G308A)
associations with FGR. Then MTHFR (C677T) genotyping wasconducted with Allele-speci ﬁc PCR to con ﬁrm meta-analysis result
in FGR-diagnosed (n =26) and healthy (n =37) pregnant women.
Results: Meta-analysis showed no association of TNF- α(G308A)
but a strong association of MTHFR(C677T) with high FGR risk
(OR=1.22, 95 % CI: 1.07-1.39, P =0.002). However, Genotyping
showed that in the studied population, MTHFR(C677T) has nosigni ﬁcant association with FGR (OR =0.917, 95 % CI: 0.328-2.560,
P=0.956).
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst meta-analysis of
TNF- α(G308A) in FGR. About MTHFR(C677T), genotyping result
was inconsistent with meta-analysis. This suggests that associationdiffers according to ethnicity, since some of the studies included
in meta-analysis ﬁgured no association in their samples. However,
due to our small sample size, further clinical trials are required toconﬁrm results in the studied population.This study was funded by
the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian
Federation #0852-2020-0028.
D. alset: None. E. Butenko: None. E. Zabanova: None. N.
Kuznetsova: None.
P01.033.A The FTO gene and adolescent pubertyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
96
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Elena Mashkina , Maria Amelina, Michail Shkurat
Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Introduction : The time of the onset of puberty and obesity are
multifactorial features of human. The aim of this work was toanalyze the association between the FTO 23525T>A gene
polymorphism and the delayed sexual development in boys aged
11-15 years.
Material and methods: DNA samples isolated from blood cells
of 322 adolescents were used. The boys were divided into 2
groups - with a normal rate of sexual development and with adelay in sexual development. The stages of sexual developmentwere determined using the Tanner scale. Allele-speci ﬁc PCR was
used to analyze the rs99305069 FTO.
Results : We analyzed the frequencies of genotypes for the FTO
gene 23525T>A polymorphism among 11-15 year old boysdepending on the stage of puberty. Heterozygotes 23525TA of
the FTO gene predominated (45%) among boys with normal
sexual development. The frequency of homozygotes for the23525A allele was 28% in this group. In the group with delaysexual development the frequency of 23525AA genotype was
40%. Homozygotes 23525AA have an increased risk of delayed
sexual development during puberty (OR =1.38 CI 1.1-2.78). Also
the 23525A allele of the FTO gene is more frequently recorded
among adolescents with delay in sexual development ( χ2=6.26
p=0.01; OR =1.49 (1.09-2.04)). Thus, an association of the
23525T>A polymorphism of the FTO gene with a disturbance inthe rate of puberty in adolescents was revealed. This study was
funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the
Russian Federation #0852-2020-0028.
E. Mashkina: None. M. Amelina: None. M. Shkurat: None.
P01.034.B Genetic counseling and carrier screening of
candidates for gamete donation at a public bank
Celia Azevedo Soares
1, Ana R. Soares1, Emídio Vale Fernandes2,
Maria Abreu1, Cláudia Falcão Reis1, Ana M. Fortuna1, Natália
Tkachenko1
1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal,
2Centro Materno Infantil do Norte, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: Genetic counseling and carrier screening of healthy
candidates is part of gamete donors ’selection. We aim to review
theﬁndings of the genetic counseling of a cohort of patients at
our public gametes bank.
Methods: Thirty-four male and 64 female candidates had
genetic counseling with a medical geneticist before donation. Ofthese, one female candidate voluntarily dropped-out. Thirty-fourmales and 63 females performed karyotype and screening for the
more common pathogenic variants of CFTR- related cystic ﬁbrosis
and spinal muscular atrophy ( SMN1 ) in the Portuguese population.
In addition, all females also performed Fragile X expansion
screening ( FMR1 ). Thirty patients with ancestry from Southern or
Central Portugal, or with known or assumed African ancestryperformed hemoglobinopathies screening.
Results: Six patients were withheld from the donation process
given their family or personal history that required further
investigation. Of the initial 97 candidates, 15.5% presentedanomalous laboratory results (15/97). Ten patients were carriersfor an autosomal recessive disorder - cystic ﬁbrosis (5/97), sickle
cell anemia (3/30), and spinal muscular atrophy (2/97). One female
was an FMR1 pre-mutation carrier (1/63). One female patient
presented with triple X mosaicism: 47,XXX[2]/46,XX[50]. Twopatients presented with chromosomal instability of unknown
origin. In one patient, a mosaic for the Philadelphia chromosome
was detected, revealing the unexpected diagnosis of chronic
myeloid leukemia.
Conclusions: From a cohort of 97 candidates, 21.7% presented
a family/personal history or an anomalous laboratory result that
required additional genetic counseling, stressing the importance
of performing pre-donation genetic counseling in this population.
C. Azevedo Soares: None. A.R. Soares: None. E. Vale
Fernandes: None. M. Abreu: None. C. Falcão Reis: None. A.M.
Fortuna: None. N. Tkachenko: None.
P01.035.C Ascertainment of genome-wide androgenetic
mosaicism after discordant results from primary fetal samples
and cultured cells
Gioia Mastromoro
1, Daniele Guadagnolo1, Enrica Marchionni1,
Francesca Di Palma1, Barbara Torres2, Marina Goldoni2, Annamaria
Onori2, Laura Bernardini2, Alessandro De Luca2, Isabella Torrente2,
Antonio Pizzuti1
1Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy,2Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
Introduction: Genome-wide androgenetic mosaicism is a rare
condition in which two euploid cell lines coexist in the sameindividual, one with biparental content and one with genome-wide paternal isodisomy. It can present prenatally resembling
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). We report a fetus with a
laborious diagnosis due to discordant results from cultured anduncultured samples.
Materials and Methods: A pregnant was referred at 15
gestational weeks for placental mesenchymal dysplasia and
omphalocele. Karyotype, chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)and BWS molecular testing (methylation-speci ﬁc multiplex
ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MS-MLPA) analysis of
11p15 BWS critical region) were performed after amniocentesis.These tests were requested again on umbilical cord sample andon previously cultured amniocytes.
Results: Karyotype, CMA performed by an oligonucleotide-array
and BWS MS-MLPA after amniocentesis were normal. BWS MS-MLPA from cultured amniocytes and umbilical cord sampleshowed KvH19 locus hypermethylation and KvDMR hypomethyla-
tion in mosaicism. These results, along with microsatellite analysis
of BWS region, were consistent with mosaic paternal isodisomy ofchromosome 11p15. Analysis performed to assess maternal
contamination showed on cultured amniocytes and umbilical
blood sample that the paternal alleles were constantly higher onall the microsatellite analyzed mapping in different chromosomes.This result leaded to suspicion of genome-wide androgenetic
mosaicism, con ﬁrmed via SNP-array analysis from cultured
amniocytes, with mosaic rate of 60%.
Conclusions: Assessment of genome-wide androgenetic mosai-
cism requires multiple laboratory approaches and an extension of
the current diagnostic process and caution to low rate of
mosaicism. Clinical acumen and an integrated testing approachare the key to a successful diagnosis.
G. Mastromoro: None. D. Guadagnolo: None. E. Marchionni:
None. F. Di Palma: None. B. Torres: None. M. Goldoni: None. A.
Onori: None. L. Bernardini: None. A. De Luca: None. I. Torrente:
None. A. Pizzuti: None.
P01.036.D Sensitive screening of cell free DNA to determine
the origin of trophoblastic tumoursAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
97
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Geoffrey J. Maher , Rosemary A. Fisher, Baljeet Kaur, Xianne Aguiar,
Preetha Aravind, Natashia Cedeno, James Clark, Debbie Damon,
Ehsan Ghorani, Foteini Kalofonou, Ravindhi Murphy, Rajat Roy,
Naveed Sarwar, Mark R. Openshaw, Michael J. Seckl
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Trophoblastic tumours that secrete human chor-
ionic gonadotropin (hCG) are commonly gestational in origin andare typically diagnosed months to years after the causative
pregnancy. However, hCG secretion can also occur in somatic or
germ cell tumours. Despite the clinical importance of distinguish-ing between gestational and non-gestational trophoblastictumours, which vary in their prognoses and treatment regimens,
tumour biopsies are not always available for genotyping due to
the risk of haemorrhage. Here we aimed to develop a sensitive cellfree DNA (cfDNA) assay to non-invasively determine the origin ofhCG-secreting tumours.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA and cfDNA from 23
women with hCG-secreting tumours underwent library prepara-tion, probe capture and deep (>5,000x) Illumina sequencing of195 common autosomal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
and 13 sex chromosome loci. Gestational tumours were identi ﬁ-
able by the presence of ‘non-host ’(i.e. paternal) alleles in cfDNA at
SNPs that were homozygous in the genomic DNA.
Results: In gestational cases, non-host alleles were detected at
multiple SNPs; non-host cfDNA comprised 0.3% - 41.4% of totalcfDNA and correlated with serum hCG levels (906 –3,042,881 IU/
ml), although detection was variable below ~1,500 IU/ml. Non-
host alleles were not detected in non-gestational cases, but the
presence of circulating tumour DNA was con ﬁrmed by the
identi ﬁcation of copy number alterations.
Conclusions: Previous methods for detecting cfDNA from hCG-
secreting tumours lacked sensitivity or were patient-speci ﬁc,
making them unsuitable for routine diagnostic testing. Oursensitive non-invasive assay, applicable to any patient, will
facilitate diagnosis at an earlier timepoint and improve patient
management.
G.J. Maher: None. R.A. Fisher: None. B. Kaur: None. X. Aguiar:
None. P. Aravind: None. N. Cedeno: None. J. Clark: None. D.
Damon: None. E. Ghorani: None. F. Kalofonou: None. R.
Murphy: None. R. Roy: None. N. Sarwar: None. M.R. Openshaw:
None. M.J. Seckl: None.
P01.038.B Delivering accurate, reproducible non-invasive
prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) for sickle cell disease using droplet
digital PCR
Joe Shaw
1, Ben Paternoster1, Maureen Ramos1, Sarah Nesbitt1,
Natalie Chandler1, Lyn S. Chitty1,2
1NHS North Thames Genomic Laboratory Hub, London, United
Kingdom,2UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,
London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Sickle cell disease (SCD) is the most common single-
gene indication for prenatal diagnosis in England. Non-invasiveprenatal diagnosis (NIPD) for SCD is desired by patients, but
complicated by the high background of the maternal mutation and
frequent unavailability of paternal samples. Droplet digital PCR(ddPCR) offers the potential for NIPD using only a maternal samplevia relative mutation dosage; however previous reports describe
unacceptable rates (up to 10%) of incorrect genotype classi ﬁcations.
Methods: A ddPCR assay was designed for the common SCD
variant, HBB c.20A>T, and validated on heterozygous genomicDNA and paternal cell free DNA. Following optimisation, cell free
DNA was extracted from 65 frozen maternal plasma samples from
pregnancies at risk of SCD with known fetal genotypes. ddPCR
analysis was performed blinded using a modi ﬁed sequential
probability ratio test (SPRT).
Results: ddPCR testing correctly predicted the fetal genotype in
48 cases (32 male, 16 female), with nine of 10 HbSS fetuses
correctly identi ﬁed. A sample from a dichorionic twin pregnancy
was included, and the modi ﬁed SPRT analysis correctly classi ﬁed
one fetus as affected whilst the other was heterozygous. The
remaining 17 (26%) cases were inconclusive, with no incorrect
fetal genotype predictions.
Conclusion: We have successfully optimised a ddPCR assay that
accurately predicts the fetal genotype in pregnancies at risk of
SCD. Further optimisation of cfDNA extraction and sampling is
required to reduce the rate of inconclusive results and con ﬁrm
accuracy. Funding was from the GOSH NIHR Biomedical Research
Centre. Samples were obtained from the RAPID sample bank.
J. Shaw: None. B. Paternoster: None. M. Ramos: None. S.
Nesbitt: None. N. Chandler: None. L.S. Chitty: None.
P01.039.C Telomeres in TB is longer than in ICM in humans at
the blastocyst stage
Anna A. Pendina
1, Andrei V. Tikhonov1, Vladimir A. Bogomolov2,
Mikhail I. Krapivin1, Olga A. E ﬁmova1, Irina D. Mekina1, Evgeniia M.
Komarova1, Natalia P. Smirnova3, Olga G. Chiryaeva1, Alexander M.
Gzgzyan1, Igor Yu. Kogan1, Vladislav S. Baranov1
1D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproduc-
tology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation,2St. Petersburg State Pediatric
Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation,3“Mother and
Child St.Petersburg ”, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Telomeres are complexes of short tandem DNA repeats and proteins
at the ends of chromosomes. Their main function is the protection
of chromosomes from shortening caused by DNA loss during eachreplication cycle. Correct regulation of telomere length (TL) is crucialfor normal embryogenesis. Here, we performed a pairwise
comparison of TLs in trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass
(ICM) of human blastocysts. A total of 22 blastocysts were includedin the study. All the blastocysts were not suitable for transferbecause of genetic abnormalities revealed by preimplantation
genetic testing. Each blastocyst was dissected into TE and ICM
using a microsurgical laser and ﬁxed on a glass slide. Telomeres
were detected by qFISH (Telomere PNA FISH Kit/Cy3, Agilent). To
avoid possible bias caused by different chromatin condensation, TLs
were assessed as relative values by dividing the telomericﬂuorescence by the ﬂuorescence of reference region (21q22.13-
q22.2) measured in ImageJ 1.51i. The relative TL values ranged
between 0.089-0.607 in TE and between 0.061-0.414 in ICM. In TE,
the relative TL appeared to be higher than in ICM (p =0.029, paired
t-test). Longer telomeres in TE may be linked to its crucial role inimplantation and subsequent placentation, both accompanied by a
high mitotic activity. Supported by RSF №18-75-10046.
A.A. Pendina: None. A.V. Tikhonov: None. V.A. Bogomolov:
None. M.I. Krapivin: None. O.A. E ﬁmova: None. I.D. Mekina:
None. E.M. Komarova: None. N.P. Smirnova: None. O.G.
Chiryaeva: None. A.M. Gzgzyan: None. I.Y. Kogan: None. V.S.
Baranov: None.
P01.040.D Are children born after medical assisted reproduc-
tion at greater risk of having an increased de novo mutation
rate?Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
98
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Roos M. Smits1, Manon S. Oud2, Aukje M. Meijerink1, Petra de Vries2,
Giles S. Holt3, Bilal K. S. Alobaidi3, Lois Batty3, Kathrin Fleischer1,4, Didi
D. M. Braat1, Liliana Ramos1,Miguel J. Xavier3, Joris A. Veltman3
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands,2Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,4TFP
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Introduction: De novo mutations (DNMs) play a prominent role in
sporadic disorders with reduced ﬁtness such as infertility and
intellectual disability. Advanced paternal age is known to increase
disease risk in offspring by increasing the number of DNMs in their
genome. Less is known about the effect of assisted reproductiontechniques (ART) on the number of DNMs in offspring. With theon-going trend of delayed parenthood more children are now
born both from older fathers and through ART.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 49 trios (mother,
father and child) and 2 quartets (mother, father and 2 siblings)divided into children born after spontaneous conception (n =18);
born after in vitro fertilisation (IVF) (n =17) and born after
intracytoplasmic sperm injection combined with testicular spermextraction (ICSI-TESE) (n =18). Groups further divided by paternal
age, young (<35) or old (>45 years of age at conception). Whole-
genome sequencing was performed twice to independentlydetect and validate all DNMs in children.
Results: A clear paternal age effect was observed, with 70
DNMs detected on average in children born to young fathers and
94 DNMs in those born to older fathers (p =0.001). No signi ﬁcant
differences were observed between different methods of concep-tion (p =1) with paternal age affecting all methods equally.
Conclusions: Paternal age, not method of conception, had a
major effect on the observed number of DNMs in offspring. Giventhe role DNMs in disease risk, this negative result is good news for
IVF and ICSI-TESE born children, if replicated in larger cohorts.
R.M. Smits: None. M.S. Oud: None. A.M. Meijerink: None. P.
de Vries: None. G.S. Holt: None. B.K.S. Alobaidi: None. L. Batty:
None. K. Fleischer: None. D.D.M. Braat: None. L. Ramos: None.
M.J. Xavier: None. J.A. Veltman: None.
P01.041.A The relevance of loss-of-function variants in the
X-chromosomal gene TEX13B in azoospermia is questionable
Margot J. Wyrwoll
1,2, Manon S. Oud3, Matthias Vockel4, Sabine
Kliesch2, Corinna Friedrich1, Frank Tüttelmann1
1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany,2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Depart-
ment of Clinical and Surgical Andrology, University Hospital Münster,
Münster, Germany,3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
Introduction: Azoospermia is often assumed to be of genetic
origin, with constantly emerging genes in the context of maleinfertility. Previously, a chromosomal translocation in two infertile
brothers with breakpoints close to TEX13B was described and a
recent publication reported a stop-gain variant in TEX13B as cause
for azoospermia in one man. According to RNA-sequencing data,TEX13B is a germ cell-speci ﬁc gene with highest expression in
spermatogonia. These ﬁndings suggest an association of the
X-linked gene TEX13B with male fertility.
Materials and Methods: Because these studies were limited in
size, we screened the exome data of our Male ReproductiveGenomics (MERGE) cohort of currently 1,003 men with various
infertility phenotypes and some fertile controls for variants in
TEX13B . Additionally, we utilised the exome data of 5,784
genetically proven fathers. The data were ﬁltered for rare stop-
gain, frameshift and splice-site variants (minor allele frequency[MAF] <1% in gnomAD database) in TEX13B .
Results: We detected nine azoospermic men carrying the
hemizygous stop-gain variant c.382C>T;p.(Gln128Ter) in TEX13B .A
f e r t i l ec o n t r o l ,am a nw i t ha s t h e n o t e r a t o z o o s p e r m i aa n dap r o v e nfather were also hemizygous for this variant. Another proven father
carried the hemizygous splice-donor variant c.459 +1G>A in TEX13B .
Conclusions: Based on these ﬁndings, we question whether
pathogenic variants in TEX13B are a monogenic cause for
azoospermia. We are currently screening additional fertile men
for the recurrent stop-gain variant c.382C>T;p.(Gln128Ter) to
determine the frequency of this variant in the fertile malepopulation. This work was supported by the DFG Clinical Research
Unit 326 ‘Male Germ Cells ’.
M.J. Wyrwoll: None. M.S. Oud: None. M. Vockel: None. S.
Kliesch: None. C. Friedrich: None. F. Tüttelmann: None.
P01.043.C Impact of cigarette smoking on the expression of
oxidative stress-related genes in cumulus cells retrieved fromhealthy women undergoing IVF
Fani Konstantinidou
1,2, Maria Cristina Budani3, Annalina Sarra4,
Gian Mario Tiboni3, Liborio Stuppia1,2, Valentina Gatta1,2
1School of Medicine and Health Sciences, "G. d ’Annunzio" University
of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy,2Unit of Molecular Genetics, Center for
Advanced Studies and Technology (CAST), "G. d ’Annunzio" University
of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy,3Department of Medical, Oral and
Biotechnological Sciences, “G. d ’Annunzio ”University of Chieti-
Pescara, Chieti, Italy,4Department of Philosophical, Pedagogical
and Quantitative Economic Sciences, "G. d ’Annunzio" University of
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
Increased production of reactiv e oxygen species is an important
factor in the pathophysiology of fe rtility decline. Cigarette smoking,
for example, can directly derange fo lliculogenesis by ROS production.
Delicate communication between the germline and cumulus cells
(CCs) is also the basis for all processes in ovarian physiology. Severalstudies have aimed to discover non-invasive tools to indirectly
evaluate oocyte quality by focusing on CCs as a mirror of oocyte
characteristics. However, the general lack of uniformity among themindicates that their utility in the clin ical setting remains controversial
due to their high sensitivity to intrinsic and extrinsic factors related to
the patient.On these premises, we focused our attention onevaluating the impact of tobacco smoking on gene expression ofCCs in two categories of individuals , 5 overall healthy smokers and 5
non-smokers (<35 years of age) undergoing IVF treatments. Total
RNA was extracted from CCs of all subjects and subsequently reversetranscribed. Predesigned oxidative stress 96-well plates were used toperform qRT-PCR analysis. A gene was considered differentially
expressed in smokers ’CCs versus control CCs when showing a fold
change >1.4 or <0.7 and a P-value < 0.05 (ANOVA). Statistical analysisshowed a signi ﬁcant down-regulation of genes protecting and
repairing cells against oxidative damage in CCs of all or the majority
of smoking females compared to their corresponding age-matched
controls, indicating a cigarette smoke-derived impact on theoxidative stress pathway.In conclu sion, an important interaction
between cigarette smoking and oxidative stress-related genes in
possible fertility biomarkers is clearly evidenced.
F. Konstantinidou: None. M. Budani: None. A. Sarra: None. G.
Tiboni: None. L. Stuppia: None. V. Gatta: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
99
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P01.044.D To be or not to be pathogenic - distinguishing
pathogenic mutations from benign missense variants in
NR5A1
Jana Emich*1, Corinna Friedrich*1, Christina Burhöi1, Thaís Fenz
Araujo2, Ann-Christin Tewes3, Susanne Ledig3, Albrecht Röpke3,
Sabine Kliesch4, Jörg Gromoll5, Frank Tüttelmann1
1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany,2Department of Genetics, Ribeirao Preto Medical School,
University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil,3Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany,4Centre of
Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of Clinical andSurgical Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany,
5Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Institute of
Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, University of Münster,Münster, Germany.
*These authors contributed equally.
Introduction: Infertility affects 10-15% of all couples. The most
severe form of male infertility is azoospermia, of which most casesare suspected to be of genetic origin. The transcription factor SF1,
encoded by NR5A1 , plays a central role in gonadal development.
Severe variants are associated with gonadal dysgenesis and sexreversal, while mild missense variants have been reported in
isolated forms of male infertility.
Materials and methods: The exome data of 1,003 otherwise
healthy infertile men from the Male Reproductive Genomics(MERGE) cohort was ﬁltered for heterozygous missense variants in
NR5A1 with a minor allele frequency of ≤0.1% in the gnomAD
database. The identi ﬁed variants were forwarded to functional
analysis by site-directed mutagenesis and a luciferase reporterassay.
Results: We detected eight potentially relevant missense
variants in nine patients with severe oligozoospermia orazoospermia, resulting in a detection rate of 1.0% for NR5A1 in
the MERGE cohort. In the luciferase assay, two of these variants
showed reduced SF1 transcriptional activity.
Conclusions: The assessment of missense variants is challen-
ging, warranting functional analyses to distinguish pathogenic
mutations from benign variants. The luciferase reporter assay
supports that two of the investigated variants are relevant in thepathogenesis of spermatogenic failure and male infertility.
This work was supported by the DFG Clinical Research Unit 326
‘Male Germ Cells ’.
J. Emich*: None. C. Friedrich*: None. C. Burhöi: None. T. Fenz
Araujo: None. A. Tewes: None. S. Ledig: None. A. Röpke: None.
S. Kliesch: None. J. Gromoll: None. F. Tüttelmann: None.
P01.045.A FKBP6 has an essential role in human
spermatogenesis
Godfried W. van der Heijden
1,2, Manon Oud2, Rytis Stakaitis3, Ieva
Golubickaite3, Channah Gaasbeek2, Nadja Rotte4,5, Sabine Kliesch4,
Liliana Ramos1, Kristian Almstrup3, Miguel J. Xavier6, Joris A.
Veltman6, Frank Tüttelmann5
1Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Radboud University Medical Centre, The Netherlands,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Human Genetics, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud UniversityMedical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Copenhagen University
Hospital - Rigshospitalet, Department of Growth and Reproduction,
Copenhagen, Denmark,4Centre of Reproductive Medicine and
Andrology, Department of Clinical and Surgical Andrology, Universityof Münster, Münster, Germany,5Institute of Reproductive Genetics,University of Münster, Münster, Germany,6Biosciences Institute,
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United
Kingdom.
We performed exome sequencing in an infertile patient and his
fertile parents to identify the genetic cause of his germ cell arrest
in spermatogenesis. A homozygous pathogenic 22-bp insertion
was identi ﬁed in the FKBP6 gene. In an independent cohort, a
second patient with a different homozygous variant predicted tobe pathogenic was also identi ﬁed in FKBP6 . RNA isolated from
testicular tissue was used to show that FKBP6 expression levels
were severely reduced in both patients, con ﬁrmed by immunos-
taining. In male mice, Fkbp6 functions in the fetal piRNA-pathway
and localizes to the synaptonemal complex (SC) during meiosis. In
adult male KO mice, failure to complete chromosome synapsis
causes meiotic arrest, presumably due to its absence from the SC.To ascertain if these features also underlie infertility in humans, we
analyzed meiotic progression in the two cases. Germ cell loss did
occur during meiosis but not due to incomplete synapsis of thechromosomes. In control samples, we were unable to detectFKBP6 at the SC, altogether suggesting a function for FKBP6
outside SC-biology. To determine if a role for FKBP6 in the piRNA-
pathway was evident in humans, we assessed its co-localizationwith piRNA-pathway factors PIWIL1 and TDRKH. In controls, FKBP6localized to cytoplasmic granules together with PIWIL1 and
TDRKH. Loss of FKBP6, however, did not affect the localization
of these factors. Our data indicates that FKBP6 is required for
human spermatogenesis and that it might play a role in the
piRNA-pathway rather than in the establishment of the SC.
G.W. van der Heijden: None. M. Oud: None. R. Stakaitis:
None. I. Golubickaite: None. C. Gaasbeek: None. N. Rotte: None.
S. Kliesch: None. L. Ramos: None. K. Almstrup: None. M.J.
Xavier: None. J.A. Veltman: None. F. Tüttelmann: None.
P01.047.C Effects of polymorphisms of energy metabolism
and angiogenesis genes on intrauterine growth restriction
Irina Novikova , Inna Pokudina, Elena Mashkina, Tatiana Shkurat
Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a condition
in which the growth rate of the fetus during pregnancy is less than
expected. Energy metabolism genes play an important role in the
regulation of both maternal and fetal body weight and thus in thedevelopment of IUGR. Another placental key factor of IUGR
physiopathology is angiogenesis. The aim of research is to study
the polymorphisms of genes of energy metabolism ( LEPR ;FTO)
and angiogenesis ( NOS3 ;VEGFA ) in women with IUGR compared
to the control group to identify it`s possible functional signi ﬁcance
in the pathogenesis of IUGR.
Materials and Methods: The material for the study was blood
samples from 36 pregnant women diagnosed with IUGR and 30healthy women. Genotyping of targeted SNPs: A223G (LEPR ),
A23525T (FTO),C786T (
NOS3 ),C634G (VEGFA ) were detected by RT-
PCR.
Results: No statistically signi ﬁcant associations of LEPR and FTO
gene polymorphisms with IUGR were found (p =0.765; p =0.461,
respectively). Genotypes CT (NOS3 ) and CC (VEGFA ) were
signi ﬁcantly associated with low risk of developing IUGR. OR
were 0,309 (CI 95% 0,110-0,868 p < 0.001) and 0.14 (CI 95% 0.04-
0.46 p=0.003) respectively. Genotypes TT(NOS3 ) and GG(VEGFA )
were associated with higher relative risk of developing IUGR. ORwere 2,400 (CI 95% 1,462-3,339 p < 0,001) and 3.67 (CI 95% 1.26-10.7 p=0.003) respectively.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
100
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: The data obtained indicate the need for further
investigation to search for genetic determinants of the develop-
ment of IUGR. This study was funded by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of the Russian Federation #0852-2020-0028
I. Novikova: None. I. Pokudina: None. E. Mashkina: None. T.
Shkurat: None.
P01.048.D KIR-HLAC genotyping in married couples with
unexplained early reproductive losses
Kateryna Sosnina , Danuta Zastavna, Oresta Terpyliak, Bogdan
Tretiak
Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine.
The immune interaction between the uterus and the embryo is
crucial to achieve a pregnancy. Maternal immunotolerance is
provided by the interaction between the cells of the maternal
immune system in the uterus (uterine NK cells) and the embryo.These cells recognize the embryo through KIR receptors, interact-ing with their HLA-C ligands on the embryo. The aim of this study
was to establish and analyze the combinations of KIRand HLA-C
genes in married couples with unexplained early reproductivelosses.
Results: KIR-HLAC genotyping was performed in 43 married
couples with unexplained reproductive losses. Depending on thenumber and type of genes, the KIRgenotype of women ( AA, AB
and BB) was established. The results were compared with the
parental HLAC genotype, and the risk of reproductive losses in such
a pair was calculated. According to the results, 23.3% of womenhave the AAgenotype (high risk of reproductive loss), 76.7% of
women had the ABgenotype (medium risk). According to the
results of KIR-HLAC genotyping of couples with early reproductive
losses, 58.14% of married couples have a high risk of reproductivelosses. Such married couples had the KIR AA genotype in women
and/or the C2/C2 HLAC genotype in women and/or men.
Conclusions: KIR-HLAC genotyping is a genetic test that allows
to assess the risks of the embryo being rejected by the maternalimmune system, and thus to direct medical interventions in order
to achieve a successful pregnancy.
K. Sosnina: None. D. Zastavna: None. O. Terpyliak: None. B.
Tretiak: None.
P01.050.B Identi ﬁcation of two novel point mutations in
DPY19L2 leading to total globozoospermia in two unrelated
patients
Fatma Abdelhedi
1,2, Emmanuel Dulioust3, Nourhène Gharbi2,
Sandrine Barbaux4, Ahmed Ziyyat4, Leila KESKES2, Jean Michel
Dupont1,4
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France,
2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de
Médecine, Sfax, Tunisia,3Laboratoire d ’Histologie Embryologie
Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France,
4Génomique, Epigénétique et Physiopathologie de la Reproduction,
U1016 INSERM-UMR 8104 CNRS, Institut Cochin, Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France.
Background: Globozoospermia is a rare and severe teratozoos-
permia characterized by the presence of round-headed sperma-
tozoa lacking an acrosome. So far, only three genes have been
well documented as responsible for this phenotype in human,namely DPY19L2, SPATA16 , and recently GGN . Genetic causes
remain unexplained for 20% to 30% of patients withglobozoospermia suggesting that this phenotype is likely
genetically heterogeneous.
Methods: As alterations of DPY19L2 gene represent the main
cause of globozoospermia in human, we ﬁrst screened for
DPY19L2 molecular defects in a cohort of 10 patients of African
and European origin, diagnosed with complete or partial
globozoospermia. Whole genome analysis with SNP array was
carried out in patients lacking genetic defects of DPY19L2 .
Results: Molecular analyses performed on 9 genetically
independent individuals showed that four (44%) were homo-
zygous for the DPY19L2 deletion, two were heterozygous
composite for two novel non-synonymous mutations (p.R686Gand p.D687E) in exon 21. No genetic causes were identi ﬁed in four
patients with partial globozoospermia.
Conclusion: Our results highlight the importance of screening
forDPY19L2 mutations in the absence of DPY19L2 deletions and
strongly suggest that partial globozoospermia is not due to
genetic defects on DPY19L2 . Alghough the genetic diagnosis of
globozoospermia does not yet provide any clear therapeuticindications, a molecular diagnosis remains useful to provideadequate genetic counseling. Considering these points, we
recommend the search for DPY19L2 defects as the ﬁrst-line
genetic analysis in complete globozoospermia but not in its partialform.
F. Abdelhedi: None. E. Dulioust: None. N. Gharbi: None. S.
Barbaux: None. A. Ziyyat: None. L. Keskes: None. J.M. Dupont:
None.
P01.051.C Causal inference analyses reveal population risks
and bene ﬁts of extending female reproductive lifespan
through manipulation of biological processes
Katherine S. Ruth
1, Felix R. Day2, Anna Murray1, John R. B. Perry2,
ReproGen consortium ( www.reprogen.org )
1Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,2MRC Epidemiology
Unit, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Institute ofMetabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Recently we demonstrated the potential for new
therapeutics to extend female reproductive lifespan by manip-ulating DNA damage response (DDR) pathways (MedRxiv https://
doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.11.20248322 ). We investigated the wider
population health risks and bene ﬁts of prolonged sex hormone
exposure from such interventions.
Materials and Methods: We performed Mendelian Randomiza-
tion using a genetic instrument for age at menopause (ANM)comprised of 290 variants from GWAS in >200,000 women. Wetested outcomes associated with hormone replacement therapy,
as being analogous to longer hormone exposure from later ANM.
Results: One-year later genetically-instrumented ANM
increased the odds of female-speci ﬁc hormone-sensitive cancers
by up to 5%. We identi ﬁed individual variants with effects on DDR
and cancer risk independently of ANM and sex hormone exposure
- loss-of-function alleles in BRCA2 and CHEK2 resulted in ANM 1.69
years earlier (95% CI 0.12-3.26, p =0.03) and 2.36 years later (1.31-
3.41, p =1×1 0
-5). We used MR-Radial to identify and exclude such
variants from analyses, strengthening the evidence for an
association with ER +breast cancer (OR =1.04, from p =4×1 0-9
to p=3×1 0-16). Later ANM had protective effects on Type 2
diabetes (OR =0.98, p =1×1 0-3) and bone health (fracture, OR =
0.98, p =3×1 0-4). There was little evidence for associations with
cardiovascular disease, longevity or Alzheimer ’s disease.
Conclusions: Later ANM is detrimental for hormone sensitive
cancers yet bene ﬁts metabolic and bone health, consistent withAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
101
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608effects of oestrogen therapy in trials. However, our results do not
support associations from observational studies. Novel therapeutic
approaches to extending reproductive lifespan are likely to have
wider effects on population health over prolonged fertility.
K.S. Ruth: None. F.R. Day: None. A. Murray: None. J.R.B. Perry:
None.
P01.052.D Locus-speci ﬁc methylation of the ESR1 gene
promoter region as a marker for the prognosis of placental
insufﬁciency and perinatal loss
Zoia I. Rossokha1, Ludmila I. Vorobey2, Valeriy V. Kaminskyi2,
Tetjana V. Kolomiichenko2, LIlia Y. Fishchuk1, Natalia L. Medvedieva1,
Ludmila I. Brisevac2, Olexandr I. Zhdanovych2, Natalia G. Gorovenko2
1State Institution "Reference-centre for molecular diagnostic of Public
Health Ministry of Ukraine", Kyiv, Ukraine,2Supic Medical Acadeny of
Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction: Chronic stress and polluted environment are known
direct determinants in prenatal maternal promoter hypermethyla-
tion of ESR1 gene and blockade of estrogen-dependent processes
in the placenta. ESR1 gene expression is important for embryo
implantation and pregnancy outcome, neuroprotection through-
out life from antenatal period, and also has an organizational
impact on the formation of long-term behavioral and cognitivefunctions, as well as maintaining energy homeostasis. The aim ofthe study was to investigate the effect of hypermethylation of the
ESR1 gene promoter region on the risk of early pregnancy and
perinatal loss.
Materials and Methods: 31 women with pregnancy loss and
10 women without reproductive failure were involved in the
study. 24 women had early pregnancy loss and 7 women had
perinatal loss. Methylation of the promoter region of the ESR1
gene was determined by methyl-speci ﬁc PCR using DNA after
bisul ﬁde conversion.
Results : Hypermethylated ESR1 promoter region was detected
in 35,48% patients with pregnancy loss. 29,16% patients with earlypregnancy loss had hypermethylated status in ESR1 . More often
hypermethylated status was found among patients with perinatal
loss - 57,14%. And no hypermethylated cases were detected inwomen without reproductive failure. Determination of hyper-methylated ESR1 promoter region was signi ﬁcantly higher in
patients with perinatal loss and 75% of them had had placental
insuf ﬁciency resulting in antenatal death at 26-28 weeks of
gestation.
Conclusion: Hypermethylation of the ESR1 gene promoter
region in women was associated with placental insuf ﬁciency and
perinatal loss. Further research is needed to develop personalizedmethods of perinatal loss prevention.
Z.I. Rossokha: None. L.I. Vorobey: None. V.V. Kaminskyi:
None. T.V. Kolomiichenko: None. L.Y. Fishchuk: None. N.L.
Medvedieva: None. L.I. Brisevac: None. O.I. Zhdanovych: None.
N.G. Gorovenko: None.
P01.053.A The role of miR 196b in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis
Victoria Spasova
1, Vesela Karamisheva1,2, Olga Antonova1, Zora
Hammoudeh1, Liliya Koleva3, Rada Staneva1, Mihail Ganev1,
Desislava Nesheva1, Draga Toncheva1, Savina Hadjidekova1
1Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2University obstetrics and
gynecology hospital “Maichin dom ”,S o ﬁa, Bulgaria,3University
Hospital “Pirogov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria.Introduction: Endometriosis is a chronic disease affecting about
10% of women worldwide. There is still a discussion among
scientist on the exact molecular pathogenesis of the diseaseappearance. MiRNAs as posttranscriptional expression regulatorsmay contribute to the development of endometriosis.
Materials and methods: Total RNA was isolated from tissue
samples of ectopic endometrium of 30 patients with endome-triosis and healthy endometrium of 15 controls (miRNeasy-MiniKit,
Qiagen). Three pool samples were constructed based on the
disease stage - each containing 15 RNA samples: early stageendometriosis, late stage endometriosis, and controls. Reversetranscription was conducted on each of the pool samples via
miScript-II-RT Kit,Qiagen. SYBR-Green-based Real-time PCR assay
was used to determine the expression pro ﬁle of 84 miRNAs
(Human miFinder miRNA PCR Array,Qiagen). QIAGEN ’s GeneGlobe
Data Analysis Centre was used to perform the data analysis. The
prediction of target genes was accomplished using miRBase.org,
Targetscan.org and Diana tools.
Results: We detected miR-196b-5p downregulated in both stages
of endometriosis compared to the healthy controls (fold change
=-19,28 for the early stage, fold change =- 1 3 9 , 5 4f o rt h el a t es t a g e ) .
HOX genes are a known target of miR -196b-5p. These genes encode
proteins that act as transcripti on factors. Changes of HOX genes
expression are associated with altered endometrium development.
Conclusion: We suggest that the altered expression of miR-
196b may contribute to reveal the etiology of endometriosisoccurrence and progression.Funding. Contract No.212/12.12.2018,
grant No.4731/03.07.2018, Council of Medical Science at the
Medical University of So ﬁa, Bulgaria; Bulgarian Ministry of
Education and Science, National Program for Research “Young
Scientists and Postdoctoral Students. ”
V. Spasova: None. V. Karamisheva: None. O. Antonova: None.
Z. Hammoudeh: None. L. Koleva: None. R. Staneva: None. M.
Ganev: None. D. Nesheva: None. D. Toncheva: None. S.
Hadjidekova: None.
P01.054.B Comparative analysis of cytogenetic abnormalities
revealed by karyotyping and interphase FISH in chorion of
ﬁrst-trimester miscarriages
Andrei V. Tikhonov
1, Olga A. E ﬁmova1, Mikhail I. Krapivin1, Yanina
M. Sagurova1, Anna A. Pendina1, Alla S. Koltsova1, Anna A.
Smirnova2, Olga E. Talantova1, Olga G. Chiryaeva1, Lubov ’I.
Petrova1, Vera S. Dudkina1, Vladislav S. Baranov1
1D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Repro-
ductology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation,2St. Petersburg State
Pediatric Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Abnormal karyotype is a frequent cause of ﬁrst-trimester
miscarriage. In ~20% of cases conventional karyotyping is notpossible because of absence of mitotic activity in chorion. Here,we compared the results of karyotyping and interphase ﬂuores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH) with centromeric/locus-speci ﬁc
DNA-probes speci ﬁc to all chromosomes excluding chromosomes
1 and 19 (Abbott Molecular) on chorion of ﬁrst-trimester
miscarriages. A total of 3511 cases were retrospectively analyzed.
In 2816 cases, conventional karyotyping was performed on direct
metaphase preparations. In 695 cases, interphase FISH wasperformed because of no metaphases on direct preparations.
The frequency of abnormal karyotype reached 64.4%(1814/2816)
in the karyotyped group and 57.7%(401/695) in the FISH-analyzedgroup. Expectably, structural chromosomal abnormalities weredetected only in the karyotyped group at the frequency of 2.9%
(53/1814). The spectrum of revealed numerical karyotypeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
102
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608abnormalities did not differ between the groups. However, their
frequencies differed between the karyotyped and FISH-analyzed
groups. Aneuploidies were revealed with higher frequency in the
karyotyped compared to the FISH-analyzed group: 73.4%(1332/1814)vs 63.8% (256/401) (p =0.0001). In contrast, polyploidy and
mosaicism were more frequent in FISH-analyzed compared to the
karyotyped group: 26.2% (105/401) vs 16.9% (306/1814) (p < 0.0001)
and 8.0% (32/401) vs 4.4% (80/1814) (p =0.0047). Thus, FISH can be
used for the detection of numeric al chromosomal abnormalities in
chorion of ﬁrst-trimester miscarriages, when karyotyping is not
possible. Difference in frequencies of the same cytogenetic
categories between the samples wi th and without mitotic activity
suggests that viability of chorionic cell depends on the type ofchromosomal abnormality. Supported by RSF №19-75-00023.
A.V. Tikhonov: None. O.A. E ﬁmova: None. M.I. Krapivin:
None. Y.M. Sagurova: None. A.A. Pendina: None. A.S. Koltsova:
None. A.A. Smirnova: None. O.E. Talantova: None. O.G.
Chiryaeva: None. L.I. Petrova: None. V.S. Dudkina: None. V.S.
Baranov: None.
P01.055.C Case report: Prenatal mosaic trisomy 9 as result of a
meiotic non-disjunction event
Sebastian Rusch
1,2, Melanie Gass2, Sevgi Tercanli3, Isabel Filges2,4
1Medical Genetics, Institute of laboratory medicine, Kantonsspital
Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland,2Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical
Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland,3Centre for Prenatal Ultrasound, Basel, Switzer-
land, Basel, Switzerland,4Department of Clinical Research, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Introduction: Prenatal mosaic aneuploidy remains a challenge for
counseling clinicians. The impact on embryonic and fetaldevelopment is depending on the level of mosaicism and tissue
distribution of the aneuploid cell line; hence, clinical conse-
quences are dif ﬁcult to predict. We present the rare instance of
mosaic trisomy 9 in a fetus with multiple malformations. Wediscuss how CMA-SNP data can contribute to understand the
mechanism of aneuploidy.
Methods: Prenatal sonography of a 44-year-old woman at 14
weeks of gestation (WG) showed tricuspid regurgitation, asmall branchial cyst, single umbilical artery and retrognathia, at 19
WG additional heart, renal and brai n anomalies. FTT found increased
risk scores of 1:102 and 1:2 for trisomy 21 and 13/18 respectively.CMA was used on amniotic ﬂuid cells to detect copy number
variants.
Results: The CMA result on amniotic ﬂuid cells was in respect to
copy number state (2.5) and B-Allele Frequencies (BAF) of approx.0, 40, 60 and 100% concordant with mosaic trisomy 9 of about
50%. Additionally, with BAF of 20 and 80% in several chromoso-
mal regions of chromosome 9 SNP-data signals indicated thepresence of an additional haplotype.
Conclusions: CMA-SNP data reveal regions containing an
additional haplotype which most likely arose from meiotic
crossing over events. The distribution of the additional haplotypein the centromeric region suggests a meiotic I non-disjunctionevent followed by a postzygotic trisomic rescue for the normal cell
line. We increase our knowledge on the fetal phenotype caused by
the aberrant cell line which is only rarely reported.
S. Rusch: None. M. Gass: None. S. Tercanli: None. I. Filges:
None.
P01.056.D Mosaicism for copy number variations in the
placenta is even more dif ﬁcult to interpret than mosaicism
for whole chromosome aneuploidyIda Charlotte Bay Lund
1,2, Naja Becher1,2,3, Jesper Graakjaer4, Dorte
Lildballe4, Niels Uldbjerg5,6, Pauline Bogaard7, Astrid Petersen7, Else
Marie Vestergaard8, Ida Vogel1,2,6
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus
N., Denmark,2Center for Fetal Diagnostics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus N., Denmark,3Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, Aarhus N., Denmark,4Clinical Genetics, University Hospital
of Southern Denmark, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark,5Depart-
ment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus N., Denmark,6Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus
University, Aarhus N., Denmark,7Department of Pathology, Aalborg
University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,8Department of Clinical
Biochemistry, Horsens Regional Hospital, Horsens, Denmark.
Objective: To compare mosaicisms in prenatal chorionic villus
samples with corresponding postpartum placental samples.
Method: We collected placentas from 15 consecutive cases of
mosaicism detected in chorionic villus samples and obtained ﬁve
standardized samples on each placenta after delivery. All pre- andpostnatal placental samples were uncultured and analyzed byhigh-resolution chromosomal microarray.
Results: Ten cases of mosaicism for whole chromosome
aneuploidy(mWC) and ﬁve cases with mosaicism for (sub)
chromosomal copy number variations(mCNVs) were included. In
5/10 mWC cases and in 4/5 mCNV cases the prenatally detected
aberration was con ﬁrmed in the postpartum placenta. Three
postpartum placentas revealed various complex aberrationsdiffering from the prenatal results: 1) mosaicisms for different
deletions/duplications on 9p and 9q in all samples (prenatal:
mosaic 5.3 Mb duplication on 9p24), 2) different regions withdeletions/duplications/loss of heterozygosity on 1p in all samples(prenatal: mosaic 2.3 Mb 1p36 duplication), and 3) mosaicism for a
duplication on 5q and a deletion on 6p in one out of ﬁve samples
(prenatal: mosaic trisomy 7).
Conclusion: CNVs constitute a complex subgroup in placental
mosaicism. Counseling of these couples after chorionic villus
sampling shouldn´t focus on the speci ﬁc CNV involved, but on the
nature of mosaicism and the option of amniocentesis andultrasound.
Funding: This work was funded by The Foundation of Aase and
Ejnar Danielsen, The Foundation of 17-12-1981 and The NovoNordisk Foundation.
I. Lund: None. N. Becher: None. J. Graakjaer: None. D.
Lildballe: None. N. Uldbjerg: None. P. Bogaard: None. A.
Petersen: None. E. Vestergaard: None. I. Vogel: None.
P01.057.A Prenatal diagnosis of Neu-Laxova syndrome
through identi ﬁcation of a novel exonic-deletion and mis-
sense mutation in the PHGDH gene
Aruna Marchetto
1, Moneef Shoukier1, Katja Gahle1, Anne Janke1,
Justin Seidel1, Ursula Hiener2, Vera Link3, Kai Wagner3, Sabine
Minderer1, Karl Philipp Gloning1
1Prenatal-Medicine Munich, Munich, Germany,2Klinikum Dritter
Orden - Department of Radiology, Munich, Germany,3Rotkreuzkli-
nikum - Institute of Pathology, Munich, Germany.
Mutations in the PHGDH gene disrupt the serine biosynthesis and
are known to be associated with the autosomal recessive disorderPhosphoglycerate dehydrogenase de ﬁciency (PHGDH) and the
more severe form Neu-Laxova syndrome 1 (NLS1). To date, there is
no clear genotype-phenotype correlation between PHGDH andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
103
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608NLS1. PHGDH is characterized by congenital microcephaly,
psychomotor retardation and seizures whereas it has been
assumed that NLS1 could be caused by more severe PHGDH -
mutations with main clinical features of intrauterine growthretardation (IUGR), microcephaly, cutaneous and craniofacialabnormalities. We present a case of a prenatal conspicuous
microcephaly linked to two novel mutations in the PHGDH gene
likely associated with NLS1.
We report on a pregnant 42-year-old patient, 23
rdgestational
week, whose fetus presented with severe microcephaly, IUGR, cleft
lip, dilated intestinal loops and mild hydronephrosis. MRI
conﬁrmed sonographic ﬁndings while array-CGH was normal (arr
(1-22)x2,(XY)x1). A multigene panel analysis (brain malformationspanel, 400 genes) revealed two likely disease-causing variants; a
maternal inherited hemizygous missense mutation c.766G>A, p.
Gly256Arg in exon 7 and a paternal inherited heterozygousdeletion of exon 6 and 7 of the PHGDH gene. The pregnancy was
terminated in the 25
thweek. Immunohistological staining of the
fetuses ’skin biopsy revealed ichthyosis and hyperkeratosis. Both
detected mutations in the PHGDH gene were localized in thenucleotide-binding domain (NBD).
Considering the molecular and clinical ﬁndings, we assume
these mutations to be causative for a Neu-Laxova syndrome. Thus,our results support previous ﬁndings indicating that mutations in
NBD mostly cause the more severe phenotype of PHGDH-
associated disorders (NLS1).
A. Marchetto: None. M. Shoukier: None. K. Gahle: None. A.
Janke: None. J. Seidel: None. U. Hiener: None. V. Link: None. K.
Wagner: None. S. Minderer: None. K. Gloning: None.
P01.058.B Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1 and the next generation:
is preimplantation genetic testing the solution?
Vivian Vernimmen , Aimee D. C. Paulussen, Constance T. R. M.
Stumpel, Ron J. T. van Golde, Christine E. M. de Die
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Introduction: Future parents affected with Neuro ﬁbromatosis
type 1 (NF1) can opt for preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) to
avoid NF1 in their offspring. We aim to identify challenges andpitfalls in PGT for NF1.
Methods: We collected data on PGT cycles from the medical
ﬁles of couples requesting PGT for NF1 between January 1997 and
January 2020.
Results: PGT was the reproductive option of choice for 96
couples. PGT was not possible for 14 couples, mostly because the
causative variant was not identi ﬁed or of unknown signi ﬁcance.
The origin of the NF1 mutation was (presumed) sporadic in 63% of
the 82 couples proceeding with PGT. PCR with multiple
polymorphic markers was most frequently applied, combined
with direct mutation analysis if needed. PGT/PCR work-up showedseveral exceptional situations: in one family two different NF1
mutations turned out to be causal and in one family with a
sporadic male index the mutation was not detected in the sperm
cells during PGT work-up. The ‘OnePGT ’genome wide haplotyping
method, based on next generation sequencing, was used for 2recent families with a familial mutation. A successful PGT test
could be developed for 78 couples with 71 different variants in the
NF1 gene. Together, 65 couples underwent 141 PGT cycles and the
transfer of 162 unaffected embryos resulted in 39 ongoing
pregnancies (pregnancy rate 24,1%/embryotransfer).
Conclusions: PGT is a successful reproductive option for
couples with NF1. Test development was possible in almost allcases reviewed despite the fact that most variants were unique
and sporadic.V. Vernimmen: None. A.D.C. Paulussen: None. C.T.R.M.
Stumpel: None. R.J.T. van Golde: None. C.E.M. de Die: None.
P01.059.C Prenatal diagnostics of NF2 mutation in the fetus,
associated with the development of endometrial cancer
Kalina Belemezova
1,2, Kunka Kamenarova3, Kalina Mihova3,
Mariela Hristova-Savova1, Albena Todorova4, Radka Kaneva3, Ivanka
Dimova1,3
1Genetic Laboratory, SAGBAL Dr. Shterev, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Medical
University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Molecular Medicine Center,
Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Laboratory Genika, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is rarely diagnosed during pregnancy.
An electronic search of the literature revealed just 25 cases of EC
diagnosed during or after pregnancy, for the period between 1995
and 2019. Ten percent of endometrial carcinomas harbor NF2
mutations. This observation is of interest since mutated NF2 canactivate mTOR, the downstream effector of PIK3CA, and in a high
percentage of this cancer type (>80%), there are PI3K pathway
aberrations. NF2 is a complex gene with somatic mutations being
associated with various cancers. Germline mutations cause the
autosomal dominant disorder neuro ﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2). Indivi-
duals with hereditary NF2 do develop schwannomas, ependymo-mas, and meningiomas. Although the somatic mutationssometimes overlap with those in hereditary NF2, no published
papers are documenting an increased risk of other cancer types in
neuro ﬁbromatosis patients. Here we report a young pregnant
woman, affected by classical NF2 (presence of bilateral schwan-nomas) and carrying mutation c.592C>T (p.Arg198Ter) in exon 6 of
theNF2 gene. Because of the high risk for inheritance (50%), CVS
was performed and DNA from the fetus was analyzed for thepresence of mutation with Sanger sequencing - the fetus was
found to be a carrier of the same pathogenic mutation. In the
meantime, ultrasound examination suspected tumor formation inthe uterus, which was con ﬁrmed to be endometrial cancer after
biopsy and pregnancy was terminated. This case suggests an
adverse effect of the simultaneously NF2-affected fetus and
mother for endometrial malignancy and suggesting PGD whenthe mother is affected by NF2.
K. Belemezova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova:
None. M. Hristova-Savova: None. A. Todorova: None. R. Kaneva:
None. I. Dimova: None.
P01.060.D Patient-friendly integrated ﬁrst trimester screening
by NIPT and fetal anomaly scan
Karin E. M. Diderich , Malgorzata I. Srebniak, Maarten F. C. M.
Knapen, Marieke Joosten, Sander Galjaard, Diane Van Opstal
ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Many major structural fetal anomalies can be diagnosed by ﬁrst
trimester fetal anomaly scan. NIPT can accurately detectaneuploidies and large chromosomal aberrations in cfDNA in
maternal blood plasma. This study shows how a patient-friendly
ﬁrst trimester screening for both chromosomal and structural fetal
anomalies in only two outpatient visits can be provided.Genotype- ﬁrst approach assures not only the earliest diagnosis
of trisomy 21 (the most prevalent chromosome aberration), but
also completion of the screening at 12 –14 weeks. To ensure
proper management and avoid unnecessary anxiety abnormalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
104
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608NIPT different from trisomy 21, 18 and 13 should be referred for
genetic counseling.
K.E.M. Diderich: None. M.I. Srebniak: None. M.F.C.M. Knapen:
None. M. Joosten: None. S. Galjaard: None. D. Van Opstal: None.
P01.061.A NIPD for translocation carriers - yes please or no
go?
Malgorzata I. Srebniak1, Fernanda S. Jehee1, Marieke Joosten1,
Marjan Boter1, Walter de Valk1, Robert van der Helm1, Erik
Sistermans2, Els Voorhoeve2, Shama Bhola2, Mariette Hoffer3,
Nicolette den Hollander3, Merryn Macville4, Diane Van Opstal1
1Erasmus MC, Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Amsterdam
UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam,Netherlands,3Leiden University Medical Center, Clinical Genetics,
Leiden, Netherlands,4Clinical Genetics, GROW School for Oncology
and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, Netherlands.
The presence of an unbalanced familial translocation can reliably
be assessed in the cytotrophoblast of chorionic villi. However,
carriers of a balanced translocation often refuse invasive testingdue to the miscarriage risk. Because the cytotrophoblast is also the
source of cell free (cf) DNA in plasma, this study aimed to
investigate whether an unbalanced translocation can also bediagnosed in cfDNA by whole-genome NIPT.Pregnant womencarrying a fetus with an unbalanced familial translocation, from
whom NIPT as well as microarray data were available, were
included in this retrospective assessment. NIPT was performed inthe course of the TRIDENT study, but at the time of screening,carrier status of a parental translocation was unknown (exclusion
criterion for NIPT in the Netherlands). In 12 cases both NIPT and
microarray data were available. In 10/12 cases the unbalancedtranslocation was correctly identi ﬁed without prior knowledge on
parental translocation. One was missed due to too low fetal
fraction. One was missed due to technical restrictions in calling16p gains. Both missed cases were later identi ﬁed by invasive
diagnostic testing after ultrasound anomalies were found.This
study supports the hypothesis that routine NIPT may be used for
prenatal diagnosis of unbalanced inheritance of familial transloca-tions, especially with prior knowledge of the translocationallowing focused examination of the involved chromosomal
regions. Our study showed that routine shallow sequencing
designed for aneuploidy detection in cfDNA may be suf ﬁcient for
higher resolution NIPT, if specialized copy number software is
used and if suf ﬁcient fetal fraction is present.
M.I. Srebniak: None. F.S. Jehee: None. M. Joosten: None. M.
Boter: None. W. de Valk: None. R. van der Helm: None. E.
Sistermans: None. E. Voorhoeve: None. S. Bhola: None. M.
Hoffer: None. N. den Hollander: None. M. Macville: None. D.
Van Opstal: None.
P01.062.B Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of paternally-
inherited disorders: three years clinical experience
Mathilde Pacault
1,2,Camille Verebi1, Maureen Lopez1, Nicolas
Vaucouleur1, Lucie Orhant1, Nathalie Deburgrave1, France Leturcq1,
Dominique Vidaud1, Emmanuelle Girodon1, Thierry Bienvenu1,
Juliette Nectoux1
1Service de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, APHP.
Centre Université de Paris, Paris, France,2Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire et d ’Histocompatibilité, Centre Hospitalier Régional
Universitaire, Brest, France.Introduction: Cell-free fetal DNA analysis is now performed
routinely for aneuploidy screening, fetal RhD genotyping or sex
determination. However, applications to single genedisorders (SGD) remain sparse. We previously described astandardized protocol for non-invasive exclusion of paternal
mutation in SGD using a targeted, droplet digital PCR-based
approach. Here, we report our three-year clinical experience sinceoffering this service.
Patients and Methods: Patients were referred by clinicians
nationwide for several monogenic disorders, paternally-inheritedorde novo , dominant or recessive, such as cystic ﬁbrosis,
neuro ﬁbromatosis type I or FGFR3 -related disorders (thanatopho-
ric dysplasia and achondroplasia). Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis
was performed using custom assays for droplet digital PCR.Results, turn-around time and cost-effectiveness were evaluated.
Results: Our tests proved very robust and highly discrimi-
nant, as a result was obtained for every 205 referral except one,
where fetal fraction was too low to conclude, but returned «unaffected fetus » on a subsequent sample. All referred
pathogenic variants could be targeted except one located in
a repetitive genomic region. Mean time between order andvalidation of an assay was 14 days. Mean result reporting timewas 6 days.
Conclusion: This genetic testing service was implemented as
a routine practice with a simple development and interpreta-tion process that could be offered for any paternally-inheritedorde novo SGD. Thanks to a short turn-around time, an
affordable price and a great robustness, this method has been
widely adopted by clinicians nationwide for dominantpaternally-inherited disorders, or as a ﬁrst test for recessive
disorders.
M. Pacault: None. C. Verebi: None. M. Lopez: None. N.
Vaucouleur: None. L. Orhant: None. N. Deburgrave: None. F.
Leturcq: None. D. Vidaud: None. E. Girodon: None. T. Bienvenu:
None. J. Nectoux: None.
P01.063.C Implementing non-invasive prenatal testing for
aneuploidy in a national healthcare system in Russia. Moscow
experience
Olesya Sagaidak
1, Alexandra Galaktionova1, Anton Olenev2,
Ekaterina Kuznetsova1, Madina Kaplanova1, Maksim Belenikin1,
Ekaterina Songolova3, Elena Baranova1,4
1LLC Evogen, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Moscow City Health
Department, City clinical hospital №24, Moscow, Russian Federation,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Moscow City Health Department, City
clinical hospital №67 named after L.A. Vorokhobova, Moscow,
Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation,4Federal State
Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Professional Education
“Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education ”of
the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow,Russian Federation.
Since March 2020, NIPT has become available for women at risk up
to 1:2500 in Moscow. Objectives. To evaluate the clinical ef ﬁcacy
of non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) versus prenatal screening
in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.
Materials . According to the results of a biochemical blood test,
patients were dividedinto two groups: the high-risk group
(threshold ≥1:100) (n =338) and the average-risk group (thresh-
old 1:101 - 1:2500) (n =8567). NIPT was performed for all patients.
In case of high risks evaluatedby NIPT, the results were con ﬁrmed
by karyotyping in the high-risk group and groupof the average-
risk patients.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
105
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results : The results of karyotyping were available in 280
patients (82.8%) of the high-risk group. High risks of trisomies by
NIPT were con ﬁrmed in 66/70 cases for trisomy 21,in 22/23 cases
for trisomy 18 and in 4/4 cases for trisomy 13. A high risk of fetalaneuploidies by NIPT was identi ﬁed in 29 cases in the average-risk
group with karyotyping available19 (65.5%) cases: 12 cases of
trisomy 21 and 3 cases of trisomy 13 were con ﬁrmed, other 4
cases were false-positives in the average-risk group (including 1case of trisomy 21 and 3 casesof trisomy 13).
Conclusion: NIPT implementation in Moscow demonstrates
high ef ﬁciency and accuracy. More data is needed to choose an
implementation strategy in a national healthcare system. The workwas supported by Moscow City Health Department grant.
O. Sagaidak: None. A. Galaktionova: None. A. Olenev: None.
E. Kuznetsova: None. M. Kaplanova: None. M. Belenikin: None.
E. Songolova: None. E. Baranova: None.
P01.064.D Simple and complex aneuploidy in premeiotic
oocytes detected by aCGH & NGS: evidence for geneticinﬂuence and effect on fertility
Harita Ghevaria
1, Sioban SenGupta1, Roy Naja2, Rabi Odia3, Paul
Serhal4, Xavier Vinals Gonzalez3, Xuhui Sun1, Joy Delhanty1
1Preimplantation Genetics Group,University College London (UCL),
London, United Kingdom,2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Igenomix
UK Ltd, London, United Kingdom,3Embryology Department, The
Centre for Reproductive and Genetic Health, London, United
Kingdom,4Clinical Department, The Centre For Reproductive and
Genetic Health, London, United Kingdom.
Aneuploidy is the major cause of embryonic & fetal death. Most
errors arise in meiosis I/II in the adult female, strongly
correlated with maternal age. Our application of arraycomparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and next genera-
tion sequencing (NGS) has shown that 10-15% of oocyte
aneuploidy is in fact premeiotic (PM) and present in the earlyembryo, leading to a risk of an aneuploid conception in adultlife irrespective of age. Mosaic aneuploidy maybe present in the
primordial germ cells or may arise during the extensive mitotic
divisions of the oogonia. A substantial individual variation inthe incidence of PM errors is likely to be related to the geneticbackground of the oocyte donor. NGS or aCGH was performed
on 141 immature oocytes [germinal vesicles (GV) & metaphase I
(MI) oocytes] and 61 mature oocytes [Metaphase II - 1st PBcomplexes]. Fifteen (19.2%) o f 78 donors had oocytes with PM
errors. Oocyte aneuploidy incidence was correlated with the
reproductive histories of female partners. In categories 1 & 2most couples have fertility issues & very similar incidence of PMerrors. Groups 3, 5 & 6 from couples with no known fertility
issues all have lower incidences. Two cases in Group 4 stand
out, with a much higher incidence which may be related to thegenetic factors responsible for the onset of breast cancer intheir 30s.
Table: Classi ﬁcation of female partners donating oocytes
Classi ﬁcation of
female partners
based on
reproductivehistoriesTotal
No. of
donorsTotal
oocytes
testedOocytes
with
premeiotic
aneuploidyNo. of donors
contributing
oocytes with
premeioticaneuploidyNo. of
oocytes
with
Simple(SE)/Complex
(CE) Errors
1. Female fertility
status unknown27 76 11 (14.5%) 6 donors 7(SE); 4(CE)
2.Primary/secondary
female factorinfertility25 48 6 (12.5%) 4 donors 3(SE); 3(CE)
3.Oocyte
preservation due tosocial reasons3 23 1 (4.3%) 1 donor 1(SE)Table: Classi ﬁcation of female partners donating oocytes
Classi ﬁcation of
female partnersbased onreproductive
historiesTotal
No. ofdonorsTotal
oocytestestedOocytes
withpremeioticaneuploidyNo. of donors
contributingoocytes withpremeiotic
aneuploidyNo. of
oocyteswithSimple
(SE)/
Complex(CE) Errors
4.Oocyte
preservation due to
breast cancer2 10 5 (50%) 2 donors 1(SE); 4(CE)
5.Female carriers of
structural
rearrangements ormonogenicdisorders (non-
cancer related)17 30 2 (6.66%) 2 donors 1(SE); 1(CE)
6.Females at
increased risk of
developing breast/ovarian cancer dueto BRCA1/2 genemutations41 50 0 0
Total 78 202 25 (12.38%) 15 donors 13 (SE); 12
(CE)
Grant Support - CRGH
H. Ghevaria: None. S. SenGupta: None. R. Naja: None. R. Odia:
None. P. Serhal: None. X. Gonzalez: None. X. Sun: None. J.
Delhanty: None.
P01.065.A Evaluation of the Telomere Length and its Effect on
the Ovarian Reserve in a Sample of Colombian Women
Johana Marin Suarez1, Harold Moreno-Ortiz2, Lissette Otero3,
Stephen Matlin3, Clara Inés Esteban-Pérez2, Maribel Forero-Castro1
1Universidad Pedagogica y Tecnologica de Colombia, Tunja,
Colombia,2Departamento Biogenética reproductiva. Invitro, Colom-
bia, Bogota, Colombia,3Life Length, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Studies have been carried out where they relate
longevity in humans with higher fertility, and indicate that delaysin the onset of menopause in longer-lived women could be due to
slower cellular aging; which has led us to think about the
importance of the effect of telomeric shortening in reproductiveaging. In addition, it has been observed that alterations intelomere length (TL) is turn related to a decrease in ovarian
reserve (OR). To evaluate telomere length and its effect on OR
values in healthy women with a diagnosis of PCOS.
Methodology: 66 healthy women and 44 women with PCOS,
LT was quanti ﬁed in mononucleated cells using the HT-QFISH
technique at the Life Length Laboratory. EB was calculated from
the measurement of LT. Individual RO markers were integratedwith LT and EB results. The chronological and biological age of the
participants was compared as well as the reproductive status.
Results: LT in both groups was in the normal range, there were
no signi ﬁcant differences between the LT (11.7 vs 11.87, p =0.33).
The mean CD was 24 years for controls and 27 years for women
with PCOS. There were no signi ﬁcant differences between CD and
BE in each group (control: 24 vs 26, p =0.46, and PCOS: 27 vs 26,
p=0.9). OR markers were higher in women with PCOS.
Conclusion: The evaluation of TL is a tool that should be
explored to evaluate the reproductive status in healthy women
with PCOS.
J. Marin Suarez: None. H. Moreno-Ortiz: None. L. Otero: None.
S. Matlin: None. C. Esteban-Pérez: None. M. Forero-Castro:
None.
P01.066.B Systematic review and meta-analysis of genetic
association studies of pelvic organ prolapseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
106
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608John W. F. Chua1, Kristina Allen-Brady2, Romana Cuffolo3, Marianne
Koch4, Felice Sorrentino5, Rufus Cartwright6,7
1Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China,2Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah,Salt Lake City, UT, USA,3Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom,4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria,5Department of
Medical and Surgical Sciences, Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecol-
ogy, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy,6Department of Epidemiology
& Biostatistics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
7Department of Urogynaecology, LNWH NHS Trust, London, United
Kingdom.
Introduction and Objective: Family and twin studies demon-
strate that pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is heritable, but the geneticetiology is poorly understood. This review aimed to identify
genetic loci and speci ﬁc polymorphisms associated with POP,
while assessing the strength, consistency, and risk of bias amongreported associations.
Methods: Updating an earlier systematic review PubMed and
HuGE Navigator as well as relevant conference abstracts were
searched using genetic and phenotype keywords from 2015-2020.Screening and data extraction were performed in duplicate. Fixed
and random effects meta-analyses were conducted using co-
dominant models of inheritance. We assessed credibility of pooledassociations using interim Venice criteria.
Results: We screened 504 new abstracts and included 46
published and 7 unpublished studies. In pooled analyses we found
signi ﬁcant associations for four polymorphisms: rs2228480 at
the ESR1 gene (OR 0.67 95%CI 0.46-0.98, I
2=0.0%, Venice
Rating BAB), rs12589592 at the FBLN5 gene (OR 1.46 95%CI
1.11-1.82, I2=36.3%, Venice Rating BBB), rs484389 in the PGR
gene (OR 0.61 95%CI 0.39-0.96, I2=32.4%, Venice Rating CBB),
and rs1800012 at the COL1A1 gene (OR 0.80 95%CI 0.66-0.96,
I2=0.0%, Venice Rating BAB). Further credible novel variants
have also been recently identi ﬁed in genome wide association
studies.
Conclusion: The genetic contributions to POP remain poorly
understood. Several biologically plausible variants have been
identi ﬁed, but much work is required to establish the role of these
genes in the pathogenesis of POP, or to establish a role for genetictesting in clinical practice.
J.W.F. Chua: None. K. Allen-Brady: None. R. Cuffolo: None. M.
Koch: None. F. Sorrentino: None. R. Cartwright: None.
P01.067.C Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT-M) for Par-
kinson disease (PD) risk reduction: Expanding of applicationsfor selecting embryos
Shachar Zuckerman
1, Ari Zimran2, Talya Eldar-Geva3, Elina Farhi1,
Shira Shaviv1, Elinor Hakam-Spector1, Tama Dinur2, Gheona
Altarescu1
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel,2Gaucher Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel,3IVF unit, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
PGT is practiced worldwide, allowing to prevent transmission of a
growing number of genetic conditions. For recessive disorders,both wild-type and carrier embryos are transferable. The justi ﬁed
applications for PGT are subject to ongoing debate. Mutations in
the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene, causing Gaucher disease (GD),have emerged as a primary risk factor for PD in both patients andcarriers. There is a differential effect of mild versus severe
mutations: Mild mutations increase the risk of developing PD by
2.2-fold while severe mutations increase this risk by 13.6-fold. PGT
counseling was given to a thirty-two years old woman with GD,compound heterozygote of N370S (mild mutation) and 84GG(severe mutation), whose mother (an 84GG carrier) died of early-
onset PD associated with severe cognitive decline. GBA sequen-
cing of her spouse was negative. The couple needed IVF. PGT-Mwas performed to select for N370S carrier embryos because of thereduced risk for PD, compare to 84GG carrier embryos. Eight
embryos were sampled: Four were carriers for 84GG mutation; 1
aneuploid; 1 had no result; 2 were N370S carriers and thustransferable. This case report demonstrates the expansion of PGT-M use for selecting embryos with reduced risks for late-onset
conditions. These novel indications for PGT-M will increase the
numbers of people who would be candidates for PGT-M. Themedical and bioethical consideration of these cases should be
acknowledged by the professional community and discussed with
couples in genetic counseling setting. Furthermore, Guidelines forPGT usage for risk reduction of late-onset disorders should beimplemented.
S. Zuckerman: None. A. Zimran: None. T. Eldar-Geva: None. E.
Farhi: None. S. Shaviv: None. E. Hakam-Spector: None. T. Dinur:
None. G. Altarescu: None.
P01.068.D Structural fetal defects after preimplantation
genetic testing - high throughput genetic investigations
Radostina Raynova
1,2, Petya Chaveeva2, Tanya Milachich2, Mom-
chil Rizov2, Tanya Timeva2, Atanas Shterev2, Ivanka Dimova2,3
1National Genetic Laboratory, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2SAGBAL"Shterev",
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,3Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Preimplantaion genetic diagnostics (PGD) is a useful approach
for reducing miscarriage and increase successful pregnancy rate
in couples, carriers of balanced structural rearrangements.Robertsonian translocation (RT) is one of the most commonbalanced structural aberrations. Previous studies of embryos ’
chromosomes in RT carriers subjected to PGD have shown
abnormal chromosome segregation, resulting in high levels ofmosaic embryos.
Here we report a case of PGD in a couple with two previous
miscarriages. Cytogenetic analysis of the partners revealed RT in
the woman: karyotype 45, XX der(14;22)(q10;q10). Because of thehigh risk for chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus, assisted
reproduction with PGT-A was recommended and performed by
Next Generation Sequencing after Whole Genome Ampli ﬁcation
using Veriseq (Illumina) protocol.
Three embryos were tested at day 5, resulting in an euploid
embryo, one complex aneuploidy; and a mosaic embryo - 46/46,
−15;+17, dup(5)(q31.1qter). Transfer was done with the euploid
embryo, but pregnacy was not realized. Mosaic embryo wastransferred afterwards and pregnancy was detected. In the ﬁrst
trimester severe cleft palate was detected in the fetus and CVS
was performed followed by array CGH analysis. The result showedterminal duplication of 12q- 46, XN, dup(12q24.23q24.33), notdetected during PGT-A. Amniocentesis was performed to exclude
placental mosaicism, followed by Vista ™Chromosome Sequencing
technology - 12qterminal duplication was con ﬁrmed and preg-
nancy was terminated.
This case demonstrates the need for careful evaluation of
pregnancies in which mosaic embryos are transferred; withemphasize on the use of high- throughout whole genometechniques for copy number analysis.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
107
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608R. Raynova: None. P. Chaveeva: None. T. Milachich: None. M.
Rizov: None. T. Timeva: None. A. Shterev: None. I. Dimova: None.
P01.069.A Embryo transfer decision dilemma in PGT-M:
Dominant or recessive inheritance
Suleyman Aktuna , Merve Polat, Evrim Unsal, L eyla Ozer, Volkan Baltaci
Yüksek Ihtisas University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Among the PGT-M cases with a history of affected
children homozygous for a recessive mutation, transfer decision of
heterozygous embryos becomes challenging in case where themutation is associated with an additional disease with autosomaldominant inheritance. Necessity of pretreament genetic counsel-
ling for these couples and the risk of heterozygous embryo
transfer due to possible penetrance differences together with thepatient management will be discussed in detail.
Materials and Methods: PGT-M was performed with direct
mutation and haplotype analyses.
Results: This study investigates PGT-M results of 10 couples
carrying different rare genetic conditions and 10 causative genespresented in Table 1. Eventough these genes are associated with
multiple OMIM phenotypes with both autosomal dominant and
autosomal recessive inheritance all reported cases presentedautosomal recessive inheritance pattern. The total number of
embryos analysed was 60 from 2 to 14 for each patient. PGT-M
analysis revealed that, 15 embryos were normal, 33 wereheterozygous and 11 were mutant.
Conclusions: Homozygous normal embryos should be prior-
itized for transfer to exclude clinical phenotype that may ocur due
to potenital penetrance and expressivity differences. Normalembryo was not detected in 3 cases, thus embryo transfer wascancelled with patient decision. This situation underlie the need
for better understanding of this phenomenon during PGT-M
management to prevent reduction of reproductive chance ofpatients coping with such tedious treatment procedures.
S. Aktuna: None. M. Polat: None. E. Unsal: None. L. Ozer:
None. V. Baltaci: None.
P01.071.C The shift towards rare: Increased frequency of rare
PGT-M cases
Leyla Ozer , Evrim Unsal, Merve Polat, Suleyman Aktuna, Volkan Baltaci
Yuksek Ihtisas University, Ankara, Turkey.Introduction: Initial step of PGT-M is the detection of causative
mutation. This has been the limiting factor for patients with rare
disorders due to complex phenotype or genetic heterogeneity.
Improvements in genomic technologies such as WES has becomean effective tool for delineating the mutations to enable PGT-M forrare disorders. This study summarizes the variability and distribu-
tion of genes from our 1085 PGT-M cases during 2014-2021
highlights the shift towards rare disorders.
Materials and Methods: PGT-M was performed using STR
based protocol for direct mutation and haplotype analysis.
Results: Retrospective data show that PGT-M was frequently
performed for 6 genetic loci (Table 1). Table 2 compares thefrequency 6 common disorders at different time intervals.
Conclusions: Results show that PGT-M was performed for 94
different genes during 2014-2017 while it reaches 323 in 2021. The
highlight of the results was decrease in the freqeuncy for totalnumber of common disorder cases (50,2% to 42,4%). Furthermore
resuts reveals that for 90% of genes only 1-4 PGT-M cases were
refererred which underlines the shift towards rare disorders withthe extended utilization of WES and increase in novel gene variants.
L. Ozer: None. E. Unsal: None. M. Polat: None. S. Aktuna:
None. V. Baltaci: None.
P01.072.D Placental tissue co-expression networks across
Russians and Yakuts identify key genes and pathways for
preeclampsia
Ekaterina Trifonova , Anastasia Babovskaya, Aleksei Zarubin, Anton
Markov, Vadim Stepanov
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian
Federation.
Population transcriptomics is a promising approach for ﬁnding loci
of susceptibility to diseases which frequency depends from the
ethnicity. Here we investigate the population transcriptomics in a
preeclampsia (PE) model using WGCNA. The study includedwhole-genome expression samples from 21 Russian (Indo-
Europeans population) and 23 Yakut (Mongoloids population)
women with PE and physiological pregnancy. We found 10Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
108
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608clusters for Russian containing 7968 genes associated with PE. The
main categories and pathways in these clusters are processes of
the cytokine signaling (FDR =0,005). For Yakut we found 9
clusters yielded 7966 PE-genes. The main GO-categories of thesegenes are amino-acid metabolism (FDR =0,003), regulation of
receptor interactions (FD =0,047) and PI3K-Akt signaling pathway
(FDR=0,023). According to the MCC analyze of CytoHubba there
were 10 hub genes with rank =1 for Russians ( CUL1, ANAPC11,
LNX1, CDC20, UBE2L6, FBXO9, KLHL13, UBA3, KCTD7, RNF111 ) and
Yakut ( KLHL3, FB11PSXL, ASB2, LRRC41, LMO7, RNF7, SKP2, FBXO2 ).
These genes are responsible for the regulation of the ubiquitin-
ligase complex. In the second step we pick-out 1701 commongenes for both populations. Most functionally active (rank =1-2)
remained the genes of the ubiquitin-ligase family and key
processes belong to the pathways of interferon signaling (FDR
=0,004). Thus, we found population-speci ﬁc pathways of PE:
these are the processes of immune response for Indo-Europeans
and the processes of ligand-receptor interaction for Mongoloids.
In addition, we have identi ﬁed common PE-genes for populations
which are associated with the processes of interferon activity andoperation the ubiquitin-ligase complex. Supported by RFBR №18-
44-700007, №18-29-1304.
E. Trifonova: None. A. Babovskaya: None. A. Zarubin: None.
A. Markov: None. V. Stepanov: None.
P01.073.A Prenatal phenotype of PNKP-related primary
microcephaly associated with variants in the FHA domain
Ilona Krey
1, Sonja Neuser1, Annemarie Schwan2, Tobias Bartolo-
maeus1, Jan Henje Döring3, Steffen Syrbe3, Margit Plassmann4,
Stefan Rohde5, Christian Roth6, Helga Rehder7,8, Rami Abou Jamra1,
Diana Le Duc1, Susanna Schubert1, Katharina Schoner8, Bernt Popp1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany,2MVZ Dr. Eberhard & Partner Dortmund,
Dortmund, Germany,3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for
Children and Adolescents, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,Germany,4Praxis für Pränatalmedizin, Dortmund, Germany,5Depart-
ment of Radiology and Neuroradiology, Klinikum Dortmund,
Dortmund, Germany,6Department for Pediatric Radiology, University
of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany,7Institute of Medical
Genetics, Medical University Vienna, Wien, Austria,8Institute of
Pathology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
Biallelic polynucleotide kinase 3 ’-phosphatase (PNKP) variants
cause different disorders ranging from neurodevelopmental
disorder with microcephaly/seizures to adult-onset Charcot-
Marie-Tooth disease. To date, only postnatal descriptions havebeen described.The index was a male fetus with prenatallydiagnosed micro- and brachycephaly, brain malformations and
microretrognathia at 13
thgestational week. A recessive disorder
was suspected because of previous termination of pregnancy(TOP) for similar abnormalities in a sister fetus. Prenatal exomesequencing using DNA derived from amniocentesis and from both
unrelated parents identi ﬁed compound-heterozygosity for the
variants c.498G>A, p.[( =),0?] and c.302C>T, p.(Pro101Leu). Segre-
gation analysis con ﬁrmed both variants in the affected previous
fetus. Syndromic oriented fetopathology after TOP of the male
index fetus revealed micrencephaly with pronounced hypoplastic
frontal lobes, shortened occipital lobes, missing temporo-parietallobulation and hypoplastic cerebellum. To characterize aberrant
splicing of c.498G>A, we performed RT-PCR analysis on RNA from
fetal muscle and a paternal PAXgene sample. This con ﬁrmed
skipping of exon 4 affecting the FHA- and phosphatase-domainsofPNKP (p.Leu67_Lys166del). To compare prenatal/postnatal
phenotypes, we retrospectively investigated two unrelated maleindividuals diagnosed with biallelic PNKP -variants. Both carry the
same splice-donor variant c.1029 +2T>C and a second missense
variant in the FHA-domain (c.311T>C, p.(Leu104Pro) and
c.151G>C, p.(Val51Leu), respectively). RNAseq showed complexsplicing events for c.1029 +2T>C and c.151G>C. Computational
modelling revealed signi ﬁcant clustering of the missense variants
in the FHA-domain.Here, we present the ﬁrst prenatally diagnosed
PNKP -related primary microcephaly-/encephaly associated with
variants affecting the N-terminal FHA-domain. Our detailed clinicaland mutational characterisation extend the continuum of PNKP -
manifestation to the prenatal stage.
I. Krey: None. S. Neuser: None. A. Schwan: None. T.
Bartolomaeus: None. J.H. Döring: None. S. Syrbe: None. M.
Plassmann: None. S. Rohde: None. C. Roth: None. H. Rehder:
None. R. Abou Jamra: None. D. Le Duc: None. S. Schubert: None.
K. Schoner: None. B. Popp: None.
P01.074.B Pregnancy loss and Exome sequencing analysis
(WES)
Aicha Boughalem
1, Detlef TROST1, Constance Wells2, Audrey
Lamouroux2, Viorica Ciorna-Monferrato3, Amandine Diakiese4, Pas-
cale Klein ﬁnger4, Laurence Lohmann4, Armelle Luscan4, Mylene
Valduga4, Jean-Marc Costa1, Patricia Blanchet2
1Laboratoire CERBA, Saint Ouen l ’Aumône, France,2Département de
Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Dével-oppement et Syndromes Malformatifs », CHU Hôpital Arnaud de
Villeneuve, Montpellier, France,3Génétique Médicale et Oncogéné-
tique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Metz-Thionville, France,4CERBA,
Saint Ouen l ’Aumône, France.
Background: Genetic abnormalities are known to cause preg-
nancy loss. In our cohort we evaluated the usefulness of exomesequencing (WES) in identifying the genetic etiology for
pregnancy loss.
Methods: A cohort of 68 samples from products of conception
or from fetal tissue, with normal karyotype and absence ofpathogenic copy-number variants were selected for WES. WES
data were analyzed based on the prenatally observed ultrasound
ﬁndings and results of fetal autopsy.
Results: WES detected 12 pathogenic variants, 3 likely
pathogenic variants, and 3 variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS) from this cohort. The Diagnostic yield for pathogenic and
likely pathogenic variants was 22% and reached 26% with theinclusion of VUS. In 9 fetuses (50% of cases) the diagnoses
followed an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern in noncon-
sanguineous couples (2 homozygous variants, 6 compoundheterozygous variants and one variant with X-linked recessiveinheritance) and in 9 cases the identi ﬁed pathogenic variant
occurred “de novo ”. Affected genes included those associated
with ciliopathic human genetic disorder, multisystem abnormal-ities, neurodevelopmental disorders, cardiac anomalies, renaldiseases, skeletal dysplasia and metabolic disorders.
Conclusion: These results supported the clinical utility of WES
for detecting the monogenic etiology of pregnancy loss. Theidenti ﬁcation of disease-associated variants provided information
for follow-up genetic counseling of recurrence risk and manage-
ment of subsequent pregnancies. Our cohort study illustrates how
high-resolution obstetric scan, detailed observation of fetalfeatures and application of exome sequencing; contribute to
elucidate the etiology of pregnancy loss. Keywords: Exome
sequencing (WES); foetopathology; pregnancy loss, medicaltermination of pregnancy.
A. Boughalem: None. D. Trost: None. C. Wells: None. A.
Lamouroux: None. V. Ciorna-Monferrato: None. A. Diakiese:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
109
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608None. P. Klein ﬁnger: None. L. Lohmann: None. A. Luscan: None.
M. Valduga: None. J. Costa: None. P. Blanchet: None.
P01.076.D Prenatal exome sequencing unravels unique co ‐
occurrence of Congenital Idiopathic arterial calci ﬁcation and
congenital Gaucher disease: A potential pitfall for counseling
Sara Hisham El-Dessouky1, Mohamed Elhodiby2, Ghada M. H.
Abdel-Salam3
1Prenatal Diagnosis & Fetal Medicine Department, Human Genetics
and Genome Research Division, National Research Centre, Cairo,Egypt,2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of
Medicine, M.U.S.T. University, Cairo, Egypt,3Clinical Genetics Depart-
ment, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, NationalResearch Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: The presence of two or more genetic disorders
represents a challenge for clinical and molecular diagnosis. If onecondition remains undiagnosed, the risk of recurrence may not beappropriately assessed. In this study, we present a complex fetal
phenotype that occurred in two successive pregnancies.
Materials and Methods: Prenatal ultrasound at 25 weeks
revealed the constellation of polyhydramnios, hydrops fetalis,
hepatosplenomegaly, arthrogryposis, microcephaly, and develop-
mental brain anomalies in the form of intracranial calci ﬁcations,
ventriculomegaly and cerebellar hypoplasia. Additionally, exten-sive vascular and cardiac calci ﬁcation in the form of diffuse,
echogenic cardiac out ﬂow tracts, generalized hyperechogenicity
in tricuspid, pulmonary valves, diffuse intrahepatic, renal andplacental calci ﬁcations were observed. The fetus suffered intrau-
terine demise at 30 weeks gestation. Autopsy con ﬁrmed the
prenatal ﬁndings. Prenatal exome sequencing (PWES), karyotyping
and microarray were arranged from the fetal blood.
Results: PWES identi ﬁed two novel homozygous missense
variants in both the GBA gene (c.170G>A, p.Cys57Tyr) and the
ABCC6 (c.3381G>A, p.Met1127 Ile) gene pointing to the co-
occurrence of congenital idiopathic arterial calci ﬁcation and
congenital Gaucher disease. All identi ﬁed variants were con ﬁrmed
by Sanger sequencing and validated by parental testing
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of congenital idiopathic
arterial calci ﬁcation caused by homozygous missense pathogenic
variant in ABCC6 gene and in combination with Gaucher
syndrome. We believe that comprehensive phenotyping is
essential for improving the diagnostic performance of PWES.Additionally our study emphasizes that unexplained phenotypes
may result from the occurrence of pathogenic variants of two or
more genetic disorders in the same patient.
S.H. El-Dessouky: None. M. Elhodiby: None. G.M.H. Abdel-
Salam: None.
P01.077.A Exome sequencing in prenatal diagnosis: results
from 88 cases
Emmanuelle Ranza
1, Xavier Blanc1, Federico Santoni1, Frédéric
Guerry1, Bernard Conrad2, Isabelle Eperon3, Cécile Tissot4, Cécile
Deluen2, Tanguy Araud2, Loïc Baerlocher2, Yasmine Sayegh Martin5,
Anne-Claude Müller-Brochut6, Christian Bisch3, Joel Fluss7, Jean-
Marie Pellegrinelli7, Marta Carrasco8, Thibaud Quibel9, Sylvie
Lacroix9, Philippe Extermann3, Graziano Pescia10, Romaine Robyr
Susini9, Stylianos E. Antonarakis1
1Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzer-
land,2Genesupport, Geneva, Switzerland,3Dianecho, Geneva,
Switzerland,4Clinique des Grangettes, Geneva, Switzerland,5Centred’Imagerie Jean-Violette, Geneva, Switzerland,6Centre GynEcho,
Fribourg, Switzerland,7HUG, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva,
Switzerland,8GHOL, Groupement hospitalier de l ’Ouest Lémanique,
Nyon, Switzerland,9EchoFemme, Geneva, Switzerland,10Genesup-
port, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Exome sequencing (ES) has become a standard test for
undiagnosed developmental disorders, now increasingly used inprenatal diagnosis. We report here our experience with 88consecutive prenatal cases through ES. The most common fetal
signs were: increased nuchal translucency (25 %), congenital heart
defect (22.7 %), skeletal malformations (22.7 %) and brainabnormalities (11.4 %). After performing a-CGH, 28 cases hadsolo and 60 trio ES. In 25 % of cases, we have identi ﬁed a
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant (as per the ACMG
guidelines) likely causative of the fetal phenotype. The diagnosticyield was 40 % for skeletal malformations, and roughly 20 % for
nuchal translucency, congenital heart defect, and brain anomaly
cases. In 18 of the solved cases, the pathogenic variants wereSNVs, while 2 were pathogenic structural variants (SV). Further-more, the trio ES has identi ﬁed in two cases complete uniparental
disomies UPD6 and UPD17, both including isodisomic segments
with likely causative recessive genes. ES is a powerful and accuratemethod for the identi ﬁcation of causative variants in prenatal; trio
sequencing reduces the turnaround time and likely increases the
diagnostic yield. The VUS remain a diagnostic challenge and
international guidelines are needed to assist in the interpretationand disclosure of the results. The discovery of novel mendelian
genes and the introduction of additional laboratory and computa-
tional methods such as long-read sequencing and improvement ofSV detection may further increase the diagnostic yield.
E. Ranza: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic
Medicine. X. Blanc: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine. F. Santoni: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss
Institute of Genomic Medicine. F. Guerry: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic
Medicine. B. Conrad: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Genesupport. Other; Signi ﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss Institute
of Genomic Medicine. I. Eperon: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Dianecho. C. Tissot: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Clinique des Grangettes. C. Deluen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genesupport. T. Araud: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genesupport. L. Baerlocher:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genesupport. Y.
Sayegh Martin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centre d ’Imagerie Jean-Violette. A. Müller-Brochut: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centre GynEcho. C. Bisch: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Dianecho. J. Fluss: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; HUG, Geneva Uni-
versity Hospitals. J. Pellegrinelli: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; HUG, Geneva University Hospitals. M. Carrasco:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GHOL, Groupement
Hospitalier de l ’Ouest Lémanique. T. Quibel: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; EchoFemme. S. Lacroix: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; EchoFemme. P. Extermann: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Dianecho. G. Pescia: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genesupport. R. Robyr
Susini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; EchoFemme.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; EchoFemme. S.E. Antonarakis:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss
Institute of Genomic Medicine. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
110
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P01.078.B Mosaic Trisomy 7: A case report of discrepancies
between noninvasive screening for fetal trisomy, array CGH,
cytogenetics, and fetal ultrasound
Dorela Kroni1,Merita Xhetani2, Marina Baldi3
1StemGen Partners Ltd, University of Medicine, Immunohematology
Department, Tirana, Albania,2University of Tirana, Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology, Tirana, Albania,
3Genoma Laboratories, Genetic Department, Roma, Italy.
Introduction: Here we report a case of mosaic trisomy 7
diagnosed incidentally, by the prenatal screening of cfDNA(CentoNIPT ®) in a31 years old pregnant women resulted
inconclusive for trisomy 21, 18, and 13 at 15 weeks of gestation.
Array CGH was performed at 18 weeks of gestation. Malekaryotype with mosaic chromosome 7 trisomy 7p22. 3q36. 3was reported. Ultrasound reports on fetal growth and devel-
opment were normal. Follow-up with cytogenetics karyotyping
at 21 weeks of gestation was performed, which revealed a resultof apparently normal male karyotype 46, XY in culturedamniocytes. Simultaneously DNA t e s t i n go fb o t hp a r e n t sa n d
fetal cultured amniocytes was performed by PCR and UPD was
excluded. Two contradictions have led us to publish this case:ﬁrst, con ﬁrmation of reported limitation of NIPT in the detection
of mosaicism, a trisomy 7 would have been reported, taking
into consideration that the analysis is performed on cfDNA withplacental and fetal origin, the r esult of mosaic trisomy 7 might
have been related to a placental m osaicism situation, which was
conﬁrmed from Array CGH analyses. Second, cytogenetics on
cultured amniocytes con ﬁrmed that fetal cells don ’t have
trisomy 7 but either array CGH nor cytogenetics were diagnosticand con ﬁrmed the origin of the mosaic trisomy 7.
Conclusion: We suggest the necessity of a full panel NIPT
instead of a narrow panel NIPT for better time management ofpregnancy and in mosaic trisomy 7 where UPD is excluded.
D. Kroni: None. M. Xhetani: None. M. Baldi: None.
P01.079.C The contribution of chromosomal abnormalities in
the formation of sporadic and recurrent early reproductive
losses
Iryna Tkach
1, Nataliya Huleyuk1, Danuta Zastavna1, Thomas Liehr2,
Ewa Ciszkowicz3
1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine,
2Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute of
Human Genetics, Jena, Germany,3Department of Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technol-
ogy, Rzeszow, Poland.
Background: Spontaneous abortion occurs in 15-20% of clinically
recognized pregnancy. The karyotype of a spontaneously aborted
of products of conception (POC) provides valuable clinicalinformation for the couple as well for basic research becouse
provide important information for the recurrence risk of cytoge-
netic abnormalities in subsequent pregnancies Aim. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the contribution of numericalchromosomal imbalances in products of conception from sporadic
pregnancy loss (SPL) and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL).
Methods: Banding cytogenetic and interphase mFISH with the
probe panel for chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, X and Y.
Results: Cytogenetic studies of 1720 spontaneously aborted
fetuses were performed. The results were strati ﬁed in 2 groups
according to anamnesis: Group I (POC of ﬁrst pregnancy and POC
from lost pregnancy, with children in anamnesis) - 1199 samplesand Group II (POC from RPL) - 521 samples. The contribution ofchromosomal abnormalities was higher in the genesis of SPL
(40.1%) compared to RPL (39.2%). Among most often diagnosed
chromosomal change was triploidy - 24.53 % in SPL vs 24.51% in
RPL, monosomy X - 21.62% vs 17.16% and trisomy 16 - 20.99% vs26.96%.
Conclusions . Consequently, detected of chromosome aneu-
ploidies in samples from products of conception is a key part of
the investigations of reproductive failure in humans.
I. Tkach: None. N. Huleyuk: None. D. Zastavna: None. T. Liehr:
None. E. Ciszkowicz: None.
P01.080.D Genetic testing of miscarriages using a QF-PCR /aCGH/
MLPA strategy: ﬁve years experiences from North-Eastern
Slovenia
alenka erjavec škerget , boris zagradi šnik, andreja zagorac, špela
stangler herode ž, nadja kokalj voka č
University Clinical Centre Maribor, maribor, Slovenia.
Introduction: Traditional testing of miscarriage samples involved
culture of tissue followed by G-banded chromosome analysis; this
approach has a high failure rate, is labour intensive and has aresolution of around 8-10 Mb. To improve diagnostic yield and
efﬁciency we have updated our testing strategy in 2016. Since
then we use more comprehensive strategy: QF-PCR assay for allsamples, followed by array CGH or MLPA, depends on agestational age of the embrional material. Here we describe the
results from the last 5 years of our strategy.
Methods: Fetal tissue samples and maternal samples were
tested using QF-PCR for the detection of aneuploidy forchromosomes 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y. Con ﬁrmed fetal
samples without aneuplody of tested chromosomes and less than
15 weeks of gestational age were then tested by MLPA while fetalsamples older than 15 weaks were analyzed by aCGH.
Results: From 335 analysed samples, 266 samples were
conﬁrmed as fetal material (78,57%). In those QF-PCR analysis
identi ﬁed aneuploidy/triploidy in 21.42%. MLPA detected sub-
telomeric imbalances in a further 12.79% (11 out of 86) while
aCGH analysis detected imbalance in 4.87% (6 out of 123) of
samples. All detected imbalances by aCGH were submicroscopic(in range 0.19-2.6Mb) and 2 out of 6 (33.33%) were classi ﬁed as
causative for the spontaneous misscariage.
Conclusions: This ef ﬁcient QF-PCR/aCGH/MLPA strategy has a
lower failure rate and higher diagnostic yield than karyotype. It istherefore an ef ﬁcient and cost-effective diagnostic testing strategy
for misscarriage products.
A. erjavec š
kerget: None. B. zagradi šnik: None. A. zagorac:
None. Š. stangler herode ž:None. N. kokalj voka č:None.
P01.081.A Deciphering the genetic cause of recurrent and
sporadic pregnancy loss
Rick Essers1,2, Ganesh Acharya3, Salwan Al-Nasiry2, H G. Brunner2,4,
S. P. Deligiannis5, E. A. Fonova6, Alexander Hoischen4, Ants Kurg7,
Igor N. Lebedev6, Merryn V. E. Macville1,2, T. V. Nikitina6, Andres
Salumets3,5, E. A. Sazhenova6, Servi J. C. Stevens1,2,E .N .
Tolmacheva6, Masoud Zamani Esteki1,2
1GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Depart-
ment of Genetics and Cell Biology, Maastricht, Netherlands,
2Maastricht University Medical Center MUMC +, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands,3Karolinska Institutet and
Department of Women ’s Health- Karolinska- University Hospital,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
111
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology- Department of Clinical
Science- Intervention & Technology CLINTEC, Stockholm, Sweden,
4Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Human
Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Institute of Clinical Medicine-
University of Tartu, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tartu,Estonia,6Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Research Institute
of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation,7Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology- University of Tartu, Department ofBiotechnology, Tartu, Estonia.
Introduction: Spontaneous abortion (SA) occurs in 10-15% of
clinically recognized pregnancies and recurrent pregnancy loss(RPL) in 1-3%. One potential cause for pregnancy loss isuniparental disomy (UPD). UPD can lead to imprinting disorders
characterized by features affecting growth and development in
liveborn offspring. This study aims to investigate the prevalenceand effect of (mosaic) de novo genomic aberrations in RPL and SA.
Materials and Methods: We recruited 32 families with
pregnancy loss (n =16 RPL cohort, n =16 SA cohort) with normal
karyotyping results in both parents and the fetus. DNA wasisolated from blood of both parents and placental tissues from the
miscarried products of conception. The tissues originate from the
extraembryonic mesoderm (EM) and the chorionic villi (CV). Weperformed SNP-genotyping (Illumina ’s Global-Screening Array-24
v2.0 BeadChips) and applied haplarithmisis to delineate allelic
architecture of fetal tissues.
Results: We analyzed 132 DNA samples (n =32 families). Within
the RPL cohort, we found aberrations in 6/16 families including:
mosaic genome-wide hexaploidy and tetraploidy, non-mosaic
genome-wide hetero UPD, mosaic UPD of chromosomes 14, 16, 6,and 5 in different families. Within the SA group, we foundaberrations in 2/16 families including: mosaic UPD of chromosome
7, segmental UPD of chromosome 5. All UPDs were maternally
inherited.
Conclusions: The prevalence of maternal UPD was 20.6% in
fetal tissues. These ﬁndings could lead to a better understanding
of causative factors for SA and RPL and the need for SNP-based
non-invasive prenatal testing. Grants : EVA (KP111513), MUMC +;
Horizon 2020 innovation (ERIN) (EU952516), European Commis-sion; RFBR (20-315-90111)
R. Essers: None. G. Acharya: None. S. Al-Nasiry: None. H.G.
Brunner: None. S.P. Deligiannis: None. E.A. Fonova: None. A.
Hoischen: None. A. Kurg: None. I.N. Lebedev: None. M.V.E.
Macville: None. T.V. Nikitina: None. A. Salumets: None. E.A.
Sazhenova: None. S.J.C. Stevens: None. E.N. Tolmacheva: None.
M. Zamani Esteki: None.
P01.082.B Regions of homozygosity in prenatal investigation:
to sequence or not to sequence?
Andreea C. Tutulan-Cunita
1, Luiza Dimos1, Anca G. Pavel1, Florina
M. Nedelea1,2,3, Azdasher Naszan4, Danae Stambouli1
1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania,2Filantropia
Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania,3Carol Davila University of
Medicine, Bucharest, Romania,4CF2 Clinical Hospital, Bucharest,
Romania.
Introduction: Many severe genetic disorders cannot be identi ﬁed
prenatally by cytogenomic analyses and, often, the parents areunaware of their carrier status. ACMG recommendations for
prenatal diagnosis state that WES may be considered when
standard CMA and karyotype analysis did not provide a diagnosis.We present the case of a fetus of consanguineous parents withultrasound anomalies and normal CMA result, where WES
uncovered two distinct pathogenic variants.Materials and methods: The patient had two consecutive
pregnancies with fetuses with short, bent femurs. DNA was
isolated from amniotic ﬂuid. CMA and WES were done on
Affymetrix 750K and on Ion Torrent S5 platform (Thermo FisherScienti ﬁc), respectively, while Sanger sequencing used BigDye
Terminator kit.
Results: Following a normal CMA result, WES was recommended.
Two novel homozygous variants were found in CRTAP gene (c.793
+1G>T) and GNS (c.811A>G, p.Arg271Gly) and classi ﬁed as
pathogenic and likely pathogenic, respectively, according to ACMG
criteria. CRTAP gene is associated with osteogenesis imperfecta type
VII, while GNS –with mucopolysaccharidosis type III D. Sanger
analysis con ﬁrmed that parents are carriers. Revising CMA, long runs
of homozygosity (ROH), including these two genes, were found.
Thus, an ultrasound anomaly led to the serendipitous discovery of
the second pathogenic mutation, which otherwise would have beenmissed according to prenatal checks.
Conclusion: While this ﬁnding will allow the selection of the
appropriate management of the future pregnancies, it invites tofurther discussion about when to proceed to WES in cases ofnormal CMA with long ROHs, regardless ultrasound results.
A.C. Tutulan-Cunita: None. L. Dimos: None. A.G. Pavel: None.
F.M. Nedelea: None. A. Naszan: None. D. Stambouli: None.
P01.083.C Retrospective study of cartilage-hair hypoplasia
carrier screening cases reveal frequent insertions in thepromoter region of the RMRP gene
Ezen Choo, Trevor Smart , Nina Sanapareddy, Irina Rakova, J.
Dianne Keen-Kim
Natera, Inc, San Carlos, CA, USA.
Introduction: Mutations in RMRP, a nuclear encoded, intronless
gene, can lead to the autosomal recessive, multi-systemic disease
cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH). Patient studies have revealed
mutations in both the promoter and the transcribed region.
Materials and Methods: We retrospectively studied 51,599
healthy individuals tested with a 137 or 274 gene carrier screening
panel. Samples were tested by next-generation sequencing with
orthogonal con ﬁrmation by Sanger sequencing when Pathogenic
or Likely Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed. Polymorphisms and
Benign/ Likely Benign variants were not included in the analysis.
We assessed the occurrence of alteration types and distribution
across the gene.
Results: We identi ﬁed 397 unique RMRP alterations, of which
20% (n =78) were insertions. The distribution of insertions across
the gene included 43 within the promoter, 8 involving thetranscription initiation site, and 27 within the transcribed region.Unique insertions affecting the promoter and start (n =51) were
more prevalent and involved larger insertions (base pairs, mean =
14.4, range:1-64) than those in the transcribed region (n =
27,
mean=2.5, range:1-17).
Conclusions: Given that RNA polymerase III promoters are
usually very short, it was surprising to ﬁnd larger and more
diverse alterations in the promoter than in the rest of the genein our carrier population. Up to 30bp promoter insertions havebeen reported in CHH patients. We identi ﬁed 3 alterations
>30bp in the promoter region. The predicted functional
signi ﬁcance is promoter inef ﬁciency and reduced transcription;
however, the clinical signi ﬁcance and risk to patient offspring is
to be determined.
E. Choo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera,
Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. T. Smart: None. N.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
112
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Sanapareddy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc. I. Rakova:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc. J. Keen-Kim: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Own-
ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc..
P01.088.D Russian women ’s preferences about invasive
prenatal testing
Elena Baranova
1, Elizaveta Zaiaeva1, Gaukhar Zobkova2, Lyudmila
Zhuchenko1, Svetlana Shelykalina3, Vera Izhevskaya4
1Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Profes-
sional Education "Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Profes-
sional Education" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the RussianFederation, Moscow, Russian Federation,2LLC Evogen, Moscow,
Russian Federation,3National Research Medical University named
after N.I. Pirogov of the Ministry of Health of Russia, Moscow, Russian
Federation,4Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: In early prenatal screening, regardless of the
technology used, con ﬁrmation of the fetal chromosomal abnorm-
ality (CA) is required by invasive prenatal diagnosis. Russian
women ’s preferences about invasive prenatal testing (IPT) are
poorly understood. The aim of study was to ﬁnd out the readiness
of pregnant women to undergo IPT to diagnose fetal CA andterminate pregnancy if pathology is detected. The material of the
research: the results of a survey of 800 pregnant women from 16
regions in Russia.
Results: It was shown that 451 (56.3%) women are ready to
undergo IPT with a high risk of fetal CA, 39 (4.8%) - will not do the
procedure, 281 (35.1%) were undecided, 29 (3.6%) did not answerthe question. Women who agreed to carry out an IPT, comparedwith those who decided not to carry out an IPT, more often noted
the importance of obtaining the most complete and early
information. Among the respondents, only a quarter of women,209 (26.1%) are ready to terminate a pregnancy in the case ofidenti ﬁed fetal CA, 84 (10.5%) will not terminate a pregnancy, 474
(59.2%) have not decided, 33 (4.1%) did not answer the question.
Women who made the decision to terminate pregnancy in thecase of identi ﬁed fetal CA were older, had more children, among
them there were more women with higher education.
Conclusions: The main preferences of pregnant women with
regard to undergoing invasive prenatal testing and termination ofpregnancy in case of detection of a chromosomal abnormality
were revealed.
E. Baranova: None. E. Zaiaeva: None. G. Zobkova: None. L.
Zhuchenko: None. S. Shelykalina: None. V. Izhevskaya: None.
P01.089.A A rare case of fetal skeletal dysplasia: TAR
syndrome
Soﬁa Pérez
1, Bruno Carrilho2, Ana Bernardo2, Ana Teresa Martins2,
Álvaro Cohen2, Inês Carvalho1
1Genetic Service, Pediatric Department, Hospital de Dona Estefânia,
Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Lisboa Central, EPE, Lisboa,
Portugal,2Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Maternidade Alfredo da Costa,
Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Lisboa Central, EPE, Lisboa,Portugal.Introduction: Thrombocytopenia Absent Radius (TAR) syndrome
is characterized by bilateral absent radii and thrombocytopenia,
sometimes associated with other skeletal, cardiac and genitour-inary anomalies. It´s an autosomal recessive disorder and resultsfrom compound heterozygosity of RBM8A pathogenic variants
(one null and one hypomorphic allele). Case Report:We report the
case of a 32-year-old female, with an ongoing pregnancy of 16weeks, no relevant personal or family history, referred to our clinic
due to an altered fetal genetic study. In the 1st trimester
ultrasound, an increased nuchal translucency was identi ﬁed,
without other changes. For this reason, a CVS was performedand the fetal microarray revealed an interstitial deletion in the
1q21.1 region. Bearing in mind that the CNV in question
encompassed the morbid RBM8A gene, in the medical genetics
consultation we requested the sequencing of the RBM8A gene,
since the simultaneous presence of the 1q21.1 deletion and a
mutation in the other allele of the RBM8A gene is associated with
TAR syndrome. In the 18-week ultrasound, bilateral agenesis of theradius, ulna and humerus was identi ﬁed, with hands visible
bilaterally. The couple opted for medical termination of preg-
nancy. Posteriorly, the sequencing of the RBM8A gene revealed
the pathogenic variant c.-21G> A, in hemizygosis, con ﬁrming the
diagnosis of TAR syndrome. The parents ’family study revealed a
paternal origin of the 1q21.1 deletion and a maternal origin of the
mutation in the RBM8A gene.
Conclusion: Fetal skeletal dysplasia comprises a complex group
of disorders, where a multidisciplinary approach is essential for the
diagnosis of rare clinical entities.
S. Pérez: None. B. Carrilho: None. A. Bernardo: None. A.
Martins: None. Á. Cohen: None. I. Carvalho: None.
P01.090.B Telomere length dynamics during human preim-
plantation development
Mikhail I. Krapivin , Anna A. Pendina, Olga A. E ﬁmova, Irina D.
Mekina, Evgeniia M. Komarova, Andrei V. Tikhonov, Olga G.Chiryaeva, Alexander M. Gzgzyan, Igor Y. Kogan, Vladislav S. Baranov
D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproduc-
tology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Telomeres are complex structures that cap the ends of chromo-
somes and help to maintain genomic integrity and stability. Since
telomere shorten after each cell division, their restoration duringthe transition of DNA to a new generation is of crucial importance.
We analyzed telomere length (TL) in metaphases from 67 human
embryos, unsuitable for transfer into the uterine cavity due toabnormal ploidy or morphology. For metaphase preparations,zygotes and embryos were treated with colchicines, hypotonic
solution and ﬁxed on the glass slides. We analyzed TLs in 84
metaphases from zygotes, 14 metaphases from the embryos atthe 3-5-cell stage, 12 metaphases from the embryos at the 6-12-cell stage, and 49 metaphases from the blastocysts. To avoid the
inﬂuence of chromatin compaction, TLs were measured as relative
values by dividing telomeric by subtelomeric ﬂuorescence
intensity. The comparison of relative TL medians between thestages of preimplantation development showed signi ﬁcant
differences: TL increased in the period from the zygote up to
the 3-5-cell stage (Mann-Whitney test, p =0.02) and from the
zygote to the 6-12-cell stage (Mann-Whitney test, p < 0.0001).
Then, TL decreased from the 6-12-cell stage to the blastocyst stage
(Mann-Whitney test, p < 0.0001). Thus, we observed the waves ofTL changes during preimplantation human development, with apeak at 6-12-cell stage followed by a decrease up to the blastocyst
stage. These alterations of TL may be a result of telomeric regionAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
113
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608recombination and, thus, does not require telomerase activity
which is absent until the blastocyst stage. Supported by RSF №18-
75-10046.
M.I. Krapivin: None. A.A. Pendina: None. O.A. E ﬁmova: None.
I.D. Mekina: None. E.M. Komarova: None. A.V. Tikhonov: None.
O.G. Chiryaeva: None. A.M. Gzgzyan: None. I.Y. Kogan: None. V.
S. Baranov: None.
P01.091.C Two Rare Cases of Miscarriage: Aneuploid Triploidy
Mustafa Oguz Acar1, Sule Altiner1, Nuket Yurur Kutlay1, Ajlan
Tukun2
1Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey,2Duzen Laboratories Group,
Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: More than 50% of early pregnancy losses have a
chromosomal abnormality. Triploidy is accounting for ∼10% of all
spontaneous abortions.Here, two fetuses with atypical triploidkaryotype referred to medical genetic department due tomiscarriage at the 12th gestational week will be presented.
Materials and Methods: Conventional cytogenetic and FISH
analyses of both abort tissues were carried out according tostandard procedure, following tissue culture. STR analysis was
used to determine the parental origins of the tetraploid
chromosomes.
Results: Karyotyping revealed, 70,XXY, +18 and 71,XXXX, +6
formations, respectively. Presence of extra chromosomes was
conﬁrmed with FISH analysis. As expected, karyotypes of both
parents were normal.
Conclusions: Although triploidy is common in abortion
materials, the case accompanied by tetrasomy of some chromo-
somes has been rarely reported in the literature. Possible
mechanisms to explain these chromosomal abnormalities will bediscussed in detail.
M.O. Acar: None. S. Altiner: None. N. Yurur Kutlay: None. A.
Tukun: None.
P01.092.D Triploidy/Vanished Twin Detection: Updated clin-
ical experience following Single Nucleotide Polymorphism-based NIPT twins validation
Val Kantor , Kathryn Young, Wendy DiNonno
Natera, Inc, San Carlos, CA, USA.
Introduction: Occurring in ~1-2% of clinically recognized
pregnancies, triploidy carries risk for miscarriage, fetal anomalies,and maternal complications. Detection is critical for medicalmanagement. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based NIPT
was previously validated to detect additional fetal haplotypes
consistent with triploidy, vanished twin, or viable twin gestation.In October of 2017 viable twin gestations were validated for SNP-
based NIPT. This study determines an updated PPV for triploidy
using SNP-based NIPT, following the removal of known viable twingestations.
Methods: Retrospective outcome was obtained on 1005 cases
with vanished twin/triploidy results, following a SNP-based NIPT ’s
twin validation. Pregnancy outcomes were de ﬁned as: con ﬁrmed
triploidy, suspected triploidy, con ﬁrmed vanished twin, suspected
vanished twin, and normal singleton.
Results: Of 1005 cases, outcome was obtained for 786 (78.2%)
cases. Including only cases of con ﬁrmed triploidy, data analysis
indicates a triploidy PPV of 59/786 (7.5%). If cases of suspectedtriploidy are included the PPV improves to 85/786 (10.8%). Theconservative PPV for vanished twin gestations was 460/786
(58.5%). When cases of suspected vanished twins were included,
the PPV improved to 499/786 (63.5%).
Conclusions: With ﬁve times the number of cases as Curnow et
al., this study shows an improved triploidy PPV (7.5% versuspreviously reported 5.3% PPV.) When triploidy is combined with
vanished twin gestation, we observed an improved overall PPV
(66.0% versus 47.4%). Our cohort con ﬁrms the ability of a SNP-
based NIPT to detect triploidy and shows an improved PPV thatcan better inform post-test counseling for both fetal and maternal
complications.
V. Kantor: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera,
Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc. K. Young: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Own-
ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc. W. DiNonno: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Natera, Inc..
P01.093.A Trisomy 8 mosaicism in the placenta: a Danish
cohort study of 37 cases and a literature review
Simon H. Thomsen
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
Objective: To evaluate the risk of fetal involvement when trisomy
8 mosaicism (T8M) is detected in chorionic villus samples (CVS).
Methods: A retrospective descriptive study of registered
pregnancies in Denmark with T8M in CVS identi ﬁed through a
database search and a review of published cases of T8M found
through a systematic literature search and inclusion of crossreferences. Pregnancies with T8M in CVS and no additional
numerical chromosomal aberrations were included.
Results: A total of 37 Danish cases and 60 published cases were
included. T8M detected in a CVS was associated with fetalinvolvement in 18 out of 97 pregnancies (18.6% [95%CI: 11.4-
27.7]). Eight out of 70 (11.4% [95%CI: 5.1-21.3]) interpreted
prenatally to be con ﬁned placental mosaicism (CPM) were
subsequently found to be true fetal mosaicisms (TFM).
Conclusion: T8M detected in CVS poses a signi ﬁcant risk of fetal
involvement, and examination of amniotic ﬂuid (AF) and/or fetal
tissue should be offered. However, a normal result of AF still has aconsiderable residual risk of fetal involvement. Genetic counsel-
ling at an early gestational age is essential, and follow-up
ultrasonography should be performed to predict fetal involve-ment if possible. Funding: Ida Vogel is funded by a research grant
from the Novo Nordic Foundation: NNF16OC0018772
S.H. Thomsen: None.
P01.094.B Mosaicism for genome-wide paternal uniparental
disomy - two prenatal cases
Raquel Lemos
1, Cíntia Ventura1, Fátima Torres1, Gabriela Fernandes1,
Isabel Durães1, Áurea Pereira1, Patricia Costa1, Jorge Castro2,
Conceição Brito2,Rita Cerqueira1
1CGCgenetics UNILABS, Porto, Portugal,2CHVNG, Obstetrícia, Vila
Nova de Gaia, Portugal.
Introduction: Uniparental disomy (UPD) is the abnormal situation
in which both members of a chromosome pair are inherited fromone parent, and the other parent ’s chromosome for that pair isAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
114
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608missing. UPD of the whole genome is not consistent with life but
mosaic genome-wide UPD might be compatible with life. We
present 2 cases of prenatal diagnosis with paternal uniparental
isodisomy (GWpUPD) after contradictory QF-PCR and fetalkaryotype results. The fetuses died and the placentas hadhydatidiform moles criteria.
Methods : Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 20 meta-
phases, stained with GTG bands, from three independent cultures.The most frequent aneuploidies by QF-PCR test was performedafter DNA extraction from the fetus sample with STR markers
speci ﬁc for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y. Chromosomal
microarray study (aCGH) was performed, after DNA extractionfrom the fetus sample, using the Affymetrix Cytoscan 750Kplatform. Results In both cases, the result of QF-PCR test revealed a
proﬁle compatible with triploidy discrepant from the karyotype
that revealed a normal female chromosomal constitution. TheaCGH on the Affymetrix Cytoscan platform allowed the con ﬁrma-
tion of the mosaicism for uniparental disomy for all chromosomes.
These results together are compatible with GWpUPD.
Conclusions: The articulation between the different techniques
was essential for the distinction between triploidy, mosaic for
GWpUPD and a normal result. A prenatal case with a normal
ﬁbroblasts karyotype and a suspected hydatidiform mole without
further studies could be misdiagnosed.
R. Lemos: None. C. Ventura: None. F. Torres: None. G.
Fernandes: None. I. Durães: None. Á. Pereira: None. P. Costa:
None. J. Castro: None. C. Brito: None. R. Cerqueira: None.
P01.095.C Reassessing the clinical pathogenicity of genomic
variant based on family history in two prenatal cases
Núria Capdevila
1, Neus Baena1, Silvia Pina1, Montserrat Pauta2,
Maria Segura3, Antoni Borrell2
1Parc Taulí Sabadell, University Hospital, Sabadell, Spain,2Clinic
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain,3Quantitative Genomic Medicine Labora-
tories, qGenomics, Esplugas del Llobregat, Spain.
Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a diagnostic tool
in postnatal settings for individuals with a suspected genetic
condition. Recently, it is increasingly used as a diagnostic tool inprenatal settings with a diagnostic yield ranging from 15% to 35%.The aim is to evaluate the pathogenicity of two genetic variants
found by WES and inherited from one parent and determinate the
risk of recurrence for the couple.
Methods: WES was performed in fetal samples with ultrasound
anomalies, previous prenatal CGH-array with normal result.
MedExome analysis using NextSeq (Illumina). Variant and segrega-tion studies were con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
ResultsCase 1: A 34-years-old pregnant woman was referred
due to prenatal ultrasound of frontal antlers fusion, suspicion of
holoprosencephaly, clubhand and facial proboscis. In the collec-tion of family history, it is noticed that the father presents bilateralculbfeet and hypertelorism. WES detected a paternally inherited
heterozygous variant c.3323G>T GLI2 (NM_005270). Case 2:
Prenatal ultrasound at 18 weeks detected shortening upper limbscompatible with phocomelia in a 29-years-old woman. Familyhistory shows the father has bilateral thumb hypoplasia and
abnormal electrocardiogram. WES detected paternally inherited
heterozygous variant c.663 +1G>A TBX5 (NM_181486.4). After
genetic counselling the pregnancies were terminated in both
cases. Initially, the variants detected were not reported as a
responsible of the foetal phenotype until the family history wascollected.
Conclusion The use of WES in foetuses with ultrasound defects
previous an accurate compilation of family history is required todetermine the pathogenicity of the variant and speci ﬁc risk of
recurrence.
N. Capdevila: None. N. Baena: None. S. Pina: None. M. Pauta:
None. M. Segura: None. A. Borrell: None.
P01.096.D Prenatal TRIO WES sequencing for fetal structural
ultrasound anomalies
Detlef TROST
1, Aïcha Boughalem1, Amandine Diakiese1, Patricia
Blanchet2, Viorica Ciorna-Monferrato3, Pascale Klein ﬁnger1, Laurence
Lohmann1, Mylène Valduga1, Armel Luscan1, Jean Marc Costa1
1Laboratoires CERBA, 95310 ST OUEN L ’AUMONE, France,2CHU
Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 34295 Montpellier cedex 5, France,
3CHR Metz-Thionville, 57085 Metz Cedex 03, France.
The usefulness of whole exome sequencing (WES) for genetic
testing in cases presenting with fetal structural ultrasound
anomalies is currently evaluated. In our cohort WES wasperformed on 128 fetus -parents TRIOs with fetal structuralanomalies in ongoing pregnancies and normal karyotype and CNV
analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from CVS or amniotic ﬂuid
samples. WES data were analyzed based on the prenatallyobserved ultrasound ﬁndings. Pathogenic, or likely pathogenic,
single nucleotide variants were identi ﬁed in 28 of 128 (35.8%)
cases, all were compatible with respective fetal structuralanomalies. In 15 cases the identi ﬁed pathogenic variant occurred
“de novo ”, two times an autosomal variant was found to be of
maternal origin with probably incomplete penetrance. In 11 of the
studied fetuses recessive disorders were detected for couplesunaware of their carrier status, these were homozygous in 7 cases(with 4 consanguineous couples) and composite heterozygous in
4 cases. We correlated the diagnostic yield to the major ultrasound
ﬁndings, which may help to establish high risk ultrasound
ﬁndings, needing investigation beyond fetal karyotyping or CNV
analyses. Prenatal WES analyses enabled us to provide pertinent
genetic counseling and to offer targeted prenatal diagnosis incase of a new pregnancy in 35.8 % of our couples.
D. Trost: None. A. Boughalem: None. A. Diakiese: None. P.
Blanchet: None. V. Ciorna-Monferrato: None. P. Klein ﬁnger:
None. L. Lohmann: None. M. Valduga: None. A. Luscan: None. J.
Costa: None.
P01.097.A Prenatal diagnosis of Wieckaer-Wolff syndrome, a
distinctive phenotype of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
caused by a ‘de novo ’ZC4H2 partial deletion
Armelle Duquenne
1, Charlotte Deneufbourg1, Jean Marc M. Biard2,
Yves Sznajer1
1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc,
UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium,2Obstetrics, Cliniques universitaires
Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium.
Introduction: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) de ﬁnes
phenotype when contractures are present in ≥2 joints. Mono-
genic conditions/cytogenetic CNV have been identi ﬁed in a wide
range of diagnosis with AMC (Hall 2017). A distinctive syndromic
form was originally described postnatally in males with ‘club feet ’,
intellectual disability, ophthalmic dyspraxia and muscle atrophy(Wieckaer 1985). Intragenic deletion/point mutations in ZC4H2
gene have been identi ﬁed responsible for this X-linked condition
(OMIM 314580/ZARD: ‘ZC4H2 associated rare diseases ’). Over time,
case reports and recent largest review showed that females maybe affected; haploinsuf ﬁciency was noted in 3; prenatalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
115
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608presentation in 6 unrelated fetuses (Frints 2019). The Belgian
consortium in prenatal diagnosis (BEMAPRE) de ﬁned SNP-array as
the ﬁrst-tier diagnostic approach for congenital malformation
(Vanakker 2013).
Method-Case Report: A pregnant woman was referred at 22
weeks to our tertiary care center for sporadic arthrogryposis,
‘unusual thin left leg ’,‘clinodactyly ’, normal growth parameters in
a female fetus. Ultrasound study was otherly normal. Invasiveprocedure (amniotic ﬂuid puncture) was performed and SNP-array
(Affymetrix CytoScan 750K) identi ﬁed a heterozygous 262kbs
deletion in Xq11.2. Breakpoint encompasses exon 1 of ZC4H2; no
contiguous gene deletion was noted. SNP-array to parentsconﬁrmed a ‘de novo ’occurrence. Parents asked for termination
of pregnancy. A short neck, anomaly on 4 limbs (distal ﬁngers
camptodactyly, unusual thin and amyotrophic appearance of left
leg with homolateral club foot) were noted.
Conclusion: We report on the seventh fetus with Wieacker-
Wolff syndrome. Cytogenetic work-up allows for precise genetic
counselling. The recurrence risk is related to X-linked gonadalmosaïcism (±10%).
A. Duquenne: None. C. Deneufbourg: None. J.M. Biard: None.
Y. Sznajer: None.
P01.098.B Impaired WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway in
the etiology of azoospermia
Dunya Aydos
1, Sena Aydos2, Yunus Yukselten3, Asuman Sungur-
oglu2, Kaan Aydos4
1Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, Ankara, Turkey,2Department
of Medical Biology, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,Turkey,3Research Laboratories for Health Science, Y Gen Biotechnol-
ogy Company Ltd., Ankara, Turkey,4Department of Urology, Ankara
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Dysregulated WNT signaling in Sertoli cells or in
germ cells is associated with male infertility, in particular theSertoli cell-only (SCO) pattern in testis. Secreted WNT ligands areimportant in development and maintenance of adult tissue
homeostasis and are antagonized by multiple secreted inhibitors
that prevent ligand-receptor interactions, such as Wnt-inhibitoryfactor 1 (WIF1). Understanding the association of WNT signalingcomponents with spermatogonia proliferation/differentiation;
induction of apoptosis in postmitotic germ cells could help
elucidating the etiology of azoospermia. To interrelate perturbedWNT signaling control and germ cell differentiation, we pro ﬁled
expression levels of canonical WNT ligand, WNT6 and WNT
inhibitors, WNT5B and WIF1 .
Materials and methods: Fold changes in expression levels of
WNT5B ,WNT6 and WIF1 were determined by quantitative
PCR in testicular samples taken with microTESE intervention in
NOA cases with SCO syndrome (n =10) and control cases with OA
(n=2).
Results: WNT5B ,WNT6 transcripts were found signi ﬁcantly
upregulated (3.51 ± 1.11 and 30.23 ± 14.04 fold-change, respec-
tively) as compared with control cases with OA ( P< 0.05). WIF1
gene expression levels showed a signi ﬁcant ( P< 0.001) decrease
(0.41 ± 0.11 fold-change) compared with OA group.
Conclusions: In NOA cases increased WNT5B mRNA levels
suggests an association with increased nuclear β-catenin in
postmitotic germ cells and defective spermatogenesis. WNT6
secreted by Sertoli cells activates WNT/ β-catenin signaling in
spermatogonia. Also, a decrease in WIF1 levels causes β-catenin
activation. In Sertoli cells, aberrant activation of canonical WNTsignaling keeps them immature, which may interrupt male fertility
via progressive degeneration of seminiferous tubules.D. Aydos: None. S. Aydos: None. Y. Yukselten: None. A.
Sunguroglu: None. K. Aydos: None.
P01.099.C Hemizygous loss of Xq26.2-q26.3 including GPC3,
GPC4 and PHF6 in a fetus with lethal complex malformations
Christa Überbacher , Irene Mutz-Dehbalaie, Renate Lunzer, Ingrid
Weber, Johannes Zschocke, Christine Fauth
Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
Introduction: Hemizygous deletions of parts of the
X-chromosome are rare and due to the nullisomy for essentialgenes often incompatible with life. Typically, affected males havea contiguous gene syndrome, which includes phenotypic features
of different disorders. Here, we describe the prenatal and autopsy
ﬁndings of a male fetus with lethal complex malformations due to
a hemizygous deletion Xq26.2-q26.3.
Methods and Results: Routine ﬁrst trimester screening
detected several abnormalities (nuchal edema, ascites, dextro-
versio cordis, exomphalos, growth retardation) which prompted
molecular karyotyping. A male karyotype with a 2 Mb
hemizygous interstitial deleti on Xq26.2-q26.3 harbouring sev-
eral disease genes was found ( GPC3 , Simpson-Golabi-Behmel
syndrome 1, SGBS1, MIM #312870; GPC4 ,K e i p e r ts y n d r o m e ,
KPTS, MIM #301026; PHF6 , Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syn-
drome BFLS, MIM #301900; HPRT1 ,L e s c h - N y h a ns y n d r o m e ,L N S
#300322). The parents decided for termination of the pregnancy.Autopsy con ﬁrmed ultrasound ﬁndings and revealed additional
features/malformations like hydr ocephalus, hypertelorism, cleft
lip and palate, bilobar lung, agenesis of the diaphragm,
polysplenia, anal a tresia, syndactyly of ﬁngers and toes, and
broad distal phalanges. The majority of these ﬁndings belong to
the phenotypic spectrum of SGBS1 with the exception of
intrauterine growth retardation. Another notable ﬁnding is the
severity of the diaphragm defect: diaphragmatic hernia isfrequent in SGBS1 but agenesis of the diaphragm has not been
previously reported.
Conclusion: The hemizygous interstitial deletion Xq26.2-q26.3
leads to a contiguous gene syndrome with congenital malforma-tions mostly typical of SGBS1. Nullisomy of neighbouring genes
like GPC4 and PHF6 may modulate/aggravate the severity of the
phenotype.
C. Überbacher: None. I. Mutz-Dehbalaie: None. R. Lunzer:
None. I. Weber: None. J. Zschocke: None. C. Fauth: None.
P01.100.D Analysis of preimplantation human and bovine
embryos with regard to XIST repression on the future active X
Melis Atalar Aksit
1,B oY u2, Bernard A. J. Roelen3, Barbara Migeon1
1McKusick Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA,2Farm Animal Health, Department of
Population Health Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands,
3Embryology, Anatomy and Physiology, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
X inactivation is the means of equalizing the dosage of X
chromosomal genes in male and female mammals, so that there
is only one active X in each cell. The XIST locus (in cis) on each
additional X chromosome initiates its silence, making it an inactiveX. Yet, how the active X in both males and females is protected
from being silenced by its own XIST locus is not well understood in
any mammal. Previous studies of autosomal duplications suggestthat gene(s) on the short arm of human chromosome 19Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
116
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608genetically interact with the X chromosome to repress XIST
function on the future active human X. Here, we examine the
time of transcription of the candidate genes from human
chromosome 19 and its ortholog, bovine chromosome 7, usingsingle cell RNA sequence data from preimplantation human andqRT-PCR data from bovine embryos. Our results suggest that XIST
on the future active X is repressed in both sexes just before, or at
the time that, the pluripotent factors are upregulated during the4-8 cell stage in the human and bovine embryo, well before thelate blastocyst when XIST is upregulated on the inactive X in
females. They also narrow the list of these putative candidate
human and bovine genes.
M. Atalar Aksit: None. B. Yu: None. B.A.J. Roelen: None. B.
Migeon: None.
P01.101.A Y-chromosome abnormalities in men with repro-
ductive failure
Mariela Hristova-Savova , Kalina Belemezova, Yuri Batchvarov,
Petya Andreeva, Daniela Savova, Maria Yunakova, Tanya Timeva,
Atanas Shterev, Ivanka Dimova
SAGBAL"D-r Shterev", So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background : The human Y chromosome harbors genes that are
responsible for testis development and also for initiation andmaintenance of spermatogenesis in adulthood. Male infertility canbe attributed to several factors such as cryptorchidism, varicocele,
endocrinological disorders, obstruction/absence of seminal path-
ways, infections, alcohol consumption or chemotherapy. However,genetic alterations have also emerged as one of the leading causeof male infertility. The objective of our study was to investigate the
type and frequency of Y-chromosome abnormalities in male
infertility.
Materials and methods : We have analyzed by cytogenetic
analysis 1063 men, attending reproductive clinic. Among them,
we have applied also PCR analysis for Yq AZF microdeletions in139 men with azoospermia and 195 men witholigoasthenozoospermia.
Results : Overall, 36 out of 1063 men were detected with some
Y-chromosome cytogenetic aberrations - their types and fre-quency are shown in the Table.
Both numerical and structural Y-chromosome aberrations were
detected in 1.7% of infertile men. Correlations with clinical andlaboratory parameters were performed. PCR analysis revealed AZF
a,b or c Y-deletions in 9 out of 139 azoospermic (6.5%) and in 2
out of 195 oligoasthenozoospermic men (1%).
Conclusion : Y-chromosome cytogenetic and molecular-genetic
aberrations were found in 4.4% of infertile men. The accurate
genetic diagnosis has a great impact on decision making forclinical management of these patients, offering in the affectedpatients PGT-A or sperm donor.
M. Hristova-Savova: None. K. Belemezova: None. Y. Batchvarov:
None. P. Andreeva: None. D. Savova: None. M. Yunakova: None. T.
Timeva: None. A. Shterev: None. I. Dimova: None.P02 Sensory Disorders (Eye, Ear, Pain)
P02.001.B Identi ﬁcation of two deletions of the cis-regulatory
region of the POU3F4 gene in patients with nonsyndromic
sensorineural deafness from North Ossetia, Russia
Rena A. Zinchenko
1,2, Tatyana A. Vasilyeva1, Natalya V. Balinova1,
Vitaly V. Kadyshev1, Elena F. Mikhailidi3, Nika V. Petrova1, Sergey I.
Kutsev1
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2N.A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3Republican Children ’s Clinical Hospital,
Vladikavkaz, Russian Federation.
Х-linked deafness 2 (DFNX2) represents the most common form of
Х-linked deafness (OMIM PS304500). It is characterized by cochlear
incomplete partition with ﬁstulous communication with internal
auditory canal. Mixed conductive and sensorineural deafness is
developing. DFNX2 is associated with small intragenic POU3F4
mutations or chromosome rearrangements involving Xq21chromosome region. Rearrangements comprise 50% of DFNX2
genetic causes.
Material and methods : 65 North Ossetian patients (Ironian
Ossetian ethnic subgroup from the North Caucasus region of Russia)are included into the study. MLPA analysis of the Xq21 is implied.
Results : In two unrelated male patients representing sporadic
cases of Х-linked deafness a deletion in Xq21.1 has been
identi ﬁed: hg18:chrX:g.(081676507_081728494)_
(081728798_081866106)del. That removes distal cis-regulatory
region in ~920 kb upstream from the POU3F4 gene and does
not affect its coding sequence. Chromosome break points havenot been determined. Size could vary from 300 bp to 200,000 bp.
Earlier, two other deletions in the same area (~8 kb and ~200 kb of
size) were identi ﬁed in Europe.
Conclusions: Observations of similar chromosome region dele-
tions in patients from different populations from West Europe and
the North Caucasus indicate that Xq21 region with its multiple
conserved noncoding sequences is a hot spot for chromosomebreaks. That requires to include Xq21 deletions screening, as well astarget Sanger sequencing of the POU3F4 gene in the routine analysis
of the molecular causes of inheri ted deafness. The research was
partially supported by RSF grant №17-15-01051 and within the state
task of the Ministry of education and science of Russia
R.A. Zinchenko: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. N.V. Balinova:
None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. E.F. Mikhailidi: None. N.V. Petrova:
None. S.I. Kutsev: None.
P02.002.C Genetic and environmental factors in ﬂuencing
sensory decays during aging in a large Italian cohort
Giorgia Girotto
1, Massimiliano Cocca2, Anna Morgan2, Eulalia
Catamo2, Paola Tesolin1, Agnese Feresin1, Paolo Gasparini1, Maria
Pina Concas2
1University of Trieste-IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,2IRCCS-Burlo
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
Sensory perception changes over a lifetime and its impairment play a
critical role in health and quality of life. Studies published until now
have focused on single sensory impairments in elderly people whiledata on the signi ﬁcant “multisensory phenotype ”(MS) are still
lacking. Genetic and phenotypic data (hearing, taste and smell
evaluated through sensory functions assessment) of 1152 individualshave been investigated. MS was calculated as the total number ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
117
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608impaired senses. The followi ng steps have been applied: 1)
regression models to assess the association between MS and
personal/lifestyle characteristics, 2) GWAS meta-analysis and 3) gene-
based analysis to ﬁnd genetic in ﬂuences on MS. Regarding (1), male
gender, ageing, and low educatio nal level were associated with MS
higher values (p-value < 0.05) while no role was recognized for
smoking habit and high alcohol cons umption. For GWAS analysis (2),
a total of seven genes resulted in being associated with MS (p-value<1 x 1 0-6). In particular, BCL7C and MACROD2 , both expressed in the
brain and in the inner ear, have been recently associated with Lewy
body dementia and neurological dis orders, respectively. Finally,
gene-based analysis (3) highlighted several genes implicated insensory signalling pathways such as LSAMP ,PRKG1, GNG7, RYR3,
PTPRN2 . Present data show that several factors- both environmental
and genetic - in ﬂuence concomitant sensory declines. Further
investigation (GWAS replicatio n combined with in vivo studies in
animal models) are needed to con ﬁrm our results that will ultimately
help to understand better the co mplex biological mechanisms
underlying MIS and ageing.
G. Girotto: None. M. Cocca: None. A. Morgan: None. E.
Catamo: None. P. Tesolin: None. A. Feresin: None. P. Gasparini:
None. M. Concas: None.
P02.003.D Molecular Diagnosis of TYR Negative Albinism
Patients by Clinical Exome Sequencing
Sezer Akyoney1,Ilayda Sahin2,3,B üşra Ünal4, Nihat Bu ğra A ğaoğlu4,
Abdulbaki Mudun5, Zeynep Parlakgüne ş6, Engin Y ılmaz7, Yasemin
Alanay2,8,Uğur Özbek2,8, Özden Hat ırnaz Ng1,8
1Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Ayd ınlar University, School of Medicine,
Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,2Acibadem Mehmet
Ali Aydinlar University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,3Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University,
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Istanbul, Turkey,4University of
Health Sciences, Umraniye Training and Research Hospital (UEA),
Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,5Acibadem Maslak
Hospital, Department of Ophthalmology, Istanbul, Turkey,6Yeditepe
University Eye Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Istanbul,
Turkey,7Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,8Acibadem University Rare Diseases
and Orphan Drugs Application and Research Center (ACURARE),Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: Albinism is a group of rare genetic conditions
inherited autosomal recessively and associated with reduced or no
melanin production. Due to high clinical/genetic heterogeneity,
genotype-phenotype correlation can only be carried out bygenetic diagnosis that is vital especially for syndromic forms.More than 33 genes are related to albinism and these can explain
the genetic background of 70-75% of all albinism cases. Among
these TYRis the most detected gene. Here we aimed to determine
the genetic background of TYR negative cases by clinical exome
analysis.
Materials and Methods: Nine TYRnegative cases were studied
by clinical exome sequencing. Analyzes of the raw data were
carried out both with ACURARE in-house pipeline and SOPHiAGENETICS software. The sequences were mapped and alignedwith the GRCh38 reference genome. The detected variants were
evaluated according to the ACMG guideline. Candidate variants
were validated by Sanger sequencing in patients and segregationanalyzes were performed in the family members that can providesamples.
Results: A homozygous variant was identi ﬁed in all nine cases
and eight of them were novel. The gene variants weresummarized in Table1. The family members were heterozygous
carriers of the same variant detected in the index case.
Conclusion: The results obtained reveal the importance of
genetic diagnosis in albinism especially in syndromic forms whomight need special follow-up
S. Akyoney: None. I. Sahin: None. B. Ünal: None. N.B.
Ağaoğlu:None. A. Mudun: None. Z. Parlakgüne ş:None. E.
Yılmaz: None. Y. Alanay: None. U. Özbek: None. Ö. Hat ırnaz Ng:
None.
P02.004.A Clinical and genetic analysis of new cases provides
further characterisation of ALDH1A3-related anophthalmia/
microphthalmia
Yesim Kesim
1, Fabiola Ceroni1,2, Alejandra Damián3,4, Fiona Blanco-
Kelly3,4, Carmen Ayuso3,4, Kathy Williamson5, Véronique Paquis6,
Dorine Bax1, Claudine Rieubland7, Chamlal Mostafa8, Marta
Cortón3,4, Nicolas Chassaing9,10, Patrick Calvas9,10, Nicola Ragge1,11
1Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health
and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UnitedKingdom,2Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,3Department of Genetics & Genomics,
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz Uni-
versity Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM),Madrid, Spain,4Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare
Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain,5MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh,
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,6Department
of Medical Genetics, Nice Teaching Hospital, Nice, France,7Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland,8Department of Pediatrics,
Tangier Hospital, Tangier, Morocco,9UDEAR, Université de Toulouse,
Variants in genes associated with albinism were detected in all patients included in the study
Patient code Gene Transcript Nucleotide change Amino acid change MAF Inheritance Rs code
TG18-30 HPS1 NM_001322482 c.612delC p.M205Wfs*5 0,0001 Homozygous rs281865082
TG18-31 OCA2 NM_001300984 c.2186T>C p.L729P N/A Homozygous Novel
TG18-46 OCA2 NM_001300984 c.2186T>C p.L729P N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-01 SLC45A2 NM_001012509 c.400delC p.(Pro134Glnfs*9) N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-01 SLC45A2 NM_001012509 c.482G>T p.G161V N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-30 SLC45A2 NM_016180 c.386-1G>A N/A N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-36 OCA2 NM_000275 c.2037G>C p.(Gln319*) 0,0000915 Homozygous rs121918169
TG19-46 OCA2 NM_000275 c.1648G>A p.(Glu550Lys) N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-48 SLC45A2 NM_001012509 c.328G>C p.G110R N/A Homozygous Novel
TG19-54 SLC45A2 NM_016180 c.386-1G>A Splice variant N/A Homozygous NovelAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
118
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608UMR 1056 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale-
Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France,10Department of Medical
Genetics, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France,11Department
of Clinical Genetics, West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Serviceand Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham Women ’s and
Children ’s Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (AM) are a
genetically heterogeneous group of disorders that can be isolatedor syndromic. Biallelic ALDH1A3 variants are responsible for 11% of
recessive AM cases, mostly described in consanguineous families,
and present severe bilateral AM with variable neurodevelopmen-tal anomalies. We present six families with biallelic ALDH1A3
variants, further characterising the associated phenotype.
Material and Methods: AM individuals from UK, France and
Spain were analysed by WES, targeted gene screening and arrays.
Results: We identi ﬁed 6 families: Family 1) with two brothers
with bilateral anophthalmia, one present additional developmen-
tal delay, absent speech and autism with compound heterozygousALDH1A3 variants (c.874G>T:p.(D292Y);c.1393A>T:p.(I465F)); 2) a
boy with bilateral anophthalmia, developmental and intellectual
delay, seizures and autistic features with compound heterozygous
variants (c.845G>C:p.(G282A);c.1459A>G:p.(R487G)); 3) a girl withbilateral microphthalmia and coloboma with compound hetero-zygous variants (c.847_849del;p.(G283del);c.953C>A,:p.(S318Y)); 4)
a girl with bilateral anophthalmia with a homozygous missense
variant (c.1144G>A:p.(G382R)); 5) a boy with bilateral microphthal-mia, unilateral coloboma and cataract, with a homozygous splice
variant (c.1233 +2T>C) and 6) a boy with bilateral microphthalmia,
iris and chorioretinal coloboma, facial dysmorphism with ahomozygous missense variant (c.434C>T:p.A145V).
Conclusions: Three of the six families presented with com-
pound heterozygous variants, highlighting this mode of inheri-
tance in ALDH1A3 -related disorders. Five of 6 families had a variant
in the catalytic domain, supporting the importance of this domain,which is critical for substrate selectivity. Severe neurodevelop-
mental phenotypes were present in two individuals, and variably
penetrant in family 1, supporting that this can be an importantfeature of the ALDH1A3 syndrome.
Y. Kesim: None. F. Ceroni: None. A. Damián: None. F. Blanco-
Kelly: None. C. Ayuso: None. K. Williamson: None. V. Paquis:
None. D. Bax: None. C. Rieubland: None. C. Mostafa: None. M.
Cortón: None. N. Chassaing: None. P. Calvas: None. N. Ragge:
None.
P02.006.C Further evidence of involvement of SERPINB6 in
autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss
Barbara Vona
1, Thore Schade-Mann1, Petra Stöbe2, Philipp
Gamerdinger1, Aboulfazl Rad1, Marc Sturm2, Hubert Löwenheim1,
Tobias B. Haack2, Anke Tropitzsch1
1Dept of Otolaryngology —Head & Neck Surgery, Tübingen Hearing
Research Centre, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany,
2Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, Tuebingen, Germany.
Introduction: Non-syndromic hearing loss is a genetically
heterogeneous sensory disorder. Autosomal recessive hearing
loss is the most prevalent form of non-syndromic hearing loss withapproximately 80 associated genes to date. SERPINB6 (serpin
family B member 6, also called protease inhibitor 6) was mapped
to the DFNB91 locus in 2010 and causally associated withmoderate-to-severe high-frequency hearing loss.
Materials and Methods: As part of our hereditary deafness
study, we ascertained a child with sensorineural hearing loss and ahistory of parental consanguinity. DNA from the proband was
subjected to genome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis.
Hearing evaluation and family history were recorded.
Results: A novel homozygous nonsense SERPINB6 variant
(ENST00000335686:c.217C>T, p.(Gln76Ter)) was identi ﬁed in a 24
Mb run of homozygosity. Moderate-to-severe high-frequency
sensorineural hearing loss was diagnosed at approximately six
years of age.
Conclusions: The limited literature about SERPINB6 in patients
with biallelic nonsense or splicing variants hints to a postlingual
onset and rapidly progressive hearing loss. Progression is
consistent with loss of a functional intracellular protease inhibitor.We add to the limited clinical and molecular genetics knowledge,better characterizing SERPINB6 -associated non-syndromic hearing
loss.
B. Vona: None. T. Schade-Mann: None. P. Stöbe: None. P.
Gamerdinger: None. A. Rad: None. M. Sturm: None. H.
Löwenheim: None. T.B. Haack: None. A. Tropitzsch: None.
P02.007.D A new cases of Axenfelt-Rieger syndrome, caused
by a novel FOXC1 mutation and 6p25 deletion
Esra Kilic
Department of Pediatric Genetics, University of Health Sciences,
Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Axenfelt-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is an autosomal
dominant genetic disorder characterised by ocular anterior
segment disorders with systemic involvement. Neural crest origindysgenesis of cornea, iris, anterior angle, glaucoma, oligodontia,conical incisor teeth, hypoplastic enamel, midface hypoplasia,
hearing de ﬁcit, growth and development disorder, cardiac defects
and intestinal malformations are clinical ﬁndings of this disorder.
Mutations or deletions in forkhead box C1 (FOXC1 , chromosome
6p25) are responsible 25% of ARS cases, pituitary homeobox 2
(PITX2 , chromosome 4q25) 55% of ARS cases.
Patients, and Results: Case 1, 3-years-old boy with develop-
mental delay, hypothroidism, iridocorneal dysgenesis, glaucoma,
midface hypoplasia, thin upper lip and enamel hypoplasia on
incisor teeth. Metabolic workup, hearing, abdominal ultrasono-graphy, echocardiography and chromosomal analysis werenormal. His microarray analysis revealed that 3,3Mb sized
heterozygous deletion on 6p25 including FOXC1 gene. Case 2, 6-
years-old boy with short stature, bilateral megalocornea, iriscoloboma, crowded teeth with hypoplastic enamel, ﬂat nasal
bridge and everted lower lip. His developmental milestones and
intellectual capacity was normal. Metabolic workup, hearing,abdominal ultrasonography, echocardiography, cranial MRI, chro-mosomal analysis, microarray analysis and PITX2 sequence analysis
were normal. Sanger sequencing of FOXC1 gene revealed, novel
heterozygous de novo c.76dupT (p.Y26Lfs *57) mutation.
Conclusion : Here we report two new patients of ARS, one had a
novel FOXC1 mutation, and the other had 6p25 chromosomal
deletion. We also observed more severe clinical phenotype in the
deletion type ARS. Ocular anterior segment disorders are clinicallyand genetically heterogenous conditions, by demonstrating theunderlying genetic cause we gave appropriate genetic counseling
and follow-up.
E. Kilic: None.
P02.008.A Brittle cornea syndrome with a novel pathogenic
variant of PRDM5 gene
Ezgi Susam
1, Nilgün Y ıldırım2, Sinem Kocagil1, Oguz Çilingir1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
119
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Eskisehir Osmangazi University Medical Genetics Department,
Eskisehir, Turkey,2Eskisehir Osmangazi University Ophthalmology
Department, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Brittle cornea syndrome is a rare syndrome, characterized by extreme
thinning of cornea with estimated prevalence less than 1 in
1,000,000. Biallelic pathogenic variants of PRDM5 and ZNF469 genes
have been identi ﬁed for etiology of the syndrome.Blue sclerae,
corneal thinning with or without corneal rupture, myopia, early-onsetkeratoconus and keratoglobus are the main ophthalmological
features of the disease. Although eyes are the most severely affected
organs, it is a systemic disorder including hearing loss and someconnective tissue manifestations lik e scoliosis, hyperelasticity, devel-
opmental dysplasia of the hip and ra rely increased bone fractures.
Here we report a 1-year-old male patient, referred to our clinic from
ophthalmology department due to keratoglobus. He was born asthird child of healthy ﬁrst-degree cousin parents at term without any
complication. At physical examin ation, he presented with corneal
opacity on left eye, bilateral b lue sclera, micrognathia and
hyperelasticity. Echocardiogr aphy and hip ultrasonography were
normal. Despite he had passed neona tal auditory screening, patient
was consulted to ENT department again for hearing evaluation and
diagnosed with moderate sensorine ural type hearing loss. With these
ﬁndings, brittle cornea syndrome was thought as the most accurate
diagnosis and PRDM5 gene sequencing revealed a novel c.177
+1G>A variant in homozygous state. This variant was classi ﬁed as
pathogenic by ACMG guidelines and segregation analysis wascompatible with parents of the proband as carrier. According to his
physical examination and the results of the molecular analyses we
have concluded that this novel variant causes Brittle corneasyndrome and genetic counseling was given to family.
E. Susam: None. N. Y ıldırım:None. S. Kocagil: None. O.
Çilingir: None.
P02.009.B Two new BRPF1 variants associated with IDDDFP
and previously unreported ocular ﬁndings
Erika Fiorentini
1, Samuela Landini2, Lucia Tiberi2, Angelica
Pagliazzi2, Giulia Gori2, Elia Dirupo2, Elisa Marziali3, Pinuccia
Fortunato3, Giacomo Bacci3, Roberto Caputo3, Sara Bargiacchi2,
Viviana Palazzo2, Rosangela Artuso2
1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Biomedical Sciences ‘Mario Serio ’, University of Florence, Firenze,
Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children ’s University Hospital,
Firenze, Italy,3Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, A. Meyer Children ’s
Hospital, Firenze, Italy.
BRPF1 gene on 3p26-p25 encodes a protein involved in epigenetic
regulation, through interaction with histone H3 lysine acetyl-
transferase KAT6A and KAT6B of the MYST family. Recently
heterozygous variants in BRPF1 have been identi ﬁed in subjects
with IDDDFP (OMIM 617333), a disorder characterized by globaldevelopmental delay, intellectual disability, language delay and
peculiar facial features (round face, ﬂat pro ﬁle, broad nasal root,
hypertelorism, blepharophimosis, ptosis, abnormally shaped ears).Joint hypermobility, cervical spinal fusion, EEG abnormalities andepilepsy also occur. Reported ocular problems are strabismus,
amblyopia and refraction errors. We found the de novo hetero-
zygous variant c.330delC (p.Ile110fs) in BRPF1 by whole exome
sequencing (WES), conducted in a patient (P1) with mild
intellectual disability, ptosis and typical facies. Interestingly, the
patient also had a Chiari Malformation type I and a subclinicaloptic neuropathy, which could not be explained by variations inother genes. WES performed in a second patient (P2) showing, as
well as P1, intellectual disability, round face, ptosis and strabismusrevealed the heterozygous variant c.1447_1450delGTCA (p.
Val4834argfsTer11) in BRPF1 ; cerebral MRI at 1 and 3 years were
normal. Having detected a peculiar ocular phenotype in P1, we
suggested optical coherence tomography (OCT) for P2; such examdetected bilateral subclinical optic neuropathy also in this case. Todate, only a few patients with BRPF1 mutations have been
described and none was reported to have an optic neuropathy.
Since subclinical optic nerve alterations can go easily undetected,our experience highlights the importance of a more detailedophthalmologic evaluation in patients with BRPF1 variant.
E. Fiorentini: None. S. Landini: None. L. Tiberi: None. A.
Pagliazzi: None. G. Gori: None. E. Dirupo: None. E. Marziali:
None. P. Fortunato: None. G. Bacci: None. R. Caputo: None. S.
Bargiacchi: None. V. Palazzo: None. R. Artuso: None.
P02.010.C Maternally inherited hemizygous 8.5 Mb Xq21.1
deletion in a male patient with choroideremia, deafness and
intellectual disability found using NGS based CNV-callingapproach
Ewelina Bukowska-Olech
1, Alexander Pepler2,Aleksander Jamsheer1,3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland,2CeGaT GmbH, Tubingen, Germany,
3Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland.
Background: Xq21 deletions associate with choroideremia-
deafness-obesity syndrome (MIM: 303110), which main clinical
features comprise choroideremia, obesity, moderate intellectual
disability and hearing impairment. This contiguous gene deletioninvolves at least CHM and POU3F4 genes known to cause
choroideremia and deafness, respectively.
Materials and methods: The male patient with choroideremia,
deafness and intellectual disability underwent the whole-exomesequencing (WES). Next, he was subjected to con ﬁrmation studies
using quantitative PCR (qPCR) and whole genome array compara-
tive genomic hybridisation (array CGH) (SurePrint G3 Human CGHMicroarray 1 × 1M; Agilent Technologies). Besides, we performedsegregation analysis applying qPCR.
Results: We identi ﬁed the maternally inherited hemizygous
Xq21.1-q21.32 deletion (hg38 chrX:85003913-92618940) usingWES based CNV-calling approach. The variant was calculatedbased upon observed versus expected coverage using exome
sequencing data. Next, we con ﬁrmed the presence of aberration
applying qPCR and narrowed down its size through array CGHmethod (hg38 chrX:84662472-93174172).
Conclusion: Our patient harbours a hemizygous Xq21 deletion
of a smaller size than similar CNVs reported in the medicalliterature thus far. Our ﬁnding supports the contribution of CNVs
to choroideremia, which is an orphan disease being tested for
ocular gene therapy. Besides, we have shown the clinical utility of
NGS based CNV-calling approach, which effectively allowed todetect of the CNV in the exome sequencing data.
This work was supported by the grant from the Polish National
Science Centre, Poland UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270 to Aleksander
Jamsheer.
E. Bukowska-Olech: None. A. Pepler: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; CeGaT. A. Jamsheer: None.
P02.011.D Genome-wide association study identi ﬁesRNF123
locus as associated with chronic widespread musculoskeletal
pain
Md Sha ﬁqur Rahman
1, Bendik S Winsvold2, S.O. Chavez Chavez3,
Sigrid Børte2, Yakov A. Tsepilov4, Sodbo Zh. Shapov4, HUNT All-InAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
120
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Pain, Yurii Aulchenko5, Knut Hagen6, Egil A. Fors6, Kristian Hveem6,
John-Anker Zwart6, J.B.J. van Meurs3, Maxim B. Freidin1, Frances M.K.
Williams1
1King ’s College London, London, United Kingdom,2Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway,3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,4Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,5PolyOmica, Maastricht, Netherlands,6Norwegian Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
Background and Objectives: Chronic widespread musculoskele-
tal pain (CWP) is a symptom of ﬁbromyalgia and a complex trait
with poorly understood pathogenesis. CWP is heritable (48-54%),but its genetic architecture is unknown and candidate gene
studies have produced inconsistent results. We conducted a
genome-wide association study to get insight into the geneticbackground of CWP.
Methods: Northern Europeans from UK Biobank comprising
6,914 cases reporting pain all over the body lasting more than 3
months and 242,929 controls were studied. Replication of threelead genome-wide signi ﬁcant single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) was attempted in 6 independent European cohorts (N =
43,080; cases =14,177). Genetic correlations with risk factors,
tissue speci ﬁcity, and colocalization were examined.
Results: Three genome-wide signi ﬁcant loci were identi ﬁed
(rs1491985, rs10490825, rs165599 ) residing within the genes
RNF123 ,ATP2C1 , and COMT . The RNF123 locus was replicated
(meta-analysis p =0.0002), the ATP2C1 locus showed suggestive
association (p =0.0227), and the COMT locus was not replicated.
Partial genetic correlation between CWP and depressive symp-
toms, body mass index, age of ﬁrst birth, and years of schooling
were identi ﬁed. Tissue speci ﬁcity and colocalization analysis
highlight the relevance of skeletal muscle in CWP.
Conclusions: We report a novel association of RNF123 locus
with CWP and suggest a role of ATP2C1 , consistent with a role of
calcium regulation in CWP. The association to COMT , one of the
most studied genes in chronic pain ﬁeld, was not con ﬁrmed in the
replication analysis.
M. Rahman: None. B. S Winsvold: None. S. Chavez Chavez:
None. S. Børte: None. Y. A. Tsepilov: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; PolyOmica. B. Research Grant (principal investiga-
tor, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Modest; Russian Foundation for BasicResearch. S. Zh. Shapov: None. Y. Aulchenko: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; PolyOmica. K. Hagen: None. E. A.
Fors: None.
K. Hveem: None. J. Zwart: None. J. Meurs: None. M.
B. Freidin: None. F. M.K. Williams: None.
P02.012.A Unexpected NGS ﬁndings in a case of Coats ’
disease, combination of rare variants in the HMCN1 and
NPHP4 genes associated with other forms of retail dystrophy
Tatiana A. Vasilyeva , Vitaly V. Kadyshev, Nika V. Petrova, Andrew V.
Marakhonov, Rena A. Zinchenko
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Coats ’disease (OMIM300216) is a form of retinal dystrophy which
occurs due to congenital abnormality of retinal vessels. Patients,
mainly young men, show unilateral retinal telangiectasia, retinalexudation and detachment. Coats ’disease occurs preferentially as
sporadic cases, its genetic cause is still unknown. A 17-year-old
Caucasian male patient with sporadic exudative vitreoretinopathy/
Coats ’disease underwent complete ophthalmological examina-
tion, whole exome sequencing by NGS method was implied forsearching causative genetic variants of the phenotype. Twoheterozygous variants in different genomic loci associated with
other forms of retinal dystrophy have been detected, a rare variant
in the HMCN1 gene c.9571C>T p.(Arg3191Cys) and a known
pathogenic variant in the NPHP4 gene c.2930C>T p.(Thr977Met).
Pathogenic variants in the HMCN1 gene are responsible for
dominant age-related macular dystrophy (#603075), variants in
the NPHP4 gene cause recessive Senior-Loken syndrome 4
(#266900). Encoding proteins are involved in the regulation ofintegrity of blood/retina barrier at the levels of vascularendothelium and retinal pigment epithelium. The NPHP4 gene is
expressed in connecting cilium, which normally performs impor-
tant function of traf ﬁcking between the external and internal
segments of photoreceptors. A mechanism of functional con-sequences of the detected variants combination is proposed to be
accumulation of several defects, violations of blood/retina barrier,
as well as diminishing of the ciliary transporting potential. Theconsequences can aggravate each other and lead to the observed
phenotype. Carried out within the state assignment of Ministry of
Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation,supported in part by RFBR grant (No.20-015-00061).
T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. N.V. Petrova:
None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.
P02.013.B Mutation analysis in frequent genes in a cohort of
Russian patients with congenital glaucoma
Andrey V. Marakhonov
1, Alexander A. Sorokin2, Tatyana A.
Vasilyeva1, Sofya A. Garifullina1, Darya M. Guseva1, Natalya A.
Semenova1, Vitaly V. Kadyshev1, Rena A. Zinchenko1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Moscow Helmholtz Research Institute of Eye Disease, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Primary juvenile glaucoma develops due to ocular hypertension
with the onset either at birth or within the ﬁrst few years of life. It
arises due to abnormalities in the anterior chamber angledevelopment, that obstructs aqueous out ﬂow in the absence of
systemic anomalies or other ocular malformations. According to
Orphanet data, its birth prevalence in Europe is 2.2 cases per
100,000 newborns. Congenital glaucoma could be inherited ineither autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant modes. Therationale of this study was to analyze mutations in frequent genes
in a cohort of Russian patients with congenital glaucoma.Twenty-
one Russian patients with a primary diagnosis of congenitalglaucoma were included in the study. Targeted sequencing and
MLPA analysis of FOXC1 ,PITX2 (with autosomal dominant
inheritance), and CYP1B1 (with autosomal recessive inheritance)
genes were performed.In eight patients, mutations in analyzedgenes were detected. One patient has previously known homo-
zygous variant in the CYP1B1 gene, NM_000104.3:c.685G>A. Four
patients have heterozygous variants in the FOXC1 gene: two novel
(NM_001453.2:c.246C>A, c.235C>T) and two previously described(c.379C>T, c.379C>T). Three more patients have heterozygous
variants in the PITX2 gene: two novel (NM_001204397.1:c.114G>T
and NM_153427.2:c.408_410delTCG) and one described earlier(NM_153427.2:c.191C>T). Thirteen patients lack variants in ana-lyzed genes.According to our study, congenital glaucoma could be
associated frequently with genes that are usually linked to anterior
segment dysgenesis including Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.Carriedout within the state assignment of Ministry of Science and Higher
Education of the Russian Federation, supported in part by RFBR
grant (No. 19-015-00122).
A.V. Marakhonov: None. A.A. Sorokin: None. T.A. Vasilyeva:
None. S.A. Garifullina: None. D.M. Guseva: None. N.A. Seme-
nova: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
121
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P02.014.C Congenital insensitivity to pain: molecular char-
acterization of a novel disrupting mutation in SCN9A
Margherita M. Marchi1,I l a r i aD ’Amato1, Mirna Andelic1,E r i k aS a l v i1,
Daniele Cartelli1, Raffaella Lombardi1,G u m u sE v r e n2, Giuseppe Lauria1,3
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy,
2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Harran, Sanliurfa, Turkey,3Department of Biomedical and Clinical
Sciences "Luigi Sacco", University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Aim of this study is to investigate the splicing consequence of a
novel intronic mutation in SCN9A (NM_002977.3) in a case of
congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP, #243000). CIP is an extremely
rare condition caused by bi-allelic inactivating mutations in SCN9A ,
encoding the sodium channel Nav1.7, responsible for ﬁring and
transmission of noxious stimuli in the peripheral nociceptors. CIPpresents clinically as the insensitivity to nociceptive pain and heat,
often with anosmia.We report an 8-years-old girl, from an inbred
family, diagnosed with CIP, showing absence of pain sensation,diminished temperature sensation, foot burns, normal olfaction,hearing and MRI. Next-generation-sequencing of SCN9A revealed
a substitution c.377 +7T>G in the donor splice-site of intron 3,
homozygous in the girl and heterozygous in her healthy mother.Total RNA from the proband, her mother and one healthy
unrelated control was extracted from blood and retrotranscribed.
The cDNA region spanning exon 2 to 4 was ampli ﬁed by PCR,
followed by the fragments dimensional analysis on agarose geland Sanger-sequencing. Sequencing revealed in the affected girl
two mis-spliced transcripts: both lacking exon 3 and presenting a
non-canonical isoform of exon 4, and one showing a partialretention of intron 2. The mis-spliced transcripts are predicted toinduce a reading frame shift, which prematurely stops after two (p.
Lys86fs2Stop) or twelve out-of-frame aminoacids (p.Lys86fs12-
Stop), resulting in the loss of NAv1.7.This study describes a novelmutation in SCN9A causing the Nav1.7 de ﬁciency underlying the
nociceptors dysfunction and highlights the importance of
investigating intronic mutations outside the splicing consensus.
M.M. Marchi: None. I. D ’Amato: None. M. Andelic: None. E.
Salvi: None. D. Cartelli: None. R. Lombardi: None. G. Evren:
None. G. Lauria: None.
P02.015.D Complex inheritance of retinal degeneration: At
least three mutations segregate in a family with autosomal-
dominant congenital stationary night blindness
Kalina Mihova
1, Krasimir Koev2, Kunka Kamenarova1, Silvia
Cherninkova3, Radka Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2University
Hospital “Tsaritsa Yoanna", Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Department of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska ”,
Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB)
comprises a group of genetically and clinically heterogeneousnon-progressive retinal disorders (RD), mainly due to rod dysfunc-
tion. This study was performed to identify the genetic defect in a
large family affected with autosomal-dominant (ad) CSNB.
Materials and Methods: Sixteen affected relatives of a large
Gypsy pedigree segregating adRD were examined clinically by
standard ophthalmological methods. Based on this, 15 patients
were diagnosed as having CSNB and one presenting Retinitispigmentosa (RP). Whole exome sequencing was performed inCSNB patients. A systematic ﬁltering approach coupled with copynumber variation (CNV) analysis was used to identify pathogenic
variants, subsequently veri ﬁed by Sanger sequencing and
segregation analysis. Additionally, MLPA analysis was used to
conﬁrm presence of CNVs.
Results: A novel RHO -mutation (c.803A>G, p.Tyr268Cys) was
identi ﬁed in 5 patients with adCSNB. They had full vision under
photopic conditions, showed no fundus abnormalities but
presented night blindness with an altered scotopic ERG. A knownRHO mutation, c.541G>A (p.Glu181Lys), was found in the patient
presenting typical signs of RP. CNV and further MLPA analysis
detected third, novel, IMPDH1- exon-17 heterozygous deletion in
11 patients, two of whom also carrying one of the RHO -mutations.
No mutation was detected in one CSNB-patient suggesting thepresence of another mutation segregating in the pedigree.
Conclusions: Here, we present a large family presenting two
distinct RD-phenotypes and at least three mutations segregatingacross three generations. Although further functional studies are
needed, this study adds a ﬁfth rhodopsin mutation associated
with CSNB. Grant references: KP-06-N33/12/18.12.2019 and D-131/24.06.2020.
K. Mihova: None. K. Koev: None. K. Kamenarova: None. S.
Cherninkova: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P02.016.A There ’s more than meets the eye: dual molecular
diagnosis in complex hearing loss patients
Beatrice Spedicati
1, Anna Morgan2, Maria Teresa Bonati2, Giulia
Severi3, Agnese Feresin1, Giulia Pelliccione2, Paola Tesolin1, Claudio
Graziano3, Paolo Gasparini1,2, Flavio Faletra2, Giorgia Girotto1,2
1Department of Medicine, Surgery a nd Health Sciences, University of
Trieste, Trieste, Italy,2Medical Genetics, Institute for Maternal and Child
Health - I.R.C.C.S. "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit,
S. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
Medical geneticists usually try to identify patients ’clinical conditions
by recognizing the speci ﬁc pattern of a syndrome. Whenever clinical
features do not ﬁt into a known model, the presence of two distinct
conditions may be hypothesized a nd high-throughput sequencing
technologies can allow a complete mo lecular characterization even
in the most complex cases. Here we describe patients presentingwith hearing loss (HL) and other signs that suggested the presence ofa dual molecular diagnosis. Patients were divided in two categories:
a) those with distinct phenotypes, i.e. syndromic or non-syndromic
HL plus other clinical features related to a second condition; b)patients with overlapping phenotypes, with HL due to either of the
two conditions. In group a) Patient-1 displayed HL and periven-
tricular nodular heterotopia, due to a homozygous deletion of theSTRC gene and a nonsense variant in the FLNA gene, respectively;
Patient-2 was affected by Kabuki syndrome ( KMT2D gene) and
Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome ( SMCHD1 gene); Patient-3
was affected by Distal renal tubular acidosis with progressivesensorineural HL ( ATP6V1B1 gene) and Marfan syndrome ( FBN1
gene). In group b) Patient-4 presented sensorineural HL and retinitis
pigmentosa: Whole Exome Seque ncing revealed two compound
heterozygous variants in the USH2A gene, responsible for Usher
syndrome type 2A, and a nonsense variant in the EYA4 gene,
associated with autosomal dominant non-syndromic HL. Overall, our
ﬁndings highlighted that “genetic- ﬁrst diagnostics ”should be the
gold standard for patients with s yndromic conditions of unclear
genetic origin, thus avoiding costly and distressing diagnostic
procedures before reaching a ﬁnal diagnosis.
B. Spedicati: None. A. Morgan: None. M. Bonati: None. G.
Severi: None. A. Feresin: None. G. Pelliccione: None. P. Tesolin:
None. C. Graziano: None. P. Gasparini: None. F. Faletra: None. G.
Girotto: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
122
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P02.017.B NGS strategy for the analysis of genes and regions
responsible for Early Onset High Myopia
Susana Noval1, Maria Nieves-Moreno1, Ana Lopez-Vazquez1, Fer-
nando Santos-Simarro2, Irene Rosa-Perez1, Inmaculada Rueda-
Arenas2, Marta Naranjo-Castresana2, Agela del Pozo2, Oriana
D’Anna1, Victoria EF Montaño2,Elena Vallespin2
1Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain,2Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute
(INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, Rare Diseases
Networking Biomedical Research Centre (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid,Spain.
Early Onset High myopia (eoHM) ( −6.00 diopters or less) is one of
the leading cause of vision loss or even irreversible blindness withpathologic complications such as myopic retinopathy, maculo-pathy, retinal detachment, cataract or primary open-angle
glaucoma that is present before the age of ten. In UMOG
(Ophtalmogenetics Multidiciplinary Unit) we have designed anddeveloped a novel and comprehensive screening strategy for allgenes and loci responsible for eoHM on next-generation
sequencing (NGS) developing a systematic application and
automation in the clinical routine. UMOG is a multidisciplinarydiagnosis and research team with extensive experience in
diagnosis, research and teaching in ophthalmogenetic diseases
in Hospital La Paz (Madrid). Samples were screened using acustomized NGS gene panel, OFT-v3-1, containing 419 genesassociated with eye pathology of suspected genetic origin,
including eoHM genes and loci. The patients study was carried
out on all the genes in the panel as it has been observed by otherresearches that a signi ﬁcant proportion of eoHM is caused by
mutations in RetNet genes. This panel was validated with at least
25 samples with excellent results. At this point, we already ran 30
eoHM families and the diagnostic yield is around 30%. Thedevelopment of this project will introduce the use of these new
technologies to Health Services for diagnosis and research and
thereby will help to improve the diagnosis, treatment and care ofpatients with this and other genomic disorders. We are grateful tothe patients and their families. Grants: PI18-1234-ISCIII and 2020/
0197782-ONCE.
S. Noval: None. M. Nieves-Moreno: None. A. Lopez-Vazquez:
None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. I. Rosa-Perez: None. I. Rueda-
Arenas: None. M. Naranjo-Castresana: None. A. del Pozo: None.
O. D ’Anna: None. V. Montaño: None. E. Vallespin: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Modest; Genycell Biotech. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Diaceutics, The Science Advisory Board.
P02.018.C LOXL1 and CACNA1A SNPs associated with exfolia-
tion syndrome susceptibility in a sample of Northern Spanish
population
Leire Escudero-Arrarás
1, Araceli Lara-López1, María Rodríguez-
Hidalgo1, Txomin Alberdi2, Iñaki Rodríguez-Agirretxe2,3,4, Javier
Mendicute2, Javier Ruiz Ederra5,4
1Biodonostia Health Research Ins titute, San Sebastián, Spain,2Depart-
ment of Ophthalmology, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastián,
Spain,3Instituto Clínico-Quirúrgico d e Oftalmología, Bilbao, Spain,
4RETICS OFTARED, National Institut e of Health Carlos III, Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness, Madrid, Spain,5Miramoon Pharma-
Biodonostia HRI, San Sebastián, S pain, San Sebastián, Spain.
Introduction: Exfoliation syndrome (XFS) is a systemic disease
characterized by whitish ﬁbrillar substance deposition in the anteriorsegment of the eye. LOXL1 and CACNA1A are the main genes
associated with an increased risk.
Materials and Methods: A case-control study with 235
Northern Spanish patients: 55 XFS patients and 180 controls.Genotypes of LOXL1 (rs1048661, rs3825942, rs2165241,rs16958477, rs12914489, rs11638944, rs7173049) and CACNA1A
(rs4926244) SNPs were analyzed by direct sequencing.
Results: The G allele and the GG genotype of SNP rs3825942
were detected at a higher frequency in pseudoexfoliation patients(p=0.00057, OR =6.46; p =0.00003, OR =8.96, respectively). The
T allele and the TT genotype of rs2165241 presented at
signi ﬁcantly higher frequencies in XFS patients (p =0.00473, OR
=2.10; p =0.00001, OR =4.49, respectively). The G allele and the
GG genotype of rs1048661 were detected at a statistically higher
frequency in XFS patients (p =0.04587, OR =1.78; p =0.00179,
OR=2.66, respectively). The AA genotype of SNP rs12914489
was detected at a statistically lower frequency in XFS patients (p
=0.01898, OR =5.503). The C allele and the CC genotype of
rs11638944 presented at signi ﬁcantly lower frequencies in
pseudoexfoliation patients (p =0.00754, OR =0.50; p =0.00876,
OR=0.35, respectively). No signi ﬁcant association between XFS
and LOXL1 rs16958477 and rs7173049 SNPs and CACNA1A
rs4926244 was observed.
Conclusion: We found a signi ﬁcant association for several
LOXL1 SNPs, whereas no differences were attributable to
CACNA1A rs4926244 SNP. LEA is supported by fellowships from
Fundación Jesús de Gangoiti Barrera and from the BasqueGovernment (2018111062, MTVD19/BD/006 and MTVD20/BD/
002). Supported by grants from the ISCIII and FEDER (PI18/
00507) and BEGISARE.
L. Escudero-Arrarás: None. A. Lara-López: None. M. Rodrí-
guez-Hidalgo: None. T. Alberdi: None. I. Rodríguez-Agirretxe:
None. J. Mendicute: None. J. Ruiz Ederra: None.
P02.019.D The Fraser-complex pathologic spectrum: Familial
cryptophthalmos in two families from GAFSA, TUNISIA
Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA, Sonda Kammoun, Fatma Abid
Mzid , Saloua Ben Amor, Jamel Feki, Takwa Sammouda, Mouna Rekik
Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17ES36,
Medical University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
Recessive mutations in genes encoding members of the Fraser
complex (FC) or associated proteins constitute an establishedgenetic cause of Fraser syndrome in its three forms related to
mutations in three different genes FRAS1, FREM2, and GRIP1
resulting in failure of the apoptosis program and disruption of theepithelial-mesenchymal interactions during embryonic develop-ment. We report in this study two Tunisian pedigrees from the
town of Gafsa in which a recessive cyptophthalmos was detected.
Material and Methods: Two male newborns were referred to
our genetic counselling for cryptophthalmos. One of them wasalso suspected to have Crigler-Najjar disease. Genetic exploration
of FRAS1 and UGT1A1 genes was conducted.
Results: The two unrelated males were born to consanguineous
parents from Gafsa. They had cryptophthalmos which is a conditionof eyelid malformation associated to an underlying malformed eye.
The ﬁrst case had unilateral right complete cryptophthalmos
associated with maldevelopment of the cornea and the crystallineas well as microphthalmia. At the left, he had posterior embry-
otoxon. Besides facial dysmorphism, he had bilateral syndactyly.
Molecular analysis showed a homozygosity for an intronic sequencechange in intron 22 of FRAS1 gene. The second patient as well as hisbrother had bilateral complete cryptophthalmos associated to
anophthalmia, microphthalmia and iris coloboma. The patient hadAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
123
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608also a neonatal jaundice which was related to the homozygous
mutation of UGT1A1 exon 3 (c.1070A>G).
Conclusion: More recently, bilateral anophthalmia and liver
malformations with intrahepatic biliary atresia were described. FCscreening is thus debated for the second family.
N.B. Abdelmoula: None. S. Kammoun: None. F. Abid Mzid:
None. S. Ben Amor: None. J. Feki: None. T. Sammouda: None. M.
Rekik: None.
P02.021.B Variants in FZD5 are primarily associated with non-
syndromic phenotypes in individuals with ocular coloboma
Richard J. Holt1, David Goudie2, Ajoy Sarkar3, Alejandra Damián4,5,
Alejandra Tamayo4,5, Carmen Ayuso4,5, Marta Cortón4,5, Alice
Gardham6, Virginia Clowes6, Julie Plaisancié7,8, Nicolas Chassaing7,8,
Patrick Calvas7,8, Nicola K. Ragge1,9
1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom,2NHS Tayside,
Dundee, United Kingdom,3Nottingham University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom,4Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital - Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain,5Centre for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain,6Northwick Park and St
Mark ’s Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom,7Purpan University
Hospital, Toulouse, France,8Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU)
de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,9Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Ocular coloboma results from failure of optic ﬁssure
closure during development. It is genetically heterogenous, withvariants in 30 genes implicated, many also associated withanophthalmia and microphthalmia. Most recently, heterozygous
FZD5 variants have been reported in individuals with coloboma
and microphthalmia, but are limited to frameshifts and inframeinsertion/deletions. We describe two missense, two nonsense, and
two frameshift variants in individuals with coloboma and/or
microphthalmia.
Materials and methods: Variants were identi ﬁed using whole
exome sequencing (WES) or customised NGS panels of ocular
development genes, in individuals from the UK (including the
DDD Study [ www.ddduk.org/access.html ]), France and Spain.
Results: We identi ﬁed six individuals with coloboma and
heterozygous likely pathogenic variants: 1) male with bilateral
microphthalmia, iris and chorioreti nal coloboma, anal atresia, atrial
and ventricular septal defect, cortical d ysplasia, microcephaly, seizures,
deafness, and tracheoesophageal ﬁstula (NM_003468.4:
c.539_540insG:p.(E181R fs*88)), also diagno sed with a pathogenic
SLC12A2 variant (NM_001046:exon4:c.C 980T:p.A327V), 2) female with
bilateral iris coloboma, patent ductus arteriosus, atrial septal defect,and volvulus (NM_003468:c.C577T:p. (R193C)), 3) female with bilateral
iris and optic nerve colobomas, and downslanted palpebral ﬁssures,
(NM_003468:c.G1566A:p.(W522*)), 4) female with unilateral iris andchorioretinal coloboma (NM_003468.4 :c.541G>T:p.(E181*)), 5) female
with bilateral coloboma (NM_003468.4:c.1150G>C:p.(D384H)), and 6)
female with unilateral iris and chorioretinal coloboma, and bilateral
optic nerve colobomas (NM_003468. 4:c.147delG:p.(H50Tfs*70)).
Conclusions: We present six individuals with FZD5 variants and
ocular colobomas, providing the ﬁrst evidence for FZD5 missense
and stopgain variants in these disorders. As iris coloboma is the
only consistent phenotype, these data highlight the importance ofadditional pathogenic variants underlying associated complex
non-ocular phenotypes.
R.J. Holt: None. D. Goudie: None. A. Sarkar: None. A. Damián:
None. A. Tamayo: None. C. Ayuso: None. M. Cortón: None. A.
Gardham: None. V. Clowes: None. J. Plaisancié: None. N.
Chassaing: None. P. Calvas: None. N.K. Ragge: None.P02.022.C Clinical exome sequencing reveals different
GUCY2D -related retinopathies in Bulgarian patients
Kunka Kamenarova
1, Nevyana Veleva2, Kalina Mihova1, Neda
Sergeeva2, Alexander Oscar2, Radka Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital
“Alexandrovska ”, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: GUCY2D gene encodes the photoreceptor guany-
late cyclase (GC-E) and different mutations can lead to cone-roddystrophy (CRD), congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB),and Leber congenital amaurosis. In this study, we describe three
unrelated families who carried different GUCY2D -variants and
presented two types of retinopathy.
Materials and Methods: Two unrelated patients with
autosomal-dominant (ad) and autosomal-recessive (ar) CRD, and
one with arCSNB were examined clinically by standard ophthal-
mological methods. Targeted sequencing of clinical exome onIllumina
®platform, followed by Sanger sequencing and segrega-
tion analysis, was used to identify pathogenic variants.
Results: All patients manifested decreased vision, photo-
phobia and elevated thresholds of dark adaptation. Genetic
analysis revealed th ree mutations in the GUCY2D gene
segregating with the phenotype in the pedigrees. The common
c.2512C>T (p.Arg838Cys) mutat ion presenting a relatively
severe clinical phenotype of adCRD was found in one of theanalyzed families. Mutations c.2900A>G (p.His967Arg) and
c.3224+1G>C (p.?) were identi ﬁed in two different combina-
tions (c.2900A>G/c.3224 +1G>C and c.3224 +1G>C/c.3224
+1G>C) in two unrelated proba nds affected by arCSNB and
arCRD, respectively. GUCY2D mutations were accompanied by
similar pattern of generalized cone (macular and peripheral)
dysfunction with a tendency to less involvement of the rodphotoreceptors in the two CRD-patients and a less severe
phenotype in the proband with CSNB.
Conclusions: GUCY2D is a major gene responsible for
progressive CRD which is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000individuals. Here, we present phenotypes of adCRD, adCRD and
arCSNB in three Bulgarian families carrying different pathogenic
variants of GUCY2D . Grant references: KP-06-N33/12/18.12.2019
and D-131/24.06.2020.
K. Kamenarova: None. N. Veleva: None. K. Mihova: None. N.
Sergeeva: None. A. Oscar: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P02.024.A Bene ﬁts of exome sequencing in patients diag-
nosed with isolated or syndromic hearing loss
Roxane van Heurck , Maria Teresa Carminho-Rodrigues, Emma-
nuelle Ranza, Caterina Stafuzza, Lina Quteineh, Corinne Gehrig, Eva
Hammar, Michel Guipponi, Marc Abramowicz, Pascal Senn, NilsGuinand, Helene Cao-Van, Ariane Paoloni-Giacobino
hug, genève, Switzerland.
Purpose : Hearing loss is characterized by an extensive genetic
heterogeneity and is a common disorder in children (1/500).
Molecular diagnosis is of particular bene ﬁt and allows to identify
clinically-unrecognized hearing loss syndromes, as well as appro-priate management and follow-up, including genetic counselling.
Methods : We performed clinical whole exome sequencing, with
analysis of a 189 gene panel associated with hearing loss, in a
prospective cohort of 70 patients including 61 children and 9adults presenting with hearing loss from 2017 to 2020.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
124
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results : The overal diagnostic rate using exome sequencing
reached 47,2 % - 50,8% in children and 22% in adults. In children
with con ﬁrmed molecular results, seventeen out of 31 (54,8%)
patients showed autosomal recessive inheritance patterns, thir-teen out of 31 (41,94%) showed autosomal dominant and onecase had X-linked hearing loss. While in adults the two patients
showed autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Out of the 31
children, 17 (54,84%) had non-syndromic hearing loss and 14(45,16%) had syndromic hearing loss. Both adult cases werediagnosed with syndromic hearing loss. The most common
causative genes were STRC (5 cases), GJB2 (3 cases), COL11A1 (3
cases), ACTG1 (2 cases), GATA3 (2 cases) and TMPRSS3 (2 cases).
Conclusion : Exome sequencing perfomed in hearing loss
situations has a high diagnostic yield in children. This can reveal
several hearing loss syndromes before involvement of other
organs/systems, thus allowing the surveillance of present and/orfuture complications associated with these syndromes.
R. van Heurck: None. M. Carminho-Rodrigues: None. E.
Ranza: None. C. Stafuzza: None. L. Quteineh: None. C. Gehrig:
None. E. Hammar: None. M. Guipponi: None. M. Abramowicz:
None. P. Senn: None. N. Guinand: None. H. Cao-Van: None. A.
Paoloni-Giacobino: None.
P02.025.B Auditory development of patients with genetically
determined hearing loss
Dominika Ozieblo
1,2, Anita Obrycka3, Henryk Skar żyński4, Monika
Ołdak1
1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of
Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,2Postgraduate School of Molecular
Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,3Depart-
ment of Implants and Auditory Perception, Institute of Physiology
and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland,4Oto-Rhino-Laryngology
Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing,
Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction: Every year, approximately 1-6/1000 children are
born with severe to profound hearing loss (HL) and for this group
of patients cochlear implantation (CI) is the treatment of choice.
The aim of our study was to analyse the auditory development ofDFNB1-negative CI patients.
Materials: The study group (n =52) was recruited from patients
with profound prelingual HL that were negative for DFNB1 locus
pathogenic variants and had no environmental HL risk factors.
Methods: In all probands exome sequencing (WES) was
performed and followed by bioinformatics analysis. Validation of
selected variants and family segregation analysis were performedusing standard Sanger sequencing or qPCR. Evaluation of patientsauditory development was performed with the LittlEARS ques-
tionnaire (LEAQ) in three subsequent intervals - at the time of
cochlear implant activation as well as in 5th and 9th month afterCI.
Results: Causative variants were identi ﬁed in 69% of patients
(36/52). The majority of them are localized in the MYO15A (n=6)
and PAX3 (n=5) genes. All patients presented a signi ﬁcant
improvement of their auditory skills in subsequent intervals at 5
th
(p < 0.001) and 9th(p < 0.05) months after CI. There were no
statistically signi ﬁcant differences between auditory development
of patients with identi ﬁed and unidenti ﬁed genetic cause of HL.
Conclusions: Obtained results show a high heterogeneity of
genetic HL causes in the population of Polish DFNB1-negative
cochlea-implanted patients. All tested children were goodcandidates for CI as their HL causative genetic variants arelocalized in genes preferentially expressed in the cochlea.
Supported by NCN grant: 2017/27/N/NZ5/02369D. Ozieblo: None. A. Obrycka: None. H. Skar żyński: None. M.
Ołdak: None.
P02.026.C Genetic Variant Curation in GJB2 and GJB6 genes
from an Argentinean cohort of hearing loss patients
Paula I. Buon ﬁglio
1, Carlos D. Bruque2, Sebastián Menazzi3, Liliana
Francipane3, Vanesa Lotersztein4, Ana B. Elgoyhen1, Viviana K.
Dalamón1
1INGEBI, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina,2Hospital de
Alta Complejidad SAMIC - El Calafate, El Calafate, Argentina,
3Servicio de Genética del Hospital de Clínicas “José de San Martín ”.,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina,4Servicio de Genética
del Hospital Militar Central Cirujano Mayor “Dr. Cosme Argerich ”,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Hereditary hearing impairment affects 1-500 newborn children. It
is characterized by the large amount of genes involved (more than100) and its phenotype heterogeneity. Despite the wide geneticvariety of hearing impairment, the most commonly mutated
genes in severe to profound autosomal recessive non-syndromic
hearing loss are GJB2 and GJB6 , accounting for nearly 50% of the
cases in most populations around the Mediterranean Sea.
Molecular diagnosis enables proper genetic counseling and
medical prognosis to patients. Therefore, correct interpretationof the phenotypic consequences of genetic variants is crucial ingenetic diagnosis, since discrepancies in sequence variant
interpretation and classi ﬁcation has been reported to lead to
serious impact in patient health maintenance.In this study weaimed to identify the genetic causes of hearing loss andperformed a manual genetic variant curation following the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association
for Molecular Pathology ACMG/AMP standards and hearing-loss-gene-speci ﬁc criteria of the ClinGen Hearing Loss Expert Panel.A
total of 600 patients were studied for genetic variants in GJB2 and
GJB6 genes by Sanger Sequencing technique and Multiplex Gap-
PCR, respectively.Overall, 48 different sequence variants weredetected in our cohort of patients, being the c.35delG the most
common causative variant identi ﬁed. Besides, more than 50% of
sequence variants were reclassi ﬁed from their previous categor-
ization in ClinVar after careful manual analysis. These resultsprovide an accurately analysed and interpreted set of variants to
be taken into account by clinicians and the scienti ﬁc community,
and hence, aid the precise genetic counseling to patients.
P.I. Buon ﬁglio: None. C.D. Bruque: None. S. Menazzi: None. L.
Francipane: None. V. Lotersztein: None. A.B. Elgoyhen: None. V.
K. Dalamón: None.
P02.027.D MYO6 intragenic deletion in a family with
autosomal dominant deafness
Chiara Pescucci
1, Francesca Gerundino1, Costanza Giuliani1, Lucia
Galli2, Giuseppina Marseglia1, Barbara Minuti1, Francesca Marin1,
Francesca Buchi1, Monica Trafeli1, Paola Pelacani1, Chiara Castag-
noli1, Elisabetta Pelo1, Alfredo Orrico2,3
1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy,2Molecular
diagnosis and characterization of pathogenic mechanisms of raregenetic diseases, AOU Senese, Siena, Italy,3Clinical Genetics ASL
Toscana SudEst Ospedale della Misericordia, Grosseto, Italy.
Introduction: MYO6 loss-of-function variants can cause auto-
somal dominant progressive hearing loss with variable age ofonset. Here we present a family with hereditary hearing lossAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
125
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern. The proband, a 40-
year-old female, began to show a progressive deafness since she
was 17 years old. She was diagnosed with sensorineural hearing
loss more pronounced in medium and high frequencies (500-8000Hz). Her mother and maternal grandmother also appearedwith the same condition with an onset during the second decade.
Materials and Methods: libraries preparation by Illumina
TSOne sequencing kit and massive parallel sequencing, followedby bioinformatic analysis of an in-silico panel of hearing loss geneswere performed. Reads were aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 using
BWA. Single-nucleotide variants and indels were called by
SAMtools and GATK. Copy number variants analysis wasperformed by CONTRA. Variants were functionally annotated byANNOVAR and interpreted by InterVar. ArrayCGH was perfomed
using a custom array speci ﬁcally designed to investigate
intragenic CNVs in hearing loss related genes.
Results: a novel MYO6 intragenic deletion was identi ﬁed in the
proband. Segregation analysis showed that the deletion co-
segregates with deafness within the family. ArrayCGH analysisallowed to con ﬁrm the presence of a 5,3 kb deletion encompass-
ing exons 2 and 3 of the gene: arr[GRCh37]6q14.1
(76515168x2,76527247_76532572x1,76537323x2).
Discussion: the identi ﬁcation of a novel deletion supports with
additional evidence the known matter that a number ofpathogenic variants in hereditary deafness are private. As a
consequence, molecular diagnosis takes advantage from com-
bined approaches for SNVs/CNVs analyses from sequencing data.
C. Pescucci: None. F. Gerundino: None. C. Giuliani: None. L.
Galli: None. G. Marseglia: None. B. Minuti: None. F. Marin: None.
F. Buchi: None. M. Trafeli: None. P. Pelacani: None. C.
Castagnoli: None. E. Pelo: None. A. Orrico: None.
P02.028.A GJB2 sequencing, Multiplex Ligation Probe Ampli ﬁ-
cation (MLPA) and Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) for themolecular diagnosis of Non-Syndromic Hearing Loss (NSHL): the
experience of a cohort of 277 Italian families
Anna Morgan
1, Flavio Faletra1, Stefania Lenarduzzi1, Martina La
Bianca1, Giulia Pelliccione1, Beatrice Spedicati2, Agnese Feresin2,
Daniela Mazzà1, Alberto Sensi3, Claudio Graziano4, Marco Seri4,
Umberto Ambrosetti5, Paolo Gasparini1,2, Giorgia Girotto1,2
1Institute for Maternal and Child Health –IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo",
Trieste, Italy,2University of Trieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery
and Health Sciences, Trieste, Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit, Depart-
ment of Clinical Pathology, Pievestina, Cesena, Italy,4Unit of Medical
Genetics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy,5University of
Milano U.O.C. Audiologia/Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda OspedaleMaggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy.
Introduction: NSHL is the most common sensory disorder, with
~80% of congenital cases due to genetic causes. In addition toscreening the most frequently mutated genes ( GJB2 /GJB6 /MT-
RNR1 ), the use of WES together with techniques able to detect
copy number variants (CNVs) has proved to be ef ﬁcient in the
molecular diagnosis of NSHL.
Materials and Methods: We applied a multi-step approach for
testing 277 NSHL families, which included: 1) an accurate clinical
evaluation, 2) the analysis of GJB2 ,GJB6 , and MT-RNR1 , 3) the
evaluation of STRC-CATSPER2 and OTOA CNVs via MLPA, 4) WES in
patients negative to steps 2-3.
Results: About 20% of patients carried mutations in the GJB2
gene. MLPA and WES led to the characterization of an additional~37% of cases. In particular, data analysis allowed to 1) con ﬁrm
the relevant role of CNVs in NSHL, with ~8% of the positive cases
carrying a pathogenic CNV, 2) unveil a series of unexpectedscenarios, e.g. the detection of syndromes in patients displaying
subtle phenotypic features, early diagnosis of late-onset diseases,
identify mutations in different genes involved in the same
phenotype, detect multiple genetic conditions in the samepatient, 3) discover new disease genes (e.g. PSIP1, TBL1Y, SPATC1L,
PLS1 ,SLC12A2 ), further exploring the complexity of NSHL.
Conclusions: Our approach proved to be ef ﬁcient in identifying
the molecular causes of NSHL, leading to an overall detection rateof ~50% in the Italian population. Furthermore, WES demon-strated its utility in identifying new disease-genes, deepening the
knowledge of the biological mechanisms of NSHL.
A. Morgan: None. F. Faletra: None. S. Lenarduzzi: None. M. La
Bianca: None. G. Pelliccione: None. B. Spedicati: None. A.
Feresin: None. D. Mazzà: None. A. Sensi: None. C. Graziano:
None. M. Seri: None. U. Ambrosetti: None. P. Gasparini: None. G.
Girotto: None.
P02.029.B Use of OTO-NGS-v2 panel for the genetic diagnosis
of hereditary hearing loss
María Lachgar
1,2, Matías Morín1, Manuela Villamar1, Miguel Ángel
Moreno-Pelayo1
1Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and IRYCIS and CIBERER,
Madrid, Spain,2Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King ’s
College London, London, United Kingdom.
Hereditary hearing loss is the most common sensory de ﬁcit in
humans. It has a highly heterogeneous genetic aetiology and,
therefore, the use of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) approachesis essential to undertake a genetic diagnosis.In this work, we useOTO-NGS-v2, a custom-designed N GS targeted panel containing 117
genes associated with hearing lo ss. Library preparation uses IDT
probes to capture the regions of interest, followed by sequencing inthe Illumina MiSeq and data analysis and variant interpretation in
SOPHiA Genetics DDM, with all mutations con ﬁrmed by Sanger
sequencing.OTO-NGS-v2 was validated using 16 previously geneti-cally characterized samples for the identi ﬁcation of single-nucleotide
variants (SNVs), small insertions and deletions (indels), and copy
number variations (CNVs). We hav e studied 108 Spanish families with
autosomal dominant sensorineural hearing loss (ADSNHL), 45 ofwhich have been genetically diagnosed, thus constituting adiagnostic rate of 41.67%. The 58.33% of the cases remain
undiagnosed and further studies are needed to identify the genetic
cause of the hearing impairment in these patients. Our resultsindicate that WFS1 and MYO7A have the highest prevalence in the
Spanish population (6.48%) followed by MYO6A (5.56%).We conclude
that OTO-NGS-v2 is a robust diagnostic tool for the genetic diagnosisof hereditary hearing loss. In this study, we have laid the foundationsfor its implementation in clinic al practice and contributed to the
understanding of the genetic landscape of hearing impairment in the
Spanish population.This research was funded by ISCIII (PI17/01659,
PI20/0429, CIBERER, 06/07/0036) and by the Regional Government ofMadrid (CAM,B2017/BMD3721).
M. Lachgar: None. M. Morín: None. M. Villamar: None. M.
Moreno-Pelayo: None.
P02.030.C A RIPOR2 in frame deletion is a frequent and highly
penetrant cause of adult onset hearing loss
Jeroen J. Smits
1, Suzanne E. de Bruijn1, Chang Liu2, Cornelis P.
Lanting1, Andy J. Beynon1, Joëlle Blankevoort1, Jaap Oostrik1, Wouter
Koole1, Erik de Vrieze1, DOOFNL Consortium, Cor W. R. J. Cremers1,
Frans P. M. Cremers1, Susanne Roosing1, Helger G. Yntema1, Henricus
P. M. Kunst1, Bo Zhao2, Ronald J. E. Pennings1, Hannie Kremer1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
126
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Hearing loss is one of the most prevalent disabilities
worldwide. The adult-onset types of the condition is highlyheritable, but the genetic causes are often unknown.
Methods: Family and cohort studies were performed and
included exome sequencing and characterization of hearingphenotype. Ex vivo protein expression addressed the functionaleffect of a DNA-variant.
Results: We identi ﬁed an in-frame deletion in RIPOR2, that co-
segregated with hearing loss in twelve families of Dutch origin inan autosomal dominant pattern. Haplotype analysis indicated thein-frame deletion to be a founder variant, present in 18 of 22,952
individuals of an unselected cohort. This suggests that the
deletion is a frequent cause of monogenic hearing impairmentin the Netherlands, with potentially 8,000 affected individuals, and
a signi ﬁcant cause of hearing impairment in neighboring
countries. Hearing loss associated with the deletion in 63 subjectsdisplayed an average age of onset of 30.6 years (SD 14.9 years)and variable audiometric characteristics. A functional effect of the
variant was demonstrated by aberrant localization of the mutant
RIPOR2 in the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells. Moreover, mutantRIPOR2 failed to rescue the morphological defects observed inRIPOR2-de ﬁcient hair cells, in contrast to the wildtype protein.
Conclusion: we identi ﬁed a relatively common type of inherited
hearing loss, with potentially thousands of individuals at risk in theNetherlands and beyond, which makes it an interesting target for
developing a (genetic) therapy. This study was ﬁnancially
supported by grants from the DCMN Radboudumc, the Heinsius-Houbolt foundation and NIH/NIDCD (R01 DC017147).
J.J. Smits: None. S.E. de Bruijn: None. C. Liu: None. C.P.
Lanting: None. A.J. Beynon: None. J. Blankevoort: None. J.
Oostrik: None. W. Koole: None. E. de Vrieze: None. C.W.R.J.
Cremers: None. F.P.M. Cremers: None. S. Roosing: None. H.G.
Yntema: None. H.P.M. Kunst: None. B. Zhao: None. R.J.E.
Pennings: None. H. Kremer: None.
P02.031.D GJB2 -associated hearing loss in Northern Ossetians
Nika V. Petrova
1, Natalia V. Balinova1, Tatyana A. Vasilyeva1,EF .
Mikhailidi2, Vitaliy V. Kadyshev1, Rena A. Zinchenko1,3
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Republican Children ’s Clinical Hospital, North Ossetia-Alania,
Vladikavkaz, Russian Federation,3N.A. Semashko National Research
Institute of Public Health, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensorineural disorder
worldwide. Pathogenic variants in the GJB2 gene are the main
cause of congenital deafness in different populations. The aim was
to determine the contribution of the GJB2 gene to the hereditarysensorineural hearing loss (HSNHL) incidence in Ossetians,including Ironians and Digorians, the main subethnic groups,
from North Ossetia-Alania. Molecular genetic testing (sequencing
and MLPA) was performed in 65 HL patients. In 27.7% HSNHL wasassociated with GJB2 variants. The c. 358_360delGAG variant
frequency was 42.5% (19/42) in Ossetians with GJB2 -associated HL,
and 15.4% (20/130) in the general sample. The c.35delG variant
accounts for 38.1% (16/42) in Ossetian patients with GJB2 -
associated HL and 12.3% (16/130) in the total sample. 368 healthy
Northern Ossetian individuals, including 248 Ironians and 65
Digorians, were analyzed for variants c. 358_360delGAG andc.35delG. The frequencies of c.35delG and c.358_360delGAG GJB2
variants were 0.0061 and 0.0121 in Ironians, 0.0077 and 0.0154 in
Digorians. Less than 30% of cases of hereditary sensorineuralhearing loss in Ossetians were GJB2 -associated. Also, as in other
North Caucasian populations (for example, in Karachai), in
Ossetians the most frequent GJB2 variant was c. 358_360delGAG.
Two variants, c.358_360delGAG and c.35delG, made up 90% ofalleles in GJB2 -associated hearing loss in Ossetians. The summar-
ized frequency of GJB2 pathogenic variants in Ossetian population
exceeds 2% (1.8% in Iranians and 2.3% in Digorians). The research
was partially supported by RSF grant №17-15-01051 and within
the state task of the Ministry of education and science of Russia.
N.V. Petrova: None. N.V. Balinova: None. T.A. Vasilyeva:
None. E.F. Mikhailidi: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A.
Zinchenko: None.
P02.032.A A novel compound heterozygous mutation in RBP3
causes High Myopia
Maya Gombosh
1, Yuval Yogev1, Noam Hadar1, Libe Gradstein2,
Ohad S. Birk3,1
1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute
of Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,2Department of
Ophthalmology, Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel,3Genetics
Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel.
We studied a girl presenting with isolated high myopia. Whole
exome sequencing was done and data were analyzed using ourin-house tool, ﬁltering through our in-house 582 ethnicity-
matched controls and available databases, based on allele
frequency, linkage locus, indel mutation analysis, etc. SNP arrays
(750K) of family members yielded possible disease-associated locion chromosomes 6 and 10. A single heterozygous missensemutation (c.3341G>A ; p. p.Arg1114Gln) in RBP3 was found within
the chromosome 10 locus, analyzed using our in-house databases
along with open access databases and veri ﬁed through Sanger
sequencing. In addition, CMA identi ﬁed a ~5 million bp
heterozygous deletion, encompassing RBP3 , within that locus.
Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) analysis of NGS data was usedto con ﬁrm the deletion mutation, showing ~50% less reads in the
deleted region compared to controls. Segregation analysis
demonstrated that the missense mutation was inherited from
the heterozygous father and that the deletion mutation was de-novo. Thus, the infantile high myopia phenotype was caused bynovel compound heterozygous RBP3 mutations: an inherited
heterozygous missense mutation and a large de-novo deletion
mutation encompassing RBP3 , that was identi ﬁed through Indel
analysis and low levels of NGS reads of the patient compared to
controls. This is a ﬁrst report of a large deletion mutation in RBP3 ,
which we show to be an unusual "second hit" de-novo germlinemutation. Genetic diagnosis is important in children presentingwith infantile high myopia, which can be the presenting sign of a
degenerative ocular disorder.
M. Gombosh: None. Y. Yogev: None. N. Hadar: None. L.
Gradstein: None. O. Birk: None.
P02.033.B Differential methylation of microRNAs encoding
genes may contribute to high myopia
Joanna Swierkowska
1, Sangeetha Vishweswaraiah2, Justyna A.
Karolak3,1, Malgorzata Mrugacz4, Uppala Radhakrishna2, Marzena
Gajecka1,3
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan,
Poland,2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oakland
University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Royal Oak, MI,USA,3Chair and Department of Genetics and PharmaceuticalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
127
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Microbiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,
4Department of Ophthalmology and Eye Rehabilitation, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction: High myopia (HM), an eye disorder with a refractive
error of -6.0 D or higher, has multifactorial etiology with
environmental and genetic factors involved. Research evidence
supports the contribution of alterations in DNA methylation andgenes encoding microRNAs (miRNAs) to myopia pathogenesis.Here, we combined both aspects to study the role of the miRNA
gene methylation in HM.
Materials and Methods: From genome-wide methylation
results of blood DNA of 18 Polish children with HM and 18matched controls, we retrieved differentially methylated CG
dinucleotides located in miRNA genes. Those miRNA genes and
their targets were included in over-representation analyses inConsensusPathDB-human. Expression of selected miRNAs ’target
genes were also assessed using the RNA-seq data of human retinal
ARPE-19 cell line.
Results: Signi ﬁcant differential methylation of CG dinucleotides
located in the promoter regions of MIR3621 ,MIR34C ,MIR423
(increased methylation level), and MIR1178 ,MIRLET7A2 ,MIR548I3 ,
MIR6854 ,MIR675 ,MIRLET7C ,MIR99A (decreased methylation level)
genes could alter their expression. Several targets of thosemiRNAs, e.g. NAP1L1 and EIF4B , were highly expressed in the
retinal cell line. Over-representation analyses of miRNAs ’genes
and their targets revealed enrichment in biological pathwaysrelated to eye structure and function, such as Wnt signaling, axon
guidance, and insulin signaling.
Conclusions: Differential methylation of promoters of indicated
miRNAs ’genes might in ﬂuence their expression. Therefore, it may
contribute to HM pathogenesis via the disrupted regulation of
transcription of miRNAs ’target genes and biological pathways
crucial for eye development and function.
Support: National Science Center in Poland (2019/35/N/NZ5/
03150) to JS.
J. Swierkowska: None. S. Vishweswaraiah: None. J.A. Karolak:
None. M. Mrugacz: None. U. Radhakrishna: None. M. Gajecka:
None.
P02.035.C Genetics of Pain: Novel variants identi ﬁed by the
European Network on Inherited Sensory Neuropathies and
Insensitivity to Pain (ENISNIP)
Annette Lischka
1, Katja Eggermann1, Arman Çakar2, Richard
Boček3, Luca Bartesaghi4, Miriam Elbracht1, Thorsten Hornemann5,
Jan Senderek6, Michaela Auer-Grumbach7, Yesim Parman2, Petra
Laššuthová3, Ingo Kurth1
1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University Hospital,
Aachen, Germany,2Neurology Department, Neuromuscular Unit,
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,
3Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic,4Department of Neuroscience and
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden,5Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland,6Friedrich-Baur-Institute at the Department of
Neurology, University Hospital LMU Munich, Munich, Germany,
7Division of Orthopedics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
Introduction: Mutations in approximately 20 genes lead to a
monogenetic disorder of lack of pain perception. This includesclinical entities such as hereditary sensory and autonomicneuropathies (HSAN) and congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP).
Clinically, the various disorders manifest themselves throughrepeated trauma and mutilation. Yet, small individual patient
cohorts and the lack of standardized phenotype information
hinder the complete elucidation of these genetic disorders.
Materials and Methods: The European Network on Inherited
Sensory Neuropathies and Insensitivity to Pain (ENISNIP) wasestablished by seven research centers and two patient advocacy
organizations specialized on HSAN/CIP and accumulates the
knowledge from clinicians, geneticists, basic scientists andpatients. The exomes of 60 HSAN patients and, if available,unaffected family members were sequenced. Genetic and clinical
data were shared and harmonized within the network.
Results: We identi ﬁed 16 likely disease-causing novel variants in
the following HSAN/CIP genes: ATL3, DST, FLVCR1, NGF, NTRK1,
PRDM12, SCN9A, SPTLC2 and WNK1 . All variants were rare or
absent from control cohorts and none had previously been
reported in the literature. If applicable, the pathogenicity wascorroborated by segregation analyses within the families.
Conclusions: Through compiling the data within the ENISNIP
network, here we report on 16 patients with novel pathogenicvariants in known HSAN/CIP genes. In a next step, the data ofgenetically unsolved cases will be harmonized and re-evaluated.
We will prospectively recruit and analyze additional patients to
identify new disease-relevant genes.
A. Lischka: None. K. Eggermann: None. A. Çakar: None. R.
Boček: None. L. Bartesaghi: None. M. Elbracht: None. T.
Hornemann: None. J. Senderek: None. M. Auer-Grumbach:
None. Y. Parman: None. P. La ššuthová: None. I. Kurth: None.
P02.036.A Genetics of Inherited Retinal Degenerations in
Icelandic patients
Daniel A. Thorsteinsson
1, Vigdis Stefansdottir2, Sigridur Thorisdot-
tir2, Thor Eysteinsson1, Jon J. Jonsson1,2
1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland,2Landspitali - National University
Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Introduction: The study objective was to delineate the genetics of
inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) in Iceland, a small nation of
364.000 and a genetic isolate. Bene ﬁts include delineating novel
pathogenic genetic variants and de ﬁning genetically homogenous
patients as potential investigative molecular therapy candidates.
Materials and Methods: The study sample comprised patients
with IRD in Iceland ascertained through national centralized
genetic and ophthalmological services at Landspitali, a nationalsocial support institute, and the Icelandic patient association.
Information on patients ’disease, syndrome, and genetic testing
was collected in a clinical registry. Variants were reevaluatedaccording to ACMG/AMP guidelines.
Results: Overall, 140 IRD patients were identi ﬁed (point
prevalence of 1/2.600), of which 70 patients had a genetic
evaluation where two-thirds had an identi ﬁed genetic cause.
Thirteen disease genes were found in patients with retinitispigmentosa, with the RLBP1 gene most common (n =4). The
c.1073+5G>A variant in the PRPF31 gene was homozygous in two
RP patients. All tested patients with X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS)had the same possibly unique RS1 pathogenic variant, c.441G>A
(p.Trp147X).
Conclusion: Pathologic variants and genes for IRDs in Iceland
did not resemble those described in ancestral North-WesternEuropean nations. Four variants were reclassi ﬁed as likely
pathogenic. One novel pathogenic variant de ﬁned a genetically
homogenous XLRS patient group. Grants . Icelandic Student
Innovation Fund no. 2107575389. The Richard P. Theodore andDora Sigurjonsdottir Fund for improving scienti ﬁc knowledge on
blindness no. 2509962099.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
128
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608D.A. Thorsteinsson: None. V. Stefansdottir: None. S. Thor-
isdottir: None. T. Eysteinsson: None. J.J. Jonsson: None.
P02.037.B The genetic testing landscape for inherited retinal
diseases in the European region
Orla Galvin , Petia Stratieva, Avril Daly
Retina International, Dublin, Ireland.
While potential treatments emerge for Inherited Retinal Diseases
(IRDs), the genetic characteristics of IRDs require a geneticdiagnosis for inclusion in clinical trials. With a genetic diagnosis
patients can take action on inheritance patterns and disease
progression. To advocate for equitable, affordable, accessible andtimely genetic testing for IRDs it was necessary to investigate thegenetic testing landscape from a processes and systems
perspective.Desktop research supplemented by survey of ophthal-
mic and/or genetic specialists across 18 countries was employed.Information was provided by: Medical Geneticists, ClinicalLaboratory Geneticists, Ophthalmologists, Retinal Specialists.
Genetic testing and counselling for IRDs vary substantially among
countries from an awareness, accessibility and affordabilityperspective. Methods of genetic testing vary and include cerebral
MRI, Sanger sequencing or Next Generation Sequencing, Whole
Exome Sequencing or Whole Genome Sequencing, SNP array orMLPA. Affordability is a barrier for patients in countries withoutpayment schemes (e.g., Poland) and where only targeted
population is covered (e.g., Bulgaria). Research project parfticipa-
tion is in some regions an alternative, however limited, withpatients often advised to send samples for examination abroad, ortravel themselves for examination outside their country of origin.
Huge disparity exists in the approach to genetic testing for IRDs.
Greater awareness of genetic testing services is required amongthe health sector and eyecare professionals. A revised approach to
the provision of genetic testing services is required to ensure
equitable access, empower patients, improve access to clinicaltrials, therapy and delivery of care.Funded by an educational grantfrom the Allergan Foundation.
O. Galvin: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Signi ﬁcant; The Allergan Foundation. P. Stratieva: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
The Allergan Foundation. A. Daly: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; The Allergan Foundation.
P02.038.C Mutation spectrum of inherited retinal dystrophies
in a cohort from the Basque Country (Spain)
María Rodríguez Hidalgo
1, Maitane Ezquerra-Inchausti1, Leire
Escudero-Arrarás1, Araceli Lara-López1, Marta Galdós2, Maialen
Aldazabal3, Gonzaga Garay-Aramburu3, Carlos Cruchaga4, Cristina
Irigoyen5, Javier Ruiz-Ederra6,7
1IIS Biodonostia, San Sebastián, Spain,2Cruces University Hospital,
Bilbao, Spain,3Araba University Hospital, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain,
4Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA,
5Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastián, Spain,6Miramoon
Pharma-Biodonostia HRI, San Sebastián, Spain,7RETICS OFTARED,
Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are a hetero-
geneous group of diseases that mainly affect the retina, with morethan 250 genes involved. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity
complicates the identi ﬁcation of causative mutations. Here we
present the results of genetic-molecular characterization in a
cohort of Basque patients.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective study was carried out
on 744 IRD affected individuals (from 266 unrelated families) using
different molecular techniques, including gene panel, whole
exome sequencing, and MLPA hybridation arrays.
Results: Overall, 50% (133/266) of the studied families were
genetically characterized. 126 likely causative variants were
identi ﬁed. Most variants, 81, were missense/nosense; 28 small
insertion/deletions, 12 affected splice regions, 4 involved copynumber variations and 1 was a complex rearrangement. Thesevariants were identi ﬁed in 42 genes. The most recurrently mutated
genes were USH2A, CERKL and RHO , in 21, 10 and 10 families
respectively. Most frequent pathogenic variants were c.2276G>T(p.Cys759Phe) in USH2A, c.847C>T (p.Arg283Ter) in CERKL and
c.3260C>T (p.Ser1087Leu) in SNRNP200 , identi ﬁed in 12, 10 and 8
families respectively.
Conclusions: Our study allowed us to characterize 50% of the
families in our cohort, having important implications for genetic
diagnosis and counselling to the Basque population. MRH is
supported by a fellowship from Gobierno Vasco, Spain (Pre-2019-1-0325). Work supported by grants from the Instituto de SaludCarlos III y fondos FEDER (PI17/01413 and PI20/01186), from
Gobierno Vasco (2018111062, MTVD19/BD/006, MTVD20/BD/002,
ZL-2020/00780) and from the Foundation of Patients of RetinitisPigmentosa (BEGISARE).
M. Rodríguez Hidalgo: None. M. Ezquerra-Inchausti: None. L.
Escudero-Arrarás: None. A. Lara-López: None. M. Galdós: None.
M. Aldazabal: None. G. Garay-Aramburu: None. C. Cruchaga:
None. C. Irigoyen: None. J. Ruiz-Ederra: None.
P02.039.D RPE65 -related retinal dystrophy: mutational and
phenotypic spectrum in 45 affected patients
Rosario Lopez-Rodriguez
1, Esther Lantero1, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1,
Almudena Avila-Fernandez1, Inmaculada Martin Merida1, Marta del
Pozo-Valero1, Irene Perea-Romero1, Olga Zurita1, Belén Jiménez-
Rolando2, Saoud Tahsin Swa ﬁri1, Rosa Riveiro-Alvarez1, María José
Trujillo-Tiebas1, Ester Carreño Salas2, Blanca García-Sandoval2, Marta
Corton1, Carmen Ayuso1
1Department of Genetics & Genomics, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital- UniversidadAutónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Centre for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain,2Department of
Ophthalmology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital (FJD),Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic RPE65 variants are related to a
spectrum of clinically overlapping inherited retinal dystrophies(IRD). A better knowledge of the mutational spectrum and thephenotype-genotype correlation in RPE65 -related IRD is needed.
Materials and Methods: Forty- ﬁve affected subjects from 27
unrelated families with RPE65 -related IRD were included. Clinical
evaluation consisted on self-reported ophthalmological historyand objective ophthalmological examination. Patients ’genotype
was classi ﬁed accordingly to variant class (truncating or missense)
or to variant location at different protein domains. Mainphenotypic outcome was age at onset (AAO) of the symptomatic
disease and a Kaplan-Meier analysis of disease symptom event-
free survival was performed.
Results: Twenty-nine different RPE65 variants were identi ﬁed in
our cohort, 7 of them novel. Most frequent variants were p.
(Ile98Hisfs*26), p.(Pro111Ser) and p.(Gly187Glu) accounting for theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
129
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 60824% of the detected alleles. Patients carrying two missense alleles
showed a later disease onset than those with 1 or 2 truncating
variants. While the 60% of patients carrying a missense/missense
genotype presented symptoms before or at the ﬁrst year of life,
almost all patients with at least 1 truncating allele (91%) had anAAO ≤1 year (Log Rank test p < 0.05).
Conclusion: Ourﬁndings suggest an association between the
type of the RPE65 carried variant and the AAO, providing useful
data for clinical management of these patients.
Funding: CIBERER (06/07/0036), IIS-FJD BioBank (PT17/0015/
0006), RAREGenomics-CM (CAM, B2017/BMD-3721), CAM (PEJD-
2018/BMD-9544), ONCE, Ramon Areces Foundation, ConchitaRabago Foundation, the University Chair UAM-IIS-FJD of GenomicMedicine, ISCIII (PI16/00425, PI19/0321, FI17/00192 and CPII17/
00006) and FEDER.
R. Lopez-Rodriguez: None. E. Lantero: None. F. Blanco-Kelly:
None. A. Avila-Fernandez: None. I. Martin Merida: None. M. del
Pozo-Valero: None. I. Perea-Romero: None. O. Zurita: None. B.
Jiménez-Rolando: None. S.T. Swa ﬁri:None. R. Riveiro-Alvarez:
None. M.J. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. E. Carreño Salas: None. B.
García-Sandoval: None. M. Corton: None. C. Ayuso: None.
P02.040.A Expanding genetic investigation in patients with
isolated foveal hypoplasia
Lucia Tiberi
1, Camilla Rocca1, Angelica Pagliazzi2, Giovanna
Traﬁcante2, Giacomo Bacci3, Elisa Marziali3, Pina Fortunato3, Debora
Vergani2,1, Daniela Formicola2, Viviana Palazzo2, Rosangela Artuso2,
Samuela Landini2,1, Laura Giunti2,1, Elia Dirupo2, Sara Bargiacchi2
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and Clinical
Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy,2Meyer Children ’s hospital,
Medical Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy,3Meyer Children ’s Hospital,
Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, Florence, Italy.
Foveal Hypoplasia is a rare ocular malformation that can be
associated with variable ocular features such as congenitalnystagmus, premature cataract, anterior segment dysgenesisand chiasmal misrouting, or either can be found in the context
of aniridia, albinism or retinal dystrophy. To date, only PAX6 ,
SLC38A8 and AHR are known to be associated with Isolated Foveal
Hypoplasia (FVH), but few patients undergo extensive clinical andmolecular investigations. In order to elucidate the genetic
background of FVH, we performed WES in eight trios recruited
at Meyer Children ’s Hospital in Florence. The patients were
phenotypized by ophthalmologist and geneticist and they all
presented FVH with no clear iris transillumination defects. In ﬁve
patients, WES revealed a combination of two in cis polymorphisms
that are in trans with another TYR deleterious mutation: this
triallelic genotype, already known to explain missing heritability in
some OCA1B albinism patients, is likely to explain also part of FVH
patients. One patient showed compound heterozygosity in TYR,
with one frameshift and one rare missense variant. Another casepresented compound heterozygous variants in OCA2 . Only in one
patient we couldn ’t reach molecular diagnosis, although variants
inTYR and OCA2 were found: nonetheless, no clear support of a
possible digenic condition was found in the literature. Our resultsrevealed that patients with FVH harbour mutations in genes
classically associated to albinism, suggesting that FVH and OCA
could be considered as part of the same spectrum. However,further studies in a larger cohort are necessary to better
characterize genotype-phenotype correlation.
L. Tiberi: None. C. Rocca: None. A. Pagliazzi: None. G.
Traﬁcante: None. G. Bacci: None. E. Marziali: None. P.
Fortunato: None. D. Vergani: None. D. Formicola: None. V.Palazzo: None. R. Artuso: None. S. Landini: None. L. Giunti:
None. E. Dirupo: None. S. Bargiacchi: None.
P02.041.A Cone-related transcriptomic pro ﬁles in Keratoconus
corneal epithelium
Katarzyna Jaskiewicz
1, Magdalena Maleszka-Kurpiel2,3, Malgorzata
Rydzanicz4, Justyna A. Karolak5, Rafa łPłoski4, Marzena Gajecka1,5
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan,
Poland,2Optegra Eye Health Care Clinic, Poznan, Poland,3Chair of
Ophthalmology and Optometry, Poznan University of MedicalSciences, Poznan, Poland,4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland,5Chair and Department of
Genetics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction: Keratoconus (KTCN) is the most common corneal
ectasia, affecting 1:2000 individuals worldwide, characterized by
progressive thinning of the cornea leading to pathological coneformation. Since corneal epithelium (CE) thinning and CE thicknessasymmetry constituting characteristic pattern were observed in
KTCN, we aimed to analyze transcriptomic pro ﬁles of three distinct
CE regions.
Materials and Methods: The 17 KTCN patients undergoing
cross-linking procedure and 5 mild myopia patients undergoing
refractive error correction (non-KTCN controls) were ascertained.The central, middle and periphery CE regions were separated fromeach obtained CE, based on CE thickness mapping. The RNA
samples were extracted using RNA/DNA/Protein Puri ﬁcationPlus
MicroKit (NorgenBiotek). The NGS libraries were prepared usingTruSeq Stranded TotalRNA LibraryPrep Gold (Illumina) andsequenced on Illumina NovaSeq6000 platform (100mln read pairs
per sample). RNA-seq data was analyzed implementing previously
established pipelines.
Results: We observed a characteristic doughnut pattern (thin
cone center surrounded by thickened annulus) on each ectatic
epithelial thickness map. The average CE thickness values of thethree analyzed regions were found to be statistically different inKTCN patients. Those irregularities in epithelial thickness pro ﬁles
in KTCN were re ﬂected in transcriptomic pro ﬁles. The identi ﬁed
differentially expressed pathways (extracellular matrix organiza-tion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition) were consistent withpreviously reported as dysregulated in KTCN.
Conclusions: The phenotypic abnormalities in distinct KTCN CE
regions are related to the identi ﬁed transcriptomic alterations.
Support: The National Science Centre grant no.2018/31/B/NZ5/
03280. Co- ﬁnanced by the European Social Fund, Operational
Programme Knowledge Education Development, project ‘Interna-
tional scholarship exchange of doctoral students and academicstaff ’, No.POWR.03.03.03.00-00-00-PN13/18.
K. Jaskiewicz: None. M. Maleszka-Kurpiel: None. M. Rydza-
nicz: None. J.A. Karolak: None. R. P łoski: None. M. Gajecka:
None.
P02.042.C Assessing the potential of next-generation sequen-
cing technologies to unravel the molecular spectrum ofmaculopathies
Marta del Pozo-Valero
1,2, Rosa Riveiro-Álvarez1,2, Inmaculada
Martín-Mérida1,2, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1,2, Saoud Swa ﬁri1,2, Isabel
Lorda-Sanchez1,2, M Jose Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, Ester Carreño3, Belén
Jiménez-Rolando3, Blanca García-Sandoval4,2, Marta Corton1,2,
Almudena Avila-Fernandez1,2, Carmen Ayuso1,2Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
130
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Genetics, IIS-FJD, UAM, Madrid, Spain,2CIBERER,
Madrid, Spain,3Department of Ophthalmology, IIS-FJD, UAM, Madrid,
Spain,4Department of Opthalmology, IIS-FJD, UAM, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Inherited macular dystrophies (MD) comprise a
heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by bilateral central
visual loss and atrophy of the macula and underlying retinal
pigment epithelium. The aim of this study is to assess the potentialof next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies to characterizeMD patients.
Methods: The cohort was classi ﬁed according to their
suspected clinical diagnosis- Stargardt disease (STGD), cone andcone-rod dystrophy (CCRD) or other maculopathies (otherMD).Unsolved cases without NGS were re-studied mainly by exome
sequencing.
Results: With the implementation of exome sequencing and
the study of intronic regions of ABCA4 , a total of 677 patients
(65%) were characterized. The re-study of unsolved cases showed
a characterization yield of 63%, including 75% of monoallelicSTGD cases in which a second pathogenic variant was found.While most of the patients referred with STGD were characterized
with ABCA4 , most of patients with otherMD were unsolved. Other
MD- related ( BEST1 ,PROM1 ,PRPH2) but also unrelated ( RHO, RPGR )
genes were involved.
Conclusions: This study provides a genetic landscape of 1036
arMD families, giving a mutational spectrum of the genes involved
in STGD, CCRD and otherMD groups of patients according to theirsuspected diagnosis. We demonstrate the increase of the
characterization diagnostic yield after the implementation of
exome sequencing regardless their diagnosis together with theanalysis of the intronic region of ABCA4 in monoallelic STGD
patients. This allows their genetic characterization, even when no
clinical and familiar data are available, leading to their reclassi ﬁca-
tion. Funding : ISCIII, CIBERER, ONCE, UniversityChairUAM-IIS-FJD,
RAREGenomics-CM
M. del Pozo-Valero: None. R. Riveiro-Álvarez: None. I. Martín-
Mérida: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. S. Swa ﬁri:None. I. Lorda-
Sanchez: None. M. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. E. Carreño: None. B.
Jiménez-Rolando: None. B. García-Sandoval: None. M. Corton:
None. A. Avila-Fernandez: None. C. Ayuso: None.
P02.044.A A burden of rare missense variants supports OTOG
as a frequent gene in familial Meniere disease
Pablo Román-Naranjo
1, Paula Robles-Bolivar1, María del Carmen
Moleón2, Andrés Soto-Varela3, Ismael Arán4, Juan Manuel Espinosa-
Sánchez2, Juan Carlos Amor-Dorado5, Angel Batuecas-Caletrio6, Paz
Perez-Vazquez7, Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1, Jose Antonio Lopez-
Escamez1,2,8
1Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), Granada,
Spain,2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación
Biosanitaria, ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de lasNieves, Granada, Spain,3Division of Otoneurology, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain,4Department of Otolaryngology, Complexo
Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain,5Department of
Otolaryngology, Hospital Can Misses, Ibiza, Spain,6Department of
Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Salamanca, Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain,
7Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Universitario de
Cabueñes, Gijón, Spain,8Department of Surgery, Division of
Otolaryngology, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain.
Introduction : Meniere disease is a set of a rare inner ear disorder
characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo, and tinnitus.Several genes, including FAM136A ,DTNA ,PRKCB orSEMA3D have
been found in autosomal dominant familial Meniere ’s disease
(FMD). The aim of this study was to investigate 73 FMD patients
(46 families) to search for new genes in FMD.
Materials and Methods : Rare variants were selected from
patient exome sequencing data to perform a gene burden
analysis. Allelic frequencies were compared with European and
Spanish reference datasets. Only genes with at least 3 rare variants(MAF≤0.05) were retrieved.
Results : We observed an enrichment of rare missense variants
inOTOG gene in FMD cases against either Non-Finnish European
population from gnomAD (OR =4.0(2.6-6.1), p =4.6x10-9)o r
Spanish population (OR =3.0(1.9-4.8), p =1.2x10-5). Ten rare
missense variants were identi ﬁed in 15/46 (33%) families with
MD in the OTOG gene. Six families with 2 or more shared variants
were identi ﬁed, suggesting compound heterozygous recessive
inheritance (Table).
Conclusions : OTOG is a frequent gene in FMD and some families
with shared variants showed an autosomal recessive inheritanceconsisting of compound heterozygous missense variants.
Funding : J.A.L.E. is partially funded by INT18/00031 from ISCIII.
This study was funded by the Luxembourg National Research
Fund INTER/ Mobility/17/11772209 Grant and EF-0247-2017 fromAndalusian Health Government to J.A.L.E.
P. Román-Naranjo: None. P. Robles-Bolivar: None. M.
Moleón: None. A. Soto-Varela: None. I. Arán: None. J.
Espinosa-Sánchez: None. J. Amor-Dorado: None. A. Batuecas-
Caletrio: None. P. Perez-Vazquez: None. A. Gallego-Martinez:
None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None.
P02.045.B Novel stopgain variant in SOX2 gene causing
autosomal dominant type 3 syndromic microphthalmia
Florina Stoica
1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Andreea Ionescu2, Nicoleta
Andreescu2, Maria Puiu2
1Ophthalmology Department, Emergency Clinical Municipal Hospital,
Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy“Victor Babes ”, Timisoara, Romania,2Center of Genomic Medicine,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes ”, Regional Center
of Medical Genetics Timis, Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children“Louis Turcanu ”, part of ERN ITHACA, Timisoara, Romania.
We aim to present a novel variant in SOX2 gene associated with a
particular ocular phenotype in a child with AD type 3 syndromicmicrophthalmia.
Methods: The patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary
team. NGS used the TruSightOne Illumina gene panel (4813genes), supported by our Ministry of Health.
Results: Ocular phenotypes in the 4 years old male patient
included bilateral microphthalmia, retinal detachment, iris and
chorioretinal coloboma, retinal dystrophy and severe visualimpairment. The left eye presented high myopia and retinalpigment deposits. Head MRI showed optic nerve and chiasma
hypoplasia. Other abnormalities were: mild intellectual disability,
epilepsy, walking dif ﬁculty, leg bone pain, genu varrum, pes
planus, and patent foramen ovale. He had normal male genitaliaand height at 50
thpercentile for age. The endocrinologist
monitors the child ’s growth. NGS performed at 4 years of age
detected a heterozygous stopgain variant NM_003106.3 (SOX2) :
c.600C>A, (chromosome 3q26.33). This sequence change creates a
premature translational stop signal NP_003097.1:p.(Tyr200Ter),
classi ﬁed as pathogenic.
Conclusions: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in SOX2 gene
are associated with syndromic microphthalmia, including ocular
and systemic abnormalities. Syndromic microphthalmia diagnosisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
131
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608was considered since patient ’s birth, yet NGS was performed at 4
years, showing that access to molecular diagnosis is still limited inRomania. The novel pathogenic variant identi ﬁed in the patient was
associated with a particular phenotype speci ﬁcally in regards to
retinal pigment deposits, yet with normal male genitalia. The
molecular diagnostic was impo rtant for the patient to receive
specialized care, while the family to bene ﬁt from genetic counselling.
F. Stoica: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. A. Ionescu: None. N.
Andreescu: None. M. Puiu: None.
P02.046.C The role of BMP3 in the development of myopia
Amy Findlay , Thibaud Boutin, Chloe Stanton, Ian Jackson,
Veronique Vitart
MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom.
Our research focuses on functional follow up of GWAS hits using a
variety of cell and animal models. A locus overlapping the BMP3gene, signi ﬁcantly associated with retinal detachment risk and
myopia, was further examined. Within the associated region, a
BMP3 coding variant was prioritized as the candidate causal
variant, alongside non-coding potentially regulatory variants. TheBMP signalling pathway has long been implicated in the
patterning and development of the eye, but BMP3 ’s role both
within this pathway and during eye development and disease isunclear. The region of interest is conserved between mouse andhuman so producing animal models carrying the missense variant
along with loss of function mutations was easily accomplished
using CRISPR cas9 genome editing and comprehensive phenotyp-ing was performed. Our unit is uniquely equipped to analyse eyephenotypes and using the Optical Coherence Tomography
machine we are able to track disease progression throughout life
and show that loss of function mice exhibit myopia. RNAseqanalysis of loss of function cell lines has shown deregulation of a
number of genes including BMP2, and 4, which have also been
implicated in myopia. Future work is required to assess how muchthe mouse and human cell line results converge, but our resultsstrengthen a role for a BMP pathway in myopia development.
A. Findlay: None. T. Boutin: None. C. Stanton: None. I.
Jackson: None. V. Vitart: None.
P02.047.D Next-generation sequencing panels for hereditary
hearing loss testing with approaches for dif ﬁcult-to-sequence
regions
Laura Sarantaus
1, Kimberly Gall2, Sari Tuupanen1, Marta Gandia1,
Hatice Duzkale1, Inka Saarinen1, Johanna Sistonen1, Juha Kosken-
vuo1, Tero-Pekka Alastalo21Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Espoo, Finland,
2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA,
USA.
Introduction: Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is a genetically
heterogeneous group of disorders. Determining the molecularetiology allows for personalised patient management and
surveillance, and recurrence risk estimation for families. Compre-
hensive genetic testing in HHL using next-generation sequencing(NGS) is complicated owing to pseudogenes and segmentalduplications affecting several key genes, such as STRC . A testing
strategy that includes dif ﬁcult-to-sequence regions is needed to
maximise diagnostic yield.
Materials and Methods: To assess the diagnostic ef ﬁcacy, we
performed a retrospective revie w of test results from NGS panels
performed for 934 de-identi ﬁed patients tested consecutively for HHL
at Blueprint Genetics, a CLIA-certi ﬁed diagnostic laboratory. The
analysis was boosted with clinically relevant deep intronic variants
and a proprietary copy number variation (CNV) analysis method for
exon-level CNVs. Variant interpretation followed ACMG guidelines.Most cases (86%, 799/934) were analysed using the ComprehensiveHearing Loss and Deafness Panel (239 genes), while a minority (14%,
135/934) were analysed using smaller panels.
Results: Molecular genetic diagnosis was established in 29.9%
(279/934) of patients, distributed in 54 genes. The most commonlyimplicated genes were GJB2 (24.4%), STRC (9.7%), MYO15A (5.0%),
and SLC26A4 (4.7%). CNVs were reported in 16.1% (45/279) of
diagnosed patients; 38.5% of CNVs were intragenic. Tailoredmolecular testing approaches for dif ﬁcult-to-sequence genes
contributed to 12.9% (36/279) of diagnoses (con ﬁrmed with
orthogonal methods).
Conclusions: These results emphasise the value of tailored
approaches for dif ﬁcult-to-sequence genes as well as the
importance of including high-resolution CNV detection in enhan-
cing the clinical utility of genetic testing using NGS panels for HHL.
L. Sarantaus: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc. S. Tuupanen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gandia: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H.
Duzkale: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T.
Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics Inc.
P02.048.A North Carlina macular dystrophy: phenotypic
variability and computational analysis of disease-implicatednon-coding changesRare variants found in OTOG gene in familial MD cases.
Variant position Families MAF FMD MAF NFE MAF CSVS CADD Domain AA change
ExAC GnomAD
11:17574758G>A F1; F14 0.021 (3/73) 0.00080 0.0011 0.0033 24.8 vWD V141M
11:17578774G>A F2; F3; F4; F5 0.034 (5/73) 0.0090 0.0041 0.017 15.95 vWD V269I
11:17594747C>A F34 0.013 (2/73) —— — 22.2 C8 P747T
11:17621218C>T F6; F7 0.013 (2/73) 0.0026 0.0058 0.0033 34 C8 P1240L11:17627548G>A F14 0.012 (1/73) 0.0056 0.0045 0.0054 23.6 Abf R1353Q
11:17631453C>T F8 0.0069 (1/73) 0.017 0.011 0.014 12.89 — L1548F
11:17632921C>T F2; F3; F4; F5 0.034 (5/73) 0.0015 0.0011 0.0054 7.71 — A2037V
11:17656672G>A F10 0.0069 (1/73) 0.0034 0.0052 0.0039 31 — R2556Q
11:17663747G>A F1; F13; F14 0.027 (4/73) 0.0058 0.0024 0.0054 19.41 — R2802H
11:17667139G>C F9; F11; F12 0.041 (6/73) 0.019 0.023 0.017 27.2 CT K2842NAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
132
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608David J. Green1, Eva Lenassi1, Cerys S. Manning1, David
McGaughey2, Vinod Sharma1, Graeme C. Black1, Jamie M. Ellingford1,
Panagiotis I. Sergouniotis1
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,2National
Eye Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Introduction : North Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD) is an
autosomal dominant, congenital disorder affecting the central retina.Here, we report clinical and genetic ﬁndings in three families
segregating NCMD and use epigenomic datasets from human tissues
to gain insights into the effect of NCMD-implicated variants.
Materials and Methods : Clinical assessment and genetic
testing were performed. Publicly-available transcriptomic and
epigenomic datasets were analyzed and the ‘Activity-by-Contact ’
(ABC) method for scoring enhancer elements and linking them totarget genes was used.
Results: A previously-described, heterozygous, non-coding
variant upstream of the PRDM13 gene was detected in all six
affected study participants (chr6:100,040,987G>C [GRCh37/hg19]).Inter- and intra-familial variability were observed; the visual acuityranged from 0.0 to 1.6 LogMAR and fundoscopic ﬁndings ranged
from visually insigni ﬁcant, con ﬂuent, drusen-like macular deposits
to coloboma-like macular lesions. Variable degrees of peripheralretinal spots (that were easily detected on wide ﬁeld retinal
imaging) were observed in all study subjects. Notably, a 6-year-old
patient developed choroidal neovascularization and requiredtreatment with intravitreal bevacizumab injections. Computationalanalysis of the ﬁve single nucleotide variants that are known to
cause NCMD revealed that these non-coding changes lie within
two putative enhancer elementspredicted to interact withPRDM13 in the developing human retina. PRDM13 was found to
be expressed in the fetal retina, with highest expression in the
amacrine precursor cell population.
Conclusions : We highlight the utility of wide ﬁeld retinal
imaging in individuals suspected to have NCMD and provide
further evidence supporting the role of PRDM13 dysregulation in
the pathogenesis of this condition.
D.J. Green: None. E. Lenassi: None. C.S. Manning: None. D.
McGaughey: None. V. Sharma: None. G.C. Black: None. J.M.
Ellingford: None. P.I. Sergouniotis: None.
P02.049.B Genotype phenotype correlations of 37 DFNB9
patients with auditory neuropathy and 17 new OTOF
pathogenic variants
Sophie Achard
1, Margaux SEREY-GAUT2,Laurence Jonard3, Isabelle
Rouillon1, Marine Parodi1, Natalie Loundon1, Elisa Rubinato2,
Sandrine Marlin2
1Hopital Necker - Service d ’ORL, Paris, France,2Hopital Necker -
Service de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France,3Hopital Necker - Service
de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France.
Auditory neuropathy represents 5-10% of child ’s hearing loss.
Pathogenic bi-allelic variations of OTOF result in autosomal
recessive deafness DFNB9. We retrospectively studied thegenotype-phenotype correlations of 37 cases from 30 families
with pathogenic bi-allelic OTOF variations. Seventeen new
pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed. All patients had isolated
auditory neuropathy. Hearing loss was pre-lingual in 78% of casesand profound in 70%. Hearing loss was progressive in 30%,
ﬂuctuating in 30% and temperature-sensitive in 22%. The
diagnosis of auditory neuropathy was mainly based on thediscordance of electrophysiological tests with acoustic otoemis-sions present (78%) and brainstem auditory evoked responsesabsent or desynchronized (81%). All patients with homozygous or
compound heterozygous "loss of function" variants had con-
genital bilateral profound hearing loss, patients compound
heterozygous for a “loss of function ”variant and a missense
variant had variable presentations. Those with two missensevariants had a mild to severe hearing loss, which could be of
secondary onset. 54% received cochlear implant rehabilitation,
16% of which were bilateral. Our study con ﬁrms a successful
hearing rehabilitation with cochlear implants, with open wordperception increasing from 0% before surgery to 80% at 8 years
after implantation. However, cochlear implantation cannot be
considered as a treatment (disturbance in noise, social dif ﬁculties
and professional integration...). Gene therapy trials in mutant OTOF
-/- adult mice have shown prolonged hearing rehabilitation,
making it possible to consider a short-term therapeutic trial for
this isolated congenital form of deafness (RHU AUDINNOVE 2019).This phenotype-genotype study is an essential prerequisite for the
future therapeutic trial.
S. Achard: None. M. Serey-gaut: None. L. Jonard: None. I.
Rouillon: None. M. Parodi: None. N. Loundon: None. E.
Rubinato: None. S. Marlin: None.
P02.050.C A newborn with corneal clouding and a diagnosis
of posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 1 due to a
duplication of the OVOL2 gene
Hester Y. Kroes
1, M B. Muijzer1, L Haer-Wigman2, E S. M. Voskuil-
Kerkhof1, P M. van Hasselt1, R P. L. Wisse1
1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,2Radboud
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: PPCD1 was recently shown to result from activating
mutations in the promotor region of OVOL2 .W ep r e s e n tan e w
pathogenic mechanism in line with this observation. Case report An
infant boy presented with progressive corneal clouding at the
Department of Ophthalmology. Pr egnancy was unremarkable, family
history negative. Ophthalmologic investigation revealed bilateraldiffuse corneal clouding and othe rwise normal results. Physical
examination was normal. A diagnosis of autosomal recessive CHED
(congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy) was suspected.
Methods: High throughput DNA-analysis was performed in the
index case and his parents. An in silico panel analysis of 424 genes
associated with visual disorders was performed consisting of
analysis of single nucleotide variants and copy number variants(CNVs), followed by SNP-array.
Results: No causative single nucleotide variants were detected
inSLC4A11 ,OVOL2 or any other gene. CNV analysis and SNP array
revealed a duplication of ~49 Kb in the chromosomal region20p11.23 encompassing OVOL2 , leading to a diagnosis of PPCD1.
The duplication was absent in DNA from the parents.
Conclusion: We present the ﬁfth index case of molecularly
proven PPCD1. The underlying molecular abnormality, a duplica-tion of the entire OVOL2 gene, suggests a gene dosage effect. So
far, four PPCD1 families have been described, each with an
activating variant in a distinct part of the promotor region ofOVOL2 . OVOL2 is a transcription factor acting as a repressor of
ZEB1 . Loss of function variants in ZEB1 cause PPCD3. This case
seems to con ﬁrm that gain of function of OVOL2 causes PPCD1.
H.Y. Kroes: None. M.B. Muijzer: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None.
E.S.M. Voskuil-Kerkhof: None. P.M. van Hasselt: None. R.P.L.
Wisse: None.
P02.051.D Functional characterization of non-canonical splice
variants in aniridia by minigenes and ex-vivo approachesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
133
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Alejandra Tamayo1,2, María Tarilonte1, Jennifer Moya1, Patricia
Ramos1, Saoud T Swa ﬁri1,2, Fiona Blanco1,2, Cristina Villaverde1,2,
Carmen Ayuso1,2, Marta Cortón1,2
1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz
University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,2Centre for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Mutations in PAX6 cause aniridia, a congenital
disorder characterized by several structural eye anomalies. We
describe the development of in-vitro and ex-vivo tools for the
functional characterization of potentially spliceogenic variants andtheir impact on the canonical PAX6 splicing.
Materials and Methods: For minigene assays, a genomic
segment encompassing the region of interest of PAX6 was cloned
into expression vectors and variants were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis. In-vitro assays were performed by transienttransfection into HEK293 and/or ARPE19 cell lines. Lymphoblas-
toid cell lines (LCL) were established by Epstein Barr virus-
mediated transformation of blood lymphocytes from patientscarrying splicing variants and control individuals. Total RNA wasextracted and reversely transcribed. The splicing patterns of mRNA
transcripts were compared by semiquantitative PCR and
sequencing.
Results: We developed four minigene PAX6 constructs: i) exons
1 to 4, ii) exons 5a and 6, iii) exons 5 to 7 and iv) exons 8 to 11,
respectively. To date, a total of 13 potentially spliceogenic variantswere assayed and 11 of them showed aberrant splicing patterns.Expression analysis in 4 patient-derived LCL showed alterations on
splicing patterns. Two out these 4 variants were also tested by
minigene assays and the ﬁndings on splicing patterns showed a
correlation between both approaches.
Conclusions: Minigene assays carrying multiple exons and LCL
studies are useful strategies to gain insight into the pathogenicity
of non-canonical splice PAX6 variants. These methods are easy-to-
carry approaches for robust splice variant analysis and to help
bring molecular diagnosis to aniridia patients.
A. Tamayo: None. M. Tarilonte: None. J. Moya: None. P.
Ramos: None. S. Swa ﬁri:None. F. Blanco: None. C. Villaverde:
None. C. Ayuso: None. M. Cortón: None.
P02.052.A Clinical molecular genetic age characteristics of
congenital aniridia in children
Natella Sukhanova
1, Rena Zinchenko2, L.A.Katargina.A.V.Marakho-
nov,T.A.Vasilieva,
1Federal State Budgetary Institution of Health ’s Central Clinical
Hospital of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, RussianFederation,2Federal State Budgetary Scienti ﬁc Institution “Research
Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The relationship between the clinical features of the
phenotype and the genotype con ﬁrmed by molecular genetic
methods in children with aniridia expands our understanding of
the clinical course of the disease and corrects possible treatment.Congenital aniridia (OMIM # 106210) is a monogenic hereditarypathology. The leading diagnostic signs are congenital absence of
iris tissue, hypoplasia of fovea, accompanied by nystagmus.
Materials and Methods: The data of ophthalmological
examination and molecular genetic analysis of 83 patients from0 to 18 years old were analyzed. Mutations were previously
identi ﬁed in 56 patients as a result of sequencing of exons of the
PAX6 gene. In 27 patients, various deletions of the 11p13 regionwere identi ﬁed by MLPA.Results: According to clinical signs, patients with congenital
aniridia were distributed: the presence of complete or partial
aniridia, nystagmus, keratopathy, cataracts and glaucoma. With
nonsense mutations, the complete absence of iris tissue and thedevelopment of keratopathy observed in average age 5 ± 1 years.Patients with open reading frame shift mutations are signi ﬁcantly
more likely to develop complicated cataract and glaucoma in
average age 10 ± 2 years. Partial aniridia occurs with missensemutations signi ﬁcantly more often.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁcation of age-related characteristics
depending on the detected mutations is of not only clinical, but
also scienti ﬁc interest, since it indicates one of the mechanisms of
regulation of the PAX6 gene function in case of damage to theorgan of vision.The research was partially supported by RSF grant
№17-15-01051
N. Sukhanova: None. R. Zinchenko: None.
P02.053.B Minigene expression system for assess the effect of
variants in the PAX6 gene on pre-mRNA splicing
Ksenia Davydenko , Alexandra Filatova, Mikhail Skoblov
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Mutations in the PAX6 gene affect the normal
development of the eye and lead to a spectrum of phenotypes,the most severe is aniridia. Today more than 600 mutations inPAX6 have been reported, about 100 of them were annotated as
affecting splicing. Moreover, variants affecting splicing could
masquerade as missense, nonsense or synonymous in databases.In order to establish the effect of reported mutations on splicing, afunctional analysis is required.
Materials and methods: Bioinformatics analysis was performed
using the SpliceAI (Illumina, USA) and MaxEntScan (MIT, USA)tools. The minigene expression system was used to evaluate the
functional effect of SNVs on splicing.
Results: We created a system of 8 plasmids containing all 10
coding exons of the PAX6 gene. Plasmids were tested for correct
splicing and resulted in normally spliced wild-type transcripts. For
all 354 PAX6 SNVs from the HGMD, LOVD, and ClinVar databases
we predicted the probability of in ﬂuence on splicing. We selected
18 intronic SNVs outside ±1,2 position whose effect on splicinghas not been con ﬁrmed experimentally and 20 exonic (synon-
ymous, missense and nonsense) SNVs which actually could affect
splicing. Functional analysis of these SNVs in the minigeneexpression system revealed a wide range of splicing defects.
Conclusion: We created and successfully tested a minigene
expression system for assess the effect of variants in PAX6 gene on
pre-mRNA splicing. This system can be used to establish thepathogenicity of splicing variants in the PAX6 gene, and to
reclassify misclassi ﬁed variants located in databases.
K. Davydenko: None. A. Filatova: None. M. Skoblov:
None.
P02.054.C novel phenotype-genotype correlation with PEX6
gene in Saudi patients with heimler syndrome
Basamat Almoallem
Department of Ophthalmology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Purpose: Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs; MIM# 601539)
are heterogeneous disorders caused by defects in genes encodingproteins that are essential for peroxisomal matrix and membraneAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
134
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608proteins. Heimler syndrome is one of the PBDs that is caused by
mutations in PEX1 and PEX6 genes. In this study, we aimed to fully
characterise the clinical and molecular aspects of two Saudi
probands who were diagnosed early with Usher syndrome.
Method: We set up a comprehensive clinical and molecular
genetic work ﬂow including detailed ophthalmological and sys-
temic assessments followed by genome-wide SNP microarrays
analysis and targeted PEX6 gene screening by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Clinically: both probands appeared dysmorphic with
long faces, high forehead, short nose, small low set ears, and full
lips. Moreover, advanced inherited retinal dysfunction represented
by waxy pallor optic disc, attenuated vessels, RPE mottling withintraretinal bony spicules pigmentations and central fovealatrophic changes in both eyes with bilateral sensory neural
hearing loss and amelogenesis imperfecta. Genetically: an
autozygous block was identi ﬁed on chromosome 6p21.1 encom-
passing PEX6 gene using SNP microarrays. Novel PEX6
(NM_000287.3)c.290T>G (p.Val97Gly) was found and co-
segregated with the phenotype in both families and found tobe“likely pathogenic ”according to ACMG guidelines.
Conclusion: Our study represents the ﬁrst report of PEX6
associated Heimler syndrome in the middle east and considered
to be the third in the literature so far. It highlights the importanceof combining molecular diagnosis with the clinical ﬁndings to
expand our knowledge of PEX6-related PBDs phenotype and the
allelic spectrum for this gene.
B. Almoallem: None.
P02.055.D Investigation of transcriptional dysregulation
events driving Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophytype 1
Nathaniel J. Hafford-Tear
1, Lubica Dudakova2, Stephen J. Tuft1,3,
Amanda Sadan1, Nihar Bhattacharyya1, Christina Zarouchlioti1,
Alison J. Hardcastle1, Petra Liskova2,4, Alice E. Davidson1
1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom,
2Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and
Inherited Metabolic Diseases, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,
3Moor ﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom,4Department of
Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University andGeneral University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Purpose: Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy (PPCD) is
associated with a dysregulated cell state, induced by mutations
that alter the levels of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)-
regulating transcription factors ZEB1, GRHL2 or OVOL2. Here weinvestigate the transcriptomic signature of dysregulation in PPCDtype 1 (PPCD1) corneal endothelial cells (CECs) to identify
biomarkers of the disease as potential therapeutic targets.
Methods: Primary CECs were cultured from ﬁve individuals
affected with PPCD1 and ﬁve controls. All PPCD1 individuals were
conﬁrmed to harbour the same regulatory mutation in the OVOL2
promoter (NM_021220:c. −370T>C). Total RNA was extracted from
each primary culture and paired-end Illumina RNA sequencingwas performed. Transcriptomic analysis was performed usingDESeq2 and IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR programs to investigate
differential gene expression and splicing events in PPCD1 CECs
compared to control CECs.
Results: Utilizing the EMT Gene Database, 279 EMT-associated
genes were found to be highly dysregulated (p-value < .05; Log-2
fold change >1) in PPCD1 including CDH1 ,OVOL2 ,GRHL2 ,GATA6
and the epithelial splice regulator ESRP1 . Alternative splicing in
PPCD1 vs controls was further identi ﬁed for ESRP1 targets, CD44
and FGFR2 .Conclusions: Our study detected aberrant upregulation of
OVOL2 in PPCD1, supporting the hypothesis for pathogenic
mechanism, and identi ﬁed other EMT-associated genes and
pathways that are signi ﬁcantly disrupted in PPCD1 CECs. Our
data suggests that overexpression of the epithelial cell type-speci ﬁc splicing regulator, ESRP1 , induces aberrant splicing of
CD44 and FGFR2 . We hypothesise that this mechanism contributes
to the ‘epithelialisation ’of the corneal endothelium observed in
PPCD1 and may represent a target for future therapeuticinterventions.
N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. L. Dudakova: None. S.J. Tuft: None.
A. Sadan: None. N. Bhattacharyya: None. C. Zarouchlioti: None.
A.J. Hardcastle: None. P. Liskova: None. A.E. Davidson: None.
P02.056.A Clinical-genetic correlation of the functional state
of the retina in ABCA4-associated pathology
Vitaly V. Kadyshev
1, Andrei V. Marakhonov1, Inna V. Zolnikova1,2,
Sergey I. Kutsev1, Rena A. Zinchenko1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Helmholtz National Medical Research Center of Eye Diseases,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Aim: To set clinical and genetic correlations of retinal pathology by
ABCA4 gene mutations, considering the functional state Material
and methods: 15 Russian patients aged from 7 to 32 y.o. with
inherited eye diseases ABCA4 -associated. All patients besides
ophthalmic examination, spectral-OCT, fundus auto ﬂuorescence,
full-ﬁeld electroretinogram (ERG), 30-Hz ﬂicker ERG, macular chro-
matic ERG (MERG) to red stimulus, molecular genetic studiesincluded Next Generation Sequenci ng and Sanger direct sequencing.
Results :I n ABCA4 -associated Stargardt disease (SD) genotype
[p.L541P, p.A1038V] of «frequent» mutations was revealed in 9patients, in 2 cases in was associated another «frequent» mutation
p.G1961E. In 4 patients with genotype [p.L541P, p.A1038V]
«severe» phenotype of Stargardt disease was found: with largedefect of the ellipsoid zone, severely subnormal macular ERG(MERG) to red stimulus and subnormal 30 Hz ﬂicker and full- ﬁeld
maximal ERG. In 2 cases with genotype [p.L541P, p.A1038V] and
mutation p.G1961E was found «mild» phenotype. NonrecordableMERG was found in 7 of 15 cases, 8 patients had subnormal.Subnormal 30 Hz ﬂicker ERG was found in 8 patients with SD.
Maximal ERG was reduced in 6 patients with SD.
Conclusions : The study made it possible to assess the effect of
mutations in the ABCA4 gene not only on the structural changes
but also on the functional state of the retina. The study expands
the range of clinical and genetic features of hereditary ophthal-mological pathology associated with the ABCA4 gene. Supportedby RFBR (project №19-015-00122 А), within the state task of the
Ministry of education and science of Russia
V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. I.V. Zolnikova:
None. S.I. Kutsev: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.
P02.057.D Health-related quality of life amongst patients with
retinal dystrophies
Deborah Scho ﬁeld
1,Joshua Kraindler1, Rupendra Shrestha1, Sarah
West1, Owen Tan1, Alan Ma2,3, Diana Jelovic2, John Grigg4,3,5, Robyn
Jamieson2,4,3
1GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic Medicine,
Macquarie Business School, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia,
2Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children ’s Medical Research Institute,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,3Sydney Children ’s HospitalsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
135
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Network, Sydney, Australia,4Save Sight Institute, Sydney, Australia,
5Sydney Eye Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
Introduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are diseases leading to
incurable blindness attributable to variations in more than 200genes. There have been signi ﬁcant advances in gene therapies
including Voretigene Neparvovec (VN), which was recently approved
for intervention in RD due to variants in RPE65 , by the Food and Drug
Administration, and the National Health Service. Approval of publiclyfunded interventions often require cos t-effectiveness analysis (quality
adjusted life years (QALYs) gain). To our best knowledge, studies
reporting health-related utilit y of RD - a key metric in computing
Q A L Y s-a r es c a r c eo rh a v ei n s u f ﬁc i e n to ri n d i r e c tm e a s u r e so fQ o L
outcomes. We aim to present the ﬁrst paper examining the health-
related utility of RD using an established QoL measure - the
Assessment of Quality of Life-8D (AQoL-8D).
Materials and methods: As part of the EPIC-Vision study, we
collected patient (age ≥18) reported AQoL-8D data as part of a
customised survey. AQoL-8D measures functioning across eightdimensions: independent living, pain, senses, mental health,happiness, coping, relationships, self-worth. The EPIC-Vision
survey also collected data on visual functioning (NEI-VFQ), and
socioeconomic data.
Results: Average health-related utility for patients with RD was
0.6, signi ﬁcantly lower than the average population norm (0.8).
Patient ’s scores were relatively lower on independent living,
mental health, relationship, self-worth, and senses. Regressionanalysis showed that patients with better visual functioning score
had better health-related utility.
Conclusions: We reported for the ﬁrst time, health-related
utility for RD patients, which can be used to inform further studieson new interventions.Funding: NHMRC Partnership Grant
(APP1116360).
D. Scho ﬁeld: None. J. Kraindler: None. R. Shrestha: None. S.
West: None. O. Tan: None. A. Ma: None. D. Jelovic: None. J.
Grigg: None. R. Jamieson: None.
P02.058.C Genetic analysis of patients with retinal dystrophies
in Croatia
Adriana Bobinec
1,2, Mijana Kero1,2, Ljubica Boban1,2, Nikolina Vidan
Rogulj1, Ana-Maria Mea šić1,2, Ivona Sansovi ć1,2, Leona Moro žin
Pohovski1, Mirjana Bjelo š3,4, Mladen Bu šić3,4, Ingeborg Bari šić1,2
1Children ’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia,2Department of Medical
Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children ’s Hospital Zagreb,
Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative
Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb,Croatia,3University Department of Ophthalmology, University
Clinical Hospital Sveti Duh, Zagreb, Croatia,4Faculty of Dental
Medicine and Health, Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek,
Osijek, Croatia.
Introduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are a group of inherited
retinal disorders characterized by progressive photoreceptors and
pigment epithelial cells dysfunction causing severe visual loss andeventual blindness. Recently augmentation gene treatment hasbeen approved for patients with biallelic mutations in the RPE65
gene known to cause pigmentary retinopathy type 20 and Leber
congenital amaurosis 2. So far gene therapy in these patientsprovided improvement of functional vision without serious
adverse reactions raising great interest for genetic testing of RD.
Materials and methods: Next-generation sequencing (NGS)
was performed in 60 patients with a referral diagnosis of retinaldystrophy using Illumina TruSight One Kit.Results: In 36 (60) patients different pathogenic variants were
found in RP1,RP2, RHO, EYS, USH2A, BEST1, PROM1, C9, ABCA4,
ADGRV1, BEST1, CEP290 genes. In two patients identi ﬁed variants
were classi ﬁed as variants of unknown signi ﬁcance. In 22 patients
NGS analysis did not reveal mutations in genes associated with RD.
Conclusion: Molecular genetic testing of retinal dystrophies has
been successfully used to clarify clinical diagnoses and direct
genetic counselling. NGS proved to be ef ﬁcient and useful method
for setting up the diagnosis in 63% of patients.This study wassupported by CERRM, Republic of Croatia, and by the EU through
ERDF, under grant agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project
„Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine - Exploring New Plat-
forms and Potentials ”.
A. Bobinec: None. M. Kero: None. L. Boban: None. N. Vidan
Rogulj: None. A. Mea šić:None. I. Sansovi ć:None. L. Moro žin
Pohovski: None. M. Bjelo š:None. M. Bu šić:None. I. Bari šić:
None.
P02.059.D Implementation of the targeted retinal dystrophy
panel in the routine genetic diagnostics of retinal disorders in
Polish patients
Ewa Matczy ńska
1,2, Przemys ław Łyszkiewicz1, Anna W ąsowska1,2,
Robert Szyma ńczak1, Ewa Suchecka1, Katarzyna Stradomska1, Marta
Beć1, Maria J ędrzejowska1,Sławomir Teper2, Maciej Krawczy ński3,
Anna Boguszewska-Chachulska1
1Genomed S.A., Warsaw, Poland,2Chair and Clinical Dept. of
Ophthalmology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland,
3Center of Medical Genetics Genesis Sp. z o.o., Pozna ń, Poland.
A targeted panel approach for genetic diagnosis of inherited
retinal dystrophies (IRD) was developed, based on the results of
the preceding NeuStemGen project (a cohort of Polish IRDpatients analysed using WES). The implementation of the
approach in routine diagnostics provided an opportunity to assess
its performance along with strengths and weaknesses.
Polish patients with clinical symptoms of retinal dystrophies (N
=168) were subjected to NGS using a custom panel capturing
coding regions of 270 IRD genes (RetNet), developed with the
Roche NimbleGen SeqCap EZ. Bioinformatic analysis was per-formed with the GATKv4 and CoNVaDING (for CNV analysis), usingthe GRCh38 reference genome. Variant analysis and interpretation
were completed according to ACMG guidelines using the in-house
variant interpretation tool - BroVar.
Overall sequencing data metrics presented a satisfactory level
of target coverage (mean coverage - 255x ± 55; fraction of target
bases covered >20x - 0.996 ± 0.001) and high heterozygote SNPcalling sensitivity (0.998 ± 0.0003), indicating near-optimal perfor-mance for SNPs and small indels, providing diagnosis con ﬁrmation
for 77 patients. CNV analysis enabled ﬁnding causative variants for
additional 9 patients (51% overall), however, CNV identi ﬁcation
performed sub-optimal in several batches due to technical biasand a low number of samples per pool.
The targeted retinal panel approach has been successfully
applied in routine IRD diagnostics of Polish patients, expandingthe knowledge of IRD genetic background in the Polishpopulation, simultaneously allowing for a cost-effective analysis
(comparing to WES). Despite reliable coverage, identi ﬁcation of
CNVs remains challenging. Further re ﬁnement of CNV and more
complex variants ’calling is necessary.
E. Matczy ńska: None. P.Łyszkiewicz: None. A. W ąsowska:
None. R. Szyma ńczak: None. E. Suchecka: None. K. Stradomska:
None. M. Be ć:None. M. J ędrzejowska: None. S. Teper: None. M.
Krawczy ński: None. A. Boguszewska-Chachulska: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
136
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P02.061.B Metastasis suppressor 1 < MTSS1> as a novel
candidate gene for inherited retinal dystrophy <IRD>
Solomon Merepa1, Suzanne Broadgate1, Jing Yu1, Sumathi
Sekaran1, Susan Downes1,2, Stephanie Halford1, United Kingdom
Inherited Retinal Dystrophy Consortium (UKIRDC)
1Nufﬁeld Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Oxford
Eye Hospital, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Over 260 genes underlying monogenic forms of
inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) have been identi ﬁed, enabling
the development of treatment regimens such as gene therapy.
However, there are still IRD cases whose underlying genetic causesare yet to be identi ﬁed, prompting the need for continued
disease-gene identi ﬁcation studies.
Methods: Two affected members of a family diagnosed with
dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) underwent whole-exomesequencing (WES). Various bioinformatics tools and gene sequen-cing databases including CADD and gnomAD were used to
annotate and prioritise candidate variants. Segregation analysis
was performed using Sanger sequencing. A variant segregatingwith the condition was characterised for expression, localisation
and function in the mammalian retina using techniques including
PCR, western immunoblotting, immunostaining, and site-directedmutagenesis.
Results: Of 22 shared dominant variants determined
from WES, a mutation in the MTSS1 gene (c.624_628del (p.
E213del)) segregated with disease in the family. The expressionand function of MTSS1 in the mammalian retina has notbeen previously described. We report, for the ﬁrst time,
expression of MTSS1 in the human retina and using antibodies
speci ﬁc for Mtss1, we demonstrate immunostaining in layers of
the mouse retina including the photoreceptors. Using mutant
expression constructs, we are currently investigating if the
mutation affects localisatio n and function of MTSS1 at the
cellular level.
Conclusions: We provide here, for the ﬁrst time, preliminary
evidence linking mutation in the MTSS1 with dominant RP.
Elucidating the speci ﬁc role of MTSS1 in the mammalian retina
could potentially inform therapeutic approaches for IRDs.
Funding: Retina UK, Fight for Sight, Commonwealth Scholar-
ships Commission
S. Merepa: None. S. Broadgate: None. J. Yu: None. S. Sekaran:
None. S. Downes: None. S. Halford: None.
P02.062.C First systematic molecular genetic analysis using
NGS analysis of 120 Greek patients with retinal dystrophy
Smaragda Kamakari
1, Stavrenia Koukoula2, Vasiliki Kokkinou1,
Lonnecke Haer-Wigman3, Ioannis Datseris4, Miltiadis Tsilimbaris5
1Ophthalmic Genetics Unit, Athens, Greece,2Ophthalmica Institute of
Ophthalmology and Microsurgery, Thessaloniki, Greece,3Department
of Human Genetics, Donders Centre for Neuroscience, RadboundUniversity Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Depart-
ment of Retinal Disorders, OMMA, Ophthalmological Institute of
Athens, Athens, Greece,5Department of Ophthalmology, University
of Crete School of Medicine, Heraklion, Greece.
Purpose: Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRDs) are characterized by
clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. The aim of this studywas to molecularly diagnose 120 Greek patients with differentforms of IRDs.Materials and Methods: 120 unrelated Greek patients were
analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), 13 and 107 of
them using a 105 retinal and a 287 ophthalmic gene panel,
respectively as described (Ellingford JM et al. J Med Genet 2016,Haer-Wigman L et al. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017). Additional analysismethods were used (Sanger, MLPA, array-CGH) in 6 cases.
Results: Potentially pathogenic mutations were detected in 47
retinal dystrophy genes including ABCA4, PRPF31, SPATA7, MERTK,FAM161A, CDHR1, USH2A, CNGB1, PROM1, RPGR and RP2 genes.The detection mutation rates were 46.15% (6/13) and 79.4% (85/
107) for the 105 and 287 gene panels, respectively. These
mutation rates were achieved using complementary methods in6 cases. Final diagnoses included retinitis pigmentosa, Ushersyndrome, cone-rod dystrophy and Leber congenital amaurosis
and two rare cases of Knobloch and Oliver-McFarlane syndromes
due to mutations in the COL18A1 and PNPLA6 genes, respectively.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst systematic investigation of the
molecular identity of 120 Greek patients with various subforms of
IRDs by NGS and complementary methods leading to an overallmutation rate of 75.8%. A plethora of novel mutations wasdocumented further expanding the genetic heterogeneity. The
molecular identi ﬁcation established the complete diagnosis of the
patients thus contributing to family making decision, prognosisand candidacy to current and future treatments.
S. Kamakari: None. S. Koukoula: None. V. Kokkinou: None. L.
Haer-Wigman: None. I. Datseris: None. M. Tsilimbaris: None.
P02.064.A Whole locus sequencing identi ﬁes a prevalent
founder deep intronic RPGRIP1 pathologic variant in the
French Leber congenital amaurosis cohort
Isabelle Perrault
1, Sylvain Hanein2, Xavier Gérard1, Nelson Moun-
guengue1, Ryme Bouyakoub1, Mohammed Zarhate3, Cécile Four-
rage4, Fabienne Jabot-Hanin4, Béatrice Bocquet5, Isabelle Meunier5,
Xavier Zanlonghi6, Josseline Kaplan1, Jean-Michel Rozet1
1Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163,
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University,Paris, France,2Translational Genetics, Institute of Genetic Diseases,
Imagine and Paris Descartes University, INSERM UMR1163, PARIS,
France,3Genomics Platform, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine
and Paris Descartes University, Paris, France,4Bioinformatic Platform.
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University,
Paris, France,5Centre de Référence des Affections Sensorielles
Génétiques, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, CHU-Saint EloiMontpellier, Montpellier, France,6Eye Clinic Jules Verne, Nantes,
France.
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) encompasses the earliest and
most severe retinal dystrophies and can occur as a non-syndromic
or a syndromic disease. Molecular diagnosis in LCA is of particular
importance in clinical decision-making and patient care since itcan provide ocular and extraocular prognostics and identifypatients eligible to developing gene-speci ﬁc therapies. Routine
high-throughput molecular testing in LCA yields 70%-80% of
genetic diagnosis. In this study, we aimed to investigate the non-coding regions of one non-syndromic LCA gene, RPGRIP1 ,i na
series of six families displaying one single disease allele after a
gene-panel screen of 722 LCA families which identi ﬁed 26 biallelic
RPGRIP1 families. Using trio-based high-throughput whole locus
sequencing (WLS) for second disease alleles, we identi ﬁed a
founder deep intronic mutation (NM_020366.3:c.1468-128T>G) in
3/6 families. We employed Sanger sequencing to search for thepathologic variant in unresolved LCA cases (106/722) andidenti ﬁed three additional families (2 homozygous and 1
compound heterozygous with the c.930 +77A>G deep intronicAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
137
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608change). This makes the c.1468-128T>G the most frequent
RPGRIP1 disease allele (8/60, 13%) in our cohort. Studying patient
lymphoblasts, we show that the pathologic variant creates a donor
splice-site and leads to the insertion of the pseudo-exon in themRNA, which we were able to hamper using splice-switchingantisense oligonucleotides (AONs), paving the way to therapies.
This work was supported by grants from Retina France, UNADEV-
AVIESAN ITMO MNP (R16073KS) and VISIO; J.-M.R. is member ofERN-EYE project (739534- ‘ERN-EYE).
I. Perrault: None. S. Hanein: None. X. Gérard: None. N.
Mounguengue: None. R. Bouyakoub: None. M. Zarhate: None.
C. Fourrage: None. F. Jabot-Hanin: None. B. Bocquet: None. I.
Meunier: None. X. Zanlonghi: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet:
None.
P02.065.B Genetic study of Italian families affected by small
ﬁbre neuropathy identi ﬁed variants in predisposing pain
phenotype
Kaalindi Misra
1, Silvia Santoro1, Andrea Zauli1, Margherita Marchi2,
Erika Salvi2, Raffaella Lombardi2, Daniele Cazzato2, Filippo Martinelli
Boneschi3,4, Massimo Filippi5,6,7,8, Federica Esposito1,5, Giuseppe
Pinter Lauria2,9
1Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurological Disorders, IRCCS San
Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,2Neuroalgology Unit,
Foundation IRCCS Carlo Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy,
3Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy,4Neurology Unit, Foundation IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy,5Neurology and Neurorehabilita-
tion Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,6Vita-
Salute San Raffaele University, Milano, Italy,7Neurophysiology Unit,
IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,8Neuroimaging
Research Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division ofNeuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,
9Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco",
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Peripheral Neuropathy (PN) affects 2.4% of people and almost
50% of general population is known to have pain-related
symptoms. Genetic studies in painful PN (PPN) revealed thatVoltage Gated Sodium Channels (VGSCs) genes are involved inpain ampli ﬁcation. Here we aimed to broaden the genetic aspect
of PPN by using whole exome sequencing (WES).
Six families with PPN were selected having at least one affected
member, positive neurological examination and pain question-
naire result with numerical rating score > =4. Variants were ﬁltered
with manually curated gene panel, allele frequency (AF) andcomputational predictors. Segregation causative/protective mod-els were applied according to pedigree and sharing models were
applied after grouping probands of each family.
According to segregation causative and protective model, we
found 129 and 112 variants respectively (AF< =10%) across
families. Among genes shared between two families with
causative approach, variants were observed in SCN9A ,SV2C and
DST, whereas protective variants in TRPM2 and LRP1 . In shared
model, we identi ﬁed 21 variants and 53 genes shared across > =3
probands. Among shared genes with predicted high-impact
variants in probands were observed in SCN9A, SCN7A, P2RY4,
P2RX7, TRPV4 and TRPM1 .
WES approach appears powerful in mutation detection and in
revealing new genotype-phenotype association. In addition to
VGSCs, other gene families including Transient Receptor Potentialand Purinergic Receptor seem to play a role in pain modulation.The same approach will be replicated on new families alreadysequenced before proceeding with ad hoc functional experiments
to deepen the role of genes in painful phenotype.
K. Misra: None. S. Santoro: None. A. Zauli: None. M. Marchi:
None. E. Salvi: None. R. Lombardi: None. D. Cazzato: None. F.M.
Boneschi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Modest; Merck, Teva Pharmaceutica l Industries, Italian Ministry of
Health, Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi Multipla, Fondazione Cariplo. D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expertwitness); Modest; Medday, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Excemed,
Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Con-
sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Medday, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono,Excemed, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. M.
Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Signiﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Teva
Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Spe akers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec,
Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva
Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Con sultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme,
Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁGenzyme,
Almirall, Merck-Serono. G.P. Lauria: None.
P02.066.C Human knockouts of olfactory receptors genes and
smell perception impairment in a large Italian cohort
Paola Tesolin1, Maria Pina Concas2, Massimiliano Cocca2, Mar-
gherita Francescatto1, Agnese Luglio1, Beatrice Spedicati1, Agense
Feresin1, Anna Morgan2, Paolo Gasparini2,1, Giorgia Girotto2,1
1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,2Institute for Maternal and Child
Health –IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo ”, Trieste, Italy.
Genetic variations across Olfactory Receptors (OR) genes in ﬂuence
the diversity of odorant sensitivity among individuals. Nevertheless,
there is still a lack of knowledge regarding the genetic bases of smell
performance. Whole-genome se quencing and smell phenotypes
data of 218 Italian individuals allowed the identi ﬁcation of 41 natural
OR knockouts (KO) (i.e., genes carrying biallelic loss of function
variants). In detail, the following steps have been performed:1.
recursive partitioning analysis to evaluate the effect of OR-KO genes ’
burden on the smell perception (measured by the number of errors
in the Snif ﬁn Sticks test),2. evaluatio n of the expression of these
genes in human and mouse tissues using publicly available data,3.estimation of the presence of organ-related diseases in Human KO(HKO) individuals for OR expressed in non-olfactory tissues (Fisher
test). Regarding (1), ageing and the burden of OR-KO led to a
worsening of smell perception (p-value <0.05). In particular, the effectof the OR-KO burden was higher in younger individuals (aged ≤57).
With respect to (2), 33/41 OR genes have been detected in the
human olfactory system (OS) and 27 in other tissues, while among
the 60 putative ORs mouse homologues, 58 were expressed in theOS and 37 in other tissues. Finally, (3) 14 pathologies resulted inbeing more frequent in OR-HKO individuals (p-value < 0.01). Our
work con ﬁrms the predominant role of age in worsening smell
perception and highlights, for the ﬁrst time, the role of the burden of
OR-KO genes.
P. Tesolin: None. M. Concas: None. M. Cocca: None. M.
Francescatto: None. A. Luglio: None. B. Spedicati: None. A.
Feresin: None. A. Morgan: None. P. Gasparini: None. G. Girotto:
None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
138
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P02.067.D Insights into the pathogenesis of Stargardt disease
associated with splicing mutation c.5714 +5G&gtA in ABCA4
gene
Jana Sajovic1, Andrej Megli č1, Zelia Corradi2,3, Mubeen Khan2,3,4,
Frans F.M. Cremers2,3, Claire-Marie Dhaenens2,5, Martina Jarc
Vidmar1, Damjan Glava č6, Ale šMaver7, Marija Volk7, Borut Peterlin7,
Marko Hawlina1, Ana Fakin1
1Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Nether-lands,4Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,5Univ. Lille,
Inserm, CHU Lille, U1172-LilNCog-Lille Neuroscience & Cognition, Lille,France,6Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
7Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: >1200 ABCA4 variants cause Stargardt disease
making genotype-phenotype correlations dif ﬁcult. Approximately
15% of Slovenian Stargardt patients harbour c.5714 +5G>A which
allowed phenotypic speci ﬁcation of this variant.
Methods: Sixteen patients with different genotypes were
recruited. Group 1 harboured c.5714 +5G>A in trans with a null
mutation (N =6) and group 2 had two null mutations (N =10).
Correlation between the degree of retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) atrophy (represented by the area of decreased auto ﬂuores-
cence on fundus imaging) and loss of photoreceptors (repre-sented by outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness on opticalcoherence tomography (OCT) and pattern electroretinography
(PERG) amplitudes) was compared between groups. Effect of
c.5714+5G>A on RNA splicing was analyzed using reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR of mRNA isolated from patient-derived
photoreceptor progenitor cells (PPCs).
Results: RT-PCR of mRNA from PPCs from a patient carrying
c.4539+1G>T and c.5714 +5G>A using primers in exons 38 and 44
showed a major normal product and minor exon 40 and exon 39/
40 deletion products. Statistical analysis showed that for a similar
RPE atrophy area, patients in Group 1 had signi ﬁcantly better
structural (thicker ONL) and functional (higher PERG amplitudes)preservation of photoreceptors (multiple linear regression, p <
0.01). Preserved photoreceptors were seen above preserved RPE
on OCT in Group 1.
Conclusions: Patients harbouring c.5714 +5G>A exhibit dis-
tinctly different phenotype than patients carrying two null
mutations, characterized by less photoreceptor loss at comparabledegrees of RPE loss. We hypothesize that remaining ABCA4function originating from the retained normally spliced product
spares photoreceptors from early degeneration and shifts the
pathogenesis to a primarily RPE disease.
J. Sajovic: None. A. Megli č:None. Z. Corradi: None. M. Khan:
None. F. Cremers: None. C. Dhaenens: None. M. Jarc Vidmar:
None. D. Glava č:None. A. Maver: None. M. Volk: None. B.
Peterlin: None. M. Hawlina: None. A. Fakin: None.
P02.068.A Biallelic pathogenic variants in COL9A3 con ﬁrm
autosomal recessive stickler syndrome
Aboulfazl Rad
1, Maryam Naja ﬁ2, Fatemeh Suri3, Stephen Loum1,
Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani4, David Murphy5, Mohammad Doosti4,
Narsis Daftarian6, Paria Najarzadeh Torbati4, Afrooz Moghaddasi3,Hamid Ahmadieh3, Mohsen Rajati7, Narges Hashemi8, Barbara
Vona1, Miriam Schmidts9
1Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Tübingen, Germany,23Pediatric Genetics Divison, Center for
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg,Freiburg University Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106
Freiburg, Germany, Freiburg, Germany,3Ophthalmic Research
Center, Research Institute for Ophthalmology and Vision Science,Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran,
Iran, Islamic Republic of,4Department of Molecular Genetics, Next
Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad 009851, Iran, Mashhad, Iran,Islamic Republic of,5Department of Clinical and Movement
Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University
College London, United Kingdom, London, United Kingdom,6Ocular
Tissue Engineering Research Center, Research Institute for Ophthal-mology and Vision Science, Shahid Beheshti University of MedicalSciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
7Associate
professor of Otorhinolaryngology, Ghaem Hospital, Sinus and
Surgical Endoscopic Research Center, Department of Otorhinolar-yngology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of MedicalSciences, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
8Department of Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran, IslamicRepublic of,9Pediatric Genetics Divison, Center for Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg University
Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106 Freiburg, Germany,Freiburg, Germany.
Introduction: Stickler syndrome (STL) is a clinically and molecu-
larly heterogeneous connective tissue disorder that includesocular impairment, hearing loss, joint and craniofacial abnormal-ities. Pathogenic variants occurring in a variety of genes cause STL,
mainly inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Autosomal
recessive STL is ultra-rare with only a few cases reported to date,including three families with biallelic COL9A3 variants. Here, we
report three unrelated families clinically diagnosed with STL who
present novel biallelic loss of function variants in COL9A3 .
Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing (ES) was employed
to sequence the DNA of probands from three unrelated Iranian
families. Conventional PCR and Sanger sequencing were per-
formed to con ﬁrm segregation of the candidate variants in
accessible family members.
Results: Our data revealed three novel loss of function variants
inCOL9A3 in three unrelated families. All affected individuals
shared moderate- to high-myopia and moderate to severesensorineural hearing loss. The other clinical observations includ-
ing hypermobility, mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, midface
hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nares, bi ﬁd uvula,
cleft hard palate, and micrognathia were slightly different amongcases. The parents in all three families did not have any STL-
associated phenotypes.
Conclusions: Our report substantially expands the molecular
genetic basis of autosomal recessive STL and con ﬁrms the clinical
phenotypes of COL9A3 -associated autosomal recessive STL.Key-
words: Stickler syndrome, COL9A3 , Autosomal recessive
A. Rad: None. M. Naja ﬁ:None. F. Suri: None. S. Loum: None. E.
Ghayoor Karimiani: None. D. Murphy: None. M. Doosti: None. N.
Daftarian: None. P. Najarzadeh Torbati: None. A. Moghaddasi:
None. H. Ahmadieh: None. M. Rajati: None. N. Hashemi: None. B.
Vona: None. M. Schmidts: None.
P02.069.B Clinical and molecular revaluation yield a 52% of
characterization in syndromic retinal diseasesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
139
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Irene Perea-Romero1,2, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1,2, Iker Sanchez-
Navarro1, Isabel Lorda-Sanchez1,2, Saoud Tahsin-Swa ﬁri1,2, Almu-
dena Avila-Fernandez1,2, Inmaculada Martin-Merida1,2, Maria Jose
Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, Rosario Lopez-Rodriguez1,2, Ionut Florin Iancu1,2,
Raquel Romero1,2, Mathieu Quinodoz3,4,5, Pablo Minguez1,2, Marta
Corton1,2, Carlo Rivolta3,4,5, Carmen Ayuso1,2
1Health Research Institute-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University
Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid,Spain,2Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases
(CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,3Institute of
Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel, Switzer-land,4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland,5Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, Uni-
versity of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Syndromic retinal diseases (SRD) are a group of rare
and complex inherited systemic disorders, characterized by a
challenging molecular study and clinical management.
Materials and Methods: A cohort study was performed on 100
index cases with an a priori diagnosis of non-Usher SRD, usingavailable clinical and familiar data and HPO (Human Phenotype
Ontology) annotation, so every case was classi ﬁed into 7 different
clinical categories according to the most prominent symptoms.Over the years, diverse molecular and bioinformatic methods have
been used. Accordingly, cases were classi ﬁed into 3 subgroups
depending on the previous molecular technique utilized, deter-mining the new approach to perform.
Results: After the phenotypic classi ﬁcation, the most common
SRD were ciliopathies (36%). A characterization rate of 52% was
obtained, being 6 cases incompletely characterized with a genethat partially explained the phenotype. An increased characteriza-tion rate was achieved taking the naïve (67.4%) or the ciliopathies
(66.7%) subgroups independently. Our results suggest that
customized panels and clinical exome would be the ﬁrst-tier
approach in the naïve cases, whereas whole-exome sequencing
would be in the re-studied and reanalysed. Due to the causative
gene found, 27.3% of the completely characterized cases werereclassi ﬁed into another clinical subgroup.
Conclusions . Our study provides an example of SRD in the daily
clinical practice and the importance of a thorough clinical analysis
and election of the molecular approach, in order to solve thesecomplex cases and elucidate new possible phenotype-genotypeassociations.
Funding: ISCIII (PI16/00425; PI19/00321; FI17/00192), CIBERER
(06/07/0036), University Chair UAM-IIS-FJD Genomic Medicine,RAREGENOMICS-CM
I. Perea-Romero: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. I. Sanchez-
Navarro: None. I. Lorda-Sanchez: None. S. Tahsin-Swa ﬁri:None.
A. Avila-Fernandez: None. I. Martin-Merida: None. M.J. Trujillo-
Tiebas: None. R. Lopez-Rodriguez: None. I.F. Iancu: None. R.
Romero: None. M. Quinodoz: None. P. Minguez: None. M.
Corton: None. C. Rivolta: None. C. Ayuso: None.
P02.070.C Could TGFBI-related corneal dystrophies be
mimicked in zebra ﬁsh via CRISPR/Cas9-mediated hot spot
arginine variations?
Fulya Yaylacioglu Tuncay
1, Beril Talim2, Pervin Rukiye Dinçer3
1Department of Medical Biology, Gulhane Medical Faculty, University
of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey,2Department of Pediatrics,
Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey,3Depart-
ment of Medical Biology,Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,Ankara, Turkey.Introduction: TGFBI-related corneal dystrophies are characterized
by hyaline or amyloid deposition in the cornea due to missense
mutations of TGFBI . The protein product of this gene (TGFBIp) was
shown in the cornea of zebra ﬁsh. Mutations of TGFBI affecting
arginine residue on the 124th position were reported as one of thehot spots for this group of corneal dystrophies. This arginine
residue was also conserved in zebra ﬁsh. Therefore, we aimed to
make an in-frame change in zebra ﬁsh genome affecting this
arginine residue by using CRISPR/Cas9 and then observe if anyaccumulation would occur in the cornea of adult zebra ﬁsh.
Materials and Methods: For the in-frame change in the target
region nine injection groups were planned. The mixturesconsisting of sgRNAs, Cas9 mRNA/protein with or without donorDNA were injected to one-cell stage embryos in each group (n =
100). T7 endonuclease assay, restriction fragment length poly-
morphism assay and Sanger sequencing were used for genotyp-ing in the injection groups.
Results: The variation p. Ser115_Arg117delinsLeu (c.
347_353delinsT) was detected in one of the injection groups inF1 embryos. This variation deleted the target arginine in TGFBIpwithout causing frameshift. Three-months old and 1-year old
heterozygote zebra ﬁsh were euthanized, and corneas were
examined under the light microscope. No deposits could bedetected with hematoxylin-eosin, Masson ’s trichrome and congo
red staining.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst study in literature that succeeded to
make an in-frame variation effecting the hot spot arginine residueof TGFBIp in zebra ﬁsh. However, this success could not result in
deposit formation in zebra ﬁsh cornea.
F. Yaylacioglu Tuncay: None. B. Talim: None. P.R. Dinçer:
None.
P02.071.D An USH2A founder mutation is the cause of Usher
syndrome type 2 in Sardinia
Vincenzo Rallo
1,2, Rita Serra1,2, Maristella Steri2, Stefania Olla2,
Michele Marongiu2, Edoardo Fiorillo2, Antonio Pinna1, Francesco
Cucca1, Andrea Angius1,2
1University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy,2Institute for Genetic and
Biomedical Research (IRGB), Monserrato (Cagliari), Italy.
Introduction: Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common cause
of combined sight and hearing loss, responsible for half of deaf-
blindness cases. USH has divided into three types: USH1,characterized by severe bilateral hearing loss and early retinitis
pigmentosa (RP); USH2, distinguished by moderate hearing loss
and RP; USH3, showing progressive hearing loss, vestibulardysfunction and RP. USH is associated with 19 loci, with 16causative genes identi ﬁed. Here, we describe the clinical ﬁndings
and molecular analysis of 3 USH-affected unrelated families living
in the island of Sardinia (Italy).
Materials and Methods: We investigated all the members of 3
families in which 9 patients showed both sensorineural hearing
loss and RP. All individuals underwent a complete ophthalmic
examination and vestibular medical tests. Whole-genome sequen-cing data were available for genetic analysis.
Results: Clinical hypothesis indicated a suspected USH2
syndrome. We identi ﬁed a single missense causal variant in the
USH2A gene, in homozygous status in all patients and hetero-zygous in unaffected parents. Mutation-related haplotype recon-
struction revealed a founder effect. To understand if this event
was restricted to a geographical area or whole island, we analysedabout 3500 Sardinians, revealing a frequency of about 2%heterozygotes distributed overall in Sardinia.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
140
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: By using our approach, we were able to describe
theﬁrst case of USH syndrome, its incidence and distribution in
Sardinia. Thus, we are able to provide an attractive perspective for
the feasibility of carrier status screening, possible geneticcounselling at the base for prevention and early treatmentstrategies of this hereditary syndrome.
V. Rallo: None. R. Serra: None. M. Steri: None. S. Olla: None. M.
Marongiu: None. E. Fiorillo: None. A. Pinna: None. F. Cucca:
None. A. Angius: None.
P03 Internal Organs & Endocrinology (Lung, Kidney, Liver,
Gastrointestinal)
P03.001.A Molecular analysis of PKD1 and PKD2 genes: a key
for achieving a great diagnosis rate in autosomal dominantpolycystic kidney disease
Elena Mesa-Rísquez , Alfonso Andújar, Isabel Sánchez-Guiu, Anna
Baquero-Vaquer, Tania Otero-Rodríguez, María Dolores Ruiz, RoserMartínez-Rubio, Amparo Girós, María Sánchez-Ibáñez, Vanesa Felipe-Ponce, Dan Diego-Álvarez, Rosario Ferrer-Avargues, Uxía Esperón,
Natalí Riva, Bárbara Masotto, Yolanda Moreno-Sáez, José Leonardo
Díaz, Jaime García, Carmen Collado, María Dolores Oliver, NormaAliaga, Angela Gaspar, Laura Cano, Ana Perpiñán, Nuria Serrano,
Clara Casañ, Celia Buades-Gomis, Alejandro Romera-López, Mayte
Gil-Borja, Sonia Santillán, Christian Martín Moya
Ascires Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna (Valencia), Spain.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the
most common inherited kidney disease, mainly caused by PKD1
and PKD2 genes. PKD1 gene analysis is technically complex due to
its large size and the presence of several pseudogenes. The aim of
this work is to present the diagnostic results of a ADPKD cohort.
143 ADPKD cases were included, of which 71.6% had family
history of ADPKD. Patients were screened for PKD1 and PKD2
genes using Long Range PCR and Sanger sequencing or Nextera ™
Technology for NGS. In some patients, a MLPA study wasperformed if a negative result was obtained from sequencing.
Genetic screening revealed 88 diagnosed patients and 55
undiagnosed, 27 of whom were carriers of Variants of Uncertain
Signi ﬁcance (VUS) and the remaining 28 were negative. Disease-
causing variants were either found in PKD1 (65 cases) or PKD2 (23
cases). Among the disease-causing variants in both genes, 25% of
them were novel variants. Diagnostic variant effects were mainlynonsense (37.5%) and small deletions (26.14%). Other types ofidenti ﬁed variants included small insertions (12.5%), missense
(11.36%), splicing (7.95%), gross deletions (3.41%) and small indels
(1.14%).
Our rate of 61.54% positive genetic diagnosis highlights the
effectiveness of molecular genetic analysis as a powerful tool for
achieving a diagnosis in ADPKD patients. NGS allows PKD1 and
PKD2 simultaneous analysis, reducing processing time and costs.
Extending the genetic analysis by exome directed panels to
related genes as GANAB ,DNAJB11 or performing cosegregation
and functional studies of VUS could lead to a higher diagnosticrate.
E. Mesa-Rísquez: None. A. Andújar: None. I. Sánchez-Guiu:
None. A. Baquero-Vaquer: None. T. Otero-Rodríguez: None. M.
D. Ruiz: None. R. Martínez-Rubio: None. A. Girós: None. M.
Sánchez-Ibáñez: None. V. Felipe-Ponce: None. D. Diego-
Álvarez: None. R. Ferrer-Avargues: None. U. Esperón: None. N.
Riva: None. B. Masotto: None. Y. Moreno-Sáez: None. J.L. Díaz:
None. J. García: None. C. Collado: None. M.D. Oliver: None. N.
Aliaga: None. A. Gaspar: None. L. Cano: None. A. Perpiñán:
None. N. Serrano: None. C. Casañ: None. C. Buades-Gomis:None. A. Romera-López: None. M. Gil-Borja: None. S. Santillán:
None. C.M. Moya: None.
P03.003.C The mild effect of the COL4A5 variant p.Gly624Asp
in a group of 15 Polish patients with Alport syndrome
Paulina Halat-Wolska1,E lżbieta Ciara1, Lukasz Obrycki2, Katarzyna
Gadomska-Prokop2, Dorota Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Joanna
Kosińska3,M a łgorzata Rydzanicz3, Piotr Stawi ński3,4, Beata Cha łupc-
zyńska1, Kamila Fr ączak1, Marzena Gawlik1, Dorota Jurkiewicz1,
Pawe łKowalski1, Magdalena Pelc1, Dorota Siestrzykowska1, Szymon
Szyszkowski1, Dorota Wicher1, Ryszard Grenda2, Krystyna Chrza-
nowska1, Rafa łPłoski3, Mieczys ław Litwin2
1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children ’s Memorial Health
Institute, Warsaw, Poland,2Department of Nephrology, The Chil-
dren ’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,3Department of
Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland,
4Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of
Hearing, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous nephropathy caused by pathogenic variants inCOL4A3, COL4A4 orCOL4A5 . About 85% of AS patients have
X-linked inheritance, which causes more severe phenotype in
males, whereas in females, penetrance depends onX-chromosome inactivation pattern. Originating in the MiddleAges COL4A5 variant c.1871G>A p.Gly624Asp is predominant in
Central/East Europe and mostly gives mild AS symptoms.
Materials and Methods: Next-generation sequencing analysis
of glomerulopathy and chronic kidney disease related genes panelwas performed in Polish patients with suspected AS.
Results: In 65 patients clinical diagnosis was con ﬁrmed at the
molecular level. The most frequent was X-linked AS caused by 32different COL4A5 variants (75%). A recurrent COL4A5 variant p.
Gly624Asp in 15 patients (nine males and six females) was
identi ﬁed. Additionally, four patients with this substitution had
pathogenic variant in COL4A3 ,HNF1B orMYH9 . The clinical course
of patients with this genotype was mostly milder than observed in
individuals with other COL4A5 variants. They presented only
haematuria with or without proteinuria. Of these, two patients alsohad hearing impairment: male with only p.Gly624Asp variant andfemale with additional variant in COL4A3 .
Conclusions: The results of this study broaden the genotypic
spectrum of AS, which will facilitate future research on thegenotype-phenotype correlations. Variant p.Gly624Asp in COL4A5
was predominant and accounted for 31% of X-linked AS in the
study group. Observations of mild phenotype in our patients withthis genotype relate to literature data. Partially supported: CMHI-
M29/18
P. Halat-Wolska: None. E. Ciara: None. L. Obrycki: None. K.
Gadomska-Prokop: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. J.
Kosi ńska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawi ński: None. B.
Chałupczy ńska: None. K. Fr ączak: None. M. Gawlik: None. D.
Jurkiewicz: None. P. Kowalski: None. M. Pelc: None. D.
Siestrzykowska: None. S. Szyszkowski: None. D. Wicher: None.
R. Grenda:
None. K. Chrzanowska: None. R. P łoski: None. M.
Litwin: None.
P03.004.A Delineation of the phenotypic and genotypic
spectrum of type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy - Alport
syndrome and thin basement membrane nephropathy
Korbinian M. Riedhammer1,2, Matthias C. Braunisch2, Jasmina
Ćomić1, Adrian Lungu3, Jovana Putnik4, Gordana Milo ševski-Lomi ć5,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
141
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Michaela Gessner6, Nata ša Stajic ́4, Ludwig Patzer7, Nora Emini8,
Velibor Tasic8, Julia Hoefele1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of
Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of
Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
3Pediatric Nephrology Department, Fundeni Clinical Institute,
Bucharest, Romania,4Institute for Mother and Child Health Care of
Serbia "Dr Vukan Čupić", Department of Nephrology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,5Department of
Nephrology, University Children ’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia,6Depart-
ment of General Pediatrics and Hematology/Oncology, Children ’s
University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany,7Children ’s
Hospital St. Elisabeth and St. Barbara, Halle (Saale), Germany,
8University Children ’s Hospital, Medical School Skopje, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: “Type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy ”describes a
spectrum of hereditary hematuric diseases comprising Alportsyndrome (AS) and (milder) thin basement membrane nephro-pathy (TBMN). AS results from biallelic causative variants in
COL4A3 /4(autosomal recessive AS) and hemizygous causative
variants in COL4A5 (X-linked AS). Females with heterozygous
causative variants in COL4A5 show a variable phenotype.
Monoallelic causative variants in COL4A3/4 are identi ﬁed in TBMN.
The designation “autosomal dominant AS ”for heterozygous
carriers of causative variants in COL4A3/4 is contested.
Methods: 64 index patients, in whom exome sequencing had
been performed, were assigned to a TBMN (18 cases) or AS (46 cases)
subgroup based on clinical/histopa thologic presentation and family
history. Phenotypic and genotypic features were compared.
Results: Diagnostic yield of type-IV-c ollagen-related nephropathy
classi ﬁed as AS compared to TBMN was signi ﬁcantly different (65%
vs. 28%; p=0.01). One case, clinically classi ﬁed as TBMN, had Dent
disease genetically. The further solved TBMN cases carried hetero-
zygous causative variants in COL4A3 ,COL4A4 orCOL4A5 (female).
Median age at ﬁrst manifestation was signi ﬁcantly lower in AS
compared to TBMN cases (5.5 years vs. 16.0 years; p=0.001). TBMN
cases had no extrarenal manifestations, in contrast to 28% of AS
cases ( p=0.01). 39% of TBMN cases had a reported family history in
contrast to 78% in AS cases ( p=0.006).
Conclusions: This study delineates the phenotypic and
genotypic spectrum of type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy.
Importantly, it takes the perspective of the clinician who has to
integrate phenotypic and anamnestic data to assess the possibilityof a hereditary disease.
K.M. Riedhammer: None. M.C. Braunisch: None. J.Ćomić:
None. A. Lungu: None. J. Putnik: None. G. Milo ševski-Lomi
ć:
None. M. Gessner: None. N. Stajic ́:None. L. Patzer: None. N.
Emini: None. V. Tasic: None. J. Hoefele: None.
P03.005.A Systematic variant reinterpretation in patients with
type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy (Alport syndrome/thin
basement membrane nephropathy) reveals a high rate of
ambiguous results
Korbinian M. Riedhammer1,2,Patrick Richthammer1, Dominik S.
Westphal1, Jasmina Ćomić1, Roman Günthner2, Matthias C. Brau-
nisch2, Sabine Rath3, Anja K. Büscher4, Hanns-Georg Klein3, Stefanie
Weber5, Julia Hoefele1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany,2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany,3Center
for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics Dr. Klein, Dr. Rost
and Colleagues, Martinsried, Germany,4Pediatric Nephrology,
Pediatrics II, University Children ’s Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany,
5University Children ’s Hospital, Marburg, Germany.
Introduction: Type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy covers a
spectrum of hereditary hematuric diseases (thin basementmembrane nephropathy, TBMN; Alport syndrome, AS). Whereas
AS results from disease-causing variants in COL4A3-5 (autosomal
recessive and X-linked AS), monoallelic disease-causing variants inCOL4A3/4 are associated with TBMN.
Methods: Variants of 96 index cases reported between 2009
and 2014 with the clinical tentative diagnosis AS (77/96), TBMN
(13/96) or unclear determination of AS/TBMN (6/96) weremeticulously reinterpreted based on ACMG criteria and current
amendments. Monoallelic (likely) pathogenic variants in COL4A3 /4
in an AS case were not considered as diagnostic, as thedesignation “autosomal dominant AS ”is contested. 6 cases had
to be excluded from further analysis due to limited data.
Results: In total, 84 variants (allocated to 96 cases) and their
genotypes have been reassessed ( COL4A3 : 21/84, COL4A4 : 18/84,
COL4A5 : 45/84). 64/90 cases included in the further analysis could
be classi ﬁed as solved (original report: 83/90; p< 0.001, Fisher
exact test). 26/90 were classi ﬁed as “not solved “(original report: 7/
90), due to inconclusive results on variant (11/90), on genotype(12/90) or both variant and genotype level (3/90).
Conclusions: Transparent and coherent variant-/genotype-
interpretation enables physicians to diagnose hereditary diseasesand allows them to provide patients with well-founded informa-tion concerning prognosis and recurrence risk. This is especially
true for type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy, covering an intri-
cate phenotypic and genotypic spectrum. Since reassessment ofvariants/genotypes in this study showed a signi ﬁcant reduction in
genetic diagnoses, reports on type-IV-collagen-related nephro-
pathy obtained in the pre-ACMG era should be critically evaluated.
K.M. Riedhammer: None. P. Richthammer: None. D.S.
Westphal: None. J.Ćomić:None. R. Günthner: None. M.C.
Braunisch: None. S. Rath: None. A.K. Büscher: None. H. Klein:
None. S. Weber: None. J. Hoefele: None.
P03.006.B Impact of human genetic variants on C-Reactive
Protein levels and acute appendicitis
Isis Ricaño-Ponce
1, Toon Peeters1,2,3, Vasiliki Matzaraki1, Mihai
Netea1,4, Inge Gyssens1,2,3, Vinod Kumar1,5
1Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, NIJMEGEN, Nether-
lands,2Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunity, Jessa
Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium,3Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences,
Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium,4Human Genomics Laboratory,
Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania,
5University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Acute appendicitis is one of the most common
abdominal emergencies worldwide. Both environmental and
genetic factors contribute to disease. C-Reactive protein is (CRP)is one of the most important biomarkers in the diagnosis of acute
appendicitis. CRP-levels are signi ﬁcantly affected by genetic
variation. However, it remains unclear whether such geneticvariation is causally related to appendicitis risk. Therefore, in thisstudy, we investigate the causal relationship between SNPsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
142
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608associated with circulating CRP-levels and the risk and severity of
acute appendicitis.
Materials and Methods: we measured CRP-levels in serum of
appendectomy patients (n =325) with appendicitis severity
categorised as complicated/uncomplicated. We also performedGWAS in the same group of patients. We performed intersection,
colocalization of our GWAS results with appendicitis and CRP-
associated loci from the Pan-UKBB cohort. We employed pathwayenrichment analyses and functional-genomics approach toprioritise genes and pathways.
Results: We observed a signi ﬁcant enrichment of CRP-loci in
SNPs associated to appendicitis and complicated appendicitis.Among these shared loci, we characterise two top loci at 1q41 andat 8p23.1. The HLX gene at 1q41 is involved in blood cells
differentiation, liver and gut organogenesis. The locus at 8p23.1
affects multiple genes that are overexpressed in appendix tissuefrom appendicitis patients. Using a functional genomics approach
we provide genetic evidence for the involvement of interferon
signalling pathway in complicated appendicitis.
Conclusions: Our results suggest shared genetic mechanisms
between appendicitis and CRP-levels. By identifying new path-
ways, our study identi ﬁed genetic causes for severity of
appendicitis.
Project funded by Limburg Clinical Research Program.I. Ricaño-Ponce: None. T. Peeters: None. V. Matzaraki: None.
M. Netea: None. I. Gyssens: None. V. Kumar: None.
P03.008.D Novel CTLA4 heterozygous mutation in a family
with type 2 autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
Federico Romani
1, Emanuele Micaglio1, Filippo Martinelli Boneschi2,
Giorgio Nevio Casari3, Sara Benedetti3, Paola Carrera3, Carlo
Pappone1
1IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy,2IRCCS
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy,3IRCCS San Raffaele
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes are an emerging ﬁeld in
current medicine due to both diagnostic and therapeutic
improvements. Although generally accepted as complex traits,many genes play a pivotal role in both pathogenesis andprognosis of autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes. Among
those genes, CTLA4 has been described as very important for
autoimmunity against endocrine tissues since 2004. We describe afamily in which a heterozygous variant in CTLA4 gene segregates
with a type 2 autoimmune polyendocrine overt phenotype. Both
the proband and his sister are indeed affected by recurrent oralcandidiasis, hypothyroidism, type 1 diabetes mellitus and Addisondisease. Interestingly, in both patients the onset of clinical picture
happened with a recurrent oral candidiasis, in absence of genetic
mutation in MODY genes. Proband and sister carry a c.475G>Cheterozygous mutation of CTLA4 gene, with unknown inheritance.
The bioinformatic analysis suggested a pathogenic effect likely
related to the absence of the described mutation in healthy
people. This conclusion is supported by the segregation with thepathologic phenotype in the examined family. To the best of ourknowledge, this is the ﬁrst case of CTLA4 heterozygous mutation in
a clinically con ﬁrmed family affected by type 2 autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome. Although proband ’s parents were not
available for the genetic analysis, this case highlights the growing
relevance of genetic testing for this condition. Moreover, our data
suggest a possible new genotype - phenotype correlationrequiring further studies in order to increase the diagnostic yieldof genetic testing in autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes.F. Romani: None. E. Micaglio: None. F. Martinelli Boneschi:
None. G.N. Casari: None. S. Benedetti: None. P. Carrera: None. C.
Pappone: None.
P03.009.A Association of KEAP1 polymorphism with auto-
immune thyroiditis
Cristina Robles Lázaro
1,2,María Ovejero-Sánchez3,2,4, Nerea
Gestoso-Uzal2,3,4, Carlos Gutiérrez-Cerrajero2,3,4, Paloma Martín-
Bejarano Soto2,3,4, Pamela Vázquez-Cárdenas3,2,4, Ana Belén Her-
rero2,3,4, Rogelio González-Sarmiento2,3,4
1Endocrinology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Sala-
manca, Spain,2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine,
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,3Institute of Biomedical
Research (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain,4Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain.
Introduction : Autoimmune thyroiditis is a chronic in ﬂammatory
process characterized by the presence of glandular lymphocytic
inﬁltration and thyroid speci ﬁc antibodies. Some studies suggest
that oxidative stress could be involved in the development of thisdisease. Keap1-Nrf2 pathway is the major regulator of cytopro-
tective responses to oxidative and electrophilic stress. Thus, the
main aim of this study is to determine if Single NucleotidePolymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes could be associated with ahigher risk of developing autoimmune thyroiditis.
Material and methods : 202 autoimmune thyroiditis patients
and 340 healthy subjects without previous history of autoimmunedisease were recruited. Genotyping of SNPs in Keap1 (rs1048290and rs11545829) and NRF2 (rs2706110) was performed using
TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. Odd ratios and 95%
conﬁdence intervals were estimated for each polymorphic variant
to evaluate the association with risk of developing autoimmune
thyroiditis, with p-values < 0.05 being considered statistically
signi ﬁcant.
Results : The analysis of genotypic and allelic distribution of
rs1048290 SNP in Keap1 gene and rs2706110 SNP in NRF2 gene
did not show statistically signi ﬁcant differences between both
groups of subjects. However, the heterozygous GA genotype ofthe Keap1 rs11545829 polymorphism was associated withincreased risk of developing autoimmune thyroiditis. Also, the
statistical analysis showed that G allele confers protection from
this disease.
Conclusion : Our study suggests that the genotype AG in the
polymorphism rs11545829 of Keap1 gene could increase the risk
of developing autoimmune thyroiditis due to an alteration of thecellular response to oxidative stress.
This study was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920.
C. Robles Lázaro: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. N.
Gestoso-Uzal: None. C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. P. Martín-
Bejarano Soto: None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None. A.B. Herrero:
None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P03.010.B The use of high throughput sequencing for the
identi ﬁcation of variants contributing to autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease in the Maltese population
Maria Cini Masini
1, Francesca Borg Carbott1, Ritienne Attard1,
Adrian Pleven1, Karen Cassar2, Roberta A. Callus3, Angela Borg
Cauchi3, Valerie Said Conti4, Stephanie Bezzina Wettinger1, Rosienne
Farrugia1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
143
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Malta, L-Imsida, Malta,2Department of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, L-
Imsida, Malta,3Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Mater Dei
Hospital, L-Imsida, Malta,4Department of Paediatrics, Mater Dei
Hospital, L-Imsida, Malta.
Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic Kidney Disease
(ADPKD) though rare, is the most common hereditary kidneydisease. It is characterized by enlarged kidneys, bilateral formation
and progressive expansion of renal cysts, as well as systemic
manifestations from the progression of renal disease requiringrenal replacement therapy or transplantation.
Materials and Methods: DNA samples were obtained from 16
recruited probands and 6 additional affected family members as
part of the Malta NGS Project. We used Agilent SureSelect
XT
Targeted Enrichment gene panel and high throughput sequen-
cing (HTS) on Illumina HiSeq4000 for 3 nuclear families. Whole
exome sequencing was carried out on another 15 probands. HTSdata was mapped to GRCh37 as paired-end libraries usingNextGENe ®software. After variant ﬁltering and prioritization,
variants were con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing using primers
unique to PKD1 orPKD2 .
Results: We identi ﬁed 13 variants in PKD1; two frameshifts,
seven missense changes (2 novel), and four nonsense mutations
(2 novel). Each PKD1 variant was identi ﬁed in a single family, and
one family had 2 linked variants. A PKD2 splice site mutation, was
identi ﬁed in two unrelated probands. For two patients no
causative variant was identi ﬁed in known ADPKD candidate genes.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that laborious long-range
PCRs of PKD1 and PKD2 may be replaced by HTS and stringent
data analysis reducing cost and analysis time.
Funding: The Malta NGS Project was supported by the R&I
programme of 2012 through the Malta Council for Science andTechnology. M. Cini Masini is funded through a Tertiary EducationScholarship Scheme.
M. Cini Masini: None. F. Borg Carbott: None. R. Attard: None.
A. Pleven: None. K. Cassar: None. R.A. Callus: None. A. Borg
Cauchi: None. V. Said Conti: None. S. Bezzina Wettinger: None.
R. Farrugia: None.
P03.013.A Association between cortisol de ﬁciency and life
threatening arrhythmia
Afaf Alsubhi
1, Mohammed Aldubayee2, Wafaa Eyaid1
1Department of Pediatrics, Genetics division, King AbdulAziz Medical
City, RIYADH, Saudi Arabia,2Department of Pediatrics, King Abdullah
Specialized Children ’s Hospital (KASCH), RIYADH, Saudi Arabia.
A 5 days old full term baby girl was admitted to our pediatric
intensive care unit with non ketotic hypoglycemia, abnormalmovement along with bradycardia and progressive prolongationof the QT interval. The Whole exome sequencing showed likely
pathogenic variant in the TBX19 gene that is associated with
congenital isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone de ﬁciency that
was proven biochemically. She was treated with hydrocortisoneand showed dramatic improvement of her QT interval length.
After discharge, she lost follow up. She was readmitted again at
the age of 16 months with similar symptoms that improved afterrestarting hydrocortisone therapy with improvement of the EKG
ﬁndings and bradycardia. In the literature there is one case report
of an adult patient with similar association between centralcortisol de ﬁciency and life-threatening arrhythmia.Hypoglycemiaper se does not cause a prolonged QT interval; this indicates that
cortisol de ﬁciency might be the cause of this patient presentation.
A. Alsubhi: None. M. Aldubayee: None. W. Eyaid: None.
P03.014.B A novel homozygous missense variant in PTPN2
associated with early onset Crohn ’s disease and growth failure
Tony Yammine , Alain Chebly, Nabiha Salem, Rita Esber, Mirna
Souaid, Chantal Farra
Medical Genetics Unit, Beirut, Lebanon.
Crohn ’s disease (CD) is a chronic idiopathic in ﬂammatory bowel
disease that can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Major
manifestations are diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss with orwithout fever. CD is a multifactorial disorder where genetic factorsare important players. Several candidate loci or genes including
PTPN2 (#MIM 176887) have been reportedly associated with CD.
PTPN2 is a major contributor in controlling in ﬂammatory signaling
cascades and maintaining intestinal barrier functions. We con-ducted whole-exome sequencing in a 9-year-old Lebanese girl
with a CD onset at 13 months and in both her asymptomatic
parents. Analysis detected a novel homozygous variant in PTPN2:c.359C>T, p.(Ser120Leu) in the patient, while both her parents
were heterozygous for the variant. c.359C>T is located in the
protein tyrosine phosphatase domain within a highly conservedamino acid. It is classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic according to the
ACMG criteria, deleterious by SIFT and disease causing by
Mutation Taster. In order to evaluate the hypothetical functional
consequences of the identi ﬁed variant, we performed a quanti-
tative expression analysis of PTPN2 in blood tissues from thepatient, her parents and two healthy controls. An almost absent
PTPN2 expression was noted in the patient compared to her
parents and the controls, suggesting a functional PTPN2 impair-ment caused by c.359C>T. This is the ﬁrst time, a homozygous
PTPN2 variant is associated with an early onset CD. Further reports
with PTPN2 gene variants would enable a better delineation of themolecular basis of CD.
T. Yammine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Saint Joseph University. A. Chebly: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. N. Salem: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. R.
Esber: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Saint Joseph
University. M. Souaid: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. C. Farra: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Saint Joseph University, Hotel Dieu de
France.
P03.015.C Spectrum of CFTR
variants in patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis revealed in Western Siberian Ugra region (Russia)
Maxim Donnikov1,2, Vitaly Mescheryakov1, Dmitry Lozhkin2, Lev
Kolbasin2, Andrey Glotov3, Oleg Glotov4, Irina Urvantseva5, Lyudmila
Kovalenko1
1Medical Institute of Surgut State University, Surgut, Russian
Federation,2Medical Genetics Counseling Service of Diagnostics
and Cardiovascular Surgery Center (Cardiology Clinic) of KHMAO-
Ugra, Surgut, Russian Federation,3Department of Genomic Medicine,
D. O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology andReproduction, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,4City Hospital
40, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,5Diagnostics andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
144
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Cardiovascular Surgery Center (Cardiology Clinic) of KHMAO-Ugra,
Surgut, Russian Federation.
Introduction: During the era of cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) target therapy
knowing population structure of CFTR variants is of immense
need. Applying battery of molecular genetics tests in routine
practice of regional genetics laboratory allowed to perform
extensive analysis of CFTR variants in regional CF patients.
Materials and methods: gDNA obtained from 57 CF patients
(1998-2020 yob) from regional CF registry by column extraction;
HRMA performed using Bio-Rad software; MLPA and Sanger
sequencing performed on GenomeLab GeXP (Beckman-Coulter);NGS performed on MiSeq using NimbleGen SeqCap_EZ_CysFib kit.
Results: Total of 117 CFTR alleles were revealed (see Table),
among them 6 major regional mutations covering 69.2% of all
alleles, with most frequent [delta]F508 variant. 28 variants ofdifferent types (mostly missense and nonsense) with frequency of
0.9% each (found only in 1 patient each) comprise 23.9% of all
alleles. If classi ﬁed by type of nucleotide sequence change, the
spectrum contains 50.4% of ins/del without frameshift mutations([delta]F508 as representative); 20.5% of missense variants (E92K);
9.4% nonsense (S466X); 9.4% ins/del with frameshift (1677delTA);
5.1% large rearrangements (dele2,3); 3.4% VUCS; 1.7% splicingdefects.
Conclusions: If ranged, CFTR variants spectrum from regional
CF cases resembles that of common Russian alleles for 5 major
variants (except R1066C, listed in Table), while sharing only 2major mutations with Europe ([delta]F508, N1303K). High pre-
valence of rare variants dictates the necessity of sequencing.
List of CFTR variants in CF patients from Ugra
CFTR variant calling (HGVS;
legacy)type of variant n =
117%
1 c.1521_1523delCTT ([delta]
F508)del w/o
frameshift57 48.7
2 c.54-5940_273
+10250del21kb
(CFTRdele2,3)large
rearrangement6 5.1
3 c.1545_1546delTA
(1677delTA)del w/
frameshift6 5.1
4 c.274G>A (E92K) missense;
splicing defect5 4.3
5 c.3196C>T (R1066C) missense 4 3.4
6 c.3909C>G (N1303K) missense 3 2.6
7 c.412_413insACT (L138ins) ins w/o
frameshift2 1.7
8 c.1397C>G (S466X)* nonsense 2 1.7
9 c.1399C>T (R1070Q)* missense 2 1.7
10 c.3209G>A (L467F) VUCS 2 1.7
11-38 28 variants (each 0,9%) all 28 23.9
M. Donnikov: None. V. Mescheryakov: None. D. Lozhkin:
None. L. Kolbasin: None. A. Glotov: None. O. Glotov: None. I.
Urvantseva: None. L. Kovalenko: None.
P03.017.A Frequnecy of CFTR mutations in a Romanian cohort
of individuals with cystic ﬁbrosis
Georgiana Ilie1, Viorica Radoi2,3, Andreea Ionescu4, Iuliana Chelu4,
Cristina Dragomir4, Gratiela Chelu4, Mihaela Popa4, Bianca Basan-
giu4, Andra Perioc4, Oana Istrate4, Traian Grozescu2, Paul Iordache5,
Lucian Pop3, Natalia Cucu6, Camil Laurentiu Bohiltea2,3, Radu-Ioan
Ursu2,3,41”Carol Davila ”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest,
Romania,2”Carol Davila ”University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Department of Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania,3National
Institute for Mother and Child Health ”Alessandrescu-Rusescu ”,
Bucharest, Romania,4Synevo Romania, Department of Medical
Genetics, Chiajna, Romania,5”Carol Davila ”University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Department of Epidemiology, Bucharest, Romania,
6University of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Department of Genetics,
Bucharest, Romania.
Background: Cystic ﬁbrosis is one the most common autosomal-
recessive genetic disorders in the Caucasian population, caused byhomozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the CFTRgene (on the long arm of chromosome 7).
Material. Methods: The study group includes 74 patients with
the clinical diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis and 132 healthy relatives of
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis (carrier screening testing). The testing
method was PCR using a panel including the most common 38
mutations in CFTR gene in the European population and the 5T-7Tallele polymorphism.
Results : All the patients with the clinical diagnosis of cystic
ﬁbrosis were positive for mutations in the CFTR gene, in a
homozygous or in a heterozigous compound state. Of all thesepacients, 56.75% (42/74) had the frameshift deltaF508 mutation,followed by other common mutations in the studied group, such
as the G551D, the R553X or the R1158X variants. 57 out of the
total of 132 suspected healthy carriers (43.2%) were positive forCFTR mutations in a heterozygous status. The most prevalent
mutation was in this case also the deltaF508 genetic variant. Rarer
mutations, such as the W1282X and the c.711 +1G>A variants,
were detected in 1 patient each.
Conclusions : The results of the study are concordant with the
reports in literature regarding the prevalence of CFTR mutations in
the Eastern-European population. Genetic testing for CFTRmutations is important not only for the genetic diagnosis of thedisease, but also for the identi ﬁcation of heterozygous carriers or
individuals at risk of passing the disease on.
G. Ilie: None. V. Radoi: None. A. Ionescu: None. I. Chelu: None.
C. Dragomir: None. G. Chelu: None. M. Popa: None. B. Basangiu:
None. A. Perioc: None. O. Istrate: None. T. Grozescu: None. P.
Iordache: None. L. Pop: None. N. Cucu: None. C. Bohiltea: None.
R. Ursu: None.
P03.018.B Late diagnosisof cystic ﬁbrosisin a 59-year-old
patient
Elena Zhekaite
1, Elena Amelina2, Elena Kondratyeva1, Tagui Adyan1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Scienti ﬁc Research Institute of Pulmonology of the Federal Medical
and Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: According to Russian CF Patient Registry 2018 the
average age of CF patients in Russia was 12.8 ± 9.6 years, the
average age of diagnosis - 3.1 ± 6.1 years (4.1month in Europe
according to European Cystic Fibrosis Society Patient Registry2016). Few patients in Russia are over 55 years of age.
Materials and methods: The patient had atypical clinical
symptoms since childhood (chronic sinusitis mostly, polypotomy
at the age of 17). For the last 15 years there were complaints ofpersistent cough, exacerbations of chronic bronchitis about 2
times a year. 3 years ago bronchiectasis were detected. Patient has
no children, his profession - a worker at a steel plant. Physicalexamination revealed dyspnea, low BMI (19.2 kg/m2), severebronchial obstruction (FVC 54%, FEV1 33%), bilateral bronchiec-
tasis on CT.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
145
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: Sweat test (Nanoduct) was performed - conductivity
83mmol/l. DNA diagnostics in the gene СFTR identi ﬁed 2
pathogenic variants - [c.1521_1523delCTT]; [c.413_415dupTAC].
Conclusions: Our clinical case shows that the patients with
"mild" CFTR genotype can be diagnosed at any age, patients withbronchiectasis, chronic polysinusitis should be tested for CF.
E. Zhekaite: None. E. Amelina: None. E. Kondratyeva: None. T.
Adyan: None.
P03.019.C Familial case of Cystic Fibrosis with genotype-
phenotype correlations
Tinatin Tkemaladze1,2,3,Mariam Ghughunishvili4,5, Eka Kvarats-
khelia1,5, Elene Abzianidze1, Volha Skrahina3, Arndt Rolfs3,6,7
1Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Tbilisi State Medical
University, Tbilisi, Georgia,2G. Zhvania Pediatric Academic Clinic,
Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,3Centogene GmbH,
Rostock, Germany,4G.Zhvania Pediatric Academic Clinic, Tbilisi State
Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,5Bakhutashvili Institute of Medical
Biotechnology, Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,
6University Rostock, Medical Faculty, Rostock, Germany,7Arcensus
GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
Introduction : Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common recessive
condition in Caucasians. Clinical expression of the disease isheterogeneous and no speci ﬁc genotype-phenotype correlation
had been observed. Certain CFTR variants are de ﬁned as “CF”
alleles causing CF phenotype, and other alleles are de ﬁned as “risk
factor ”alleles, causing CBAVD, pancreatitis and atypical CF.
Case report : Here we describe a familial case of CF with three
children: 11 yo and 8 yo siblings with classical CF phenotype had
positive NBS and elevated sweat chloride test results. In younger 6
yo sibling NBS and sweat chloride test results were normal andshe only had two episodes of airway infections and small weight.
Results :CFTR sequencing was performed for all three siblings:
two older siblings with classical CF phenotype had 1677delTA andI1234V variants (both classi ﬁed as “CF”alleles), whereas younger
sibling had 1677delTA and L997F variants (classi ﬁed as “CF”and
“risk factor ”alleles respectively). When the healthy parents ’
samples were analyzed the father turned out to have oneheterozygous 1677delTA allele, and the mother had two variants- L997F and I1234V (classi ﬁed as “risk factor ”and “CF”alleles
respectively). Currently mother is 40 yo and she is completely
healthy.
Conclusion : To date none of the above-mentioned combina-
tion of alleles detected in the siblings and the mother are
described in the cftr2.org database. We propose that combinationof“CF”allele and “risk factor ”allele does not cause CF and proper
classi ﬁcation of variants is crucial for correct interpretation and
diagnosis of the condition.
T. Tkemaladze: None. M. Ghughunishvili: None. E. Kvarats-
khelia: None. E. Abzianidze: None. V. Skrahina: None. A. Rolfs:
None.
P03.020.D Unusual presentation of CF in an infant
Dario Portillo-Miño , Efren Esteban Cerón-Muñoz
Hospital Infantil Los Angeles, Pasto, Colombia.
Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal
recessive, genetic condition in Caucasians, occurring in 1 of every2,000 to 3,000 live births. Hepatic abnormalities in patients with CFhave usually been reported in about 30-40% of the children. Amultisystemic, progressive, and lethal disease is distinguished by
the relationship of several organic components, mainly; pulmon-
ary, pancreatic, and gastrointestinal.
Materials and methods: It is was the research in the clinic
history, laboratory test, and molecular studies for the case.Besides, the search of the literature in PubMed, Google Scholar,
Science Direct, LILACS, and Scielo. The case report is based on the
CARE 2016 guideline.
Results: This case report attempts an approach to the clinical
ﬁndings of hepatobiliary manifestations in CF. An infant was less
than 1-month-old with an insidious clinical picture that debut with
cholestasis and jaundice. The CFTR gene analysis results withmutation c.2353C>T (transition of cytosine by thiamin at position2353 of cDNA), p.Arg785* (in the protein produces a change of
arginine by stop codon), in a homozygous state, this change has
been reported in the literature as a pathogenic change related toCF.
Discussion/Conclusion: CF is associated with liver involvement
around 30%. In children, hepatobiliary symptoms occur at pubertywhen damage to the liver system is in advanced stages. Theatypical presentation of CF with liver involvement is very rare and
lethal in an infant. Understanding the different form of CF, it is
essential for early diagnosis and to achieve integral management.
D. Portillo-Miño: None. E. Cerón-Muñoz: None.
P03.022.B Exome sequencing implicates heterozygous variant
inDSTYK in functional urinary bladder disturbance
Clara Vidic
1, Marcin Zaniew2, Holger Thiele3, Janine Altmüller3,
Heiko Reutter1,4, Alina C. Hilger1,5
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Department of Pediatrics, University of Zielona Góra, Zielona Góra,
Poland,3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,4Department of Neonatology and Pediatric
Intensive Care, Children ’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,5Department of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Introduction: DSTYK encodes dual serine/threonine and tyrosine
protein kinase. DSTYK has been associated with autosomal
dominant congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tractand with autosomal-recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia. Here
we report a father and his two dizygotic twin sons with a novel,
heterozygous variant in DSTYK , all presenting with voiding
dysfunction due to functional urinary bladder disturbance.
Materials and Methods: We performed whole exome sequen-
cing of the family. All three presenting clinically with hesitancy,abnormal voiding pattern and night incontinence till adolescence.In the sons cystoscopy excluded urethral valves but showed
hypertrophy of the bladder neck and trabeculated bladder.
Additionally, both sons were diagnosed with epilepsy. Based onthe pedigree, ﬁltering of exome data focused on rare (MAF <
0.01%), autosomal-dominant variants, predicted to be deleterious,
residing in highly conserved regions of the exome. Validation of
prioritized variants was performed using Sanger sequencing.
Results: We identi ﬁed a novel, heterozygous c.271C>A (p.
Leu91Met) variant in DSTYK segregating with the disease. The amino
acid is highly conserved. Rated deleterious by 3 different prediction
programs (SIFT, PolyPhen, Mutatio nTaster) and with a CADD score of
24.5, this variant was prioritized as likely disease causing.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, we describe the
ﬁrst familial case with autosomal dominant inherited variants in
DSTYK and speci ﬁc functional bladder outlet obstruction and
epilepsy. Acknowledgements: C.V. is supported by BONFOR grant
O-149.0133. A.C.H. is supported by BONFOR grant O-149.0123.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
146
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608C. Vidic: None. M. Zaniew: None. H. Thiele: None. J. Altmüller:
None. H. Reutter: None. A.C. Hilger: None.
P03.024.D Polymorphisms of glutathione synthetase gene are
associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes and
hyperglycemia
Iuliia Azarova , Elena Klyosova, Ekaterina Shkurat, Alexey Polonikov
Kursk State Medical University, Kursk, Russian Federation.
Background: The present study investigated whether single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in glutathione synthetase ( GSS)
gene, antioxidant enzyme involved in glutathione metabolism,
contribute to type 2 diabetes (T2D) susceptibility.
Methods: A total of 3198 unrelated Russian subjects including
1572 T2D patients and 1626 sex- and age matched healthy
subjects were enrolled for the study. Three common tagSNPs such
as rs13041792, rs1801310 and rs6088660 of GSS were genotyped
using the MassArray System. Plasma glutathione and reactiveoxygen species (ROS) levels of study participants were measured
byﬂuorometric and colorimetric assays, respectively.
Results: We found that SNP rs13041792 at the GSS gene is
associated with an increased risk of T2D (OR 1.24, 95%CI 1.06-1.44,
P=0.027). A GSS haplotype rs1801310G-rs6088660C-rs13041792A
(OR 1.26, 95CI 1.08-1.47, P
global=0.039) showed a signi ﬁcant
association with T2D risk. Genotype rs13041792-A/A was asso-ciated with increased levels of fasting blood glucose (FBG) in
entire group of T2D patients (P =0.032) and diabetic males (P =
0.026). Meanwhile, genotype rs1801310-A/A was associated withdecreased levels of total glutathione in plasma in diabetic females(P=0.039). Genotype rs6088660-T/T showed an association with
decreased levels of FBG in males (P =0.007) and decreased levels
of ROS in females (P =0.039).
Conclusion: We found for the ﬁrst time that genetic
polymorphisms at GSS gene are associated with susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes and related hyperglycemia through the mechan-isms involving decreased antioxidant defense and increasedproduction of reactive oxygen species. The study was supported
by Russian Science Foundation ( №20-15-00227).
I. Azarova: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collabora-
tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Signi ﬁcant; Russian Science Foundation. E. Klyosova: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Russian Science Foundation. E. Shkurat: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Russian ScienceFoundation. A. Polonikov: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Russian Science Foundation.
P03.025.A Clinical utility of genetic testing in early-onset
kidney disease: seven genes are the main players
Andrea Domingo Gallego
1, Marc Pybus1, Gemma Bullich2,1, Mónica
Furlano1, Laia Ejarque-Vila1, Laura Lorente Grandoso1, Patricia Ruiz1,
Gloria Fraga3, Mercedes López González4, Juan Alberto Piñero
Fernández5, Lidia Rodríguez Peña5, Isabel Llano Rivas6, Raquel
Sáez7, Anna Bujons-Tur1, Gema Ariceta4, Lluis Guirado1, Roser Torra1,
Elisabet Ars1
1Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain,2Centre Nacional d ’Anàlisi
Genòmica (CNAG)-Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona,Spain,3Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,4Hospital Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,5Hospital Universitario
Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,6Hospital Universitario Cruces,
Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain,7Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian,
Spain.
Background: Inherited kidney diseases are one of the leading
causes of chronic kidney disease (CKD) that manifests before the
age of 30 years. Precise clinical diagnosis of early-onset CKD iscomplicated due to the high phenotypic overlap, but genetictesting is a powerful diagnostic tool. We aimed to develop a
genetic testing strategy to maximize the diagnostic yield for
patients presenting with early-onset CKD and to determine theprevalence of the main causative genes.
Methods: We performed genetic testing of 460 patients with
early-onset CKD of suspected monogenic cause using next-
generation sequencing of a custom-designed kidney diseasegene panel in addition to targeted screening for c.428dupC MUC1 .
Results: We achieved a global diagnostic yield of 65% (300/
460), which varied depending on the clinical diagnostic group.Among the 300 genetically diagnosed patients, the clinicaldiagnosis was con ﬁrmed in 77%, a speci ﬁc diagnosis within a
clinical diagnostic group was identi ﬁed in 15%, and 7% of cases
were reclassi ﬁed. Of the 64 causative genes identi ﬁed in our
cohort, seven ( COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5, HNF1B, PKD1, PKD2 , and
PKHD1 ) accounted for 66% (198/300) of the genetically diagnosed
patients.
Conclusions: Two-thirds of patients with early-onset CKD in this
cohort had a genetic cause. Just seven genes were responsible for
the majority of diagnoses. Establishing a genetic diagnosis is
crucial to de ﬁne the precise etiology of CKD, which allows
accurate genetic counseling and improved patient management.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII)/FEDER funds: PI15/
01824, PI16/01998, PI18/00362, PI19/01633, RETIC REDINREN
RD16/0009/0019, and Plataforma ISCIII Biobancos PT20/00196.
A. Domingo Gallego: None. M. Pybus: None. G. Bullich: None.
M. Furlano: None. L. Ejarque-Vila: None. L. Lorente Grandoso:
None. P. Ruiz: None. G. Fraga: None. M. López González: None.
J. Piñero Fernández: None. L. Rodríguez Peña: None. I. Llano
Rivas: None. R. Sáez: None. A. Bujons-Tur: None. G. Ariceta:
None. L. Guirado: None. R. Torra: None. E. Ars: None.
P03.026.B iPSC as a genetic model for investigating NAFLD
risk variants
Antonio Munoz
1, Yu-Lin Kuang1, Gilbert Nalula1, Elizabeth Theusch1,
Gabriela Sanchez2, Carlos Iribarren2, Ronald M. Krauss1, Aras N.
Mattis3, Marisa W. Medina1
1Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA,2Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Oakland, CA, USA,3Department of Pathology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Introduction: Current cellular genetic models for Non-Alcoholic
Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) have limitations that prevent the
scalable investigation of gene variants. Missense variants rs738409(I148M) in PNPLA3 (palatin like phospholipase domain containing
protein 3) and rs58542926 (E167K) in TM6SF2 (transmembrane 6
superfamily member 2) increase hepatocyte intracellular lipid
accumulation and are robustly associated with NAFLD. The goal ofthis study was to assess whether undifferentiated induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be used to model the effect of
these two NAFLD variants on intracellular lipid accumulation.
Materials and Methods: PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 expression were
conﬁrmed in iPSCs from individuals of European ancestry carrying
PNPLA3 and/or TM6SF2 variant alleles (n =10) and non-carriers (nAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
147
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608=10). Cells were exposed to oleate (0-100μM) or BSA control for
24hrs, and neutral lipids were stained with Nile red, visualized by
ﬂuorescence microscopy, and quanti ﬁed by FACS.
Results: Oleate incubation led to a dose-dependent increase in
intracellular lipids, rising 40 ± 18% (mean ± SD) in the oleate-treated cells compared to control-treated cells (p =0.001, n =20).
Notably, the increase was greater in TM6SF2 and/or PNPLA3 variant
carriers (48 ± 16%) compared to non-carriers (24 ± 8 %), p =0.002.
Even in BSA-treated cells, there was a trend of elevated lipid levelsin carriers compared to non-carriers (p =0.25).
Conclusion: Greater oleate-induced increases of intracellular
lipids in iPSCs with the NAFLD risk alleles indicate thatundifferentiated iPSCs are a reasonable, more ef ﬁcient substitute
for hepatocytes when studying cellular lipid accumulation and an
informative cellular model for the identi ﬁcation and functionaliza-
tion of NAFLD genetic risk variants. Funding Sources:
P50GM115318, R01HL139902, P30DK026743
A. Munoz: None. Y. Kuang: None. G. Nalula: None. E. Theusch:
None. G. Sanchez: None. C. Iribarren: None. R.M. Krauss: None.
A.N. Mattis: None. M.W. Medina: None.
P03.028.D Genetic heterogeneity of megacystis-microcolon-
intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
Martin Schwarz
1, Marcela Malíková1, Júlia Martinková1, Petra
Cibulková2, Renáta Michalovská3, Markéta Havlovicová1, Milan
Macek, jr1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Praha, Czech Republic,
2Agel Laboratories - Laborato ře AGEL a.s., Nový Ji čín, Czech Republic,
3GHC Genetics s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome (MMIHS; MIM 249210) is a rare multisystem syndromewhere its name re ﬂects most commonly affected organs. Although
ACTG2, LMOD1, MYH11, MYL9, MYLK have been associated with the
disease, 55% of all cases remain undiagnosed by genetic testing.Hereby, we report two additional cases with pathogenic variantsinACTG2 , and a case where a pathogenic variant in KCNMA1 was
found.
Materials and Methods: Next generation sequencing (NGS)
was performed. Sanger sequencing was used to verify NGS resultsand determine the segregation of the presumably pathogenic
variants in available ﬁrst degree relatives.
Results: Two previously described de novo heterozygous
pathogenic variants in the ACTG2 /(c.119G>A p.(Arg40His) and
c.770G>A (p.Arg257His)/ where detected. A de novo heterozygous
Class 4 variant c.1132G>A (p.Gly375Arg) was detected in theKCNMA1 gene.
Conclusions: Only 47 patients with ACTG2 related MMIHS have
been reported thus far. We identi ﬁed another two cases which will
contribute to the better understanding of this heterogeneousdisorder. Variants in KCNMA1 have also been associated with
Liang-Wang multiple malformation syndrome (LIWAS;
MIM:618729), where available literature is unfortunately sparse.
Previously reported cases with LIWAS bearing the same variant,have among other pathognomonic features also megacystis andimpaired bowel motility. Clinical presentation of LIWAS in the
neonatal period could be similar to MMIHS with bowel and urinary
bladder problems being dominant clinical signs. Therefore, LIWASshould be considered in the differential diagnosis of MMIHS, in
particular during early childhood.
Supported by MH CZ - DRO, Motol University Hospital, Prague,
Czech Republic 00064203.M. Schwarz: None. M. Malíková: None. J. Martinková: None.
P. Cibulková: None. R. Michalovská: None. M. Havlovicová:
None. M. Macek, jr: None.
P03.030.B Discovery of novel miRNA markers for pituitary
neuroendocrine tumour
Helvijs Niedra
1, Raitis Peculis1, Ilze Konrade2,3, Inga Balcere2,3, Mihails
Romanovs2,3, Liva Steina4, Janis Stukens4, Jelizaveta Sokolovska5,
Janis Klovins1,Vita Rovite1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study centre, Riga, Latvia,2Riga
East Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia,3Riga Stradins
University, Riga, Latvia,4Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital,
Riga, Latvia,5University of Latvia Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia.
Introduction: Recently plasma miRNAs have been studied as
biomarkers in various tumors including pituitary neuroendocrine
tumors (PitNETs). The identi ﬁcation of PitNET derived miRNAs in
plasma remains challenging due to tumor volume and miRNAdilution within blood. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study that
used the NGS approach to characterize circulating miRNAs in
plasma acquired from Bilateral petrosal sinus sampling (BIPSS) - agold standard in diagnosis of ACTH secreting PitNETs.
Materials and Methods: We sequenced plasma miRNA
samples acquired from sinistral and dextral sides of sinus petrosusinferior and complementary plasma from peripheral blood (beforeCRH administration, 5 and 15 minutes after stimulation).
Results: The highest amount of differentially expressed miRNAs
was observed 5 minutes after CRH stimulation (20 upregulated, 14downregulated). The highest amount of ACTH was released in thesinistral side during the 5th minute after the stimulation by CRH. In
the plasma of sinistral side at the 5th minute we identi ﬁed two
miRNAs: hsa-miR-7-5p and hsa-miR-375-3p that were highlyupregulated compared to peripheral blood. Using clustering
analysis, we were able to distinguish plasma samples acquired
from BIPSS and blood plasma, indicating that the miRNA fractioncharacterized in this study has potentially PitNET borne origin.
Conclusions: Here we provide the ﬁrst insight into the
landscape of circulating miRNAs in close proximity to PitNET.
The data indicates that ACTH secreting PitNET releases twocirculating miRNAs upon stimulation with CRH (hsa-mir-7-5p, hsa-mir-375-3p) alongside with ACTH implying the further studies of
these miRNA as diagnostic markers.
H. Niedra: None. R. Peculis: None. I. Konrade: None. I. Balcere:
None. M. Romanovs: None. L. Steina: None. J. Stukens: None. J.
Sokolovska: None. J. Klovins: None. V. Rovite: None.
P03.031.C GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A variant analysis in
suspected MODY patients
Zivile Zemeckiene , Marius Sukys, Rimvydas Jonikas, Inga Nasvy-
tiene, Inga Valanciute, Inga Poceviciene, Rasa Ugenskiene
The Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kauno
Klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an
inherited form of diabetes mellitus which is caused by pathogenicvariants in one of 14 known genes, mostly in GCK,HNF1A and
HNF4A . A correct MODY diagnosis might change the treatment
and reduce the risk of diabetic complications. In this study we
analysed GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes in Lithuanian patients,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
148
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608consulted for MODY in The Hospital of Lithuanian University of
Health Sciences Kauno Klinikos.
Materials and Methods: We performed Sanger sequencing of
GCK,HNF1A and HNF4A genes for 77 adults (over 18 years) with
suspected MODY during 2018-2020.
Results: For nine patients causative/likely causative variants
were determined. Four patients had heterozygous variants
previously reported as pathogenic (NM_000162.3( GCK):c.234C>G,
NM_000162.3 (GCK ):c.703A>G (two patients), NM_000545.6
(HNF1A ):c.493T>C). The other variants were novel. Heterozygous
GCK variant c.471_473del was detected in two patients from the
same family with persistent hyperglycaemia. Variant causesdeletion of amino acid (p.Glu157del) located in an importantenzyme domain. Duplication of 19 nucleotides c.1745_1763dup in
HNF1A was identi ﬁed in patient with previously diagnosed
diabetes. This variant creates frameshift with premature termina-tion codon (p.Thr589ProfsTer66) which is known mechanism of
MODY. Heterozygous HNF4A variant c.704G>T was found in two
unrelated patients with previously diagnosed diabetes and familyhistory. This variant changes amino acid (p.Arg235Ile) in theconservative ligand binding protein domain and might affect
protein structure. All three novel variants were evaluated as likely
pathogenic.
Conclusions: Six different pathogenic/likely pathogenic var-
iants were determined in nine patients with suspected MODY
diabetes. Three of the variants were novel.
Z. Zemeckiene: None. M. Sukys: None. R. Jonikas: None. I.
Nasvytiene: None. I. Valanciute: None. I. Poceviciene: None. R.
Ugenskiene: None.
P03.033.A Clinical description of a new type of mucopolysac-
charidosis in Yakutia
Saina Novgorodova
1, Aytalina Sukhomyasova1, Elizabeth Guri-
nova2, Vera Argunova2, Lena Nikolaeva3, Nadezhda Maximova1
1Research Laboratory "Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics" of
the Medical Institute NEFU, Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2Republican
hospital №1-National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federa-
tion,3Republican Hospital No. 1-National Center of Medicine,
Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Since 2005, clinical symptoms associated with
mucopolysaccharidosis-plus have been recorded in Yakut patients;
previously undescribed storage disease with an autosomal-recessive type of inheritance was suspected [Gurinova E.E. 2014].
In 2017, a molecular genetic cause of a new rare autosomal-
recessive syndrome in the Yakut and Turkish populations wasidenti ﬁed, clinically similar to other types of mucopolysacchar-
idosis, but has other features of the course, such as congenital
heart defects, renal and hematopoietic disorders leading to infant
mortality [Kondo et al., 2017; Dursun et al., 2017; Vasilev et al.,2020]. The new disease was added into the McCusick internationaldatabase under the OMIM number # 617303 and named
mucopolysaccharidosis-plus syndrome (MPS-PS). In the Yakut
and Turkish populations, the same mutation was found in theVPS33A gene (NM_022916.4: c.1492C> T, NP_075067.2: p.Arg498Trp, subsequently referred to as p.R498W)]. In this thesis,
we present brief clinical features of 17 patients with MPS-PS in
Yakutia. All children were born in Yakut families from youngparents, not in consanguineous marriage. 9 children were born
from the second pregnancy and later pregnancies. In 4 cases,
pregnancy was complicated by the miscarriage threat; accordingto ultrasound data, no gestation pathology was detected. Acharacteristic feature of MPS-PS is early debut and early infant
mortality, multisystem organ damage - lungs, kidneys (secondarynephrotic syndrome, severe proteinuria 2-3 g/day, nephromegaly),
heart (septal heart disease, severe course), central nervous system
and hematopoietic disorders (severe anemia requiring blood
transfusion, coagulopathy with hemorrhagic syndrome), theactivity of lysosomal hydrolases and urinary glucosaminoglycanstest are uninformative.
S. Novgorodova: None. A. Sukhomyasova: None. E. Gurinova:
None. V. Argunova: None. L. Nikolaeva: None. N. Maximova:
None.
P03.035.C A clinical case of patient with cholestatic liver
disease due to mutations of the MYO5B
Tamara Yurievna Lesnichenko
1, Natalia Alexandrovna Semenova2,
Olga Nikolaevna Ivanova2, Elena Anatolievna Kamenec2, Ekaterina
Yurievna Zakharova2
1Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Profes-
sional Education "Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Profes-sional Education" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the RussianFederation, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Federal State Budgetary
Scienti ﬁc Institution "Research Centre for Medical Genetics", Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Defects in MYO5B gene, on which bile salt export
pump depends to localize to the canalicular hepatocellularmembrane usually cause diarrh ea 2, with microvillus atrophy
(OMIM # 251850) but also may result in liver disease without
enteropathy. It characterized by low-GGT-cholestasis variable
severity, hepatomegaly, normal or mildly elevatedtransaminases.
Materials and Methods: We present a female patient at the
age of 2y4m with isolated cholestasis. Her infantile period was
normal. The disease manifested by high temperature, hepatome-galy, acholic stools. Serum clinical laboratory tests showed
cholestasis with normal GGT activity, conjugated hyperbilirubine-
mia 30mmol/l, normal transaminase levels, increased serumalkaline phosphatase 587E/l, hypercholesterolemia 8,03mmol/l.Deﬁciency of lysosomal acid lipase was excluded by an enzyme
test. NGS was used to analyze 52 genes responsible for hereditary
diseases with cholestasis. Two nucleotide variants in MYO5B gene
were detected.
Results: We identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous frameshift
duplication c.1604_1610dupGCCAGCA p.His537GlnfsTer28.
Another heterozygous variant c.1201C>T (p.Arg401Cysrs761492029), revealed in the MYO5B gene, described as
pathogenic. Then, we performed Sanger sequencing on the
DNA extracted from the mother, the father and the sister of theproband to analyze the segregation of each genetic variantidenti ﬁed by NGS. Parents and older sibling are healthy and
heterozygous for one or another mutant allele.
Conclusions: Thus, the ﬁndings support the disease-causing
role of novel MYO5B mutation. Many patients with low-GGT-
cholestasis remain genetically undiagnosed. Veri ﬁcation of the
genetic aetiology of cholestasis allows selection of appropriate
treatment strategies, determination of genetic risk and discussionof the necessity of prenatal testing.
T.Y. Lesnichenko: None. N.A. Semenova: None. O.N. Ivanova:
None. E.A. Kamenec: None. E.Y. Zakharova: None.
P03.036.D Identi ﬁcation of gene variants in Indonesian
Hirschsprung disease patients using whole exome sequencing
Gunadi
1, Alvin Santoso Kalim1, Marcellus1, Dyah Ayu Puspitarani1,
Kristy Iskandar2, Galuh Dyah Nur Astuti3,4Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
149
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Pediatric Surgery Division, Department of Surgery/Genetics Working
Group, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas
Gadjah Mada/Dr. Sardjito Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia,2Depart-
ment of Child Health/Genetics Working Group, Faculty of Medicine,Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/Dr. SardjitoHospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia,
3Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Division
of Human Genetics, Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty ofMedicine, Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia.
Introduction: Hirschsprung ’s disease (HSCR) is a complex genetic
disorder with at least 24 genes have been identi ﬁed for the
pathogenesis of HSCR. However, they only contributed to 20% ofHSCR cases. We aimed to further elucidate the genetic basis of
HSCR in Indonesia.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed in 20 sporadic isolated HSCR patients and four non-
HSCR subjects as controls. We excluded variants presented in
controls, followed by in silico prediction tools and population allele
frequency databases to select rare variants. We determined theminor allele frequency (MAF) using gnomAD (MAF < 0.1%).
Results: We involved 11 (55%) males and 9 (45%) females. We
identi ﬁed several candidate genes, including PTPN13, UBR4, ECE1,
GDNDF, ASTN1, CELSR3, XYLT1, SORL1 and FAT1 . One of them, a
novel frameshift variant in PTPN13 gene (c.5763delT; p.Tyr1921Ter)
which may lead to loss of function on protein level. Moreover, we
also identi ﬁed compound heterozygous variants in MUTYH gene:
theﬁrst variant, a known protein truncating variant associated
with colorectal cancer, c.1354G>T; p.Glu452* and the second
variant is a novel c.116C>T; p.Ala39Val variant. We also found co-mutation of UBR4 gene (c.5497G>A; p.Gly1833Arg) and novel
variant of GDNF gene (c.349G>A; p.Gly117Ser) in one patient.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed several novel genes and variants
that might contribute to the pathogenesis of HSCR. Our studyfurther con ﬁrms the complex network during the enteric nervous
system development and HSCR pathogenesis. This study was
funded by the World Class Research grant (Ministry of Research
and Technology/National Research and Innovation Agency,Indonesia
Gunadi: None. A. Kalim: None. .. Marcellus: None. D.
Puspitarani: None. K. Iskandar: None. G. Astuti: None.
P03.037.A A case of familial brain-lung-thyroid syndrome due
to a NKX2.1 run-on mutation
Federica Baldan
1, Elena Cavaliere1,2, Anna J. Gortan1,2, Nadia
Passon2, Dora Fabbro2, Dario Marin1,2, Myriam Carecchio3, Sara C.
Credendino4, Rosa Gallo4, Paola Cogo1,2,Giuseppe Damante1,2,
Gabriella De Vita4
1University of Udine, Udine, Italy,2Academic Hospital of Udine, Udine,
Italy,3University of Padua, Padua, Italy,4University of Naples, Udine,
Italy.
NKX2.1 is a homeobox gene encoding a tissue-speci ﬁc transcrip-
tion factor able to bind DNA by its homeodomain. NKX2.1expression is fundamental for thyroid, lung and ventral forebraindevelopment and correct maturation. Indeed, loss of function
mutations of this gene cause the ‘brain-lung-thyroid ’syndrome
(BLTs), which is characterized by various combinations of thyroiddysgenesis, infant respiratory distress syndrome, and hyperkinetic
movement disorders, mainly chorea. Here, we describe a familial
case of BLTs due to a NKX2.1 run-on mutation. The proband is aneleven-year-old boy who, at birth, suffered from respiratorydistress associated to pulmonary hypertension. Delayed motor
and speech language milestones were reported. Moreover, hesuffered from frequent upper-respiratory infections, short stature
due to subclinical hypothyroidism, sleep disturbance and learning
difﬁculties. A neurologic assessment revealed generalized chorea
unstable gait and mild hypotonia. The patient ’s mother suffered of
impaired gait and frequents falls, as well as learning disability andsubclinical hypothyroidism. On examination, she presented with
distal choreiform movements in the lower limbs. The patient ’s
aunt and grandmother reported gait imbalance and frequents fallsduring childhood; none of them presented with movementdisorder. Genetic testing for the NKX2.1 gene was performed
and a run-on mutation (c.1204dupT; p.*402Leuext*37) was
identi ﬁed: duplication of the thymine corresponding to the ﬁrst
base of the stop codon causes the changing of the stop codon in aleucine-coding codon. The resulting frameshift generated a tail of
36 additional amino acids at the protein C-terminus. Segregation
analysis con ﬁrmed that all the affected relatives carried the same
genetic variant.
F. Baldan: None. E. Cavaliere: None. A.J. Gortan: None. N.
Passon: None. D. Fabbro: None. D. Marin: None. M. Carecchio:
None. S.C. Credendino: None. R. Gallo: None. P. Cogo: None. G.
Damante: None. G. De Vita: None.
P03.038.B Effects of growth hormone treatment in Noonan
syndrome: correlations with genotype
Diana Miclea
1,2, Yline Capri2, Alain Verloes2
1"Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-
Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania,2Department of Genetics, APHP-
Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France.
Background: In Noonan syndrome(NS), the treatment with
growth hormone(GH) has been carried out in the last decades,
with reported effects on improvement of growth velocity andadult height, however, these data usually included patients with
NS phenotype, only the last few years bringing data about GH
treatment in genotyped NS patients. Aim.To evaluate the effect of
GH treatment according to genotype in patients with NS, by asystematic review of the literature.
Methods: We evaluated auxological, hormonal and imagistic
data before and under GH treatment in patients with geneticallyconﬁrmed NS reported in literature between 2001 and 2020.
Results: We identi ﬁed 21 studies, including data from 336
genotyped patients with NS. Of these, 243patients(72.3%)
presented pathogenic variant for PTPN11 gene, 17patients(5%)
forSOS1 , 15 patients(4.4%) for RAF1 , 9patients(2.6%) for SHOC2 ,
8patients(2.3%) for KRAS , 5patients(1.4%) for BRAF and 2patients
(0.5%) for each of the genes MEK1,SPRED1,HRAS,NRAS and RIT1.
The age of GH treatment initiation was 8.3years. The mean periodof treatment was of 6.7years. The height before GH treatment was
-2.8SD and at the end of GH treatment was of -2.1SD, with a mean
adult height of 165.6cm for males and 155.4cm for females. Thetarget height was -0.6SD. It was not observed a difference ongrowth between the patient categories according to the genes.
Conclusion: This study is the ﬁrst review about the pattern of
growth under GH treatment in genotyped NS and even it wasthought that this pattern is well known, we need more data toconclude the real effect on growth regarding each gene involved
in NS.
D. Miclea: None. Y. Capri: None. A. Verloes: None.
P03.039.C Next generation sequencing in the diagnostic
approach to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Deimante Brazdziunaite
1, Marius Miglinas2, Algirdas Utkus1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
150
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
2Center of Nephrology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Classically, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease (ADPKD) is presented as a common Mendelian disorder
and represent the leading genetic causes of renal disease inadults. It is caused by mutations either in PKD1 orPKD2 . However,
next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers the opportunity to
signi ﬁcantly improve the diagnostic yield in ADPKD. Body .
Introduction of the ﬁrst therapy approved for ADPKD - vasopressin
V2-receptor antagonist (Tolvaptan) - brought more new attentionto this disease. Using European Renal Association-European
Dialysis and Transplant Association Registry, and population
based studies, Willey et al. (2016) indicated that the ADPKD pointprevalence in the EU is <5/10,000. Moreover, disease appears to
be quite genetically heterogeneous. The PKD mutation database
counts more than 1000 pathogenic variants in PKD1 and about
200 in PKD2 gene. According to various authors, about 8-10% of
ADPKD cases do not have pathogenic variant in PKD1/2 genes.
Possibility to apply extended diagnostics by NGS revealed
previously unknown causes. Pathogenic variants in GANAB gene
and PKD phenocopies due to variants in HNF1 β,PKHD1 ,DNAJB11 ,
orTSC1/2 genes are described. However, the list of novel
phenocopies and potential candidate genes is not ﬁnal yet. This
brings questions whether clinical diagnostic criteria will be asspeci ﬁc and sensitive in distinguishing these new genetic forms
and phenocopies of PKD.
Conclusion: Technological advances let us distinguish different
aetiologies of apparently the same disease as well as expand ourknowledge. Furthermore, in the era of individualised treatment
the most accurate molecular diagnosis is required.
D. Brazdziunaite: None. M. Miglinas: None. A. Utkus: None.
P03.041.A Protein loosing enteropathy and lymphedema in a
girl with a homozygous DCHS1 mutation
Tatiana V. Gabrusskaya
1,Evgeny N. Suspitsin1,2, Elizaveta Y.
Lapina1, Elena A. Kornienko1
1St.-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, St.-Petersburg,
Russian Federation,2N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Hennekam syndrome (HS) and van Maldergem
syndrome (VMS) are two entities sharing some clinical features.
While unusual facial gestalt and some degree of developmentaldelay is observed in both conditions intestinal lymphangiectasiaand lymphedema have been considered exclusive for HS.
Materials and Methods: We present a case of 5 year-old girl of
Syrian descent with severe protein loosing enteropathy (PLE) dueto lymphangiectasia, lymphatic malformation in mediastinum,asymmetric lymphedema, facial dysmorphisms ( ﬂat nasal bridge,
epicanthus, microtia), bilateral hearing loss and growth retarda-
tion. No parental consanguinity was reported. She was bornpreterm, had severe course of bronchopulmonary dysplasia anddeveloped symptoms of PLE in the ﬁrst year of life. The girl had
hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated fecal alpha-1
antitrypsin. Right arm and left leg lymphedema became obviousby the age of 5. The patient was suspected to have Hennekam
syndrome and subjected to clinical exome sequencing.
Results: No pathogenic variants in Hennekam syndrome-
associated genes (CD55, FAT4, CCBE1 and ADAMTS3) have beenfound. Rare DCHS1 variant c.1954A>G (p.S652G) was detected in
homozygous state; bialleli c DCHS1 alterations have beenpreviously described in some p atients with van Maldergem
syndrome type 1.
Conclusion: Since DCHS1 and FAT4 molecules form a receptor -
ligand pair, we hypothesize that DCHS1 mutation may cause HS-like phenotype. We demonstrate that lymphatic pathologyincluding PLE, lymphatic malformation and lymphedema can be
a part of both conditions. This observation extends existing data
on clinical overlap between VMS and HS.
The work was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant
20-45-01005
T.V. Gabrusskaya: None. E.N. Suspitsin: None. E.Y. Lapina:
None. E.A. Kornienko: None.
P03.042.B Male pseudo hermaphroditism in a 54 years oldwoman
María Luz Bellido
1, Teresa de Haro1, Trinidad Gonzalez2, Matias
Perez1
1Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain,
2Hospital Universitario Clínico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Disorders of sex development (DSD) comprise a
heterogeneous group of congenital conditions associated with
atypical development of internal and external genitalia. Sexdetermination is governed by genes from SRY region at Y
chromosome that initiates the male developmental program.
However, there exist many other genes involve in this process.Wedescribe the case of a 54-years-old woman with an incidentalﬁnding of absence of uterus, ovaries, prostate or seminal vesicles,
after a TC scan performed for other pathologies.
Methods: GTG-banding karyotype was performed according to
standard protocols. Twenty metaphases chromosomes wereexamined.Next-generation sequencing study was done by MiSeq
analyzer from Illumina ®.
Results: Karyotype result: male, 46,XY.Sequencing study ﬁnding:
Gene
(localization)Variant Type Status dbSNP/
HGMDHeritage Classi ﬁcation
SRD5A2
(2p23.1)c.679C>T,
(p.
Arg227Ter)Nonsense Heterozygous rs121434248
/ CM920642AR Pathogenic
c.344G>A,
(p.
Gly115Asp)Missense Heterozygous rs121434246
/ CM920633AR Probably
Pathogenic
SRD5A2 codiﬁes to 5-alpha-reductase type 2. This enzyme
catalyzes the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone,which is essential for normal differentiation of the external malegenitalia and virilization.
Conclusion: The ﬁnal diagnosis was male pseudo-
hermaphroditism due to 5-alpha-reductase type 2 de ﬁciency
(OMIM#264600). 46,XY patients show ambiguous genitalia at birth,including perineal hypospadias and a persistent urogenital sinus
with a blind perineal vaginal ori ﬁce.DSD used to be diagnosed at
birth or childhood by pediatricians or within the family, makingour case especially unusual. The patients need an individualized
management, especially for decisions related to sex of rearing,
future intervention, hormone treatment and reproductive options.
M. Bellido: None. T. de Haro: None. T. Gonzalez: None. M.
Perez: None.
P03.044.D The importance of NGS data reanalysis and further
functional analysis: an example of impaired phosphate
metabolism
Margarita Sharova
1, Svetlana Papizh2, Olga Levchenko1, Alexandra
Filatova1, Andrey Marakhonov1, Anatoliy Tulpakov1, Mikhail
Skoblov1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
151
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Veltischev Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics of the
Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: The regulation of phosphate metabolism occurs
mainly in kidneys through reabsorption of phosphate ions by the
NaPi-IIa (SLC34A1) and NaPi-IIc (SLC34A3) transporters. Pathogenicvariants in these genes are identi ﬁed in patients with hereditary
hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria or hypercalcemia,
infantile 2.
Materials and methods: patients with a clinical diagnosis of
hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets were referred for moleculargenetic testing. Three patients underwent full-genome sequen-
cing followed by reanalysis of genomic data; for one NGS panel
data were reanalyzed. Experimental validation of the effect ofvariants on splicing was performed using minigene and RNA
analysis.
Results: Primary NGS data analysis didn ’t reveal causative
variants for the phenotype or there was only one variant forautosomal recessive disease. Further investigation of data found
in-frame deletion p.91_97del in SLC34A1 gene with global
frequency 1,7% in two patients in compound heterozygous state,that previously was described as pathogenic. Intronic pathogenicdeletion c.925 +20_926-48del101was found in two brothers in
compound heterozygous state. Also, VUS c.1449G>A in SLC34A1
gene was detected. Minigene assay showed that the variant leadsto truncation of exon 13 by 34 nucleotides with frameshift and
PTC formation. Another functional study by RT-PCR identi ﬁed
variant c.846G>A in SLC34A3 as splicing variant, leading toskipping of exon 8 without frameshift.
Conclusion: Reanalysis of genomic data is important not only
over time, but also by other clinical bioinformaticians. Some
pathogenic variants with high global frequency could be ﬁltered
out in the early stages of NGS analysis. Functional analysis allowsto investigate the pathogenicity of VUS.
M. Sharova: None. S. Papizh: None. O. Levchenko: None. A.
Filatova: None. A. Marakhonov: None. A. Tulpakov: None. M.
Skoblov: None.
P03.045.A Contribution of a non-coding variant in autosomal
recessive ACTG2-related visceral myopathy identi ﬁed by
whole-genome sequencing
Mari Mori
1,2, Kristen V. Truxal1,2, R. Tanner Hagelstrom3, Amanda
Clause4, Vinay Prasad5,2, Kandamurugu Manickam1,2, Stephen G.
Kaler1,2,6, Maria M. Alves7, Carlo Di Lorenzo8,2
1Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children ’s
Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA,2Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA,3Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA,
USA,4Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA,5Pathol-
ogy & Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Colum-
bus, OH, USA,6Center for Gene Therapy, Abigail Wexner Research
Institute, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA,
7Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,8Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus,
OH, USA.
Introduction: Pediatric intestinal pseudo-obstruction (PIPO) is a
heterogeneous condition characterized by impaired gastroin-
testinal propulsion and a broad c linical spectrum ranging from
a severe form requiring parenteral nutrition to milder formswith some ability to tolerate ora l nutrition. Various molecular
bases underlying primary PIPO have been identi ﬁed, of whichACTG2-related visceral myopathy is the most common for
familial or sporadic (de novo) primary PIPO with autosomal
dominant inheritance. However, a recent case report suggests
that some mild ACTG2 variants may be associated withautosomal recessive inheritance. We present a family in whichboth parents have relatively mild gastrointestinal symptoms,
and two sons have severe PIPO , consistent with autosomal
recessive inheritance.
Results: Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) revealed a missense
variant c.28G>A (p.Val10Met) in the ACTG2 gene in the mother
and the sons, and deletion of ACTG2 exon 1 (non-coding) in the
sons and presumably in the father.
Conclusions: Our case reinforces that monoallelic mild ACTG2
variants may underly mild primary PIPO, while biallelic mild
variants can cause severe diseases. Prior molecular studies on PIPO
in the literature were based on whole-exome sequencing ortargeted Sanger sequencing, which may fail to detect deletion of
the non-coding exon. Alterations in non-coding ACTG2 segments
can be under-recognized causes of mild gastrointestinal symp-toms and may explain some instances of inter-familial variability.WGS offers a more comprehensive genetic workup for severe
primary or idiopathic PIPO because of such genetic heterogeneity.
Notably, the absence of family history does not reliably excludethe presence of genetic causes in PIPO.
M. Mori: None. K.V. Truxal: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; co-investigator,
Abeona Therapeutics. R. Hagelstrom: None. A. Clause: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina, Inc.. E. Owner-
ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Modest; Illumina. V. Prasad: None. K. Manickam: None.
S.G. Kaler: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Principal Investigator, NINDS (pending), Colla-borator, NIGMS (pending), Sponsor, NINDS (pending). F. Con-sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Vivet Therapeutics; Chairperson,
Data Monitoring Committee. M.M. Alves: None. C. Di Lorenzo: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Qol, Mahana, InnovativeHealth Solutions, Mallinckrodt, Allergan, Takeda.
P03.046.B Application of NGS sequencing for improved
diagnosis in the pediatric nephrology setting
Radosveta Bozhilova
1, Olga Beltcheva1, Galia Zlatanova2, Kunka
Kamenarova1, Kalina Mihova1, Felitsiya Shakova1, Dimitar Roussi-
nov2, Maria Gaydarova2, Vanio Mitev1, Radka Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center, Dpt. Medical Chemistry and Biochem-
istry, Medical University –Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2SBAL
Pediatric Diseases, Nephrology and Hemodialysis Clinic, Department
of Pediatrics, Medical University -So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Introduction: Nephrotic syndrome, resulting from pathological
changes in the glomerular ﬁlter, is a common childhood disorder.
While it usually resolves with corticosteroid treatment, 10-20% ofthe cases are resistant to therapy and often progress to end-stagerenal disease. A monogenic cause of steroid resistant nephrotic
syndrome (SRNS) is identi ﬁed in up to half of the cases and more
than 50 genes have been associated with the disease.
Materials and Methods: Nine SRNS patients, initially screened
for NPHS1 ,NPHS2 and WT1 mutations, were recruited. Two
children presented with extrarenal features - seizures and braininfarctions. We used TruSight One Sequencing Panel (Illumina) onMiSeq platform for identi ﬁcation of disease-causing variants and
Sanger sequencing for con ﬁrming the mutations and establishingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
152
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608their origin. The pathogenicity of novel variants was evaluated
based on the ACMG criteria.
Results: Homozygous mutation in NOS1AP , recently found to be
associated with SRNS, was identi ﬁed in one case. An additional
rare MYH11 variant may account for the brain infarctions in this
child. A heterozygous frameshift mutation in CFHR5 and
combinations of rare amino acid substitutions in known SRNS
genes ( ACTN4 ,LAMB2 , etc.) accounted for three additional cases.
Conclusion: The application of NGS for screening of an
extended gene panel allowed us to identify the genetic cause of
the disease in approximately half of the SRNS patients recruited
for the study. As expected, a wide variability of genes andmutation types were involved. A possible oligogenic inheritancewas observed in some of the cases. Grant references: D-93/
24.06.2020; D01-285/17.12.2019, MES, Bulgaria
R. Bozhilova: None. O. Beltcheva: None. G. Zlatanova: None.
K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova: None. F. Shakova: None. D.
Roussinov: None. M. Gaydarova: None. V. Mitev: None. R.
Kaneva: None.
P03.047.C Functional consequences of rs1800629 TNF gene
associated with asthma and tuberculosis development
Irina Zhalsanova , Elena Bragina, Nadezhda Babushkina, Nataliya
Tarasenko, Maxim Freidin, Valery Puzyrev
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) is one of the
proin ﬂammatory cytokines involved in the various infectious and
allergic diseases development. We studied the SNP(rs1800629)
association located in the TNF gene promoter region with
bronchial asthma (BA) and tuberculosis (TB) development and
evaluated the functional consequences of the rs1800629 by
analyzing the expression level in short-term cell cultures ofperipheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) stimulated byinducers (lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interferon-gamma (IFN- γ)).
Methods: Genotyping was performed using qPCR among
patients with BA, TB, and in the control group (n =1231). TNF
gene expression level was evaluated response to stimulation inPBMC from healthy donors, differentiated on genotypes
rs1800629 (n =17). Samples were incubated with stimuli (LPS,
IFN-γ), and control samples without stimuli within overnight at
+37°C. Target gene expression was analyzed by RT-PCR.
Results: Association analysis showed, AA genotype frequency
in TB patients was higher than in patients with BA (p =0.047) and
the control group (p =0.033). TNF gene expression level upon IFN-
γstimulation was 4,2 times higher compared to unstimulated
PBMC (p < 0.05). The A allele (AA
+GA) presence promoted a 1.5-
fold decrease in TNF gene expression upon stimulation with IFN- γ
compared to GG. TNF gene expression increased upon LPS
stimulation, but no signi ﬁcantly.
Conclusions: Thus, differences in the TNF gene transcription
pattern depending on the genotype and the stimulation mode.These features are important for understanding the geneticsusceptibility to infectious and allergic diseases of individuals
living in regions with different infectious load levels. The study
was supported by the RFBR grant No.15-04-05852.
I. Zhalsanova: None. E. Bragina: None. N. Babushkina: None.
N. Tarasenko: None. M. Freidin: None. V. Puzyrev: None.
P03.048.D Genome wide association study of type 2 diabetes
complications in population of LatviaRaitis Peculis
1, Monta Ustinova1, Raimonds Rescenko1, Vita Rovite1,
Linda Zaharenko1, Ilze Elbere1, Laila Silamikele1, Ilze Konrade2,1,
Jelizaveta Sokolovska3, Valdis Pirags3,1, Janis Klovins1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia,
2Faculty of Medicine, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia,3Faculty
of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia.
Introduction: Complications of type 2 diabetes affect a signi ﬁcant
proportion of patients and their prevalence, correlates with
increased duration of diabetes. Yet, time of onset of complications
is variable for different persons with type 2 diabetes suggesting anindividual level predisposition and protection. Therefore, investi-gation of the genetic component of type 2 diabetes complications
is warranted.
Materials and methods: We have assayed 601 type 2 diabetes
patients with four common diabetes complications using HumanGSA genotyping array. Genome wide association study was
performed to investigate the genetic background of following
phenotypes: diabetic neuropathy, diabetic nephropathy, macro-vascular events, and ophthalmic complications. Genotype analysiswas performed comparing diabetes patients with complication
present to those without particular complication.
Results: Association analysis identi ﬁed eight novel type 2
diabetes susceptibility loci with genome wide signi ﬁcance. Two
SNPs, rs1132787 ( GYPA ) and rs522521 ( LOC105371557 ) were
associated with diabetic neuropathy, while seven (one sharedwith diabetic neuropathy) rs2477088 ( PDE4DIP ), rs522521
(LOC105371557 ), rs4852954 ( NAT8 ), rs6032 ( F5), rs6935464
(RPS6KA2 ), rs7236163 ( ZNF519 ), and rs3095447 ( CCDC146 ) (latter
is also shared with ophthalmic complications) were showedsigni ﬁcant association with macrovascular complications. The
association results were adjusted for covariates (age, sex, BMI,
diabetes duration, median HbA1c, and prescription drug use) and
a genome-wide signi ﬁcant threshold of P < 5 × 10
−8was used.
Conclusions: Using the genome-wide genotyping approach
this study identi ﬁed ten novel associations with T2DM complica-
tions (at eight loci) and provides additional insight into geneticmarkers of these phenotypes. The study was supported byEuropean Regional Development Fund Project No 1.1.1.2/VIAA/2/
18/287.
R. Peculis: None. M. Ustinova: None. R. Rescenko: None. V.
Rovite: None. L. Zaharenko: None. I. Elbere: None. L. Silamikele:
None. I. Konrade: None. J. Sokolovska: None. V. Pirags: None. J.
Klovins: None.
P04 Skeletal, Connective Tissue, Ectodermal and Skin
Disorders
P04.001.B 6q13 microdeletion - mapping the clinical
phenotype
Raquel Rodrigues , Oana Moldovan, Rosário Silveira-Santos, Ana B.
Sousa, Ana Sousa
Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction: Proximal 6q11q14 deletions are exceedingly rare,
particularly the enclosed 6q13q14 microdeletions. Little is known
about their phenotypic consequences, which include mild/
moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID),minor dysmorphism, and connective tissue abnormalities. We
describe a case of 6q13 microdeletion, among the smallest
reported within this syndromic region, aiming to contribute to thegenomic mapping of associated clinical features.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
153
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Methods: The proband, a 34yo male, was referred to the
Genetics Department for mild ID and motor clumsiness. In
childhood, he presented mild DD, language delay and learning
difﬁculties. Additional features included strabismus, cryptorchid-
ism, joint hypermobility, and abnormal foot position. A DNAsample was analyzed by array-CGH (180K CGX-HD). Segregation
was investigated by FISH.
Results: Array-CGH revealed a 4.71Mb microdeletion in 6q13
(70917114_75625720; hg19), encompassing 17 OMIM genes.Parental studies con ﬁrmed this deletion occurred de novo .
Discussion: Previous reports proposed candidate genes for DD/
ID within 6q11q4 region, namely KCNQ5 , which is deleted in our
patient. However, the chief candidate gene underlying learningdifﬁculties and language delay was proposed to be HRT1B , which
is not deleted in this case. DD/ID is unspeci ﬁc and frequently
features in contiguous deletion syndromes, probably contributedby several genes in the deleted interval. Conversely, connective
tissue abnormalities are speci ﬁc characteristics often observed in
6q11q14 microdeletions, including hypermobility and foot defor-mities. Thus far, the latter have been assigned to COL12A1 gene.
However, COL12A1 is not deleted in our case, suggesting a key
role for other genes, such as COL9A1 and COL19A1 , in the etiology
of these problems.
R. Rodrigues: None. O. Moldovan: None. R. Silveira-Santos:
None. A.B. Sousa: None. A. Sousa: None.
P04.002.C A novel truncating variant in the FGD1 gene
associated with Aarskog-Scott syndrome in a family pre-
viously diagnosed with Tel Hashomer camptodactyly
Lena Sagi-Dain
1, Irena Kessel1, Amir Peleg1, Tamar Paperna2, Nina
Ekhilevitch2, Alina Kurolap3, Hagit Baris Feldman3,Marina Bar-
Shay1
1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,2Rambam Medical Center,
Haifa, Israel,3Ichilov Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome is a genetic association,
characterized by camptodactyly with muscular hypoplasia, skeletal
dysplasia, and abnormal palmar creases. Currently, the genetic
basis for this disorder is unknown, thus there is a possibility thatthis association may be contained within another geneticdiagnosis. In this manuscript we present a family with a previous
clinical diagnosis of Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome.
Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel hemizygous truncat-ing variant c.269_270dup (p.Phe91Alafs*34) in the FGD1 gene
(NM_004463.3) in all three symptomatic patients, congruous with
a diagnosis of Aarskog-Scott syndrome. Our manuscript adds tothe limited data on Aarskog-Scott syndrome, and emphasizes theimportance of unbiased comprehensive genetic testing towards
establishing a diagnosis for genetic associations.
L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Kessel: None. A. Peleg: None. T.
Paperna: None. N. Ekhilevitch: None. A. Kurolap: None. H. Baris
Feldman: None. M. Bar-Shay: None.
P04.003.D Abdominal wall defects in the Czech Republic:
Frequency and prenatal diagnostics
Antonin Sipek Sr
1,2,3, Vladimir Gregor1,2, Antonin Sipek Jr1,4,5, Jan
Klaschka6,7, Marek Maly6,8, Jitka Jirova9
1Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer University Hospital,
Prague 4, Czech Republic,2Department of Medical Genetics, Pronatal
Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic,3Department of Medical
Genetics, Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine,Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic,4Institute of Biology and Medical
Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic,5Institute of Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,6Institute of Computer
Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic,
7Institute of Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,8National Institute of
Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic,9Institute of Health Informa-
tion and Statistics of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Omphalocele and Gastroschisis are the most
important anomalies from the group of Abdominal Wall Defects(AWD). The main goal of our study was to evaluate the changes inthe frequency of these anomalies in the Czech Republic and the
overall effectiveness of their prenatal diagnostics.
Materials and Methods: We are using the of ﬁcial population
data from the National Registry of Congenital Anomalies of the
Czech Republic, which is run by the Institue of Health Information
and Statistics of the Czech Republic. The registration process iscountry-wide and compulsory by the national law. We analyzedthe numbers of omphalocele (Q792) and gastroschisis (Q793)
cases in the newborns and prenatally diagnosed cases in the
Czech Republic (1994-2018).
Results: The total incidence of omphalocele was 3.32 per
10.000 live births (1.39 in births and 1.93 in prenatally diagnosed
cases). For gastroschisis, the total incidence was 3.09 (0.90 in births
and 2.19 in prenatally diagnosed cases). The total frequency ofboth anomalies increased during the selected period in the Czech
Republic, the increase is statically signi ﬁcant (p < 0.05). The
average week of gestation at the time of positive prenataldiagnostics decreased signi ﬁcantly for both anomalies (P < 0.05).
Conclusions: The improvement of ultrasound prenatal diagnos-
tics enabled the successful detection of AWDs in earlier gestation
weeks. The overall incidence of both anomalies is however increasingin the Czech Republic, as more and more mothers prefer surgical
intervention over the termination of the pregnancy.
Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic,
grant nr. AZV 17-29622A
A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic,
research grant: AZV 17-29622A. V. Gregor: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Ministry of
Health of the Czech Republic, research grant: AZV 17-29622A. A.
Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, research grant:
TN, 00064190. J. Klaschka: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech
Republic, research grant: AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, research grant: TN,
00064190. J. Jirova: None.
P04.004.A Biallelic deep intronic variants c.1528-126A>G and
c.5457 +81T>A in TRIP11 are associated with achondrogenesis
1A
Priyanka Upadhyai , Radhakrishnan Periyasamy, Vishal S. Guleria,
Shalini Nayak, Katta M. Girisha
Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, India.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
154
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Biallelic loss of function variants in TRIP11 encoding
for GMAP-210 cause lethal chondrodysplasia achondrogenesis
type 1A (ACG1A). Complete depletion of TRIP11 impairs Golgi
structure, vesicular transport and results in loss of IFT20 anchorageto the Golgi that is vital for ciliary traf ﬁcking and ciliogenesis. Here
we report four affected foetuses, two each from two families,
homozygous for putative pathogenic deep intronic variants inTRIP11 .
Materials and Methods: Perinatal autopsy and radiological
evaluation was performed, followed by exome and genomesequencing. Segregation analysis was performed by Sangersequencing. Fibroblast cell-lines were available from an affected
foetus. Transcript analysis was performed by qRT-PCR and RT-PCR
respectively. Protein levels were ascertained by immunoblotting.The Golgi, ciliogenesis and autophagy were evaluated byimmunostaining.
Results: The deep intronic variants c.1528-126A>G and c.5457
+81T>A in TRIP11 were present in homozygous state in all
affected foetuses and the parents were heterozygous carriers. This
led to drastic depletion of TRIP11 mRNA, protein levels and
produced severely compacted Golgi in ﬁbroblasts. The c.5457
+81T>A variant caused aberrant splicing and retention of 77 base-
pairs of intron 18. We observed severe depletion of ciliated
ﬁbroblasts and reduction in cilia length, not reported so far in
patient cells with TRIP11 -related disorder. Moderate autophagic
dysfunction was noted in affected ﬁbroblasts, congruent with the
role of IFT20 in modulating autophagy in primary cilia dependent
manner in some cellular contexts.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings illustrate how pathogenic variants
occurring in deep intronic and putative regulatory regions ofTRIP11 may impact its expression and activity leading to ACG1A.
P. Upadhyai: None. R. Periyasamy: None. V.S. Guleria: None.
S. Nayak: None. K.M. Girisha: None.
P04.005.B Pre and post-natal achondroplasia, retrospective
series of 64 consecutives cases with analyze of the diagnosticmethods and timing issues
Genevieve Baujat , Roxana Borghese, Pascale Sonigo, Joana
Bengoa, Caroline Michot, Elodie Millischer-Bellaiche, Sophie Rondeau,Beatrice Childs, Tania Attie-Bitach, Bettina Bessieres, Laurent
Salomon, Yves Ville, Jean-Paul Bonnefont, Julie Steffann, Valerie
Cormier-Daire
Necker Hospital, Paris, France.
The last years, diagnosis of achondroplasia bene ﬁted of advances
in prenatal imaging, and in invasive and non-invasive molecularscreening.
Objectives: To analyse diagnosis procedures and outcome on
64 consecutive con ﬁrmed cases of achondroplasia seen in the
French Centre of Reference for Skeletal Dysplasia, between 2008and 2016.MethodsDiagnosis stage/ age, analyse of the achon-
droplasia features by imaging (ultrasound (US), 3D-CT), molecular
conﬁrmation method, and pregnancy outcome were retrospec-
tively determined.
Results : 64 cases of achondroplasia were included. The
diagnosis was made during the pregnancy in 43 cases (67%,
mean stage of 30 weeks). For the remaining 21 cases (33%), thediagnosis was performed at birth in all cases but one, diagnosed at
2 months. Among the eight foetuses with inherited ACH: 4 were
diagnosed after early chorionic villus sampling, leading totermination of pregnancy (TOP) and 4 diagnosed after 26 weeks,by US.In the de novo prenatal 35 cases, mid-trimester US was
normal in 80% of cases. The diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by the 3D-CTin all 17 cases when performed (52%), and/ or by molecular
screening after amniocentesis (43%). The prenatal diagnosis led to
TOP in 12 cases (34%), in a mean stage of 32 weeks. 66% of the
foetuses diagnosed in prenatal went into the birth.
Conclusion: The systematic screening of the second term was
normal in 80%. One third of the diagnosis led to TOP. The results
con
ﬁrm the late diagnosis of de novo achondroplasia during
pregnancy, leading to major psychological and ethical issues forthe parents.
G. Baujat: None. R. Borghese: None. P. Sonigo: None. J.
Bengoa: None. C. Michot: None. E. Millischer-Bellaiche: None. S.
Rondeau: None. B. Childs: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. B.
Bessieres: None. L. Salomon: None. Y. Ville: None. J. Bonnefont:
None. J. Steffann: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None.
P04.007.D Shared Runs of Heterozygosity Mapping using
whole genome sequencing reveals a complex structural
variant in GSN causing novel cutaneous-visceral organ
Gelsolin amyloidosis
Adam Jackson1,2, Glenda Sobey3, Ashutosh Wechalekar4, Dorota
Rowczenio4, . Genomics England Research Consortium5, Glenda
Beaman2, Rob McMahon1, Unzela Khan1,E m m aM i l e s1, Amy Gold-
man1,S i m o nL o v e l l6, Jill Clayton-Smith1,2, Siddharth Banka1,2
1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United
Kingdom,2Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,3National
EDS Service, Shef ﬁeld Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust, Shef ﬁeld,
United Kingdom,4National Amyloidosis Centre, University College
London (Royal Free Campus), London, United Kingdom,5Genomics
England, London, United Kingdom,6Division of Evolution and
Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University ofManchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Introduction: We report a multi-generational family of several
individuals with cutis laxa, bowel perforation, cardiac rupture andclinical diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Several histopatho-
logical, targeted sequencing studies failed to identify the genetic
cause. Two affected individuals were detected with cutaneousamyloid, but proteomic studies failed to reveal its origin.
Methods and Results: We devised a novel Heterozygosity
Mapping approach using srWGS data and identi ﬁed a ~10.38Mb
disease-haplotype on chromosome 9q33.1-q34.11. This region ’s
targeted analysis revealed an ~1kb deletion involving in-frame
loss of exon 12 of GSN predicted to result in partial deletion and
fusion of two gelsolin domains of the protein. DdPCR con ﬁrmed
the variant ’s segregation with the phenotype in extended family
members (LOD score 4.52). Sanger sequencing revealed the
variant to be a complex deletion-inversion-insertion event.
Sequence analysis showed the variant to have likely originatedfrom fork-stalling template-switching attributable to microhomol-ogy and formation of complex DNA structure due to multiple
nested inverted and mirror repeats. Sequencing of mRNA and the
amyloid protein is ongoing.
Conclusions: A complex structural variant (SV) involving exon
12 of GSN causes a novel form of potentially lethal ‘cutaneous-
internal organ amyloidosis ’that is clinically, genetically and
mechanistically distinct from Finnish-type amyloidosis. To ourknowledge this is the ﬁrst example of application of hetero-
zygosity mapping to identify the cause of a Mendelian disorder,
and of nested mirror and inverted repeats resulting in agermline SV in humans. This work highlights the value of WGSin resolving the cause of unsolved and novel disorders resulting
from SVs.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
155
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608A. Jackson: None. G. Sobey: None. A. Wechalekar: None. D.
Rowczenio: None. .. Genomics England Research Consortium:
None. G. Beaman: None. R. McMahon: None. U. Khan: None. E.
Miles: None. A. Goldman: None. S. Lovell: None. J. Clayton-
Smith: None. S. Banka: None.
P04.008.A Clinical features and molecular characterization of
three Japanese patients with autosomal dominant Robinowsyndrome caused by DVL3 variants
Kumiko Yanagi1, Eriko Nishi2, Arisa Igarashi1, Maki Omata1, Yukimi
Abe1, Nana Kobayashi1, Kazuhito Satou1, Kanako Ishii3, Nobuhiko
Okamoto2, Yoichi Matsubara1, Tadashi Kaname1
1National Center for Child Health and Development, Setagaya,
Japan,2Osaka Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Osaka, Japan,
3Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
Autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome 3 (DRS3, OMIM 601368)
is a rare skeletal dysplasia syndrome characterized by dysmorphicfeatures resembling a fetal face, short stature, mesomelic limb
shortening, vertebral and hand anomalies. Urogenital malforma-
tions are frequently reported. The causative gene, DVL3 (Dishev-
eled 3 , NM_004423) mapped on 3q27 encodes cytoplasmic
phosphoprotein DVL3 known as a homologous to Drosophila
dishvelled (dsh). Dsh relays Wnt signals from receptors todownstream effectors and roles on developmental processes,including segmentation and neuroblast speci ﬁcation. Only eight
variants have been reported to date. All are splicing or frameshift
variants with premature stop codons and predicted to result in apremature termination within Dhc-C domain of DVL3. Here wereport three Japanese boys who were diagnosed with DRS3 by
identi ﬁcation of heterozygous variants in DVL3 . Two patients
(Patient 1 and patient 3) were enrolled in the IRUD (Initiative onRare and Undiagnosed Diseases) as undiagnosed patients. One
patient (Patient 2) was initially suspected of having Aarskog
syndrome (OMIM 305400), but was no pathogenic variants foundin the FGD gene by direct sequencing. Whole exome sequencing
and annotated variants ﬁltering were performed in these patients.
We identi ﬁed two novel frameshift variants, c.1671_1686del:p.
(Tyr558Alafs*105) in Patient 1 and c.1716-1722del:p.(Ser573A-lafs*93) in Patient 2, and one novel in-frame deletion,c.1861_1884del:p.(Pro621_Ala628del) in Patient 3. The in-frame
deletion lacks eight amino acid residues including two phosphor-
ylation sites, which were evolutionary conserved. The deletionwould affect DVL3 polymerization leading interrupt Wnt signaling.
We are presenting clinical features in each patient.
K. Yanagi: None. E. Nishi: None. A. Igarashi: None. M. Omata:
None. Y. Abe: None. N. Kobayashi: None. K. Satou: None. K. Ishii:
None. N. Okamoto: None. Y. Matsubara: None. T. Kaname:
None.
P04.009.B De ﬁning the molecular pathology of autosomal
recessive congenital icthyosis among a cohort of Egyptian
patients
Khalda S. Amr, Nesma Mohamad Elaraby , Ghada Y. El-Kamah
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Background Autosomal recessive congenital icthyosis (ARCI) are
heterogeneous group of rare genodermatoses characterized by
marked phenotypic and genotypic variability. Non syndromic ARCIare caused by mutations in more than a dozen of distinct genes.Molecular testing for ARCI in a clinical setting is not an easy task;some genes as ( TGM1 ; 190195) on chromosome 14q11.2, are
relatively common while mutations in other genes are rare. Aim:
To identify the underlying molecular pathology in a cohort of 55
non syndromic ARCI Egyptian families with at least one affectedsib, using next generation sequencing (NGS).
Methods: NGS analysis was performed through a panel of 14
ARCI genes.
Results: Genetic variants could be identi ﬁed in 29 (52.7%) of the
55 studied non-syndromic ARCI families. All studied patients weredescending from consanguineous families and most of the
characterized mutations were found in a homozygous state.
Characterized variants included; sixteen pathogenic, among whichare ﬁve novel missense mutations and eleven previously
described variants within the TGM1 gene. The ﬁve novel missense
mutations are; (NM_000359.2) c.344T>A(Val115Asp), c.1165C>T
(Arg389Cys), c.1423T>A(Cys475Ser), c.1762G>A(p.Ala588Thr), andc.1922G> (Cys641Val).
Conclusion: NGS panel analyses identi
ﬁed mutations within the
TGM1 gene in 52.7% of studied families prioritizing it as a targetgene for future molecular analyses among Egyptian ARCI patients.Limited resources prevented further whole exome analyses to
help characterize the molecular pathology in the remaining
almost 50% of our cohort as well as possible detection of otherinvolved genes that might explain the marked heterogeneousphenotypes present within our patients.
K.S. Amr: None. N.M. Elaraby: None. G.Y. El-Kamah: None.
P04.011.D Bone mineralization inSATB2-associated syndrome
Anne Dittrich, Joyce Geelen , Jos Draaisma
Rradboudumc Amalia children ’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: SATB2-associated syndrome, also called Glass
syndrome, is caused by pathogenic variants or deletions/duplica-
tions affecting the special AT-rich sequence binding protein 2
(SATB2 ) gene. SATB2 is a transcriptional regulatory protein involved
in craniofacial and central nervous system development. Glasssyndrome is characterized by intellectual disability with severely
limited speech, high palate and dentofacial abnormalities. In this
case series we will focus on the role of SATB2 on bone metabolism
Materials and Methods: we collected the data on bone
metabolism of all children followed at the Radboudumc Amalia
children ’s hospital.
Results: We have 4 children at follow-up with Glass syndrome.
All children have signs of increased bone turnover. The oldest
child had two long bone fractures at the age of 12 and low bone
mineral density with a lumbar z-score of -3.5. For this reasontherapy with intravenous bisphosphonate was started with goodresult. There were no additional fractures and the lumbar z-score
increased to -1.9.
Conclusion: As shown, reduced bone mineralization in SATB2 -
associated syndrome due to high bone turnover starts at youngage. In an earlier study the prevalence of decreased bone
mineralization was reported to be 76% with 67% of patients
had signs of increased bone turn-over. However, in a report withrecommendations on the SATB2-associated syndrome, it is statedthat one should consider osteopenia evaluation and optimize
bone mineralization as needed. However, due to our experience,
we would suggest that evaluation should be incorporated in theguideline, as preventive and therapeutic options are possible.
A. Dittrich: None. J. Geelen: None. J. Draaisma: None.
P04.012.A More than meets the eye: expanding and reviewing
the clinical and mutational spectrum of brittle cornea syndromeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
156
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Tibbe Dhooge1,Tim Van Damme1, Del ﬁen Syx1, Laura Muiño
Mosquera1,2, Sheela Nampoothiri3, Anil Radhakrishnan4, Pelin Ozlem
Simsek-Kiper5, Gülen Eda Utine5, Maryse Bonduelle6, Isabelle
Migeotte7, Osama Essawi1, Serdar Ceylaner8, Adila Al Kindy9, Brad
Tinkle10,S oﬁe Symoens1, Fransiska Malfait1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Biomolecular Medicine,
Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
2Divison of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,3Department of Pediatric
Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre,
Cochin, India,4Department of Ophthalmology, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Cochin, India,5Department of
Pediatric Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey,6Centre for Medical Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium,7Center of Human Genetics, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium,8Intergen Genetic Research Center,
Ankara, Turkey,9Department of Genetics, College of Medicine, Sultan
Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman,10Division of Medical Genetics,
Peyton Manning Children ’s Hospital, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by corneal thinning and fragility, leading to
corneal rupture, the main hallmark of this disorder. Non-ocularsymptoms include hearing loss, but also signs of connective tissue
fragility, placing it in the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) spectrum.
It is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ZNF469 orPRDM5 ,
which presumably encode transcription factors for extracellularmatrix components. We report the clinical and molecular features
of nine novel BCS families, four of which harbor variants in ZNF469
and ﬁve in PRDM5 . We also performed a genotype and
phenotype-oriented literature overview of all (N =85) reported
patients with ZNF469 (N=53) and PRDM5 (N=32) variants.
Musculoskeletal ﬁndings may be the mean reason for referral, and
often raise suspicion of another heritable connective tissuedisorder such as kyphoscoliotic EDS, osteogenesis imperfecta or
Marfan syndrome, especially when corneal rupture has not yet
occurred. Our ﬁndings highlight the multisystemic nature of BCS
and validate its inclusion in the EDS classi ﬁcation. Importantly,
gene panels for heritable connective tissue disorders should
include ZNF469 and PRDM5 to allow for timely diagnosis and
appropriate preventive measures for this rare condition.
T. Dhooge: None. T. Van Damme: None. D. Syx: None. L.
Muiño Mosquera: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. A. Radhakrish-
nan: None. P. Simsek-Kiper: None. G. Eda Utine: None. M.
Bonduelle: None. I. Migeotte: None. O. Essawi: None. S.
Ceylaner: None. A. Al Kindy: None. B. Tinkle: None. S. Symoens:
None. F. Malfait: None.
P04.013.B Bilateral and symmetrical enchondromatosis
lesions: clinical, radiologic and genetic ﬁndings
Pauline Marzin
1,2, Celine Huber2, Genevieve Baujat1,2, Caroline
Michot1,2, Agnès Guichet3,4, Estelle Colin3,4, Michel Panuel5, Valérie
Cormier-Daire1,2
1Service de Génétique clinique et Centre de référence pour les
maladies osseuses constitutionnelles, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, 75015 Paris, France,2Université de Paris, Laboratory of
Molecular and Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia,INSERM UMR 1163, Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France,3Biochem-
istry and Genetics Department, University Hospital of Angers, Angers,
France,4MitoLab, UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM, MitoVasc Institute,
University of Angers, Angers, France,5Aix Marseille University, CNRS,
EFS, ADES, Marseille, France.Enchondromas are benign cartilaginous tumors, typically localized
in the metaphyses. The most common enchondromatosis, Ollier
disease and Maffucci syndrome related to IDH1 and IDH2 , are
characterized by asymmetrical lesions. Bilateral and/or symme-trical enchondromas can be seen in rarer enchondromatosis suchas metachondromatosis, dyspondyloenchondromatosis, geno-
chondromatosis and spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD,
related to recessive variants in ACP5 ). Even though variants in
PTPN11 and COL2A1 have been identi ﬁed in metachondromatosis
and dyspondyloenchondromatosis, respectively, molecular basis
of bilateral and/or symmetrical enchondromas remain unknown.
We performed whole exome sequencing analysis from bloodsamples in a cohort of 11 individuals from eight familiespresenting with bilateral and symmetrical enchondromas. We
identi ﬁed variants in known genes in three families of the eight
(38%), including a mosaic variant in the IDH1 gene in two patients,
with symmetrical enchondromas and a large homozygous
deletion encompassing ACP5 in one patient with SPENCD. Variants
of uncertain signi ﬁcant (VOUS) were identi ﬁed in two other
families, including a heterozygous nonsense variant in the PELI2
gene, encoding an interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)-
interacting proteins, in three affected members from the same
family and a de novo heterozygous 1.5 Mb deletion of
12p12.1p11.22 in a patient with enchondroma and type Ebrachydactyly. No candidate variant was identi ﬁed in three
families including one family with recurrent sibs. These ﬁndings
support the need of increasing the number of families tested and/or the analysis of affected tissues.
P. Marzin: None. C. Huber: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Michot:
None. A. Guichet: None. E. Colin: None. M. Panuel: None. V.
Cormier-Daire: None.
P04.014.C Sitting-to-standing height ratio is a sex-speci ﬁc risk
factor for chronic back pain
Maxim B. Freidin
1, Yakov A. Tsepilov2,3, Yurii S. Aulchenko2,3,
Pradeep Suri4, Frances M. K. Williams1
1King ’s College London, London, United Kingdom,2Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,3PolyOmica, ’s-Hertogen-
bosch, Netherlands,4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
Background: Chronic back pain (CBP) is more common among
females for reasons not fully understood. We hypothesized that
sitting-to-standing height ratio, known to be different betweenthe sexes, may contribute.
Methods: We used European individuals from UK Biobank
(project #18219) comprising 222,361 males and 263,602 femalesto test this hypothesis. Logistic regression was used to assess theassociation of CBP with sitting height, standing height, and their
ratio while adjusting for age, BMI, and job involving prolonged
standing and heavy lifting. Mediation analysis and Mendelianrandomization (MR) were applied to assess causality. Instrumentsfor MR were selected from publicly available GWAS data for
sitting-to-standing height ratio, ensuring non-overlap with chronic
BP GWAS using UK Biobank.
Results: Both sitting and standing height exhibited a weak
association of similar magnitude for CBP in both sexes (Table).
However, sitting-to-standing height ratio was associated with
greater odd of CBP in males (Table) but with lower odds in females(Table). Mediation analysis showed both direct and BMI-mediated
risk effects of the ratio on CBP in males; while in females there was
BMI-mediated risk effect and direct protective effect. MRsupported a causal impact of sitting-to-standing height ratio onCBP risk in females, but not in males.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
157
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusion: We provide evidence that different body propor-
tions seen in men and women may contribute to the different risk
of CBP between the sexes.
Odds ratios for anthropometric traits over chronic back pain
Trait Males Females
Standing height 1.013 (1.011-1.016) 1.011 (1.009-1.014)
Sitting height 1.030 (1.026-1.034) 1.013 (1.008-1.017)
Sitting-to-standing
height ratio14.373 (4.819-42.867) 0.139 (0.050-0.382)
M.B. Freidin: None. Y.A. Tsepilov: None. Y.S. Aulchenko: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; PolyOmica. P. Suri: None.
F.M.K. Williams: None.
P04.016.A Transcriptomic diagnosis of a deep intronic CLCN7
mutation
Odelia Chorin1, Naomi Yachelevich2, Khaled Mohamed3, Ilana
Moscatelli4, John Pappas1, Kim Henriksen3, Gilad D. Evrony1,5
1Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York, NY, USA,
2Division of Clincal Genetic Services, Department of Pediatrics, New
York, NY, USA,3Nordic Biosciences Biomarkers and Research, Harlev,
Denmark,4Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden,5Department of Pediatrics, and Depart-
ment of Neuroscience & Physiology, New York University GrossmanSchool of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
Background Over half of children with rare genetic diseases
remain undiagnosed despite maximal clinical evaluation and DNA ‐
based genetic testing. As part of an Undiagnosed Diseases
Program applying transcriptome (RNA) sequencing to identify the
causes of these unsolved cases, we studied a child with severeinfantile osteopetrosis leading to cranial nerve palsies, bone
deformities, and bone marrow failure, for whom whole ‐genome
sequencing was nondiagnostic.
Methods : We performed transcriptome (RNA) sequencing of
whole blood followed by analysis of aberrant transcript isoforms
and osteoclast functional studies.
Results: We identi ﬁed a pathogenic deep intronic variant in
CLCN7 creating an unexpected, frameshifting pseudoexon causing
complete loss of function. Functional studies, including osteoclas-
togenesis and bone resorption assays, con ﬁrmed normal osteo-
clast differentiation but loss of osteoclast function.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of a pathogenic deep intronic
variant in CLCN7 , and our approach provides a model for
systematic identi ﬁcation of noncoding variants causing osteope-
trosis —a disease for which molecular ‐genetic diagnosis can be
pivotal for potentially curative hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation. Our work illustrates that cryptic splice variants may
elude DNA ‐only sequencing and supports broad ﬁrst‐line use
of transcriptome sequencing for children with undiagnoseddiseases.
O. Chorin: None. N. Yachelevich: None. K. Mohamed: None. I.
Moscatelli: None. J. Pappas: None. K. Henriksen: None. G.D.
Evrony: None.
P04.017.B Two novel variants in MMP13 gene in a Czech
family with metaphyseal anadysplasia type 1
Lucie Hru šková
1, Helena Paszeková1, Ivo Ma řík2,3, Veronika
Kruli šová1, Daniela Zemková4, Anna Vá žná5,Z d ěnka Vl čková1,
Renata Michalovská11GHC Genetics, s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic,2Ambulant Centre for
Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech Republic,3Faculty of
Health Care Studies, West Bohemia University, Pilsen, Czech Republic,
4Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,5Department of
Anthropology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Science, CharlesUniversity, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Metaphyseal anadysplasia type 1 is an autosomal
dominant skeletal disease characterized by metaphyseal changes,epiphyseal dysplasia and rhizomelic shortening of limbs followed
by regression of symptoms with later growth. Genetic origin is
associated with pathogenic variants in MMP13 gene. Matrix
metalloproteinase 13 encoded by this gene plays important rolesin bone formation and growth.
Materials and Methods: We performed massive parallel
sequencing of gDNA isolated from whole blood on NextSeq(Illumina) using panel Clinical Exome (CES) kit by Sophia Genetics,
followed by Sanger sequencing and CNV analysis. This solution
consists of 116,355 individually designed probes that span approx.11 Mb of target regions covering more than 4,900 genes, withknown mendelian/inherited disease-causing mutations.
Results: Molecular genetic analysis identi ﬁed two previously
unreported heterozygous cis-variants c.236A>C and c.251T>G inMMP13 in a Czech boy suspected with metaphyseal anadysplasia,
type 1. Clinical-radiological examination showed rhizomelic short-
ness of stature, femoral bowing, abnormality of metaphyses,
delayed ossi ﬁcation of carpal bones and patella. The same bone
dysplasia occurs in the sister, mother, maternal aunt and maternal
grandfather. Subsequent molecular genetic testing in these family
members showed that the two variants described above in theMMP13 gene also occur in them and thus segregate with the
occurrence of the disease in the family.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings demonstrate the ef ﬁciency of exome
sequencing approach in determination of molecular background indifferential diagnosis not only of skeletal dysplasias. Further, ourﬁndings expand genotype spectrum of MMP13 associated disorders
and offer precise diagnosis of metaphyseal anadysplasia type 1.
L. Hru šková: None. H. Paszeková: None. I. Ma řík:None. V.
Kruli šová: None. D. Zemková: None. A. Vá žná:None. Z. Vl čková:
None. R. Michalovská: None.
P04.018.C Very early diagnosis of Cole-Carpenter syndrome:
novel variant and maternal mosaicism
Daniele Guadagnolo
1, Gioia Mastromoro1, Enrica Marchionni1,
Francesca Di Palma1, Claudia Cesario2, Mario Roggini3, Antonio
Novelli2, Antonio Pizzuti1
1Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy,2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù
Children ’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,3Department of Pediatrics,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
Introduction: Fetal abnormal head shape represents a signi ﬁcant
challenge in prenatal diagnosis. It can be the initial presentation of
several disorders, requiring multidisciplinary approaches.
Materials and methods: A 35-year-old woman was referred at
34 gestational weeks for unusual fetal head shape. Chromosomal
molecular analysis, performed after amniocentesis for multiple
soft markers, was normal. After caesarean delivery at 38gestational weeks, the baby was in normal length and weight
ranges, but macrocephaly, micrognathia and broad nasal bridge
were noted. Total body X-rays and trioClinical Exome Sequencing
(CES) were requested.
Results: X-rays showed dolicocephaly, ossi ﬁed metopic suture,
widening of the bregmatic fontanella and of the sagittal andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
158
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608lambdoideal sutures , perisutural calci ﬁed spots. CES detected a novel
heterozygous missense variant in P4HB (prolyl 4-hydroxylase subunit
b; MIM*176790) in the proband (NM_000918.4:c.1375G>A;
NP_000909.2:p.Gly459Arg;rs749458033). The same variant was foundin heterozygosis with 34% mosaicism rate in the mother. Hetero-zygous P4HB mutations cause Cole-Carpenter syndrome 1
(MIM#112240). The variant was no t described in literature, HGMD,
ClinVar or DECIPHER. It is very ra re (GnomADv2.1.1: 0.000016) and
has high predicted deleteriousness. It is classi ﬁed as Likely
Pathogenic. Cole-Carpenter syndr ome is characterized by dysmorph-
isms, wide sutures and fontanelles, short stature, proptosis, hydro-
cephalus, bone fragility, no intellec tual disability. Somatic mosaicism
for a pathogenic P4HB has already been described in the healthy
father of an affected child.
Conclusion: Early molecular analysis for skull anomalies can
guide subsequent clinical approaches but also yield complexresults. We suspect that parental mosaicism might be more
common than previously thought for P4HB variants.
D. Guadagnolo: None. G. Mastromoro: None. E. Marchionni:
None. F. Di Palma: None. C. Cesario: None. M. Roggini: None. A.
Novelli: None. A. Pizzuti: None.
P04.020.A hiPSC-derived epidermal keratinocytes from
ichthyosis patients show altered expression of corni ﬁcation
markers
Dulce Lima Cunha
1,2,3, Amanda Oram1, Robert Gruber4, Roswitha
Plank1,2, Arno Lingenhel2, Manoj Kumar Gupta5, Janine Altmüller6,
Peter Nürnberg6, Mariya Moosajee3, Matthias Schmuth4, Johannes
Zschocke2, Tomo Šarić5, Katja Martina Eckl2,7,Hans Christian
Hennies1,2,6
1Department of Biological and Geogr aphical Sciences, University of
Hudders ﬁeld, Hudders ﬁeld, United Kingdom,2Institute of Human
Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,3Institute
of Ophthalmology, UCL, London, United Kingdom,4Department of
Dermatology, Medical University o f Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,
5Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute for Neurophysiol-
ogy, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany,6Cologne Center
for Genomics, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany,7Depart-
ment of Biology, Edge Hill Universi ty, Ormskirk, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Inherited ichthyoses represent a heterogeneous group
of skin disorders characterised by impaired epidermal barrier
function and disturbed corni ﬁcation. Current knowledge about
disease mechanisms has been uncovered mainly through mouse
models or human organotypic models. However, most mouse lines
suffer from severe epidermal barrier defects causing neonatal deathand human keratinocytes have very limited proliferation ability in
vitro.
Results: We have generated human induced pluripotent stem
cells (hiPSCs) from patients with co ngenital ichthyosis, either non-
syndromic autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) or theichthyosis syndrome trichothiodys trophy (TTD). hiPSCs were success-
fully differentiated into basal keratinocytes (hiPSC-bKs), with high
expression of epidermal keratins 5 and 14. Terminal differentiation ofhiPSC-bKs was induced and markers keratin 1 and involucirn wereexpressed. TTD1 hiPSC-bKs showed reduced expression of FLG and
SPRR2B in line with previous reports and mouse models. ARCI hiPSC-
bKs showed more severe defects, with downregulation of severalgenes involved in epidermal ceramide metabolism. Differences to
ﬁndings in ARCI patients might point to the importance of speci ﬁc
mutations and an in ﬂuence of patient treatment on their
keratinocyte expression pro ﬁles.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the successful genera-
tion of hiPSC-based in vitro models mimicking the diseasephenotypes, proving a valuable system for molecular investiga-
tions and drug development. Studies with organotypic models will
be used to further characterize functional changes associated with
ichthyosis. Patient-derived hiPSCs can be a long-term source for avariety of different cells and signi ﬁcantly contribute to the
development of complex skin disease models, ultimately facilitat-
ing the translation of therapeutic approaches into clinical studies.
D. Lima Cunha: None. A. Oram: None. R. Gruber: None. R.
Plank: None. A. Lingenhel: None. M. Gupta: None. J. Altmüller:
None. P. Nürnberg: None. M. Moosajee: None. M. Schmuth:
None. J. Zschocke: None. T.Šarić:None. K. Eckl: None. H.
Hennies: None.
P04.021.B Four novel EFNB1 variants found through
sequencing-based methods in female patients with cranio-frontonasal syndrome
Ewelina Bukowska-Olech
1, Anna Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk2, Maria
Jedrzejowska3, Ewa Obersztyn4, Pawel Gawlinski4, Michal Piechota5,
Marta Bielska6, Aleksander Jamsheer1,5
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poz nan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland,2Department of Pediatric Neurology and Rehabilitation,
Medical University of Bialy stok, Bialystok, Poland,3Department of
Medical Genetics, The Children ’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland,4Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child,
Warsaw, Poland,5Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan,
Poland,6Department of Pediatrics, Hematology, Oncology and
Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
Background: Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) is a rare X-linked
disorder that results from pathogenic variants in the EFNB1 gene. The
syndrome inherits in a paradoxical manner and exceptionally
presents greater severity of sympt oms in heterozygous females than
hemizygous males.
Materials and methods: We recruited ﬁve sporadic (patients 1-
4) and one familial case (patients 5& 6), all of whom presented aspectrum of craniofacial abnormalities. Of note, we reporteddiscordant phenotype in twin female patients 5& 6. We applied
either targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) of a custom
gene panel or PCR and Sanger sequencing to achieve a moleculardiagnosis. Besides, we run both zygosity analysis and X chromo-some inactivation (XCI) assay for twin patients 5& 6.
Results: First, we reported three additional novel variants in the
EFNB1 gene: p.(Trp12*), p.(Tyr73Met fs*86), p.(Glu210*), and one
known: p.(Cys64Phe). Second, we con ﬁrmed the monozygosity of
patients 5& 6. Finally, we showed random XCI in twin patient 5
(46% vs 54%), who presents milder phenotype in comparison toher twin sister (patient 6) having non-random XCI (84% vs 16%).
Conclusion: Ourﬁndings provide valuable molecular data that
may be applied both in diagnostics and genetic counselling. We
have described the intriguing differences of the clinical phenotypein the monozygotic twin patients 5& 6 harbouring an identical p.(Glu210*) variant and we have pointed to the presence of unusual
phenomenon such as mildly affected females with CFNS.
This work was supported by the grants from the Polish National
Science Centre, Poland: UMO-2016/23/N/NZ5/02577 to E.B.-O andUMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270 to A.J.
E. Bukowska-Olech: None. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk: None. M.
Jedrzejowska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. P. Gawlinski: None. M.
Piechota: None. M. Bielska: None. A. Jamsheer: None.
P04.022.C Comprehensive genetic screening in patients with
syndromic craniosynostosisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
159
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Trayan N. Delchev , Savina Hadjidekova, Hadil Kathom, Stoyan
Bichev, Tsvetina Veleva, Iliana Boneva, Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella
Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Syndromic craniosynostosis is a genetically deter-
mined premature ossi ﬁcation and closure of one or more of the
cranial sutures. This may result in severe dysmorphism, increased
intracranial pressure, seizures, visual and hearing defects, psycho-motor delay and behavioural anomalies. Syndromic craniosynos-
tosis is also commonly associated with additional malformations
and dysmorphic features.
Materials and Methods: We present our comprehensive
genetic investigation of 39 patients with syndromic craniosynos-
tosis screened systematically with a combination of cytogenetic
analysis, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA)
and array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH).
Results: Pathological ﬁndings were established in 15.3% (6/39)
of the cases using aCGH, 8.33% (3/39) using MLPA and 2.85% (1/
39) using conventional karyotyping. About 12.8% (5/39) of thepatients with normal karyotype carried submicroscopic chromo-somal rearrangements.
Conclusions: In our study array-based comparative genomic
hybridisation had the highest detection rate compared tochromosome analysis and MLPA. „Gain of function “variations
and duplications were the predominant type of genetic defect we
found. This suggests the leading role of those ﬁndings in the
pathogenesis of syndromic craniosynostosis.
T.N. Delchev: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. H. Kathom: None.
S. Bichev: None. T. Veleva: None. I. Boneva: None. D. Avdjieva-
Tzavella: None.
P04.023.D Analysis of novel splice site variants in craniosy-
nostosis causing genes
Angela Borst
1, Tillmann Schweitzer2, Denise Horn3, Erdmute
Kunstmann1, Eva Klopocki1
1Institute of Human Genetics University of Wuerzburg, Würzburg,
Germany,2Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery University Hospital
of Wuerzburg, Würzburg, Germany,3Institute for Medical and
Human Genetics Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Ger-many.
Congenital malformation of the skull are rare disease conditions,
which may have severe impact on the life of patients.Craniosynostosis appears with a prevalence of 1 in 2500 newborns
and represents a premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures.
The disease can either occur as part of a syndrome or as non-syndromic, isolated craniosynostosis. The Craniosynostosis 3 (MIM615314) phenotype, a molecular well-described form of isolated
craniosynostosis, is caused by mutations in the TCF12 gene. In
contrast to TCF12 , mutations in the FGFR2 gene are multifaceted
and are associated with diverse syndromes, including craniosy-
nostosis syndromes, i.e. Apert (MIM 101200), Pfeiffer (MIM 101600)
and Saethre-Chotzen (MIM 101400) syndromes.
The aim of our study was, to identify novel genetic variants in
craniosynostosis associated genes by Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) using a speci ﬁc craniosynostosis gene panel and to further
analyse the detected genetic variants. In a proportion of caseschanges in the splicing process of the corresponding gene werepredicted in silico. To validate the consequences of the splice site
variants on correct transcript splicing, we performed in vitro splice
assays with mutation-matched minigene constructs in U2OS cells.In total, we investigated four potential splice site variants in TCF12
and FGFR2 . In three patients with coronal synostosis, the variantslead to an aberrant splicing (exon skipping, inclusion of intronic
sequence) of the TCF12 transcript. Taken together, we could
validate novel splice site mutations in the TCF12 and FGFR2 genes
and extend the mutational spectrum.
A. Borst: None. T. Schweitzer: None. D. Horn: None. E.
Kunstmann: None. E. Klopocki: None.
P04.024.A TRAF3 and NBR1 both in ﬂuence the effect of CYLD
(Arg936X) mutation on NF- κB activity
Judit Danis
1,2,3, Evelyn Kelemen3,4, Neil Rajan5, Nikoletta Nagy1,3,
Márta Széll1,3, Éva Ádám3
1ELKH-SZTE Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, Hungary,
2HCEMM-USZ Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, Hungary,
3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Szeged, Szeged,
Hungary,4Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary,5Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Recently the cases of a Hungarian and an Anglo-Saxon pedigrees
has been presented, who are affected by CYLD cutaneous
syndrome (syn: Brooke-Spiegler syndrome), carry the samedisease-causing mutation (c.2806C>T, p.Arg936X) of the cylindro-
matosis (CYLD) gene but exhibit striking differences in their
phenotypes. By whole exome sequencing, missense geneticvariants of the TRAF3 and NBR1 genes were identi ﬁed from
affected family members of the Hungarian family, that are not
present in the Anglo-Saxon family, suggesting their affected
proteins (TRAF3 and NBR1) are putative phenotype-modifyingfactors. To clarify how wild type and mutant TRAF3 and NBR1modify the effect of CYLD on NF- κB signal transduction pathway,
an in vitro experimental system was set up. Our study revealed
that the combined expression of mutant CYLD(Arg936X) both withTRAF3 and NBR1 caused increased NF- κB activity, regardless of the
latter two proteins being wild type or mutant. We conclude that
increased expression levels of these proteins further strengthenthe effect of CYLD(Arg936X) mutation on the NF- κB activity in
HEK293 cells and may explain the phenotype modifying effect of
these genes in CYLD cutaneous syndrome.
Funding: NKFIH K128736, FK134355J. Danis: None. E. Kelemen: None. N. Rajan: None. N. Nagy:
None. M. Széll: None. É. Ádám: None.
P04.025.B Dedifferentiated liposarcoma: Case report
Fiorita G. L. Mundim
1,2, Wesley R. S. Liberato1, Reigson A. Dias1,
Leticia Benevenutti1, Felipe R. C. Meira1, Katia M. T. C. Castro1, Pedro
G. L. Mundim1, Nathalia T. Sousa1, Renan Reis2
1UNIFENAS, Alfenas/MG, Brazil,2UNIVAS, Pouso Alegre/MG, Brazil.
Introduction: Dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDL) is considered a
well-differentiated form of histological (tumor) progression of
liposarcoma. Around 15% of cases have the potential tometastasize and with a high rate of recurrence. Since DDL canmorphologically mimic other sarcomas that have higher rates of
metastasis, especially in the retroperitoneum and inguinal
canal, the diagnosis and correct classi ﬁcation of DDL are essential
to determine an adequate prognosis and treatment for thepatient.
Materials and Methods: In the present case report, it is a
female patient, 39 years old, residing in Pouso Alegre, Brazil, inOctober 2019. She started with pain in the left gluteal regionassociated with nodular lesion in the place with progressiveAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
160
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608growth. The biopsy showed a mesenchymal neoplasia. Subse-
quent immunohistochemical examination revealed a tumor
compatible with a Dedifferentiated liposarcoma.
Results: DDL is a cellular and typically non-lipogenic sarcoma
with signi ﬁcant pleomorphism. Molecularly characterized by a ring
or a giant marker / rod chromosomes composed of material from
12q13-15. Most DDL also have gene ampli ﬁcation MDM2 and
CDK4, which may be similar to other tumors (Intimal sarcoma,Parosteal osteosarcoma, low grade central osteosarcoma, etc.)
Conclusion: For the diagnosis and correct classi ﬁcation of the
DDL, it is essential to carry out a cy togenetic study, Immunostaining
f o rM D M 2a n dC D K 4o rm o l e c u l a rt e s t i n gf o r1 2 q 1 3 - 1 5a m p l i ﬁcation.
F.G.L. Mundim: None. W.R.S. Liberato: None. R.A. Dias: None.
L. Benevenutti: None. F.R.C. Meira: None. K.M.T.C. Castro: None.
P.G.L. Mundim: None. N.T. Sousa: None. R. Reis: None.
P04.027.D Targeted next generation sequencing of Hypohi-
drotic ectodermal dysplasia in Egyptian pedigrees
Hoda Abdalla Ahmed Radwan1, Khalda Sayed Amr1, Eman Rabie1,
Ghada El-Kamah1, Inas Sayed1, Mennat Mehrez1, Nehal Hassib1,
Suher Zada2, Maha Abuzaid1, Mohamed Abdel-Kader1, Mostafa
Mostafa1, Yasmine Mohsen1
1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt,2American University, Cairo,
Egypt.
Introduction: Ectodermal dysplasia (ED) de ﬁnes a group of genetic
disorders characterized by developmental defects of 2 or more
structures of ectodermal origin. Pathogenesis is governed by defectsin many genes involved in multi ple developmental pathways.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is the most common ED
form characterized by hypodontia, hy pohidrosis, hypotrichosis and in
several instances dysmorphic features. Mutations in four genes: EDA,EDAR, EDARADD and WNT10A were reported to contribute to 90% of
H E Dc a s e s .T h ea i mo fo u rs t u d yi st oa s s e s st h ec l i n i c a la n d
molecular pro ﬁles of HED in Egyptian patients.
Patients and Methods: Thirty- ﬁve HED patients descending
from 32 unrelated pedigrees were clinically diagnosed based on
thorough clinical and dental examination. Patients were tested
using an NGS custom panel comprising the four aforementionedgenes. Sanger sequencing was performed for variant con ﬁrmation
and segregation analysis. Pathogenicity of variants was assessed
according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG)
guidelines as well as bioinformatics tools (e.g., Polyphen, SIFT,and Alamut).
Results: We identi ﬁed 12 pathogenic mutations: six novel and
six previously reported mutations. A molecular basis was identi ﬁed
in 16/32 pedigrees. EDA was the most frequent (13/16), followedby EDARADD (2/16) and EDAR (1/16). No variants were identi ﬁed
in the WNT10A gene.
Conclusion: The EDA, EDAR and EDARADD harbored the
molecular pathology in 50% of the studied HED patients. Thatmight be attributed to different ethnic backgrounds, and further
analyses through exome sequencing of the uncharacterized
patients might con ﬁrm rare genes involvement or identify new
genes governing ED pathogenesis.
H.A.A. Radwan: None. K.S. Amr: None. E. Rabie: None. G. El-
Kamah: None. I. Sayed: None. M. Mehrez: None. N. Hassib:
None. S. Zada: None. M. Abuzaid: None. M. Abdel-Kader: None.
M. Mostafa: None. Y. Mohsen: None.
P04.028.A Peds2Gene study: clinical and molecular delinea-
tion of a Spanish cohort of pediatric patients with Ehlers-
Danlos SyndromeLaura Plaza , Antonio Federico Martinez-Monseny, Dídac Casas,
Asunción Vicente, Francesc Palau
Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a group of
hereditary connective tissue disorders that manifests as skin
hyperextensibility, hypermobility of joints and fragility of blood
vessels. The hypermobility-type EDS (hEDS) is the most frequentand its molecular cause is unknown. Diagnosing EDS is challen-
ging due to the high clinical variability and the lack of a diagnostic
biomarker in paediatrics.
Materials and Methods: Prospective and retrospective obser-
vational study at a tertiary pediatric hospital including patients <
18 years at the date of diagnosis with EDS between 2012-2020.
The data was collected reviewing clinical records.
Results: Thirty- ﬁve patients were included; hEDS (65.7%),
classical (22.8%), vascular (5.7 %), kyphoscoliotic (2,8%) and
dermatosparaxis types (2.8%). Most of them were women
(62.9%). Musculoskeletal symptoms were the commonestcomplication (91.4%), with chronic pain of joints being themost frequent feature (62.9%). Psychiatric disorders were
present in 54.3% of patients, with the most frequent being
anxiety and depression (22.8%). A higher Beighton score did not
correlate with musculoskeletal , dermatologic, or other compli-
cations. Atrophic scarring and easy bruising were less frequent
in hEDs patients (p < 0.000,p < 0. 002). Chronic abdominal pain
was signi ﬁcantly associated with mi graine (p < 0.002). All the
types have molecular con ﬁrmation except the hEDS, but we
found some genes (TNXB,ELN,PI EZO2) that could be implicated,
requiring future studies.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst Spanish study focusing on
pediatric EDS. We propose interesting and novel genotype-
phenotype aspects. We provide detailed insights into the potential
complications during childhood to help minimize the physical andemotional impact of the syndrome in patients and their families.
L. Plaza: None. A. Martinez-Monseny: None. D. Casas: None.
A. Vicente: None. F. Palau: None.
P04.029.B New variant in TANGO1 gene in a patient with
hypermobile type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Anna Junkiert-Czarnecka , Maria Pilarska-Deltow, Aneta B ąk, Marta
Heise, Olga Haus
Department of Clinical Genetics Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz,
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
Introduction: Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS) is a
non-in ﬂammatory connective tissue disorder. It is perhaps the
most common hereditary connective tissue disorder. hEDS
unlike other types of EDS has no known genetic etiology. One
of the dysfunctions in hEDS patients ’cells is the impaired
transport of extracellular matrix proteins from cells to inter-
cellular space. A protein taking part in this process is TANGO1
encoded by the TANGO1 gene. The aim of the study was a
sequencing analysis of TANGO1 gene and an attempt to
evaluate its potential role in the etiology of the hypermobile
type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Methods: The study was carried out on a patient with a
hypermobile type of EDS. It was a 48-year-old woman presentedwith: joints hypermobility, recurrent dislocations, whole body pain,
easy bruising, striae, gothic palate and arachnodactyly. Her
daughter had mild symptoms of hEDS. Sequencing analysis ofTANGO1 was performed using the Sanger sequencing technique.
For bioinformatic analysis, VarSome tool was applied.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
161
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: In studied patient variant c.5637_5638insA (p.
Leu1880ThrfsTer6) in TANGO1 gene was detected. This variant
was not described up to now in EDS patients, and according to
VarSome it is pathogenic.
Conclusion: Analysis of the role of the TANGO1 gene in the
etiology of hypermobile type of EDS is a new approach to
evaluating the genetic background of this disorder. The impact of
a pathogenic variant in TANGO1 on its function and resulting
extracellular matrix condition need further investigations. Thisinvestigation was ﬁnanced by a grant from National Science
Centre Poland (2018/29/N/NZ5/00345).
A. Junkiert-Czarnecka: None. M. Pilarska-Deltow: None. A.
Bąk:None. M. Heise: None. O. Haus: None.
P04.030.C Molecular spectrum in 23 Spanish families affected
by hereditary multiple osteochondromas
M C. Martínez-Romero1,2,3, A T. Serrano-Antón1,2,4, M J. Sánchez-
Soler1,2,3, L Rodríguez-Peña1, M J. Ballesta-Martínez1,2,3, V López-
González1,2,4, M Barreda-Sánchez1,3, M E. Pérez-Tomás1, P Carbonell-
Meseguer5,2, C Salcedo-Cánovas6, E Guillén-Navarro1,2,4
1Sección de Genética Molecular (Centro de Bioquímica y Genética
Clínica), Sección de Genética Médica (Servicio de Pediatría), Hospital
Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. Instituto Murciano de
Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB-Arrixaca), El Palmar (MURCIA), Spain,
2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,3Cátedra de Genética Médica. UCAM-
Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,4Departamento de
Pediatría. Facultad de Medicina. UMU-Universidad de Murcia, Murcia,Spain,5Sección de Genética Molecular (Centro de Bioquímica y
Genética Clínica), Sección de Genética Médica (Servicio de Pediatría).
Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. Instituto Murciano
de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB-Arrixaca), El Palmar (MURCIA),Spain,6Servicio de Traumatología. CSUR ortopedia. Hospital Clínico
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El Palmar (MURCIA), Spain.
Introduction: Osteochondroma represen ts the most common benign
osseous tumour, 20-50%; in familiar occurrence two AD diseases are
probable: hereditary multiple osteochondromas (HMO)(ORPHA:321)
associated with variants in EXT1( MIM,#133700) or EXT2(MIM,#133701)
genes and metachondromatosis (MC)(ORPHA:2499), caused inPTPN11(MIM,#156250). Both disorders have risk of malignant
transformation (3-5%). Our goal is to ﬁnd out the molecular spectrum
in a cohort of Spanish patients with multiple osteochondroma.
Methodology: Coding and ﬂanking exons of EXT1
(NM_000127.2), EXT2(NM_207122.) and PTPN11(NM_002834.4)
genes were performed by capture (SureSelectQXT ®Agilent) and
sequenced by Illumina platform. Minimum depth coverage was20x. Copy Number Variation (CNV) were evaluated using DecoN
algorism and MLPA-P215-B3-EXT-Kit.
Results: 23 index patients (12 females/11 males) with average
age of 15 years were included. Distribution of variants by geneswere EXT1(56.5%), EXT2(34.8%) and PTPN11(8.7%). De novo
variants represented 56.5% cases versus 44.5% inherited. A total
of 22 pathogenic variants (15 novel/7 reported in HGMD ®2020.4)
were identi ﬁed, most of them privates (22/23) being only
recurrent one variant in two cases (EXT1:c.936-11insTG). Type of
variants: frameshift (45.4%), nonsense (27.3%), splicing (13.6%),
CNV (9%) and missense (4.5%). Anatomical distribution referred ofosteochondroma was mainly in long-bone extremities (65.2%) and
hands (43.5%), nevertheless genotype-phenotype correlation by
genes was not observed; in 7 patients (30.4%) osseous deformitiesrequired surgery but malignant degeneration was not noti ﬁed.
Conclusion: -There is a broad allelic heterogeneity in EXT1 and
EXT2 genes resulting with 15 novel variants identi ﬁed. -Secondaryvariants in PTPN11 gene highlights the importance of expanding
the study to other HMO genes for a more suitable personalized
treatment.
M.C. Martínez-Romero: None. A.T. Serrano-Antón: None. M.J.
Sánchez-Soler: None. L. Rodríguez-Peña: None. M.J. Ballesta-
Martínez: None. V. López-González: None. M. Barreda-Sánchez:
None. M.E. Pérez-Tomás: None. P. Carbonell-Meseguer: None.
C. Salcedo-Cánovas: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None.
P04.031.D Father and daughter with acromicric dysplasia
Cinzia Mautone
1, Mario Francesco Iasevoli1, Pamela Paglia1,
Giuseppina Barra1, Dario Di Salvio2, Mariateresa Falco3, Carolina
Mauro3, Emanuele Agolini4, Antonio Novelli4, Daniela Melis1,3
1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica
Salernitana" University of Salerno, Baronissi (SA), Italy,2Department
of Maternal-Infant, Pediatric Section, University of Naples Federico II,Napoli, Italy,3Pediatric Unit San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona
University Hospital, Salerno, Italy,4Departmnent of Laboratories,
Medical Genetic Unit Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Roma,
Italy.
Introduction: Mutations of FBN1 are responsible for different
disorders including Acromicric dysplasia (characterized by short
hands and feet, joint limitations), Geleophysic dysplasia (progres-sive heart involvement), and Weill-Marchesani syndrome (micro-
spherophakia).Case report: We describe father and daughter with
short stature with no other systemic involvement. Father wasevaluated from ﬁrst years of life for congenital hip dysplasia and
short stature; he underwent GH therapy with poor results. His
childhood X-rays showed shortness of long bones and hands ’
phalanges and typical notches of II and V metacarpus. At physicalexamination both showed round face, well-de ﬁned eyebrows,
bulbous nose with anteverted nostrils, disharmonic short stature
with short limbs, relative macrocephaly, and brachydactyly; hand
camptodactily was detected during childhood in the father and inthe child at 4 years of age. No joint stiffness was recored duringadulthood in the father. NGS panel of genes involved in skeletal
dysplasias found an heterozygous variant (c.5285G>A) in FBN1
gene in both father and daughter, previously unreported; adifferent pathogenetic variant involving Glycine 1762 has been
associated with both Acromicric and Geleophysical dysplasia. No
cardiac or ocular involvement were present, thus a diagnosis ofAcromicric dysplasia was proposed.
Conclusion: We report a familial case of Acr omicric dysplasia, with
a novel variant in FBN1 gene. Clinical features of both father and
daughter overlap. The father und erwent GH therapy in childhood,
with poor results. The report could expand clinical features of thiscondition and help to de ﬁne natural history of the disease.
C. Mautone: None. M. Iasevoli: None. P. Paglia: None. G.
Barra: None. D. Di Salvio: None. M. Falco: None. C. Mauro: None.
E. Agolini: None. A. Novelli: None. D. Melis: None.
P04.032.A Aarskog-Scott syndrome: case report and updated-
review
Marta Spodenkiewicz
1, Gauthier Loron2,3,4, Céline Poirsier1, Fran-
cesco Laconi5, Marie Massier1, Perrine Venot2, Clémence Jacquin6,
Lucas Hérissant1, Emilie Landais1, Martine Doco-Fenzy1,7,8
1Service de génétique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France,2Service
Pédiatrie B, CHU Reims, Reims, France,3Faculté de médecine, Reims,
France,4CReSTIC/ EA3804, Reims, France,5Service de chirurgieAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
162
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Pédiatrique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France,6CHU Reims genetics Unit,
Reims, France,7SFR CAP SANTE, UFR de médecine, Reims, France,
8EA3801, Reims, France.
Aarskog-Scott syndrome (ASS) or facio-digito-genital dysplasia
(OMIM#305400) is a rare X-linked inherited disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the FYVE, RhoGEF, and pleckstrin homology
domain-containing protein 1 ( FGD1 ) gene. This syndrome affects
about 1 in 1,000,000 births. Affected patients present a broadclinical phenotype with dysmorphism, short stature, skeletal and
urogenital anomalies.
The probant is a two years old boy with camptodactyly,
dysmorphism, cryptorchidism and short stature. Exome sequen-cing found a hemizygous variant c.123del (NM_004463) in FGD1 ,
inherited from his mother who presents camptodactyly and
hypertelorism. FGD1 gene encodes the FGD1 protein, a guanine
nucleotide exchange factors, able to activate Rho GTPase cell
division cycle 42 (CDC42). Rho GTPase-CDC42 plays a role in
control cytoskeleton-dependent membrane rearrangements, tran-scriptional activation, secretory membrane traf ﬁcking, extracellular
matrix and cytoskeleton remodeling. Rho GTPases are involved in
human diseases as developmental, hematological, autoin ﬂamma-
tory, autoimmune disorders. To our knowledge less than 60damaging pathogenic variants in FGD1 were reported to date, and
the variant of our patient was not yet reported.
The aim of this work is to report the case of our patient and his
family with a highly variable phenotype and to review the literatureof patients in order to update the spectrum of this rare disease.
M. Spodenkiewicz: None. G. Loron: None. C. Poirsier: None. F.
Laconi: None. M. Massier: None. P. Venot: None. C. Jacquin:
None. L. Hérissant: None. E. Landais: None. M. Doco-Fenzy:
None.
P04.033.B Clinical and molecular study of a cohort of 79
patients with a pathogenic variation in GDF5 gene and review
of the literature
William Dufour
1, Fabienne Escande1, Anne-Sophie Jourdain1, Odile
Boute1, Anne Dieux1, Carherine Vincent-Delorme1, Muriel Holder2,
Francesca Forzano3, Laurence Faivre4, Christel Thauvin4, Marion
Gerard5, David Geneviève6, Marjolaine Willems6, Bertrand Isidor7,
Chloé Quélin8, Sylvie Odent8, Valérie Cormier-Daire9, Geneviève
Baujat9, Gilles Morin10, Lyse Ruaud11, Yline Capri11, Alice Gold-
enberg12, Yves Alembik13, Nicole Revençu14, Bianca Ethel Gutiérrez-
Amavizca15, Nicolas Chassaing16, Fanny Laffargue17, Christine
Francannet17, Tiffany Busa18, Véronique Paquis19, Sylvie Manouvrier1,
Florence Petit1
1CHU de Lille, Lille, France,2Guy ’s and St Thomas ’NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom,3Guy ’s and St Thomas ’NHS
Foundation Trust, London, France,4CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,
5CHU de Caen, Caen, France,6CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier,
France,7CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France,8CHU de Rennes, Rennes,
France,9Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,10CHU
Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France,11Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris,
France,12CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,13CHU de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France,14Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels,
Belgium,15Ciudad Juarez Autonomous University, Ciudad Juarez,
Mexico,16CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,17CHU de Clermont-
Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France,18Hôpital Universitaire Timone
Enfants, Marseille, France,19CHU de Nice, Nice, France.
The GDF5 gene is mainly expressed in the joints during the
embryonic period. It is known to be responsible for differentbone pathologies according to its alteration mechanism:
brachydactyly in case of mono-allelic loss of function;symphalangism and multiple synostoses in case of hetero-
zygous gain of function; Grebe, Du Pan and Hunter-Thompson
syndromes in case of bi-allelic loss of function; susceptibility to
osteoarthritis and hip dysplasia in the presence of polymorph-isms within its promoter. Thro ugh the numerous associated
phenotypes, GDF5 illustrates the dif ﬁculties in interpreting
genomic variations. We studied a large international cohort of
79 patients harbouring GDF5 variations in order to: 1) Describe
precisely the clinical and molecul ar data of patients; 2) Identify
rare phenotypes and 3) Demonstrate genotype-phenotype
correlations. We observed that some features seems to have a
higher frequency in our cohort compared to those of theliterature, notably 2nd ray clinodactyly and Angel ShapedPhalango-Epiphyseal Dysplasia, joint laxity, various dental
abnormalities, premature osteoathritis and hip disorders
(mainly coxo-femoral dysplasia).
Table 1: Frequency of the different impairment in patients with brachydactyly
type C
cohort
patientspercentage literature
patientspercentage
Angel-Shaped
Phalango-Epiphyseal
Dysplasia22/63 34.9% 5/27 18.5%
1strays
brachymetacarpy49/63 77.8% 16/27 59.3%
2ndrays
brachymesophalangy51/63 81% 18/27 66.7%
3rdrays
brachymesophalangy36/63 57.1% 13/27 48.1%
5thrays
brachymesophalangy47/63 74.6% 19/27 70.4%
2ndrays
brachybasophalangy14/63 22.2% 8/27 29.6%
3rdrays
brachybasophalangy14/63 22.2% 10/27 37%
2ndrays clinodactyly 22/66 33.3% 17/30 56.7%
3rdrays clinodactyly 14/66 21.2% 11/30 36.7%
5thrays clinodactyly 43/66 65.2% 17/30 56.7%
polyphalangy 19/63 30.2% 9/27 33.3%
pseudoepiphyses 16/63 25.4% 6/27 22.2%
foot damage 20/49 40.8% 11/26 42.3%height<-2SD 21/57 36.8% 7/19 36.8%bone age delay 24/26 92.3% 7/8 87.5%
dental anomalies 19/55 34.5% 1/15 6.7%
hip anomalies 15/61 24.6% 3/19 15.8%joint laxity 16/62 25.8% 2/17 11.8%
premature
osteoarthrosis6/33 18.2% 0/14 0%
asymptomatic 3/74 4.1% 4/33 12.1%
W. Dufour: None. F. Escande: None. A. Jourdain: None. O.
Boute: None. A. Dieux: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. M.
Holder: None. F. Forzano: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin:
None. M. Gerard: None. D. Geneviève: None. M. Willems: None.
B. Isidor: None. C. Quélin: None. S. Odent: None. V. Cormier-
Daire: None. G. Baujat: None. G. Morin: None. L. Ruaud: None. Y.
Capri: None. A. Goldenberg: None. Y. Alembik: None. N.
Revençu: None. B.E. Gutiérrez-Amavizca: None. N. Chassaing:
None. F. Laffargue: None. C. Francannet: None. T. Busa: None. V.
Paquis: None. S. Manouvrier: None. F. Petit: None.
P04.034.C Porokeratosis of Mibelli in the Tunisian population:
association of nonsense and synonymous variantsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
163
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Haïfa El Mabrouk1,2, Lobna Boussofara3,4, Hamza Chouk1,2, Nadia
Gharyani Fétoui3,4, Ali Saad3,2, Mohamed Denguezli3,4, Dorra
H’mida3,2
1Higher Institute of Biotechnology, Monastir, Tunisia,2Laboratory of
Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology,Farhat HACHED University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia,3Faculty of
Medicine Ibn El Jazzar, Sousse, Tunisia,4Department of Dermatology
and Venerology, Farhat HACHED University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia.
Introduction: Porokeratosis of Mibelli (PM) is a rare autosomal
dominant genodermatosis linked to the MVK and PMVK genes. We
aim to establish molecular evidence of PM in our Tunisianpatients.
Material and methods: Direct sequencing was performed in a
cohort of 8 patients with PM and 9 of their clinically healthyrelatives from 2 unrelated families in central Tunisia.
Results: 7 patients and 2 healthy relatives presented a known
pathogenic variant ( PMVK c.412C> T; p.R138*), and 6 patients and
4 of their relatives presented a synonymous variant ( PMVK
c.147A>G; p.E49 =).
Discussion: In the present work, we propose to report an
association of the synonymous variant p.49Glu =in exon 2 to the
pathogenic variant p.Arg138* at exon 4, both at the PMVK gene.
This association seemed to modulate PM patients ’phenotype.
Patients carrying the association present either moderate
phenotypes; the number of lesions exceeded 10 coveringapproximately 5% of the body surface or severe phenotypes: inwhich affected body surface exceeds 10%, with lesions of the
genitals and the face. When the synonymous variant is absent,
patients present only a few annular plaques with reduced size,suggesting a mild clinical phenotype.
Conclusion: The association between the two variants lead us
to believe that the synonymous variant could constitute a modi ﬁer
of the PMVK gene.
H. El Mabrouk: None. L. Boussofara: None. H. Chouk: None. N.
Gharyani Fétoui: None. A. Saad: None. M. Denguezli: None. D.
H’mida: None.
P04.035.D GLI3-variants causing isolated polysyndactyly are
not restricted to the gene ’s last third
Henrike L. Sczakiel
1,2, Wiebke Hülsemann3, Angela T. Abad-Perez1,
Sarina Schwartzmann1, Denise Horn1, Malte Spielmann4,5, Stefan
Mundlos1,2, Martin A. Mensah1,6
1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institut für Medizinische Genetik
und Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany,2Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, Berlin, Germany,Berlin, Germany,3Handchirurgie Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift,
Hamburg, Germany,4Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität
zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,5Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Human Molecular Genomics Group, Berlin, Germany,
6Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
Introduction: Loss of function variants of GLI3 are associated with
a variety of forms of polysyndactyly: Pallister-Hall-Syndrome (PHS),Greig-Cephalopolysyndactyly-Syndrome (GCPS) and isolated poly-
syndactyly. So far, mutations in the ﬁrst and third third of the GLI3
gene have been associated with GCPS while mutations in thesecond third of GLI3 have been associated with PHS. Cases of
isolated polysyndactyly were attributed to mutations in the third
third of GLI3. Here we present more than 30 individuals from over
15 families with pre- and postaxial polysyndactyly in whom wecould con ﬁrmGLI3 mutations.Materials and Methods: Sanger sequencing of the GLI3 gene
was performed in patients with clinical ﬁndings suggestive for a
GLI3-associated polysyndactyly syndrome. Additionally, we
searched the literature for previously reported cases of eitherPHS, GCPS or isolated polysyndactyly with con ﬁrmed mutations in
theGLI3 gene.
Results: We tested over 80 individuals with polysyndactyly for
GLI3 variants and detected a causing mutation in more than 15
families. The mutations spanned almost the entire coding regionof the GLI3 gene (c.366 - c.4172) and were mostly amorphic. We
observed no genotype-phenotype correlation within those cases.
Overall, we found a high phenotypic variability within and acrossfamilies. A close review of the literature revealed more cases ofisolated polysyndactyly with mutations across nearly the entire
coding region of GLI3.
Conclusions: We found that isolated polysyndactyly is a
common phenotype of inherited as well as de novo GLI3 mutations
and is not restricted to mutations in the last third of the GLI3 gene.
H.L. Sczakiel: None. W. Hülsemann: None. A.T. Abad-Perez:
None. S. Schwartzmann: None. D. Horn: None. M. Spielmann:
None. S. Mundlos: None. M.A. Mensah: None.
P04.037.B A novel c.671_682del NCSTN variant in a family
with Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Nikolai P. Pace
1, Dillon Mintoff2, Peter Bauer3,Isabella Borg1,2
1University of Malta, Msida, Malta,2Mater dei Hospital, Msida, Malta,
3Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
Introduction: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic, suppura-
tive condition of the pilosebaceous unit (PSU), the pathophysiol-
ogy of which is still being elucidated. The disease is multifactorial,
caused by both genetic and environmental factors. The potentialrole of underlying genetic variants, particularly within the γ-
secretase complex has recently garnered signi ﬁcant research
interest by the international HS community.
Methodology: The proband, a 21-year-old male and his 45-
year-old mother had Hurley Stage IIIa HS and shared a follicular,
Latent Class 2 phenotype. The maternal grandmother suffered
from a mild form of axillary HS. In view of these ﬁndings, a familial
form of HS with variable expressivity was suspected and moleculargenetic studies were carried out.
Results: WES analysis on the proband revealed a novel
heterozygous c.671_682del p. (Val224_Thr227del) variant in theNicastrin ( NCSTN ) gene. This 12bp in-frame deletion lies in exon 6
ofNCSTN , resulting in the loss of 4 amino acid residues. Targeted
gene sequencing identi ﬁed the same heterozygous variant in the
affected mother. The NCSTN deletion was not identi ﬁed in a local
reference dataset comprising 60 ethnically matched whole exome
sequences.
Conclusion: This result expands the mutational spectrum of the
NCSTN gene. It is the ﬁrst gene variant identi ﬁed in HS Maltese
patients. Further genetic studies will be carried out on all local HS
patients to unravel the genetic aetiology of HS in the local
population using a high throughput exome sequencing approach.We hope to establish genotype-phenotype associations whichwould lead to better clinical management and targeted treatment
for HS.
N. Pace: None. D. Mintoff: None. P. Bauer: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Centogene. I. Borg: None.
P04.038.C A missense mutation in VAV3 in a familial case of
high bone massAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
164
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Núria Martínez-Gil1, Diana Ovejero2, Natalia Garcia-Giralt2, Leo-
nardo Mellibovsky2, Xavier Nogués2, Raquel Rabionet1, Daniel
Grinberg1, Susanna Balcells1
1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of
Biology, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, IRSJD, Barcelona,Spain,2Musculoskeletal Research Group, IMIM (Hospital del Mar
Medical Research Institute), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red en Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBERFES), ISCIII,Barcelona, Spain.
Osteoporosis is the most common bone disease, characterized by
a low bone mineral density (BMD) and increased risk of fracture. Atthe other end of the BMD spectrum, some individuals present
strong, fracture-resistant, bones. Both osteoporosis and high bone
mass (HBM) are heritable and their genetic architecture encom-passes polygenic inheritance of common variants and some casesof monogenic highly penetrant variants in causal genes. We have
investigated the genetics of a family presenting HBM segregating
in an apparently Mendelian dominant pattern. Since polygeniccauses and mutations in known HBM genes had been previouslydiscarded, we searched for rare causal variants in novel genes by
whole-exome sequencing in two affected and one non-affected
family members. Rare coding variants ful ﬁlling the inheritance
pattern were further restricted to include only those genes that
could be related to bone development, function or disease,
leaving 8 variants. Of those, we highlight a missense variant inVAV3, a gene encoding a guanine-nucleotide-exchange factorwith an important role in osteoclast activation and function.
Although no previous cases of VAV3 mutations have been found
in humans, Vav3 KO mice display dense bones, equivalent to theHBM phenotype present in our family. A second missense variant,which might play a secondary role, was found in SIK3. However,
the mouse and human bone phenotypes associated with this
gene do not ﬁt with HBM. Future functional assessment of the
VAV3 variant will likely con ﬁrm VAV3 as a novel HBM gene and a
potential therapeutic target for osteoporosis. Funding: SAF2014 ‐
56562 ‐R, SAF2016 ‐75948 ‐R.
N. Martínez-Gil: None. D. Ovejero: None. N. Garcia-Giralt:
None. L. Mellibovsky: None. X. Nogués: D. Speakers Bureau/
Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Amgen, Lilly, UCB. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;UCB, Amgen. R. Rabionet: None. D. Grinberg: None. S. Balcells:
None.
P04.039.D A new variant of c409delA in the EXT2 gene
identi ﬁed among Yakut families with hereditary multiple
exostosis
Alexandra E. Yakovleva
1, Anastasia L. Danilova1, Diana A.
Petukhova1, Polina I. Golikova1, Gavril D. Moskvitin1,2, Aitalina L.
Sukhomyasova1,2, Nadezda R. Maksimova1
1Research Laboratory "Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics", M.
K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian
Federation,2Medical Genetic Center, Republican Hospital №1-
“National Medical Center ”, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Hereditary multiple exostosis (HME) (OMIM 133700, OIMM 133701)
is a genetically heterogeneous disease with an autosomaldominant mode of inheritance, characterized by the presence ofmultiple cartilaginous growths in the metaphyses of long bones.
Materials and Methods: We examined 27 unrelated probands
with a clinical diagnosis of HME using mass parallel - massive forallEXT1 and EXT2 coding regions, followed by validation of the
results by Sanger sequencing.Results: Molecular genetic research revealed an unknown
heterozygous frameshift variant c.409delA (p.Ile137fs) in the 2
nd
exon EXT2 among 8 unrelated Yakut patients, which was also
conﬁrmed by direct Sanger sequencing. The detected mutation
was checked in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD),Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD), Genome Aggregation
Database (gnomAD). This mutation predicted to be highly
damaging on a protein function. Experiments were performedusing the equipment of the Center for collective use of the North-Eastern Federal University.
Conclusions: As a result of this study, for the ﬁrst time in the
Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), a previously undescribed hetero-zygous frameshift variant c.409delA (p.Ile137fs) in the 2
ndexon of
theEXT2 gene. The study was supported by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of the Russian Federation. (Project No.
FSRG-2020-0014 "Genomics of Arctic: epidemiology, hereditaryand pathology").
A.E. Yakovleva: None. A.L. Danilova: None. D.A. Petukhova:
None. P.I. Golikova: None. G.D. Moskvitin: None. A.L. Sukho-
myasova: None. N.R. Maksimova: None.
P04.041.B Aberrant binding of mutant HSP47 affects post-
translational modi ﬁcation of type I collagen and leads to
osteogenesis imperfecta
Delﬁen Syx1, Yoshihiro Ishikawa2,3, Jan Gebauer4, Sergei P. Boudko5,
Brecht Guillemyn1, Tim Van Damme1, Sanne D ’hondt1,S o ﬁe
Symoens1, Sheela Nampoothiri6, Douglas B. Gould2, Ulrich Bau-
mann4, Hans Peter Bächinger3, Fransiska Malfait1
1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,2UCSF School of Medicine, San
Francisco, CA, USA,3Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR, USA,4University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,5Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA,6Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India.
Heat shock protein 47 (HSP47), encoded by the SERPINH1 gene,
is a molecular chaperone essential for correct folding ofcollagens. We report a homozygous p.(R222S) substitution in
HSP47 in a child with severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The
highly conserved p.R222 residue is located within the collagen-interacting surface and HSP47-R222S shows a signi ﬁcantly
reduced af ﬁnity for type I collagen in binding assays. This
altered interaction leads to p osttranslational overmodi ﬁcation of
type I procollagen, with increased glycosylation and/or hydro-xylation of lysine and proline residues as shown by mass
spectrometry. Since a normal intracellular folding and secretion
rate of type I procollagen was observed, this overmodi ﬁcation
cannot be explained by prolonged exposure of the procollagenmolecules to modifying enzyme s, as is commonly observed in
other OI types. We found signi ﬁcant upregulation of several
molecular chaperones and enzymes involved in procollagenmodi ﬁcation and folding on Western blot and RT-qPCR and
showed that an imbalance in binding of HSP47-R222S to
unfolded type I collagen chains results in increased binding of
other chaperones and modifying e nzymes in a gelatin sepharose
pulldown assay. In conclusion, our ﬁndings suggest a compen-
satory mechanism for aberrant HS P47-R222S binding, eventually
leading to overmodi ﬁcation of type I (pro)collagen chains,
thereby underscoring the im portance of HSP47 for proper
posttranslational modi ﬁcation and providing insights into the
molecular pathomechanisms of the p.(R222S) alteration in
HSP47, which leads to a severe OI phenotype. This work wassupported by Research Foundation Flanders (Belgium), GhentUniversity, German Research Council, National Institutes of
Health and Shriners Hospitals for Children.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
165
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608D. Syx: None. Y. Ishikawa: None. J. Gebauer: None. S.P.
Boudko: None. B. Guillemyn: None. T. Van Damme: None. S.
D’hondt: None. S. Symoens: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. D.B.
Gould: None. U. Baumann: None. H. Bächinger: None. F. Malfait:
None.
P04.042.C Association of one-carbon metabolism-related
genes and ichthyosis vulgaris manifestation in Eastern
Ukraine
Olena M. Fedota1,Iurii O. Sadovnychenko1,2, Halyna V. Makukh3,
Lilia B. Chorna3, Larissa V. Roshcheniuk2,4, Vitalii M. Vorontsov4,
Pavlo P. Ryzhko4
1V.N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, Kharkiv, Ukraine,2Kharkiv
National Medical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine,3Institute of Hereditary
Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Lviv,Ukraine,4Regional Clinical Dispensary for Skin and Venereal Diseases
no. 1, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
Introduction: The prevalence of ichthyosis vulgaris (IV) in Eastern
Ukraine is 1:2557. The dermatosis is caused by FLG mutations
R501X and 2282del4, but their penetrance in heterozygotes is
incomplete. The purpose of the study was to analyze the effects of
one-carbon metabolism-related genes on the IV clinical manifes-tation in FLG mutation carriers.
Materials and methods: The MTHFR C677T (rs1801133), MTHFR
A1298C (rs1801131), MTR A2756G (rs1805087) and MTRR A66G
(rs1801394) SNPs were analyzed by PCR-RFLP in 31 IV patients, 7their non-IV ﬁrst-degree relatives with FLG mutations and 150
healthy controls. Statistical analysis was performed using chi-
square test and OR.
Results: In 2282del4/wt IV individuals, the distributions of wild-
type, heterozygous and variant homozygous genotypes were:
rs1801133 —0.29:0.71:0.00; rs1801131 —0.53:0.47:0.00; rs1805087
—0.70:0.24:0.06; rs1801394 —0.23:0.53:0.24. In this group the MTR
2756AA genotype and MTR 66GG genotype frequencies were 1.4-
1.6 higher than in IV patients with the other FLG genotypes, the
MTR 2756AA genotype frequency was 1.6 times higher than in
healthy controls (p < 0.01). The association between IV and one-carbon metabolism-related genes was evaluated for single- and
multilocus disease models. The strongest genotype-phenotype
relationships were found for the genotypes: MTHFR 677CT —OR=
3.60 (95% CI 1.21 −10.71, p =0.032), MTHFR 677CT/ MTHFR 1298AA
+AC—OR=4.39 (95% CI 1.47 −13.14, p =0.008), MTHFR 677CT/
MTHFR 1298AA/ MTRR 66AG —OR=7.64 (95% CI 2.34 −24.94, p =
0.001), MTHFR 677CT/ MTHFR 1298AA/ MTR 2756AA/ MTRR 66AG —
OR
=11.23 (95% CI 2.51 −50.21, p =0.002).
Conclusion: SNPs in one-carbon metabolism-related genes can
be considered as modi ﬁers of FLG 2282del4 mutation in IV clinical
manifestation.
O.M. Fedota: None. I.O. Sadovnychenko: None. H.V. Makukh:
None. L.B. Chorna: None. L.V. Roshcheniuk: None. V.M.
Vorontsov: None. P.P. Ryzhko: None.
P04.044.D Incontinentia pigmenti and favism due to a large
genomic deletion including IKBKG and G6PD
Maria Grossmann1, Stephanie Spranger2, Snjezana Rendulic3,
Andrea Bier1, Silke Reif1, Manuela Timmer1, Christian Jänecke1,
Vivien Klaschka1, Jens Plaschke1, Stefan Krüger1
1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany,2Praxis
für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany,3Praxis für Humangenetik und
Prävention, Stuttgart, Germany.Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a genodermatosis in four stages
including blistering, wart-like rash, swirling macular hyperpigmen-
tation and linear hypopigmentation, and also affects hair, teeth,
nails, eyes and brain. IP is caused by mutations in the IKBKG
(NEMO ) gene and inherited in an X-linked dominant manner with
high penetrance. Affected females show a highly variable
phenotype. IP is usually prenatally lethal in males. About 65% of
females with IP have a recurrent ~11.7-kb deletion spanning exons4 to 10 and ~8.6% have point mutations. Only seven otherdeletions were described to date.
Here we describe a 24-year-old female patient with typical skin
lesions since birth. She showed neither neurological nor othersymptoms of IP and suffered two miscarriages. Furthermore, thepatient had intolerance of fava beans and some drugs, indicating
X-linked dominant G6PD associated favism. Her mother and her
sister were also affected of IP and favism.
Neither long-range (gap) PCR for detection of the recurrent exon
4 to 10 deletion, nor sequence analysis detected a pathogenic
mutation. MLPA revealed a heterozygous deletion spanning thewhole IKBKG gene as well as the 5 ’adjacent entire G6PD gene.
NC_000023.10:g.(153,744,322_153,759,773)_
(153,793,401_153,798,250)del. This deletion is to our knowledge of
yet undescribed extent. The only two patients with large IKBKG
deletions involving the whole G6PD gene described so far by Fusco
et al. did not show any clinical manifestations of G6PD deﬁciency in
contrast to the patients described here.
In summary, this is the ﬁrst description of a contiguous gene
syndrome including Incontinentia pigmenti and favism.
M. Grossmann: None. S. Spranger: None. S. Rendulic: None.
A. Bier: None. S. Reif: None. M. Timmer: None. C. Jänecke: None.
V. Klaschka: None. J. Plaschke: None. S. Krüger: None.
P04.045.B The importance of extracutaneous organ involve-
ment for the clinical severity and prognosis observed in
incontinentia pigmenti caused by IKBKG mutations
Hwa Young Kim, Jung Min Ko , Hyun Beom Song, Kyu Han Kim, Jong
Hee Chae, Man Jin Kim, Moon-Woo Seong
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of.
Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare X-linked skin disease caused by
mutations of the IKBKG gene, which is required for activation of the
nuclear factor-kappa B signaling pathway. Multiple systems can beaffected with highly variable phenotypic expressivity. We aimed toclarify the clinical characteristics observed in molecularly-
conﬁrmed Korean IP patients. Medical records of 25 females
conﬁrmed as IP by molecular genetic analysis were retrospectively
reviewed. A phenotypic score of extracutaneous manifestationswas calculated to assess the disease severity. The IKBKG gene
partial deletion or intragenic mutations were investigated by a
long-range PCR, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation,
and direct sequencing methods. Among 25 individuals, 18 (72%)
were sporadic cases. All patients showed typical skin manifesta-
tions at inborn or during the neonatal period. Extracutaneousﬁndings were noted in 17 (68%) cases; ocular manifestations (28%),
neurological abnormalities (28%), hair abnormalities (20%), dental
anomalies (12%), nail dystrophy (8%). The common IKBKG exon
4-10 deletion was observed in 20 (80%) patients. In addition, 5
intragenic sequence variants were identi ﬁed, including 3 novel
ones. The phenotype scores were highly variable from abnormal
skin pigmentation only to one or more extracutaneous features,
even though there was no meaningful signi ﬁcant difference for
each clinical characteristic between the groups with sequence
variants and common large deletion. Heterogeneity ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
166
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608extracutaneous manifestations and high incidence of sporadic
cases were observed in our cohort with IP. Long-term monitoring
with multidisciplinary management is essential for evaluating the
clinical status, providing adequate genetic counseling and under-standing genotype-phenotype correlation in IP.
H. Kim: None. J. Ko: None. H. Song: None. K. Kim: None. J.
Chae: None. M. Kim: None. M. Seong: None.
P04.047.D Further insights in the FKBP14 -related khyphosco-
liotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: report of 3 unrelated indivi-
duals and 2 new pathogenic variants
Marlies Colman1,2, Robin Vroman1,2, Tibbe Dhooge1,2, Zoë Mal-
fait1,2, Biruté Burnyté3, Sheela Nampoothiri4, Delﬁen Syx1,2, Fransiska
Malfait1,2
1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent,
Belgium,3Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania,4Amrita Institute
of Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Kerala, India.
The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (kEDS) is an
autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder characterized by
kyphoscoliosis, muscle hypotonia and generalized joint hypermo-bility. It results from de ﬁciency of either lysyl hydroxylase 1 (LH1
encoded by PLOD1 ) or the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase
family FK506-binding protein 22kDa (FKBP22 encoded by FKBP14 ).
FKBP22 acts as a molecular chaperone involved in the folding andquality control of collagen molecules (among which types III and
VI collagen). De ﬁciency of FKBP22 may lead to accumulation of
incorrectly folded collagen molecules in the endoplasmic reticu-lum (ER), causing premature interactions. We present the clinicalmanifestations of three non-related individuals with homozygous
pathogenic FKBP14 variants: proband 1 (c.587A>G; p.(Asp196Gly));
proband 2 (c.362dupC; p.(Glu122Argfs*7)) and proband 3 (c.2T>G;p.(Met1?)); with experimental data of the variants found in
probands 1 and 2. Both the c.587A>G; p.(Asp196Gly) and the
c.362dupC; p.(Glu122Argfs*7) variant cause absence of FKBP22protein. In addition, we found intracellular accumulation of typesIII and VI collagen and impaired ﬁbroblast migration. Investigation
of ER-stress related proteins (CHOP, XBP1, ATF6, (p)eIF2aplha, BIP)
did not reveal any signi ﬁcant upregulation.
Conclusion: This study broadens the clinical and molecular
spectrum of FKBP14 -related kEDS with three non-related individuals
and two new pathogenic var iants. We showed delayed ﬁbroblast
migration and intracellular acc umulation of type III and type VI
collagen and we provide the ﬁrst evidence of a homozygous
pathogenic missense variant.M.C., D.S. and F.M. are a PhD candidate,
a postdoctoral researcher and a senior clinical investigator respec-tively, of the Research Foundation Flanders, Belgium.
M. Colman: None. R. Vroman: None. T. Dhooge: None. Z.
Malfait: None. B. Burnyté: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. D. Syx:
None. F. Malfait: None.
P04.048.C Homozygosity for a previously unreported deletion
in B3GAT3 causes linkeropathy - a clinical report describing anadult patient
Anneli C. S. Bolund , Bente Langdahl, Trine B. Laurberg, Michel B.
Hellfritzsch, Hans Gjørup, Bjarne Møller-Madsen, Trine Ø. Nielsen,Stense Farholt, Pernille A. Gregersen
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark.
Background: Proteoglycans (PGs) are complex macromolecules
consisting of a core protein and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) sidechains. PGs are important for the constitution and functioning of
the connective tissue. The normal composition of the GAG side
chains de ﬁnes the nature of the PGs and a wide range of
biological events. De ﬁciencies of speci ﬁc enzymes involved in the
linkage of GAGs to the core protein, leads to a heterogeneousdisease group called Linkeropathies. This is a group of multisystem
conditions characterized by skeletal dysplasia and various extra-
skeletal features. The conditions show variable severity andoverlapping phenotypes. β-1,3-glucuronyltransferase 3, encoded
byB3GAT3 , is an enzyme involved in the linkage process to form
functional PGs, and biallelic pathogenic variants in B3GAT3 hence
leads to linkeropathy.
Case presentation: A now 22-year-old female patient, born of
consanguineous parents, is presen ted. The disease history included
congenital severe joint malalignment of elbows, hips, knees and feet,
continuous hypermobility, severe kyphoscoliosis, osteoporosis with
multiple fractures, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and mild
dysmorphic features. Whole exome sequencing was performed,
and homozygosity for a novel in-frame deletion in B3GAT3 ,
(c.61_63delCTC (p.(Leu21del))) was detected. Both unaffected parents
(ﬁrst double cousins) were heterozygous carriers.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report to describe homozygosity for
an in-frame deletion in B3GAT3 (p.(Leu21del)) and the ﬁrst adult
phenotype described. Previously described cases of B3GAT3 -
deﬁciency were all children with phenotypes ranging from
prenatal manifestation and early lethality to less severe. We
suggest that this novel homozygous in-frame deletion in B3GAT3
causes a recessive form of linkeropathy.
A.C.S. Bolund: None. B. Langdahl: None. T.B. Laurberg: None.
M.B. Hellfritzsch: None. H. Gjørup: None. B. Møller-Madsen:
None. T.Ø. Nielsen: None. S. Farholt: None. P.A. Gregersen:
None.
P04.049.B Lipoid proteinosis: A novel mutation in ECM1 gene
in a Turkish patient
Elifcan Tasdelen1, Isa An2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Sanliurfa Education and Research
Hospital, Sanl ıurfa, Turkey,2Department of Dermatology, Sanliurfa
Education and Research Hospital, Sanl ıurfa, Turkey.
Background: Lipoid proteinosis (LP) (OMIM-247100), also known
as Urbach-Wiethe disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in
the ECM1 gene, is characterized by skin lesions such as yellow
inﬁltrating papules, acneiform scars and verrucous hyperkeratosis.
In most patients, hoarse voice is observed due to vocal cord
thickening. All these ﬁndings occurs as a result of accumulation of
hyaline-like material in the skin and mucosa. Furthermore,neuropsychiatric ﬁndings have been associated with intracranial
calciﬁcations observed in LP patients. Extracellular matrix protein-
1 (ECM1) encoded by ECM1 gene is involved in differentiation of
keratinocytes by binding to structural proteins, and angiogenesis.Case report: Here, we desribe 7-year-old girl, a child of
consanguineous parents, with diffuse acneiform scar on the face,
moniliform blepharosis on the eyelids, verrucous lesions ondorsum of the hands, hypopigmented patches on the arms andback and hoarse voice. In sequencing analysis of ECM1 gene, a
novel homozygous NM_004425:c.1246 C>T(p.Arg416Ter) mutation
in exon 8 causing premature stop codon was detected. Thisvariant neither found in ExAC nor 1000G databases. The effect of
the mutation on protein is predicted as damaging by in silico
analysis.
Conclusion: Approximately sixty mutations associated with LP
have been reported so far. Half of these mutations have been
detected in exons 6 and 7 of the ECM1 gene. The p.Arg416TerAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
167
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608mutation is outside these hotspot regions and have not been
reported previously. It explains the phenotype of our patient likely
by causing nonsense mediated decay resulting in the non-
functional ECM1 protein.
E. Tasdelen: None. I. An: None.
P04.050.C Novel variant in SMAD3 gene associated with
Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 3
Albertas Valint ėlis1, Marius Šukys1, Egl ėEreminien ė2, Inga Nasvy-
tienė1, Lina Basel-Salmon3,4,5, Rasa Ugenskien ė1
1Department Of Genetics And Molecular Medicine, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania,2Department of
Cardiology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas,Lithuania,3Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical
Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel,4Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel,5Laboratory of Immu-
nology and Genetics, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, PetahTikva, Israel.
Introduction: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a systemic con-
nective tissue disorder characterized by vascular ﬁndings, skeletal
abnormalities, craniofacial features and cutaneous ﬁndings which
sometimes can be misdiagnosed as Marfan syndrome The
diagnosis is established based on clinical ﬁndings and the
identi ﬁcation of heterozygous pathogenic variant in one of the
several reported genes.
Methods: We report a 41-year-old woman with a prior clinical
diagnosis of Marfan syndrome (systemic score 8 and aortic rootdilatation Z score 2.99). Additionally she had right vertebral arterytortuosity, a history of gastric hemorrhage from Dieulafoy ’s ulcer,
hand osteoarthritis, osteoporosis (repeated spontaneous metatar-
sal fractures), hypermobile joints (Beighton score 4), uvula aplasia,velvety and translucent skin with visible underlying veins. The
patient also has primary thrombocythemia (with JAK2 pathogenic
variant) and chronic tubotympanic suppurative otitis media. Noaffected relatives were documented.
Results: We performed cardiovascular gene panel analysis via
Next generation sequencing: no FBN1 gene variant was found, but
heterozygous gene SMAD3 variant NM_005902.4: c.1262G>A of
unknown signi ﬁcance was detected. This variant is not found in
control databases and was not repo rted in literature, in silico tools
predict it as deleterious, UniProt database suggest that an important
protein domain is affected. Variant segregation analysis was notperformed as patient ’s parents are deceased. As clinical features are
more suggestive to Loeys Dietz type 3 syndrome and variant is
predicted deleterious we determined the variant as likely pathogenic.
Conclusion: Genetic testing allowed us to establish a proper
diagnosis and provide more extensive management plan for the
patient.
A. Valint ėlis:None. M.Šukys: None. E. Ereminien ė:None. I.
Nasvytien ė:None. L. Basel-Salmon: None. R. Ugenskien ė:None.
P04.051.D Four hypotrichosis families with pathogenic var-
iants in the gene LSSpresenting with and without neurode-
velopmental phenotypes
Nicole Cesarato
1, Maria Wehner1, Mari Ghughunishvili2, Axel
Schmidt1, Michael Lentze3, Cristina Has4, Matthias Geyer5, F. Buket
Basmanav1, Regina C. Betz1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Givi Zhvania Academic Clinic of Pediatrics, Tbilisi State Medical
University, Tbilisi, Georgia,3Department of Pediatrics, University ofBonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,4Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany,5Institute of Structural Biology, University of
Bonn, School of Medicine, Bonn, Germany.
Introduction: LSS, encoding for lanosterol synthase, has been
associated with congenital cataract, autosomal recessive hypo-
trichosis simplex resp. congenital alopecia with or withoutneuroectodermal phenotypes including intellectual disability,
epilepsy, microcephaly, genital abnormalities in males and
dermatological symptoms. In this study, we report novelpathogenic variants found in LSS.
Materials and Methods: Direct Sanger sequencing of the LSS
gene or Whole Exome Sequencing was performed on individuals
affected with hypotrichosis and their family members. Protein
structure modelling was used to reveal the consequences of theidenti ﬁed mutations.
Results: All affected individuals, originating from Iraq, Syria,
Afghanistan and Georgia, suffered from mild hypotrichosis to severealopecia. One patient presented also with a developmental speechdisorder, learning dif ﬁculties and microcephaly. The following
variants were found either in homozygous or in compound
heterozygous state and co-segrega ted in these families: c.530G>A;
p.(Arg177Gln), c.934C>T;p.(Arg312Trp), c.881G>T;p.(Arg294Leu),c.1702C>T;p.(Arg568Trp). The most interesting variant was the
homozygous synonymous variant c.393G>A;p.(131Leu =), shown to
activate a cryptic donor splice site, resulting in an in frame deletion of11 amino acid residues (r.425-457del). Modelling of the mutant sites
based on the crystal structure of LSS revealed that all mutations have
consequences on the 3D protein structure.
Conclusions: It remains unclear which variants in LSSlead to an
alopecia phenotype only, and which lead to accompanying severe
neurodevelopmental and dermatological phenotypes. If signi ﬁ-
cantly more patients with mutations in LSSwill be reported, we
may be able to develop a better understanding of this protein andallow predictions concerning the phenotypic outcomes of
individual LSSmutations.
N. Cesarato: None. M. Wehner: None. M. Ghughunishvili:
None. A. Schmidt: None. M. Lentze: None. C. Has: None. M.
Geyer: None. F.B. Basmanav: None. R.C. Betz: None.
P04.052.A Searching for TGFB3 gene mutations among Polish
patients with Marfan syndrome and related disorders
Maria Pilarska-Deltow
1, Marzena Skrzypczak-Zieli ńska2, Anna
Junkiert-Czarnecka1, Aneta B ąk1, Marta Heise1, Olga Haus1
1Nicolaus Copernicus University, Torun, Poland,2Institute of Human
Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is the best known
congenital disease of connecting tissue. The classical symptomsof MFS include skeletal, cardiovascular and eye abnormalities.However, the variety and variable severity of them make the
diagnosis dif ﬁcult due to the similarities with Marfan-like
syndromes, including Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS). According tothe classi ﬁcation, there are six subtypes of LDS. Mutations in TGFB3
are responsible for LDS 5, which is less symptomatic and without
molecular analysis can easily be confused with MFS.
Materials and Methods: Sanger sequencing was performed for
119 Polish patients with suspicion of Marfan or another Marfan-
like syndrome.
Results: Sequencing of TGFB3 revealed three mutations.
According to VarSome database, mutation c.412G>T (p.Ser138Ala),with the allele frequency 0.01% (ExAc) was predicted as benign.
Mutation c.488G>A (p.Arg163Gln), with the allele frequencyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
168
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6080.004% (ExAc) was classi ﬁed as a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS) (VarSome). The frequency of the mutation c.1138C>T (p.
Pro380Ser) is not available in the ExAc, according to in silico tools this
is also VUS. In the case of this mutation (p.Pro380Ser) we con ﬁrmed
the paternal inheritance of the mutation in the parental study.
Conclusions: Mutations were detected in patients in whom
previous NGS examination of the common genes associated with
Marfan-like syndromes did not reveal pathogenic variants. Theresults point at the need to study less obvious genes of marfanoidsyndromes to improve their diagnostics, which may have
implications for patient prognosis, as well as diagnosis and
prevention in family members.The investigation was supported byNicolaus Copernicus University grant WL174.
M. Pilarska-Deltow: None. M. Skrzypczak-Zieli ńska: None. A.
Junkiert-Czarnecka: None. A. B ąk:None. M. Heise: None. O.
Haus: None.
P04.053.B Targeted next generation sequencing substantially
advances molecular diagnosis of Marfan and Marfan relateddisorders
Darina L. Kachakova
1, Kunka Kamenarova1, Kalina Mihova1, Ivo
Kremensky1, Ivanka Dimova2, Vanyo Mitev1, Radka Kaneva1
1Laboratory of Genomic Diagnostics, Molecular Medicine Center,
Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty,Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Laboratory of Genomic
Diagnostics, Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Medical University of
Soﬁa, 2- Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical
University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction : There are more than 200 heritable connective tissue
disorders. Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a rare, autosomal-dominantconnective tissue multisystem disorder. Signi ﬁcant clinical overlap
with other systemic connective tissue diseases, has been
documented.
Materials and methods : Eight patients with differential
diagnosis Marfan and Marfan like syndromes and 1 patient with
Ehlers-Danlos were directed for targeted next generation sequen-
cing (NGS) in Molecular medicine center in the period 2019-2020year. NGS was performed on MiSeq platform using TruSight onekit. Direct sequencing by Sanger was used in order to con ﬁrm
estimated pathogenic variants.
Results : Genetic cause of the disease was estimated in 4 from 9
analyzed patients. In two patients FBN1 mutations were found
(c.8051 +2T>A and p.Arg516Ter). In the other patients the
following pathogenic variants were detected: c.1877A>T (p.Lys626Met) in SKIand c.1642A>C (p.Ser548Arg) in SOS1 and thus
clinical diagnoses were re ﬁned. In three patients we found VUS in
the following genes: COL5A2 ,COL11A1 ,FLNB ,NOTCH1 ,BAG3 .I n
one patient with aortic aneurism a new likely pathogenic variantc.779delC (p.Pro260Hisfs*47) in FOXE3 was found. Pathogenic
mutations in forkhead domain of this gene were previously linked
to autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurism. Although the
new variant lies outside this domain we suggest that is stillpossible to contribute to the disease.
Conclusion : Many connective tissue disorders have overlapping
symptoms and targeted NGS sequencing contributes substantially
to genetic diagnosis and re ﬁnement of the clinical diagnosis in
some of the cases. This work was supported by infrastructural
projects D01-285/2019; D01-395/2020 funded by MES.
D.L. Kachakova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova:
None. I. Kremensky: None. I. Dimova: None. V. Mitev: None. R.
Kaneva: None.P04.054.C Four novel families expand the genotypic and
phenotypic landscape of MESD -related Osteogenesis
Imperfecta
Thao Tran
1, Rachel Keller1,Brecht Guillemyn2, Melanie Pepin1, Jane
Corteville3, Samir Khatib4, Mohammad-Sadegh Fallah5, Sirous
Zeinali5,6, Fransiska Malfait2,S oﬁe Symoens2, Paul Coucke2, Peter
Witters7, Hamideh Bagherian4,5, Deborah Nickerson1, Michael
Bamshad1, Jessica Chong1, University of Washington Center for
Mendelian Genomics, Peter Byers1
1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA,2Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium,3Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA,4GMDC Al Quds University, Al Quds, Palestinian Territory,
5Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,6Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic
of,7University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
The bone disorder osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is genetically
heterogeneous. Most affected individuals have an autosomaldominant disorder caused by heterozygous variants in either of
the type I collagen genes ( COL1A1 orCOL1A2 ). Rare autosomal
recessive forms of OI are associated with variants in genes thatencode proteins involved in the modi ﬁcation of collagens,
regulation of collagen expression, alteration of cellular differentia-
tion along the bone lineage, and in collagen secretion. Recently,
four different biallelic pathogenic variants in Mesoderm Develop-ment LRP Chaperone ( MESD ) were shown to cause a progressively
deforming recessive type of OI, associated with recurrent fractures
and oligodontia in ﬁve patients of ﬁve families. We report four
additional patients from four independent families with biallelicvariants in MESD : the earlier reported c.632dupA p.(Lys212-
Glufs*19) and c.676C>T p.(Arg226*) - which are associated with
a severe form of OI - and one new pathogenic variant c.603-606delTAAA (p.Asn201Lysfs*15) which causes a neonatal lethalform of OI. MESD acts in the WNT signaling pathway where it is
thought to play a role in the folding of the WNT co-receptors Low
Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Proteins 5 and 6 (LRP5 andLRP6) and in chaperoning their transit to the cell surface. Wehypothesize that in the absence of functional MESD, WNT
signaling in osteogenic cells is blocked. Our report broadens the
phenotypic and genetic spectrum of MESD -related OI, provides
additional insight into the pathogenic pathways and underscores
the necessity of MESD for normal WNT signaling and bone
formation.
T. Tran: None. R. Keller: None. B. Guillemyn: None. M. Pepin:
None. J. Corteville: None. S. Khatib: None. M. Fallah: None. S.
Zeinali: None. F. Malfait: None. S. Symoens: None. P. Coucke:
None. P. Witters: None. H. Bagherian: None. D. Nickerson: None.
M. Bamshad: None. J. Chong: None. P. Byers: None.
P04.055.D Sixth family with con ﬁrmed metaphyseal dysplasia,
Spahr type and a novel variant in MMP13 : case report and
review of the literature
André M. Travessa
1, Silvia Modamio-Høybjør2, Karen E. Heath2, Ana
Berta Sousa1
1Medical Genetics Department, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital de
Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon,Portugal,2Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM),
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autonóma de Madrid,
IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit(UMDE), Hospital Universitario La Paz, and ERN-BOND, Madrid,Spain.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
169
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Metaphyseal dysplasia, Spahr type (MDST,
MIM#250400) is an ultra-rare metaphyseal dysplasia likely often
mistaken as rickets. Only 16 patients from eight families have been
reported, with molecular con ﬁrmation in ﬁve families (10 patients).
We present a case of MDST and review the existing literature,highlighting the features that differentiate this from other
metaphyseal dysplasias.
Case report: The proband is a 23-month-old gild referred for
growth delay and genu varum . She was born at 33 weeks of
gestation to healthy unrelated parents with no relevant family
history. At birth, she had normal somatometry for gestational age.
The neonatal period was unremarkable. Genu varum was noted at
6 months. Length crossed centiles downwards and was -2.75 SD at19 months. She was otherwise healthy, and had a normal
psychomotor development. The analytical evaluation of calcium
and phosphate metabolism was normal, excluding rickets.However, the skeletal survey showed metaphyseal irregularities
in the long bones, especially the lower limbs, compatible with a
metaphyseal dysplasia. A customized skeletal dysplasia NGS panelwas thus performed, and the pathogenic variant c.287_293del, p.(Cys96Phefs*19) in MMP13 gene was identi ﬁed in apparent
homozygosity, con ﬁrming the diagnosis of MDST.
Discussion and conclusions: We report the 11
thpatient (sixth
family) with con ﬁrmed MDST, and review the existing literature.
Patients with MDST present with postnatal mild short (or even
normal) stature. Genu varum is milder and knee pain is more
common as compared to other metaphyseal dysplasias. No extra-skeletal features or laboratory ﬁndings exist. NGS is the investiga-
tion of choice for MDST.
A.M. Travessa: None. S. Modamio-Høybjør: None. K.E. Heath:
None. A.B. Sousa: None.
P04.057.B Clinical utility of a sponsored, no-cost skeletal
dysplasia gene panel testing program: Results from 850 tests
Guillermo Seratti1, Vikram Pansare1, Tiffany Yar Pang1, Emanuela
Izzo1, William Mackenzie2, Cathleen Raggio3, Klane White4, Rebecca
Truty5, Britt Johnson5, Swaroop Aradhya5
1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA,2Nemours Alfred I.
duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA,3Hospital for
Special Surgery, Uniondale, NY, USA,4Seattle Children ’s Hospital,
Seattle, WA, USA,5Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Rare diseases, such as mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) IVA (Morquio
A syndrome) and MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome), are often
misdiagnosed as other types of skeletal dysplasia (SD) or may go
undiagnosed for extended periods, potentially resulting indelayed intervention and irreversible disease progression. Dis-cover Dysplasias
TMsponsored testing program offers a focused SD
gene panel for US and Canadian patients, with the goal of helping
facilitate timely diagnoses. Eligible patients must have one ormore of: skeletal abnormalities suggestive of SD, short stature,disproportionate growth, dysmorphic facial features or other signs
suggestive of SD. The program uses a panel with 109 genes
associated with SD. Third-party re ﬂex biochemical enzyme testing
is offered for inconclusive MPS molecular results. Geneticcounseling is provided for all patients as part of the program. A
total of 850 US patients were tested under the program from
December 2019-August 2020. Median age at testing was 7 years(range: 0-90). Initial symptom onset was noted prenatally for
22.7% and at birth for 32.9%. Median age at ﬁrst sign among
patients presenting after birth was 5 years. A genetic diagnosiswas established in 210 patients (36 genes): a molecular diagnosticyield of 24.7%. One MPS VI patient and two MPS IVA patients were
identi ﬁed; the latter were con ﬁrmed by re ﬂex enzyme testing. Useof a targeted gene panel testing program, with genetic counseling
support and MPS re ﬂex enzyme testing, has clinical utility in
identifying the genetic etiology of MPS and SD, and may allow for
disease-speci ﬁc interventions and proactive treatment plans.
G. Seratti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. V. Pansare: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. T.Y. Pang: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E.
Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharma-
ceutical Inc. W. Mackenzie: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak-
ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BioMarinPharmaceutical Inc. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; LPA,BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, MPS. Other; Modest; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. C. Raggio: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants aswell as grants already received); Modest; BioMarin PharmaceuticalInc, NextCure, OIF. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BioMarin Pharma-
ceutical Inc, Alexion. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; OIF,EDS, SDMC, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Ascendis, Alexion,
Mereo. K. White: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Ultra-genyx, Ascendis, Theracon. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak-
ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc, Ultragenyx. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;Modest; National MPS Society, Little People of America, BioMarinPharmaceutical. Other; Modest; UptoDate.com. R. Truty: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Modest; Invitae. B. Johnson: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. S.
Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Invitae.
P04.058.C Exome sequencing combined with RNA sequencing
clariﬁes the mode of inheritance of MYH3-associated spondy-
locarpotarsal syndrome: a case report
Marija Volk , Karin Writzl, Matev žJus, Ale šMaver, Helena Jakli
č,
Borut Peterlin
Clinical institute of genomic medicine, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the MYH3 gene have been
associated with dominant and recessive Contractures, pterygia,and spondylocarpotarsal fusion syndrome, type 1 (CPSFS1). By
combining exome and RNA sequencing, we provide evidence that
MYH3:c.1581 +1G>A variant, previously reported in association
with apparently recessive CPSFS1 (PMID:29805041) is likely
associated with a dominant predisposition to CPSFS1.
Materials and methods: A 14-month girl was referred to our
institute with scoliosis, contractures, ptosis, short stature, bicuspidaortic valve and suspected skeletal dysplasia. Familial history
revealed that the mother has short stature, scoliosis, contractureAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
170
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608of Vth ﬁnger and ptosis, while maternal uncle and grandfather
have short stature and scoliosis. We performed exome sequencing
(ES) and cDNA sequencing of the targeted MYH3 region.
Results: ES revealed the presence of a heterozygous patho-
genic variant MYH3(NM_002470.4):c.1581 +1G>A in the proband.
Because this variant was originally reported in association with
recessive inheritance, it was not initially considered causative in
heterozygous form. However, segregation analyses revealed thatthe similarly affected mother also carried the identi ﬁed variant as
affected proband. Expression analysis of mRNA MYH3 transcript
showed retention of intron 15, which was predicted to lead to an
in-frame insertion of 34 amino-acid sequences. This insertionpossibly leads to a gain-of-function effect.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that MYH3 variant c.1581 +1G>A
is an in-frame insertion and might also be associated with the
dominant type of CPSFS1. Our case highlights the utility ofexpression analysis, which is essential for the correct interpreta-
tion of splice-site variants and genetic counselling.
M. Volk: None. K. Writzl: None. M. Jus: None. A. Maver: None.
H. Jakli č:None. B. Peterlin: None.
P04.059.D Myhre Syndrome: a rare cause of short stature and
osteomuscular pain
Antonio Miguel Poyatos-Andújar
1, Susana García-Linares1, Mar-
garita Martínez-Atienza2, Francisca Quintana-Luque1, Susana Pedri-
naci-Rodríguez2, María Luz Bellido-Díaz2, Matías Pérez-Sánchez2
1Hospital Universitario Clínico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain,2Hospital
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Myhre syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant
connective tissue disorder with multisystem involvement character-
ized by a clinical spectrum that includes growth retardation, skeletalanomalies, muscular hypertrophy, joint stiffness, facial dysmorphism,
deafness, cardiovascular disease, learning and social challenges and
abnormal sexual development. The molecularly con ﬁrmed cases
have a de novo heterozygous gain-of-function mutation in SMAD4.
Material and Methods: We present a 20-years-old girl who was
born after a dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy with increased
nuchal translucency for this fetous. The patient present at birthlow weight and increased pulmonary pressures, during herdevelopment present slow weight gain, muscular weakness,
hearing loss, challenging behavior, scoliosis and menstrual
dysfunction. All molecular and citomolecular studies performedduring the infancy were normal. We performed a clinical exome
sequencing (CES) analysis after clinical and familiar evaluations.
Results: We found the pathogenic variant c.1486C>T, p.
Arg496Cys in the SMAD4 gene, this variant was determined asde novo with the segregation analysis.
Conclusions: In our case, the diagnosis was delayed beyond the
second life decade, this illustrates the dif ﬁc u l t yo fc o r r e c t l yd i a g n o s i n g
patients with Myhre syndrome. The frequency of neoplasia in series ofcases and endometrial cancer in patients with Myhre syndrome, raises
the possibility of cancer susceptib ility in these patients. It is important
to alert clinicians to the possibili ty of detecting this syndrome for a
correct treatment during infancy and surveillance during adult age.
A. Poyatos-Andújar: None. S. García-Linares: None. M.
Martínez-Atienza: None. F. Quintana-Luque: None. S. Pedri-
naci-Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz: None. M. Pérez-Sán-
chez: None.
P04.060.A Large deletions of NF1: phenotypical description
and parental origins of a severe conditionLaurence Pacot
1,2, Dominique Vidaud1,2, Audrey Sabbagh3, Ingrid
Laurendeau2, Audrey Briand-Suleau1,2, Audrey Coustier1, Théodora
Maillard1, Cécile Barbance1, Patrick Nitschké4, Arnaud Jannic5, Salah
Ferkal5, Béatrice Parfait1,2, Michel Vidaud1,2, members of the NF
France Network, Pierre Wolkenstein5,Eric Pasmant1,2
1Service de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, DMU
BioPhyGen, AP-HP.Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France,2Institut
Cochin, Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris,CARPEM, Paris, France,3UMR 261 MERIT, IRD, Université de Paris,
Paris, France,4Bioinformatics Platform, Imagine Institute, INSERM
UMR 1163, Université de Paris, Paris, France,5Département de
Dermatologie, AP-HP and Université Paris 12, Hôpital Henri-Mondor,Créteil, France.
Background : Whole NF1 locus deletions are identi ﬁed in 5-10% of
patients affected by neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1). Several
studies have previously described particularly severe forms of the
disease in NF1 patients with NF1 deletion. However, comprehen-
sive descriptions of large cohorts are still missing to fullycharacterize this contiguous gene syndrome.
Methods: NF1 patients from a large French NF1 cohort were
molecularly characterized using next-generation sequencing,
microsatellites analysis, and MLPA between 2005 and 2020 . NF1 -
deleted patients were enrolled and phenotypically characterized
with a standardized questionnaire. Parental origin of de novo NF1
deletions was determined in thirty trios and three duos using fourintragenic and three extragenic microsatellites in the NF1 locus.
Results: A deletion of the NF1 gene was detected in 4% (139/
3479) of molecularly con ﬁrmed NF1 index cases. Patients ranged
between 4 months and 69 years old, with a median at 21 yearsold. A comprehensive clinical assessment showed that 93% (116/126) of NF1-deleted patients ful ﬁlled the NIH criteria for NF1. More
than half has café-au-lait spots, skinfold freckling, Lisch nodules,
neuro ﬁbromas, neurological abnormalities, and cognitive impair-
ment or learning disabilities. Comparison with previously
described “classic ”NF1 cohorts showed a signi ﬁcantly higher
proportion of symptomatic spinal neuro ﬁbromas, dysmorphism,
learning disabilities, malignancies, and skeletal and cardiovascularabnormalities in the NF1-deleted group. Maternal origin of the
deletion was con ﬁrmed in 25 cases.
Conclusions: We described the largest NF1-deleted cohort to
date and con ﬁrmed a more severe phenotype in NF1-deleted
patients with a predominant maternal origin of the deletions.
L. Pacot: None. D. Vidaud: None. A. Sabbagh: None. I.
Laurendeau: None. A. Briand-Suleau: None. A. Coustier: None.
T. Maillard: None. C. Barbance: None. P. Nitschké: None. A.
Jannic: None. S. Ferkal: None. B. Parfait: None. M. Vidaud: None.
P. Wolkenstein: None.
E. Pasmant: None.
P04.061.B Identi ﬁcation of rare variants for nonsyndromic
cleft lip with/without cleft palate in a cohort of multiplexfamilies
Annika Scheer1, Fabian Brand2, Julia Fazaal1, Nina Ishorst1, Peter M.
Krawitz2, Elisabeth Mangold1, Kerstin U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute for Genomic
Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,Germany.
Nonsyndromic cleft with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P) are among
the most common birth defects and have a multifactorial etiology.In the last years, genome wide association studies have identi ﬁed
around 40 common risk regions with small to moderate effectAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
171
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608sizes, but the contribution of rare variants with higher effect sizes
has been studied to a lesser extent. The aim of our study was to
systematically identify potential causal rare variants in 55
individuals from 10 multiplex families affected with nsCL/P. Eachof the families had at least three affected family members over atleast two generations. Whole genome sequencing was performed
using Illumina Truseq Nano DNA Library Prep Kit, and variant
calling was performed according to an in-house pipeline on afamily-wise basis. Overall, 7,435,742 single-nucleotide variants and45,627 structural variants were identi ﬁed in the entire cohort,
representing a unique resource for the analysis of rare events. In
ourﬁrst analysis we focused on the protein-coding regions and
are currently applying technical, pedigree-based and frequencyﬁltering in each of the families. In family 1, this analysis together
with subsequent annotation in the Variant Effect Predictor
identi ﬁed 66 candidate variants in 65 genes, one of which has
been previously suggested as risk gene in an independent exome
sequencing study ( PLEKHA5 , Cox et al. 2018). Based on single-cell
expression data during mouse embryonic development, addi-tional candidate genes (e.g. MPZL2, GPC6) were also identi ﬁed. The
analysis of the remaining nine families is currently ongoing, and
results will be presented at the conference.
A. Scheer: None. F. Brand: None. J. Fazaal: None. N. Ishorst:
None. P.M. Krawitz: None. E. Mangold: None. K.U. Ludwig:
None.
P04.062.C Analysis of single-cell based expression variability
between candidate genes for syndromic and non-syndromic
forms of orofacial clefting
Anna Siewert
1, Julia Welzenbach1, Benedikt Reiz2, Elisabeth
Mangold1, Henning Dickten2, Kerstin U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2FASTGenomics, Comma
Soft AG, Bonn, Germany.
Orofacial clefts (OFCs) are among the most common human birth
defects. OFC can occur as an isolated phenotype, or as part of a
more complex malformation syndrome. In the latter, additional
tissues and organ systems show developmental differencesbeyond OFC. We here hypothesized that candidate genesinvolved in syndromic OFC-forms may be expressed in more cell
types during embryonic development, compared to genes
causing non-syndromic OFC. To study this, we re-analyzedrecently published single-cell expression data from the Mouse
Organogenesis Cell Atlas (Cao et. al 2019), covering the relevant
time period for facial development from embryonic days E9.5-E13.5. We downloaded data from 100,000 sampled cells andperformed data analyses using the R package Seurat (Stuart et. al
2019) and the analytical ecosystem FASTGenomics. Data was split
by embryonic day to yield a developmental time frame.Candidate genes associated with non-syndromic OFCs weredeﬁned based on data from prior genome-wide association
studies, while genes causing established OFC-syndromes (auto-
somal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive) were retrievedfrom the literature. At each time point, we extracted thepercentage of cell types expressing the respective gene and
compared expression levels between the different groups. Our
results show that on average, genes underlying AD forms ofsyndromic OFC are expressed in signi ﬁcantly more cell types
during organogenesis compared to risk genes for non-syndromic
OFC (P-values: 2.02x10
-06for E9.5; 1.44x10-04(E10.5); 1.11x10-04
(E11.5); 0.002 (E12.5); 0.002 (E13.5)). This analysis will help tofurther understand the molecular pathways and etiological
differences between syndromic and non-syndromic forms.A. Siewert: None. J. Welzenbach: None. B. Reiz: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Comma Soft AG. E. Mangold:
None. H. Dickten: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Comma Soft AG. K.U. Ludwig: None.
P04.063.D Search for exonic homozygous/compound hetero-
zygous variants in affected sib-pairs identi ﬁes novel candidate
genes for nonsyndromic cleft palate
Nina Ishorst1, Helena Shkuro1, Julia Fazaal1, Ann Kathrin Hoebel1,
Holger Thiele2, Teresa Kruse3, Michael J. Dixon4, Kerstin U. Ludwig1,
Elisabeth Mangold1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2University of Cologne,
Cologne Center for Genomics CCG, Cologne, Germany,3Department
of Orthodontics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,4Faculty
of Biology, Medicine & Health, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom.
Nonsyndromic cleft palate only (nsCPO) belongs to the typical forms
of orofacial clefts and is a common congenital malformation. nsCPO
is a multifactorial disorder with environmental and genetic factorscontributing to disease risk. Of note, the genetic contribution is
rather high with an estimated heritability of >90%. To date, one
common risk locus for nsCPO is con ﬁrmed, and nine have been
reported recently but still await independent replication. Epidemio-logical observations and genetic studies suggest that high
penetrance rare/low frequency variants contribute to nsCPO, which
might be inherited in an autosomal-recessive manner. In this study,we focussed on detection of novel nsCPO candidate genes byidentifying compound heterozygous/homozygous variants. To that
end, we reanalyzed whole-exome sequencing data from six affected
sib-pairs born to unaffected parents. After ﬁltering for population
frequency (MAF < 5%) and manual inspection of reads, we detected
169 putative compound heterozygous and 13 putative homozygous
variants. We next prioritized these 182 variants/80 candidate genesbased on (1) the functional effects at transcriptional level and in silico
predictions, (2) intolerance for a certain class of rare variation, and (3)
expression in mouse embryonic palatal shelves at embryonic day
E13.5. This resulted in a list of the 32 most promising candidategenes, which include one compound heterozygous situation withinGRHL3 , which has been implicated in nsCPO, and novel genes
encoding proteins involved in cell migratory processes, such as
DDR2, a binding partner of the gene product of the well establishedclefting gene CDH1 .
N. Ishorst: None. H. Shkuro: None. J. Fazaal: None. A.K.
Hoebel: None. H. Thiele: None. T. Kruse: None. M.J. Dixon: None.
K.U. Ludwig: None. E. Mangold: None.
P04.064.A Systematic analysis of non-coding de novo muta-
tions from whole genome sequence data of triads with non-syndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate
Hanna K. Zieger
1, Leonie Weinhold2, Axel Schmidt1, Manuel
Holtgrewe3, Stefan A. Juranek4, Anna Siewert1, Frederic Thieme1,
Fabian Brand5, Julia Welzenbach1, Dieter Beule3,6, Katrin Paeschke4,
Peter M. Krawitz2, Kerstin U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute for Medical
Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University Hospital Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,3Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin Institute of Health,
Berlin, Germany,4Department of Oncology, Hematology and
Rheumatology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,5InstituteAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
172
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,6Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany.
Non-syndromic cleft lip with/wi thout cleft palate (nsCL/P) is a
common multifactorial disorde r with strong genetic contribu-
tion. Here, we systematically investigate the contribution of de
novo mutations (DNMs) to nsCL/P risk, using whole-genome
sequence (WGS) data for 211 nsCL /P and 284 non-cleft reference
trios from the Kids First Project. For the total set of 31,490 DNMs,
overall comparison between cohorts did not show conclusive
differences, neither in absolut e numbers nor when weighted for
different functional scores. However, we observed nominallysigni ﬁcant accumulation of non-coding DNMs at bivalent TSS/
enhancer chromatin states in nsCL/P during human embryonic
face development at Carnegie Stage 15 (p =0.0269), and a
nominally signi ﬁcant enrichment of non-coding DNMs in
topologically associating domains at two GWAS risk loci, i.e.
4q28.1 (7 cases, 0 controls, p =0.0008) and 2p21
PKDCC (7 cases, 2
controls, p =0.0161). We ﬁnally used transcription factor (TF)
binding information to identify TFs with potential key role in
nsCL/P etiology. Based on position weight matrices, we
predicted TF binding sites for 810 human TFs, and calculatedchanges of binding capacity at 28,773 DNM-sites. We observed asigni ﬁcant enrichment of DNM-hits for motif TFAP2A in nsCL/P,
and identi ﬁedATF3 ,MSC and HES5/7 as potential TF candidates.
Notably, for MSC and ATF3 ,t h i s ﬁnding was supported by a
strong quantitative effect on the predicted binding change,
which for MSC is currently validated using in vitro assays. Our
study provides novel insights into nsCL/P etiology and suggestsa TF-based approach that can be used to annotate non-codingrisk variants from WGS data.
H.K. Zieger: None. L. Weinhold: None. A. Schmidt: None. M.
Holtgrewe: None. S.A. Juranek: None. A. Siewert: None. F.
Thieme: None. F. Brand: None. J. Welzenbach: None. D. Beule:
None. K. Paeschke: None. P.M. Krawitz: None. K.U. Ludwig:
None.
P04.065.B Chondrocyte protein co-expression network analy-
sis reveals a link between ECM mechanosensing and glucose
metabolism in osteoarthritis
Aspasia Destouni
1, Konstantinos C. Tsolis2, Anastassios Economou2,
Ioanna Papathanassiou3, Charalambos Balis1, Evanthia Mour-
moura1, Aspasia Tsezou1,3
1Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece,2Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research,KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium,3Department of Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Introduction: Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is the second most
common structural OA disorder affecting approximately 22.9%
of individuals 40 years and over globally. The only currently
available effective treatment is total knee joint replacement, whichis performed at the late stages of the disease. The lack of effectivedisease-modifying drugs and preventive tools highlights our
incomplete understanding of the fundamental biological aspects
of osteoarthritis.
Materials and methods: We performed label-free shotgun LC-
MS in primary chondrocytes obtained from the articular cartilage
of 10 OA and 6 healthy individuals. We implemented the statisticalconcepts of Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis toreconstruct in an unbiased way the organisation of thechondrocyte proteome and to parse the shared chondrocyte
protein interactome in disease associated modules.
Results: Chondrocyte proteome is parsed into functional modules
with well characterized signi ﬁcance to the disease, such as core
structural components of the cartilage ECM which form a meta-module with proteins mediating glycolysis. Meta-module protein
abundance is reduced whilst proteins mediating focal adhesion and
cytoskeletal dynamics are increased in OA. COL11A1 and TNC have
signiﬁcant associations with OA in the GWAS catalog and are
members of the ECM module indicating that variants could be
exerting a detrimental effect in the context of ECM
mechanosensing-based regulation of chondrocyte metabolism.
Conclusions: Our systems analysis recapitulates hallmarks of
OA and offers new insights into the modular structure of the
protein interactome that is associated with OA chondrocyte
biology. Grant: iStemTheOS, Grant No. MIS 5033630/ELKE5876
from the Hellenic Foundation for Research & Innovation.
A. Destouni: None. K.C. Tsolis: None. A. Economou: None. I.
Papathanassiou: None. C. Balis: None. E. Mourmoura: None. A.
Tsezou: None.
P04.066.C A family with Osteochondritis Dissecans and
multiple fractures harboring COL9A2 and PLS3 Mutations
Estelle Arnaud Gouttenoire
1, Sophie Lang-Andrey2, Françoise
Lemaire-Girard1, Jean Dudler2, Michael Morris1
1SYNLAB Switzerland, Department of Genetics, Lausanne, Switzer-
land,2HFR Fribourg, Department of Rheumatology, Fribourg,
Switzerland.
A 25-year-old woman consulted in our specialized genetic
rheumatology clinic, with symptomatology evolving since the age
of 11, with knee pain and episodes of joint blockage, MRI positiveaxial spondyloarthropathy and hyperlaxity. The diagnosis of bilateral
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) was made at the age of 22. She
later developed ankle pain also related to OCD and spiral fracture ofthe tibia and proximal ﬁbula, without trauma. The proband ’sb r o t h e r
had multiple fractures and joint blockage since childhood, and 1
maternal uncle had joint blockage since childhood. The proband ’s
mother had pain in childhood and has been suffering from pain inher arms, knees and ankles for 1 year. The maternal grandmotherhas lumbar disc degeneration and hearing problem. NGS of a 251-
gene skeletal dysplasia panel re vealed that proband is double-
heterozygote for COL9A2 c.186G>A and PLS3 c.827G>A, p.(Trp276*).
PLS3 mutations cause X-linked osteoporosis with fractures. COL9A2
mutations have been associated with AD multiple epiphyseal
dysplasia, characterized by early onset of pain associated withOCD in some patients, and also with intervertebral disc disease.Interestingly, these 2 variants segregate in the family. This approach
conﬁrms the importance of genetic consultation in familial
rheumatological conditions and reveled the existence of 2 over-lapping genetic connective tissue pathologies.
E. Arnaud Gouttenoire: None. S. Lang-Andrey: None. F.
Lemaire-Girard: None. J. Dudler: None. M. Morris: None.
P04.067.D Atypical type VI Osteogenesis Imperfecta mouse
models the intersection of IFITM5 and SERPINF1 pathways in
patients
Gali Guterman Ram
1, Ghazal Hedjazi2, Chris Stephan3, Stéphane
Blouin2, Victoria Schemenz4, Wolfgang Wagermaier4, Jochen Zwer-
ina2, Peter Fratzl4, Kenneth M. Kozloff3, Nadja Fratzl-Zelman2, Joan C.
Marini1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
173
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Section on Heritable Disorders of Bo ne and Extracellular Matrix, Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA,2Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of OEGK and
AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st Medical Department, HanuschHospital, Vienna, Austria,3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA,4Max Planck Institute of
Colloids and Interfaces, Dept. of B iomaterials, Potsdam, Germany.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a well-known skeletal dysplasia. Type
V OI, caused by recurrent dominant mutation in IFITM5/ BRIL, and
type VI OI, caused by recessive null mutations in SERPINF1 /PEDF, have
distinct features. IFITM5 -S40L mutations causes severe dominant
atypical type-VI OI (aVI) with phenotype, bone histology and
decreased cellular secretion of PEDF similar to type VI OI.
Our objective is understanding the pathways connecting IFITM5
and SERPINF1 in bone development.
We generated an Iﬁtm5 S42L knock-in mouse model. Newborn
Iﬁtm5 S42L mice, heterozygous(HET) and homozygous(HMZ), are
non-lethal, have ﬂared rib cage, shoulder and knee dislocations.
Radiographically, ≈50% HET mice exhibit fractures and 96% of
HMZ incur fractures at multiple ages. Similar to patients,
heterozygous males have normal PEDF level and increased serumALP (p < 0.01). Mechanical testing of 2-month HET and HMZshowed reduced stiffness, yield and fracture load, with markedly
increased brittleness. On μCT, HET mice have decreased Ct.Th,
increased BV/TV, Tb.N. Whole-body DXA-aBMD was signi ﬁcantly
decreased, with HMZ are more severe than HET(p < 0.01). qBEI of
cortical bone revealed hypermineralization in 1-and 2-month HET,
with increased CaMean, CaPeak(p < 0.05) and CaHigh(p < 0.0001,p=0.0027 respectively) and increased density and decreased area
(both p < 0.001) of osteocyte lacunar sections. Second harmonic
generation ﬂorescence microscopy revealed HET bones contain
mostly disordered matrix(p < 0.0001). Cultured calvarial and longbone osteoblasts exhibit differences in differentiation pattern,dependent on mating scheme, age and skeletal site.
Our murine model with physiologic levels of Iﬁtm5 S42L
expression recapitulates patient phenotype and will be used toinvestigate mechanisms and pathways involving Iﬁtm5 and
Serpinf1 .
G. Guterman Ram: None. G. Hedjazi: None. C. Stephan: None.
S. Blouin: None. V. Schemenz: None. W. Wagermaier: None. J.
Zwerina: None. P. Fratzl: None. K.M. Kozloff: None. N. Fratzl-
Zelman: None. J.C. Marini: None.
P04.068.A Study of OI patient osteoblasts to investigate
phenotypic variability of dominant osteogenesis imperfecta
Milena Jovanovic , Apratim Mitra, Ryan Dale, Joan Marini
NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous bone disorder
characterized by bone fractures, growth de ﬁciency and skeletal
defects. An important and unexplained feature of OI and many
dominant disorders is phenotypic variability with the samemutation. We present the ﬁrst comparative study of osteoblast
differentiation from normal pediatric controls vs OI patients with
phenotypic variability. We focused on COL1A1 mutations Gly352-
Ser and Gly589Ser. For each mutation we investigated osteoblastsin two unrelated patients, one with mild and one with severe
phenotype. OB cell layer and secreted collagen were overmodi ﬁed
in all patients, shown by3H steady-state assay, indicating delayed
folding; however, quantitative analysis of hydroxylysines did notcorrelate with patient severity. Alizarin Red staining showed
patient OB deposit signi ﬁcantly less mineral in vitro than controls(p < 0.05), with OB from severe patients depositing signi ﬁcantly
less mineral than from mild patients (p < 0.05). RNA-Seq tran-
scriptomics of differentiated osteoblasts showed proteasomal
protein degradation, autophagy, and vesicle organization path-ways upregulation vs controls, while protein translation wasdownregulated. OB from both severe patients have upregulation
of pathways related to ubiquination vs controls. RNA-Seq is
currently being validated by RT-qPCR and western blot and thefunctional signi ﬁcance of pathways investigated. This study will
lead to novel insights into OI osteoblast differentiation, the
respective roles of OB and matrix in phenotypic variability and the
effect of substitution position along the collagen helix.
M. Jovanovic: None. A. Mitra: None. R. Dale: None. J. Marini:
None.
P04.069.B Bone cell functions in PPIB knockout mouse model
for type IX osteogenesis imperfecta are distinct from classical
dominant OI
Ying Liu
1, Theresa Hefferan2, Nadja Fratzl-Zelman3, Joan Marini1
1Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular Matrix,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA,2Biomaterials and
Histomorphometry Core Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA,3Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch
Hospital of OEGK and AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st MedicalDepartment, Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, Austria.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a collagen-related bone disorder,
which is caused by either dominant mutations in collagen, orrecessive defects in genes encoding collagen-interacting proteins.
Cyclophilin B (CyPB), encoded by Ppib, functions as a procollagen
prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex component (P3H1/CRTAP/CyPB)and independently as the major peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomer-
ase (PPIase) catalyzing collagen folding. Mutations in Ppib cause
recessive type IX OI. We reported previously that Ppib
-/-mice have
abnormal type I collagen post-translational modi ﬁcation and
crosslinks. This study focuses on Ppib-/-bone cell functions,
utilizing histomorphometry and qBEI analysis of femoral tissue, RT-
PCR and alizarin red staining of osteoblasts, and osteoclastdifferentiation. Histomorphometry of Ppib-/-femora reveals
reduced trabecular thickness (p < 0.05), trabecular number (p <
0.01), bone volume (p < 0.001), and cortical thickness (p < 0.0001).
Distinct from high turnover in dominant OI, Ppib-/-osteoblast
number and surface are signi ﬁcantly decreased (p < 0.01; p < 0.05).
Osteoclast number does not differ between KO and WT bone, as
well as in vitro osteoclast differentiation. Ppib-/-femora show
reduced osteoid volume (p < 0.05), MAR (p < 0.0001) and BFR/BS(p < 0.01) vs WT. Ppib-/-osteoblasts reveal elevated matrix
mineralization ( p< 0.001), consistent with increased expression
of late osteoblast differentiation markers Sost, Mepe, Phex, Dmp1 ,
vs WT. qBEI analysis yields increased CaMean, CaPeak (both p <0.001) and CaHigh values (p =0.014) in femoral midshaft cortical
bone of KO vs WT. Cyclophilin B/ Ppib KO mice, modelling type IX
OI, have bone cell functions distinct from classical dominant OI.PPIB KO bone has a low turnover cellular pattern with decreasedosteoblast number and bone formation, increased mineralization,
and normal osteoclast numbers.
Y. Liu: None. T. Hefferan: None. N. Fratzl-Zelman: None. J.
Marini: None.
P04.070.C Genome sequencing discloses a homozygous
noncoding deletion of 72kb upstream of SNX10 in autosomal
recessive osteopetrosisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
174
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Gandham SL Bhavani1, Prajna Udupa1, Neethukrishna Kausthub-
ham1, Sandip Bartakke2, Katta M. Girisha1
1Department of Medical genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,2Department
of Clinical Hematology, Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital, Pune,India.
Introduction: Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) is a rare
genetic disorder of bone resorption caused by defective
osteoclasts resulting in increased bone density. Other character-
istic features of this condition are macrocephaly, visual impair-ment, splenomegaly, and bone marrow failure. The incidence ofthis disorder is 1 in every 250,000 live births with onset ranging
from neonatal stage to adulthood. Eight genes are associated with
autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. Pathogenic variants in SNX10
(sorting nexin 10) contribute to ARO in 4% of cases. SNX10 helpsin osteoclast differentiation by RANKL-stimulation.
Materials and methods: We ascertained a four-year old boy
born to consanguineously married couple. Detailed clinicalevaluation and skeletal survey were done. We performed exomesequencing followed by genome sequencing to identify the
genetic etiology.
Results: Proband exhibited macrocephaly, visual impairment,
pectus carinatum and hepatosplenomegaly. Increased bone
density, sandwich vertebrae and bone-in-bone appearance were
observed on radiographs. Exome sequencing was non-diagnostic.Whole genome sequencing identi ﬁed a large homozygous indel,
g.26263639_26335652delinsCAA, which includes ~72kb deletion
along with three-nucleotides insertion in the SNX10 gene. This
deletion encompasses noncoding exon 1, 5 ’untranslated region,
the promoter region, and upstream of SNX10. Parents are carriersof this deletion.
Conclusion: The novel ~72kb indel in noncoding region of
SNX10 is the likely cause of autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in
our patient. We hereby report the second large homozygous indel
inSNX10 resulting in autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.
G.S. Bhavani: None. P. Udupa: None. N. Kausthubham: None.
S. Bartakke: None. K.M. Girisha: None.
P04.071.D The use of bisphosphonates to treat osteoporosis
in patients with Lysinuric Protein Intolerance
Jos Draaisma , Joyce Geelen, Maaike de Vries, Anne Dittrich
Radboudumc Amalia children ’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background: Lysinuric Protein Intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal
metabolic disorder. Patients present with failure to thrive,cytopenia, acute encephalopathy or developmental disability.Long term complications includes also low bone mineral density.
In general the treatment is focused on the prevention of
hyperammonemia. The aim of this report is to propose the useof bisphosphonates for osteoporosis in patients with LPI.
Methods: Clinical description of a patient and review of
literature.
Results: A 8-year old girl was born to non-consanguineous
parents. She had a normal course until the age of 6 years. Since
than she had multiple fractures including multiple vertebral
fractures at different occasions due to mild trauma. Furtherinvestigation led to the genetically con ﬁrmed diagnosis LPI. The
lumbar Z-score was -3.7. She was treated with intravenous
pamidronate and supplemental calcium and vitamin D. No further
fractures occurred. After one year the z-score increased to -1.9,after two year -1.3.Discussion: In a cohort study performed in France 80% of the
patients with LPI was diagnosed with osteopenia. In a series of 29
patients in Finland, 69% of patients had one or more fractures,
mostly in childhood. The exact mechanism of the osteoporosis in LPIis still not fully understood. The normal initial therapy of patientswith LPI (a protein-restricted diet and supplemental L-citrulline) does
not change the signs of low bone mineral density. Bisphosphonates
can be used to treat osteoporosis in patients with LPI.
J. Draaisma: None. J. Geelen: None. M. de Vries: None. A.
Dittrich: None.
P04.072.A Severe osteosclerosis and early poor outcome in a
patient with TCIRG1 mutation
Elena Sukarova-Angelovska , Marina Krstevska-Konstantinova,
Natasa Alulovska, Svetlana Kocheva
Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Osteopetrosis is a heterogeneous group of disorders of bone
metabolism triggered by defective osteoclast function. Increased
bone density leads to worsening of many body functions. Among all
known genetic causes, loss of function mutation in TCIRG1 gene isresponsible for the disease in 70% of the cases. Impaired function of
α3 subunit V-ATPase leads to inappropriate extracellular acidi
ﬁca-
tion, osteoclast proliferation and unossi ﬁed osteoid matrix. We
present a male neonate that admitted our clinic shortly after birthdue to the suspicion of sepsis. Episodes of multifocal osteomyelitis
occurred successively. He had several dysmorphic features-macro-
cephaly, protruded forehead, prominent eyes, receding mandible,large ears. Several painful swellings were present due to the multiplebone ﬁssures. X-ray series con ﬁrm sclerosis of all bones, appearance
of dense bone formation, sandwich vertebrae, widened growth
plate and calvarial bone thickening. The mutation of TCIRG1 wasfound (G 2415A). Development of side effects occurred within the
ﬁrst several months (metabolic acidosis, hepatosplenomegalia,
anemia, skeletal deformities; blindness and deafness). He developedhydrocephalus and consecutive seizures at 9 months and died at theage of 11 months due to respiratory failure. Although the mutations
in TCIRG1 gene are frequent cause of AR osteopetrosis, there is a
wide heterogeneity of clinical presentation - from moderate tomalignant, primarily due to the different mutation and consecutiveacidiﬁcation error. Genotype-phenotype studies are limited; more-
over, the same mutation could give rise to different phenotypes.
Further investigation is needed in order to elucidate all contributingmechanisms that can indicate the severity of the disease.
E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. Krstevska-Konstantinova:
None. N. Alulovska: None. S. Kocheva: None.
P04.074.C Periodontal (formerly type VIII) Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome: description of 12 novel cases and expansion ofthe clinical phenotype
Salima EL CHEHADEH
1,2,A n n eL E G R A N D3,4, Corinne STOETZEL2,
Véronique GEOFFROY2,C l a r i s s eB I L L O N3,4, Salma ADHAM4, Xavier
JEUNEMAITRE3,4, Roland JAUSSAUD5, Jean Muller2,6,E l i s eS C H A E F E R1,
Karelle BENISTAN7, Sébastien GAERTNER8,9,A g n è sB L O C H -
ZUPAN10,11,12,M a r i e - C é c i l eM A N I E R E10,11,12, Catherine PETIT10,11,13,
Anne-Claire Bursztejn14,15, Laurence BAL16, Anthony REYRE17, Tiffany
BUSA18, Hélène DOLLFUS1,2,D a nL I P S K E R14,19
1Service de Génétique Médicale, Institut de Génétique Médicale d ’Alsace
(IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre,Strasbourg, France,2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, UMRS_1112,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
175
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Institut de Génétique Médicale d ’Alsace (IGMA), Université de
Strasbourg et INSERM, Strasbourg, France,3Université de Paris, INSERM,
U970, Paris Centre de Recherche Cardiovasculaire, Paris, France,4Centre
de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, AP-HP, Hôpital européenGeorges Pompidou, Paris, France,5Département de médecine interne
immunologie clinique, CHRU de Nancy et université de Lorraine, Nancy,
France,6Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Nouvel hôpital civil,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de, Strasbourg, France,7Centre de référence des
syndromes d ’Ehlers-Danlos non vasculaires, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré,
Garches, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Garches, France,
8Service des Maladies Vasculaires - Hypertension Artérielle, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,9INSERM, UMR 1260,
Regenerative Nanomedicine, FMTS, Strasbourg, France,10Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Strasbourg, France,
11Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Pôle de Médecine et Chirurgie
Bucco-Dentaires, Hôpital Civil, Centre de référence des maladies raresorales et dentaires, O-Rares, Filière Santé Maladies rares TETE COU,
European Reference Network ERN CRANIO, Strasbourg, France,
12Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
INSERM U1258, CNRS-UMR7104, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,13INSERM, UMR 1260 ‘Osteoarticular and Dental
Regenerative Nanomedicine ’, Faculté de Médecine, Fédération de
Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Strasbourg, France,
14Clinique Dermatologique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France,15Service de dermatologie, hôpitaux de Brabois,
CHU de Nancy, Vand œuvre-lès-Nancy, France,16Timone Aortic Center,
Timone Hospital, APHM ; Department of Vascular Surgery, TimoneHospital, APHM, Marseille, France,17Service de neuroradiologie
interventionnelle, CHU de Marseille, Hôpital La Timone, Marseille,
France,18Département de génétique médicale, CHU de Marseille,
Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, France,19Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (pEDS) is a rare condition
caused by autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in the C1R and
C1S genes, encoding subunits C1R and C1S of the ﬁrst component
of the classical complement pathway. It is predominantly character-
ized by early-onset severe periodo ntitis with premature tooth loss,
pretibial hyperpigmentation and skin fragility. Rare arterial compli-cations have been reported, but venous insuf ﬁciency is rarely
described. Here we report twelve novel patients carrying either de
novo (4/12) or inherited (8/12) heterozygous pathogenic variants in
C1Rand C1S, in order to characterize their clinical phenotype, with a
focus on the vascular features. All presented with typical pEDS
clinical signs including severe periodontitis (except the youngestpatient aged 3 years) with complete tooth loss in three patientsb e f o r et h ea g eo f3 0 .T h r e ep a t i e n t sa n do n er e l a t i v ea l s od i s p l a y e d
widespread venous insuf ﬁciency leading to chronic varicose leg
ulcers. One patient suffered an intracranial aneurysm with vascularcomplications in 3 relatives including thoracic and abdominal aorticaneurism and dissection and intracranial aneurysm rupture. This
work highlights the importance of early diagnosis of pEDS to direct
appropriate dental care and precise the genetic counselling. It alsoconﬁrms that vascular complications are possible, although they are
not frequent, which leads us to propose to carry out a ﬁrst complete
vascular evaluation after the diagnosis. Larger case series arehowever needed to precise the frequency of these vascularcomplications and to improve our understanding of the link
between complement pathway activation and connective tissue
alterations observed in these patients.
S. El chehadeh: None. A. Legrand: None. C. Stoetzel: None. V.
Geoffroy: None. C. Billon: None. S. Adham: None. X. Jeunemai-
tre:None. R. Jaussaud: None. J. Muller: None. E. Schaefer: None.
K. Benistan: None. S. Gaertner: None. A. Bloch-zupan: None. M.
Maniere: None. C. Petit: None. A. Bursztejn: None. L. Bal: None.
A. Reyre: None. T. Busa: None. H. Dollfus: None. D. Lipsker:
None.P04.075.D Comprehensive analysis of the genetic determi-
nants of proportionate short stature by targeted NGS
Angel Campos-Barros
1,2, Elena Vallespín1,2, Karen E. Heath1,2,
Angela Del Pozo1,2, Mario Solís1, Isabel González-Casado3, Paula
Casano4, Isabel R. Martínez-Orga1, María Fernández-Elvira1, Victoria
E. Fernández-Montaño1
1INGEMM, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
2CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (U753), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,3Dept. of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
4Dept. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain.
Proportionate short stature is a common condition (3% of general
population) with a heterogeneous genetic etiology. Despite theadvances in the understanding of pathophysiological growthregulation, the underlying genetic causes are still underdiagnosed.
Aim and subjects: Molecular genetic screening of a cohort of 201
pediatric cases (86 females and 115 males) with proportionateshort stature (height< -2.0 SDS) by targeted NGS.
Methods: Genomic DNA samples were analyzed with a custom
panel (Seq-Cap-EZ; Nimblegen, Roche) including 331 known
genes implicated in the etiology of syndromic and non-syndromic proportionate short stature. Variant prioritization was
based on sequence quality assessment (Q>30); coverage (mean
>90x; %bp>20x >80%); population frequency (MAF <1% ingnomAD controls), variant effect (missense, nonsense, frameshift,splicing effect) and in silico pathogenicity prediction (CADD_1.4
score >20).
Results and discussion: 97 potentially deleterious variants
were identi ﬁed in a total of 84 (41.8%) index cases, of which, 35
(57.3%) in genes involved in GH-IGF1 signaling (i.e. GHRH, GHRHR,
GHR, IGF1R, PTPN11, IGF2R ), and 26 (26.8%) in genes regulating
IGF1 bioavailability ( IGF1, IGFALS, IGFBP4, PAPPA2, PAPPA ). The
remaining variants were in genes: i) associated with syndromic
forms of proportional short stature, KDM6A (Kabuki-syndrome; n
=3),NFKB2 (DAVID syndrome, n =3),CUL7 (3M-syndrome, n =3),
and BTK(n=1); ii) implicated in pituitary morphogenesis, PROKR2
(n=5),IHH(n=5); iii) extracellular matrix genes, ACAN (n=11); or
iiii) in genes encoding paracrine factors of the growth plate, NPPC ;
(n=2) and NPR2 (n=3). Targeted NGS analysis signi ﬁcantly
improves the diagnostic rate of proportionate short stature. GrantsPI 12/00649; 18/00402 (ISCIII); ENDOSCREEN S2010/BMD-2396
A. Campos-Barros: None. E. Vallespín: None. K.E. Heath:
None. A. Del Pozo: None. M. Solís: None. I. González-Casado:
None. P. Casano: None. I.R. Martínez-Orga: None. M. Fernández-
Elvira: None. V.E. Fernández-Montaño: None.
P04.076.A Plasma inorganic pyrophosphate levels correlate to
speci ﬁc phenotypes and variant archetypes of ABCC6 in
pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients
Matthias Van Gils
1,2, Justin Depauw1, Shana Verschuere1,2, Lukas
Nollet1,2, Olivier M. Vanakker1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium,2Department of
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an ectopic
mineralization disease caused by biallelic ABCC6 mutations.
Decreased inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) levels have been linked
to ectopic mineralization in patients. However, whether correla-
tions exist between PPi levels and the phenotype or ABCC6
genotype is unknown.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
176
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Methods: PPi levels of 128 blood samples (92 [62 patients], 22
[21 carriers] and 14 [14 controls]) were measured. ABCC6
pathogenic variants (C3-C5) were considered. PXE phenotypes
were assessed using the Phenodex scoring (PS) system at initialpatient sampling. Two-fold statistical analysis was performed: bulkanalysis and single/ ﬁrst sample analysis. Correlations between PPi,
age, sex and PS were investigated. Based on mutation archetypes
(erroneous mRNA [D], nonsense [N] and missense [M] variants)and increasingly stringent variant selection genotype-PPi correla-tions were assessed.
Results: Patients and carriers had lowered PPi levels (respectively
±51% and ±78% of controls; P < 0.001) with sample range overlapbetween all groups. Sex (Bulk: P =0.010; Single: P =0.060) and age
(Bulk: P =0.005, r =0.288, Single: P =0.015, r =307) signi ﬁcantly
affected PPi levels only in patients. A signi ﬁcant inverse correlation
between PPi levels and cardiac PS scores was identi ﬁed (P=0.041, r
=-0.263) alongside a weak inverse association between PPi and
vascular PS (P =0.09). Signi ﬁcant differences in PPi levels between D
+Ma n dN +M genotypes were found in bulk analysis only (P < 0.05).
Conclusions: PPi is reduced in patients and carriers but overlap
between groups suggests other pro-mineralization factors are also
relevant in at least some patients. Correlations between PPi and
cardio(vascular) phenotypes sugge st PPi has promise as a biomarker;
genotype-correlations however require further con ﬁrmation.
M. Van Gils: None. J. Depauw: None. S. Verschuere: None. L.
Nollet: None. O.M. Vanakker: None.
P04.077.B lncRNA gene variants SPRR2C rs2291979 and
LOC105375120 rs4724102 are associated with psoriasis
Laimutis Kucinskas
1, Migle Anilionyte1, Vesta Kucinskiene2, Skaidra
Valiukeviciene2
1Institute of Biological System and Genetic Research, LUHS, Kaunas,
Lithuania,2Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences (LUHS), Kaunas, Lithuania.
The aim: to determine the signi ﬁcance of SNV of genes SPRR2C
rs2291979, LOC105375120 rs4724102 and LINC01698 rs75193730 in
the genotypes of psoriasis and control group persons and evaluate
associations between genotype and clinical signs of psoriasis .
Patients and Methods .Ninety ﬁve samples from psoriasis patients ’
group and 77 samples from a control group of healthy people were
examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
leukocytes by DNA salting out procedure. Genotyping was performedby real time polymerase chain reaction and data were analysed by
statistical analysis program IBM SPSS statistics .
Results: SPRR2C SNV rs2291979 frequency of A allele was 7,9 %
compare to 1,3 % of control group (p =0,011). LOC105375120
genotype G/G frequncy was 57,9 % in patient group compare with
28,6 % control group (p <0,001) and allele G frequency was 77,4 % in
patient group (p <0,00001). No statistically signi ﬁcant difference was
found between LINC01698 SNV rs75193730 genotypes and alleles .
Conclusions: Statisticaly signi ﬁcant higer frequency was determi-
nated of SNV SPRR2C rs2291979 A allele and LOC105375120 G/G
genotype and G allele compare with control group. No statisticallysigni ﬁcant associations of clinical signs and alleles and genotypes of
genes SNV SPRR2C rs2291979, LOC105375120 rs4724102 and
LINC01698 rs75193730 were determinated .
L. Kucinskas: None. M. Anilionyte: None. V. Kucinskiene:
None. S. Valiukeviciene: None.
P04.078.C The HRAS-RIN1 signaling axis controls integrin
trafﬁcking in keratinocytes and its dysregulation contributes
to the epidermal manifestation in Costello SyndromeTheresa Nauth , Laura Isabel Brandenstein, Verena Rickassel, Georg
Rosenberger
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Human
Genetics, Hamburg, Germany.
Germline missense mutations in the HRAS gene cause Costello
syndrome (CS), a rare developmental disorder characterized by a
typical facial gestalt, postnatal growth de ﬁciency, intellectual
disability, predisposition to malignancies as well as skeletal,
cardiac and dermatological abnormalities. The molecular patho-
physiology caused by heterozygous HRAS gain-of-function muta-tions have been analyzed in various tissues and cell types.However, up to date the molecular basis for cutaneous
manifestations in CS is largely unknown. To study epidermal
pathobiology, we generated permanent human keratinocyte cells(HaCaT) stably expressing wild type HRAS
WTor CS-associated
HRASGly12Serand screened for keratinocyte-speci ﬁc HRAS binding
partners by af ﬁnity puri ﬁcation and quantitative mass spectro-
metry. We identi ﬁed and veri ﬁed RIN1 (Ras and Rab interactor 1)
as most important interaction partner of active HRAS variants inkeratinocytes. By its dual function as an activator of ABL1/2 and
RAB5A, RIN1 is involved in cytoskeletal remodeling and endoso-
mal sorting of cell surface receptors, such as integrins. FACS-basedintegrin endocytosis assays showed aberrant integrin traf ﬁcking in
keratinocytes expressing HRAS
Gly12Serand application of prima-
quine revealed integrin recycling to be essentially affected. Byimmunocytochemistry, we detected an increase of intracellularvesicular β1 integrin which strongly co-localized with RAB5, RAB21
and EEA1. The altered bioavailability of integrins in keratinocytes
expressing HRAS
Gly12Serwas associated with impaired cell spread-
ing. Our data demonstrate that CS-associated HRASGly12Ser
interferes with RIN1-RAB5 mediated endosomal sorting of
integrins and, thus, adhesion-dependent processes. We conclude
that dysregulation of receptor traf ﬁcking and cell adhesion are
relevant in the pathobiology of CS.
T. Nauth: None. L.I. Brandenstein: None. V. Rickassel: None.
G. Rosenberger: None.
P04.079.D IRAK2 is associated with rheumatoid arthritis
susceptibility
Rim Sghiri1, Hana BenHassine2, Asma Boumiza2, Khadija Bac-
couche3, Foued Slama2, Adel Almogren1, Zahid Shakoor1, Elyes
Bouajina3, Ramzi Zemni2
1King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2Faculte de Medecine de
Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia,3Hopital Farhat Hached de Sousse, Sousse,
Tunisia.
Objectives : Investigate the association of the single nucleotide
polymorphisms of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 2
(IRAK2) rs3844283 and rs708035 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Patients and methods: IRAK2 rs3844283 and rs708035
genotyping was determined by mutagenically separated PCR in
a cohort of 222 (30 men, 192 women, mean age 49 years) adult RApatients and 224 matched controls.
Results : IRAK2 rs3844283 C allele was detected in 66% of RA
patients and 74% of controls. The CC genotype was the most
frequent genotype in both RA patients (45.5%) and the controls(56.3%). The G allele was found to be associated with RAsusceptibility (OR =1.47, 95% CI =1.10-1.96, p =0.008). The GG
genotype was found to be associated with RA in the co-dominant
and the dominant models (OR =2.03, 95% CI =1.08-3.81, p =
0.042 and OR =1.54, 95% CI =1.06-2.23, p =0.023, respectively).
IRAK2 rs708035 was found not to be in the Hardy-WeinbergAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
177
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608equilibrium. The hyperfunctional IRAK2 rs708035 A allele was
more frequent in RA patients than in controls (69.9 versus 62.2%,
respectively, p =0.015). Moreover, IRAK2 rs708035 and IRAK2
rs3844283 were in linkage disequilibrium and the GA haplotypewas signi ﬁcantly more frequent in RA patients than in controls (p
=0.034).
Conclusion: This study for the ﬁrst time ever reports the
association of IRAK2 rs3844283, IRAK2 rs708035, and thecorresponding haplotypes with RA. Functional studies arerecommended to elucidate the risk posed by the GA haplotype
for the development of RA.
R. Sghiri: None. H. BenHassine: None. A. Boumiza: None. K.
Baccouche: None. F. Slama: None. A. Almogren: None. Z.
Shakoor: None. E. Bouajina: None. R. Zemni: None.
P04.080.A A TRAF6 genetic variant is associated with low
bone mineral density in rheumatoid arthritis
Rim Sghiri
1,Hana BenHassine2, Najla El Amri3, Khadija Baccouche3,
Foued Slama2, Zahid Shakoor4, Adel Almogren4, Elyes Bouajina3,
Ramzi Zemni2
1king Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2Faculte de Medecine de
Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia,3Hopital Farhat Hached de Sousse, Sousse,
Tunisia,4King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Objectives: This study was aimed at investigating the association
of the single nucleotide polymorphism of tumor necrosis factor
receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6), rs540386, with low bone
mineral density (BMD) among patients with rheumatoid arthritis(RA).
Patients and Methods: TRAF6 rs540386 genotyping was
performed by mutagenically separated PCR in a cohort of 188
(23 men, 165 women, median age, 56.2 years) adult RA patientsand 224 age and gender-matched controls. BMD was measured
using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (Lunar Prodigy
advance scans, GE Healthcare, USA).
Results: Among the RA patients, 64 (55 women, 9 men) had low
BMD comprising of 57 patients with osteoporosis and 7 with
osteopenia. Whereas TRAF6 rs540386 was not associated with RA
susceptibility, it was however found to be a risk factor for reducedlumbar spine Z-score in the recessive model (OR =3.34, 95% CI =
(1.01-11.00), p =0.038). This association was con ﬁrmed further in
the multivariate logistic regression analysis taking into account
several potential confounding factors (OR =3.34 (1.01-11.00), p =
0.048). In addition, mean total femur Z-score was found to be
reduced in TT patients when compared to CC +CT patients (-
1.30 ± 1.32 versus - 0.60 ± 1.05, p =0.034). No association between
TRAF6 rs540386 and local bone damage was observed.
Conclusions: This study for the ﬁrst time ever demonstrated an
association between a genetic variant of TRAF6 and low BMD
among patients with RA. Further investigations are needed toelucidate the exact role of this variant.
R. Sghiri: None. H. BenHassine: None. N. El Amri: None. K.
Baccouche: None. F. Slama: None. Z. Shakoor: None. A.
Almogren: None. E. Bouajina: None. R. Zemni: None.
P04.081.B Association between a functional polymorphism
within the IL-17RC gene and idiopathic scoliosis in Bulgarianpopulation
Svetla Nikolova
1, Milka Dikova2, Alexandre Loukanov3
1Soﬁa University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,3Saitama University, Saitama, Japan.Introduction: Several genome wide association studies suggested
the common IL-17RC gene variants could take part in the
pathogenesis of idiopathic scoliosis. The present case-controlstudy investigated the association between a functional poly-morphism, IL-17RC*rs708567 (G/A), and idiopathic scoliosis in a
Bulgarian population sample.
Materials and Methods: The association study was performed
on 127 patients and 254 controls after obtaining written informedconsent. The mean Cobb angle was 53.8° ± 21.2. The mean age of
patients was 11.2 ± 2.9 years. The cases were divided into
subgroups based on the age of onset, sex, family history, andprogression. The genotyping was carried out by TaqMan Real-Time PCR method. The statistical analysis was performed by
Pearson ’s Chi-squared test and Fisher ’s Exact Test with p-value less
than 0.05 as statistically signi ﬁcant.
Results: The frequencies of the variant A allele and AA
genotype in the total group of patients and in the subgroup of
patients with Cobb angle above 40° were signi ﬁcantly higher than
that in the controls (p < 0.05). In addition, this case-control studyrevealed statistically signi ﬁcant association between IL-
17RC*rs708567 (G/A) and primary scoliosis in males, females,
adolescents, familial and sporadic cases.
Conclusions: The results con ﬁrmed previously reported asso-
ciations between a common variant within IL-17RC and idiopathic
scoliosis in Caucasian and Asian population groups and suggested
that the molecular marker rs708567 is an independent predispos-ing and modifying factor of idiopathic scoliosis in different
subgroups of Bulgarian patients.This work was supported by
MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI T20K05260 and Jikoshunyu Kyoinhaibun-keihi T5452 funded by Saitama University.
S. Nikolova: None. M. Dikova: None. A. Loukanov: None.
P04.082.C Genotype-phenotype correlation of aberrations at
7q21.2-q21.3 locus in patients affected with isolated or
syndromic form of split-hand/foot malformation
Anna Sowi ńska-Seidler
1, Magdalena Socha1, Anna Materna-
Kiryluk1,2, Aleksander Jamsheer1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Pozna ń, Poland,2Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS,
Pozna ń, Poland.
Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) refers to the group of
congenital limb malformations characterized by the absence or
hypoplasia of the central rays of the autopods. Eight loci are
associated with this clinically and genetically heterogeneousdisorder. SHFM type 1 (SHFM1) maps to 7q21.2-q21.3 and occursin an isolated form, associated with other abnormalities, or as a
part of a congenital anomaly syndrome. In most cases SHFM1
results from deletions encompassing the DLX5/DLX6 genes or their
regulatory elements. Herein, we report on ﬁve new index cases
harboring 7q21.2-q21.3 rearrangements and perform a genotype-
phenotype correlation for these individuals and two previously
published families of Polish origin affected with SHFM1. Chromo-some analysis including conventional GTG banding and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) were applied to
identify the causative aberrations. Balanced translocations: t(7;12)
(q21.2;q21.3) and t(7;10)(q21.2;q22.2) were identi ﬁed in the most
severely affected patient diagnosed with EEC and developmental
delay, and in a patient with bilateral ectrodactyly of the hands and
feet and hearing loss, respectively. Two other sporadic patientsaffected with isolated ectrodactyly of the feet carried microdele-tions spanning less than 200 kb encompassing the limb-speci ﬁc
enhancers within DYNC1I1 . Also, a 4.5 Mb deletion of the 7q21.2-Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
178
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608q21.3 region was identi ﬁed in a sporadic patient diagnosed with
EEC syndrome. We present the spectrum of abnormalities in
SHFM1 cases that depends on the 7q21.2-q21.3 aberrations
breakpoints, deletion size and its gene/regulatory elementscontent. This work was supported by the grants from the PolishNational Science Centre UMO-2016/21/D/NZ5/00064 to A.S-S.,
UMO-2016/23/N/NZ2/02362 to M.S. and UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/
00270 to A.J.
A. Sowi ńska-Seidler: None. M. Socha: None. A. Materna-
Kiryluk: None. A. Jamsheer: None.
P04.083.D SHFM3 caused by a duplication involving BTRC but
not POLL and with possible modi ﬁer variants in FRAS1 and
C2CD3
Gökhan Nalbant
1, Asl ıhan Tolun2
1Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Health
Sciences, Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University,Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) involves the
central rays, the phenotype is very diverse, and six loci are known.
SHFM3 (10q24) displays dominant inheritance. Causative duplica-
tion includes two genes; BTRC is involved in Wnt signallingcascade by regulating β-catenin levels in limb development and
POLL in base excision repair. Whether both genes contribute to
the condition has not been elucidated. The disorder varies in
severity even among relatives. We investigated a Turkish familyafﬂicted with SHFM3.
Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing for unaffected
mother, affected father and two affected daughters was
performed to ﬁnd the causal variant. SNP genotypes were used
to detect the disease gene locus and to investigate for any
deletion or duplication linked to the malformation.
Results: Linkage analysis revealed a single locus at 10q24.32. All
7 affected individuals investigated carried a maximal 264 kbheterozygous duplication. Very rare FRAS1 :p.E296K and C2CD3: p.
A2041V were found in daughters but not father.
Conclusions: We present the smallest duplication causing
SHFM3 and involving BTRC gene only, indicating that POLL does
not contribute to the condition . Candidate variants detected
could be the genetic factors that aggravate the malformation in
siblings and are being investiga ted for possible relations to
pathways regulated by BTRC. Both FRAS1- and C2CD3-de ﬁcit
phenotypes include autopod malf ormations. We will also search
for modi ﬁers in the second-cousin. Modi ﬁer variants could give
a clue about why this disorder exhibits variable severity amongkin. Supported by the Research Fu nd of the Istanbul Technical
University (2021-42537).
G. Nalbant: None. A. Tolun: None.
P04.084.A Is Xlαsassociated with short stature?
Arrate Pereda
1, Yerai Vado1,2, Karen E. Heath3,4,5, Jesus Pozo-
Roman6,7,8, Maria Angeles Santos-Mata9, Elena Artola10, Guiomar
Perez de Nanclares1
1Rare Diseases Research Group, Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory,
BioAraba Health Research Institute, OSI Araba, Araba University
Hospital-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, Spain,2NanoBioCel
Research Group, Laboratory of Pharmacy and PharmaceuticalTechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of the Basque CountryUPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, Spain,
3Institute of Medical andMolecular Genetics (INGEMM), La Paz University Hospital, Autono-
mous University of Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,4Skeletal dysplasia
Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), La Paz University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain,5CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,6Departments of Pediatrics and
Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Niño Jesús UniversityHospital, Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain,7La
Princesa Research Institute, Madrid, Spain,8CIBEROBN, Institute of
Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,9Pediatric Endocrinology Unit,
Paediatric Service of the University Hospital de Jerez, Jerez de laFrontera, Cádiz, Spain,10Paediatric Department, Donostia University,
Donostia, Gipuzkoa, Spain.
Introduction: GNAS , located on 20q13.2, is a highly complex
imprinted locus from which at least four transcripts (NESP55,
GNAS, XL-GNAS and A/B) are generated and, some of them, in an
allele speci ﬁc way. It is well known that heterozygous GNAS
alterations in either allele are associated with growth impairment,
pre- and postnatally. But less is known about the effect of genetic
alterations at XL αs(eXtra Large Gs α), encoded by and alternative
exon 1 of the paternally expressed long form of Gsα.
Patients and Methods: Three independent families in which
the probands (P) were referred for short stature (SS) (P1) and
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) or PTH-related proteinsignalling disorder type 2 (iPPSD2) (P2,P3) were studied by NGS-custom panels. Variant con ﬁrmation and cosegregation studies
were carried out via Sanger sequencing. Parental origin of the
allele was tested by allele-speci ﬁc RT-PCR ampli ﬁcation, and
sequencing.
Results: Three different heterozygous variants of uncertain
signi ﬁcance (VUS) were identi ﬁed in the XLαsexon (Table 1).
Familial studies suggested cosegregation when the variant waspresent on the paternal allele.
Conclusion: We describe the ﬁrst three families in whom
XLαss p e c i ﬁc exon variants on the paternal allele seem to be
associated with short stature an d brachydactyly (BD). Additional
studies are required. Funding: ESPE RU Grant 2020; ISCIII,
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, co- ﬁnanced
by the European Regional Development Fund (PI20/00950);University Basque Country UPV/EHU (PIF17/29).
A. Pereda: None. Y. Vado: None. K.E. Heath: None. J. Pozo-
Roman: None. M. Santos-Mata: None. E. Artola: None. G. Perez
de Nanclares: None.
P04.085.B Monogenic variants in short stature: use and
efﬁciency of targeted NGS panel in 300 patients
Caroline Michot
1, Pauline Marzin1, Geneviève Baujat1, Coralie
Haudry2, Anne-Laure Tourre2, Julie Steffann2, Sophie Rondeau2,
Valérie Cormier-Daire1
1Reference Center for skeletal dysplasia, INSERM UMR1163, Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France,2Molecular Genetic Unit,
Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Necker-Enfants
Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
Short stature is a frequent reason for paediatric consultations.
After clinical, endocrinological and radiological explorations, even
patients shorter than -2,5 SD remain without diagnosis. Next
generation sequencing (NGS) has improved the ability to offertestings for heterogeneous conditions. We report the analysis of
300 patients with short stature.
A targeted NGS panel was designed to sequence 150 skeletal
dysplasia genes. Amplicons were captured by a custom Sure-Select kit (Agilent) and sequenced on HiSeq (Illumina). Annotation
and analysis of variants were realized by a homemade interfaceAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
179
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608(PolyWeb). Results were discussed with the physicians of the
reference center for Skeletal Dysplasias.
Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 48 patients (16%) and
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VOUS) in 18 cases (6%),
involving 8 different genes. Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed
in:NPR2 (n=16), ACAN (n=11), FGFR3 (n=8),IHH (n=8) and
SHOX (n=5). Patients had neither body disproportion, nor
Madelung deformation. X-rays showed no or minor abnormalities,such as bone age anomalies, slightly curved radius or stocky longbones. VOUS variants involved the same genes, and also COL9A2
(n=1),COL11A1 (n=2) and COL11A2 (n=2). These last variants
were classi ﬁed as class 3, as patients displayed no epiphyseal
dysplasia.
Targeted NGS allowed molecular elucidation in 16 % of patients
with proportionate short stature and minor skeletal features.
These results highlight the impact of monogenic variants in shortstature patients, involving a few number of genes, and the
efﬁciency of targeted NGS in this indication. Molecular elucidation
is important for the assessment of therapeutic options for thesepatients.
C. Michot: None. P. Marzin: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Haudry:
None. A. Tourre: None. J. Steffann: None. S. Rondeau: None. V.
Cormier-Daire: None.
P04.086.C Identi ﬁcation and tissue-speci ﬁc characterization of
novel SHOX-regulated genes highlights SOX family members
among other genes
Sandra Hoffmann
1, Ralph Roeth1, Sabrina Diebold2, Jasmin Gogel1,
Steffen Just2, Gudrun A. Rappold1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany,2Clinic for
Internal Medicine II, Molecular Cardiology, Ulm, Germany.
SHOX -deﬁciency causes a spectrum of clinical phenotypes related
to skeletal dysplasia and short stature including Léri Weill
dyschondrosteosis, Langer mesomelic dysplasia, Turner syndrome,as well as idiopathic short and tall stature. SHOX controlschondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, bone maturation,
as well as cellular growth arrest and apoptosis via transcriptional
regulation of its direct target genes NPPB ,FGFR3 , and CTGF .
However, our understanding of SHOX-related pathways is stillincomplete. To elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms
and to better understand the broad phenotypic spectrum of
SHOX -deﬁciency, we analyzed differentially expressed genes in
human ﬁbroblasts (NHDF), where SHOX is expressed at detectable
level. Twenty-three putative target genes were selected for further
validation by whole-body and tissue-speci ﬁc characterization
(head, heart and pectoral ﬁns) in developing shox -deﬁcient
zebra ﬁsh embryos. Physiological relevance was con ﬁrmed for
the majority of these genes in pectoral ﬁns and network-based
analysis showed that 20/23 genes act in a common network.Interestingly, several soxfamily members ( sox5 ,6,8and 18) were
shown to be signi ﬁcantly deregulated in shox -deﬁcient pectoral
ﬁns among other genes including nppa ,nppc ;cdkn1a ,cdkn1ca ,
cyp26b1 ,cyp26c1 , highlighting the important role of gene family
members in shox -related growth disorders. Our results providenovel insights into the genetic pathways and molecular events
leading to the clinical manifestation of SHOX -deﬁciency.
S. Hoffmann: None. R. Roeth: None. S. Diebold: None. J.
Gogel: None. S. Just: None. G.A. Rappold: None.
P04.087.D Exome analysis of prenatal and postnatal cases
referred with skeletal dysplasia
Andrea Haworth1, Tessa Homfray2, Suzanne Drury1, Rand Dubis1,
Meriel McEntagart2, Katrina Tatton-Brown2, Helen Savage1, John
Filby1, Nicholas J. Lench1, Louisa Ive1, Eva Serra1, Natalie Trump1,
Nayana Lahiri2, Janna Kenny2, Frances Elmslie2, Phil Ostrowski2,
Esther Dempsey2, John Short2, Charlene Crosby2, Christine M. Hall2,
Sahar Mansour2
1Congenica Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2St George ’s
Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Skeletal dysplasias (SD) are rare disorders representing approxi-
mately 5% of all congenital anomalies. They are highly hetero-geneous and clinical ﬁndings are often non-speci ﬁc, so accurate
diagnosis often relies on expert interpretation of radiological
ﬁndings. Until recently treatments have been limited but
development of new therapeutics has highlighted the need to
provide accurate and timely diagnosis. We describe the genomic
and phenotypic ﬁndings of SD cases referred to clinical genetics
over an approximately 2.5-year period. All cases underwent exomesequencing (ES) as part of a service provided by Congenica and
the South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London. 53
cases were referred with a clinical diagnosis of possible SD and amolecular diagnosis was obtained in 49% (26/53). A higherdiagnostic yield was observed in prenatal (64%, 16/25) rather than
postnatal cases (35.7%, 10/28). Causal variants were identi ﬁed in
26 genes. Variant types identi ﬁed included those impacting both
coding and non-coding regions (5 ’UTR) and CNVs. The molecular
diagnosis was not always concordant with the suspected clinical
diagnosis, particularly in a prenatal setting and the advantages ofundertaking analysis of all skeletal dysplasia genes in these casesis illustrated in two cases ( SOX9 and GNPTAB ). Accurate molecular
diagnosis has directly in ﬂuenced patient management, including 2
cases with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis where surveillance wasinitiated and 1 case of prenatal hypophosphatasia wherediagnosis provided appropriate management of pregnancy and
access to therapeutic intervention. Furthermore, in one family the
identi ﬁcation of the underlying molecular cause has expanded the
phenotypic spectrum of disease (cartilage-hair hypoplasia).
A. Haworth: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Limited. T. Homfray: None. S. Drury: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Limited. R. Dubis: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Limited. M.
McEntagart: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None. H. Savage: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Limited. J.
Filby: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica
Limited. N.J. Lench: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Limited. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica
Limited. L. Ive: None. E. Serra: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Proband Features Other affected family
membersParental
originCustom panel XL αs
NM_080425.3NP_536350.2 ACMG
1 SS father, paternal
grandfatherPaternal Skeletal dysplasia (385
genes)c.1043G>A p.
(Arg348Gln)PM2; BP4 (7 vs
2) VUS
2 SS, BD sister, father (only SS) Paternal iPPSD and related disorders
(92 genes)c.1343A>C p.
(Asp448Ala)BP4 (13 vs 0)
VUS?
3 none De novo ?
(ongoing)c.79G>A p.(Glu27Lys) PM2, BP4 (9 vs
4) VUSAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
180
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Limited. N. Trump: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Congenica Limited. N. Lahiri: None. J.
Kenny: None. F. Elmslie: None. P. Ostrowski: None. E. Dempsey:
None. J. Short: None. C. Crosby: None. C.M. Hall: None. S.
Mansour: None.
P04.088.A What are key parameters for obtaining the most
likely clinical diagnosis from the wide phenotypic spectrum ofskeletal dysplasia in patients with previously identi ﬁed
disease-causing gene variant
Marija Mijovic1, Bojan Bukva2,3, Jelena Ruml Stojanovic1, Aleksan-
dra Miletic1, Brankica Bosankic1, Hristina Petrovic1, Goran Cuturilo1,3
1University Children ’s Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Belgrade, Serbia,2University Children ’s Hospital, Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Belgrade, Serbia,3Faculty of Medicine, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: It is known that alteration of several genes
associated with skeletal disorders could lead to multiple, highly
variable phenotypes. Aim of present study was to establish the
crucial clinical and/or genetic parameters for obtaining thediagnosis in three patients with previously unclassi ﬁed skeletal
dysplasia in whom the causal gene variant was identi ﬁed.
Materials and Methods: Genetic testing was performed using
whole exome sequencing (WES). Detailed analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation was performed by the team of geneticist
and child orthopedist. Contribution of following parameters was
assessed: speci ﬁc radiological and orthopedic signs; existence of
associated disorders; adult phenotype in familial cases; phenotypeof the patient with the same variant from the literature if available,
and gene localization of the identi ﬁed variant.
Results: Case 1: Infant with severe nonfamilial skeletal dysplasia,
with congenital arthrogryposis and multiple associated problems.
WES result: TRPV4 : heterozygous pathogenic missense variant
c.806G>A, p.Arg269His. Clinical diagnosis: Metatropic dysplasia.Case 2: Child with familial skeletal dysplasia with short stature andcoxa vara. WES result: COL2A1 : heterozygous pathogenic missense
variant c.1681G>A, p.Gly561Ser. Clinical diagnosis: Spondyloepi-
physeal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening (Czech dysplasia).Case 3: Young child with familial skeletal dysplasia with shortstature, joint laxity and other skeletal involvement. WES result:
COMP : heterozygous likely pathogenic missense variant
c.1293C>A, p.Asp431Glu. Clinical diagnosis: Multiple epiphysealdysplasia (Fairbank type).
Conclusion: Multidisciplinary approach could facilitate the
establishment of the most likely clinical diagnosis in patients withskeletal disorders with previously identi ﬁed causative gene
variant. Key parameters for obtaining the clinical diagnosis differ
from gene to gene.
M. Mijovic: None. B. Bukva: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None.
A. Miletic: None. B. Bosankic: None. H. Petrovic: None. G.
Cuturilo: None.
P04.089.B A previously unreported pathogenic variant in
TAB2 in a patient with polyvalvular heart dystrophy, short
stature and dysmorphism
Nis Brix
1,2, Rikke Christensen1, Susanne W. Grotkjær3, Dorte G.
Nielsen4, Kasper J. Kyng5, Pernille A. Gregersen1,6
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus
N, Denmark,2Department of Public Health, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark,3Department of Pediatrics, Herning Hospital,Herning, Denmark,4Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark,5Department of Pediatrics and
adolescence, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark,6Centre
for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescence, AarhusUniversity Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Introduction: TGFβ-activated kinase 1-binding protein 2 (TAB2)
encodes a scaffold protein that forms the TAK1-TAB complexinvolved in proliferation, differentiation and myocardial homeostasis.Pathogenic variants are associated with autosomal dominant
congenital heart defects (OMIM #614980). We describe a 5-year-
old girl and her mother with a previously unreported frameshiftvariant in TAB2 identi ﬁed by whole exome sequencing (WES).
Clinical report: The girl was born by elective caesarean section
(gestational age 39 +0, birth weight 2594g). She was followed for
growth retardation, and at 4.5 years, she was -3SD for height andweight. She had mild insuf ﬁcient dysplastic atrioventricular valves
and joint hypermobility. She was dysmorphic with ﬁfthﬁnger
clinodactyly, pes planus, mild hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, mildmidface hypoplasia, frontal bossing, bulbous nasal tip and broadmouth. The mother has short stature (-2.5SD), a dysplastic mitral
valve with mild insuf ﬁciency, and has previously been treated for
supraventricular tachycardia. Several other family members on themother ’s side have short stature and variable cardiac abnormalities.
Methods and Results: Using WES performed on DNA from the
patient and both parents, we analysed data as a trio with focus on
maternally inherited variants and found heterozygosity for apreviously unreported maternally inherited class 4 variant (ACMG
guidelines) in TAB2 (NM_015093.5:c.[604_605dup];[ =], p.(Pro203-
Hisfs*41)). Segregation analysis in the family is ongoing.
Discussion: Ourﬁndings, especially the precise clinical descrip-
tion of an adult person (the mother) and the extensive pedigree,
add to the phenotypic spectrum of a TAB2 -related systemic
connective tissue disorder with polyvalvular dystrophy, shortstature and dysmorphism.
N. Brix: None. R. Christensen: None. S.W. Grotkjær: None. D.
G. Nielsen: None. K.J. Kyng: None. P.A. Gregersen: None.
P04.090.C Evidence that ciliary genes contribute to non-
syndromic familial tall stature
Birgit Weiss
1, Birgit Eberle1, Ralph Röth1, Christiaan de Bruin2, Julian
C. Lui3, Katrin Hinderhofer1, Jeffrey Baron3, Jan M. Wit2,Gudrun A.
Rappold1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany,2Leiden Uni-
versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3National Institute of
health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Human growth is a complex trait. A considerable number of gene
defects have been shown to cause short stature, but there are only
few examples of genetic causes of non-syndromic tall stature.Besides rare variants with large effects and common risk alleleswith small effect size, oligogenic effects may contribute to this
phenotype. Exome sequencing was carried out in a tall male
(height 3.5 SDS) and his parents. Filtered damaging variants withhigh CADD scores were validated by Sanger sequencing in the trioand three other affected and one unaffected family members.
Network analysis was carried out to assess links between the
candidates, and the transcriptome of murine growth plate wasanalyzed by microarray as well as RNA Seq. Heterozygous gene
variants in CEP104, CROCC, NEK1, TOM1L2 and TSTD2 predicted as
damaging were found to be shared between the four tall familymembers. Three of the ﬁve genes (CEP104, CROCC and NEK1)
belong to the ciliary gene family. All genes are expressed in mouse
growth plate. Pathway and network analysis indicated closeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
181
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608functional connections. Together, these data expand the spectrum
of genes with a role in linear growth and tall stature phenotypes.
B. Weiss: None. B. Eberle: None. R. Röth: None. C. de Bruin:
None. J.C. Lui: None. K. Hinderhofer: None. J. Baron: None. J.M.
Wit: None. G.A. Rappold: None.
P04.091.D Compound heterozygous mutations in ERCC2 are
associated with trichothiodystrophy type 1
Fahrettin Duymus , Deniz Esin, Busra Goksel Tulgar, Nadir Kocak,
Tulin Cora
Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
A 9-month-old male patient was admitted to our clinic with sparse
hair, developmental delay and recurrent infections. He was theﬁrst child of child of non-consanguineous Turkish parents. In the
patient ’s anamnesis, it was learned that there was a rash on her
skin at birth. İchthyosis and mild scaling were reported on the
scalp, trunk, and lower extremities of the patient from 1 month ofage. In the evaluation of the patient, there were short brittle hair,
dry skin, dystrophic tooth structure, and hyperkeratosis in the feet.
Whole exome sequencing analysis was performed from thepatient who had ichthyosis and frequent infections.ERCC2:
c.2164C>T and ERCC2:c.1867dup heterozygous mutations were
detected. The clinical ﬁndings of the patient were also compatible
with trichothiodystrophy (TTD). TTD is a rare genetic diseasecharacterized by brittle hair, ichthyosis, and recurrent infections.
Molecular genetic evaluation is very useful in the diagnosis of TTD.
ERCC2: c.2164C> T mutation was previously reported as com-pound heterozygous with pathogenic p. (Arg616Pro) variant in apatient diagnosed with TTD in 1994 by Broughton et al. To the
best of our knowledge the ERCC2: c.1867dup variant has not been
previously reported in the literature and is a frame shift-typevariant. it has never been described before that the compound
heterozygosity of these mutations causes photosensitive TTD. He
was diagnosed to have photosensitive TTD type 1 and his motherand father are the carriers. Genetic counseling was given to thefamily of the patient. A schedule was prepared for regular clinic
follow-up of the patient.
F. Duymus: None. D. Esin: None. B. Goksel Tulgar: None. N.
Kocak: None. T. Cora: None.
P04.093.B An exceptional biallelic N-terminal frameshift
mutation in ZMPSTE24 leads to non-lethal progeria due to
utilization of a downstream alternative start codon
Lukas Kaufmann
1, Jasmin Blatterer1, Erich Scha ﬂinger1, Aiman S.
Khan2, Lisa Auinger1, Benjamin Tatrai1, Sumra W. Abbasi3,
Muhammad Z. Ali2, Ansar A. Abbasi4, Ali Al Kaissi5, Klaus Wagner1,
Muzammil A. Khan2, Christian Windpassinger1
1Diagnostic & Research Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria,
2Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, D. I. Khan,
Pakistan,3NUMS Department of Biological Sciences, Rawalpindi,
Pakistan,4Department of Zoology, Mirpur, Pakistan,5Ludwig
Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction: Mandibuloacral dysplasia with type B lipodystrophy
(MADB) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of premature aging,associated with severe abnormalities in bone, skin and adipose
tissue. The main underlying genetic cause of MADB are homo-
zygous or compound heterozygous missense mutations in theZMPSTE24 -gene. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in ZMPSTE24 ,
however, have been associated with lethal restrictive dermopathy(RD), which leads to death within the ﬁrst weeks of life. In the
present study, a large consanguineous Pakistani family segregat-
ing MADB was recruited for molecular investigation in order to
identify the underlying genetic cause.
Materials and Methods: The disease was diagnosed through
clinical features of MADB, assisted by radiologic and biochemical
tests. For genetic analysis whole exome sequencing (WES) was
performed, followed by homozygosity mapping and variantannotation using VarSeq ™v2.2 (Golden Helix, Inc.).
Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel N-terminal
homozygous frameshift mutation NM_005857:c.28_29insA, p.
(Leu10Tyrfs*37) in ZMPSTE24 segregating with the disease
phenotype. Remarkably, the potential loss-of-function mutationresults in a non-lethal phenotype in our patients. A more in-depth
analysis of the mutation revealed that the observed one base pair
insertion creates a novel downstream in-frame start codon.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of a
biallelic loss-of-function mutation not implicated in lethal RD. We
propose a rescue mechanism involving the usage of a gained in-frame downstream start codon, which could potentially avoidframeshift and lead to residual enzymatic function. These ﬁndings
might be crucial for the interpretation of far N-terminal mutations
in complex genotype-phenotype correlations.
L. Kaufmann: None. J. Blatterer: None. E. Scha ﬂinger: None.
A.S. Khan: None. L. Auinger: None. B. Tatrai: None. S.W. Abbasi:
None. M.Z. Ali: None. A.A. Abbasi: None. A. Al Kaissi: None. K.
Wagner: None. M.A. Khan: None. C. Windpassinger: None.
P05 Cardiovascular Disorders
P05.001.C Segregation of rs897543876 in BMP4 gene in family
with nonsyndromic aortic dilatation
Zuzana Capkova
1,2, Jana Petrkova1,2, Pavlina Capkova1,2, Lucie
Punova1,2, Martin Prochazka1,2, Josef Srovnal1,3
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Olomouc,
Olomouc, Czech Republic,2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty
of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký University Olomouc, Olomouc,
Czech Republic,3Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký University Olomouc,Olomouc, Czech Republic.
Background: Aortic dilatation is the most common pathological
involvement of the thoracic aorta. This aberration can arise by variouscauses such as congenital connectiv e tissue disorder (CCTD), injury or
inﬂammation and is accompanied by bicuspid aortic valve, arterial
hypertension and atherosclero sis. CCTD were associated with
increase of aortic dilatation but genetics of nonsyndromic aorticdilatation is still unknown. Case report: Here we report family with
aortic dilatation. Proband was gen etically tested for CCTD in his 61
years. Aortic dilatation was observed and his echocardiographyshowed bicuspid aortic valve. Hypertension was treated in thispatient. His brother had aortic dilatation and aortic insuf ﬁciency.
Daughter of proband was observed for anxiety. Daughter and son of
proband were without aortic dilatation.
Method and result: Proband was consulted by geneticist and
biological materials was collected with his informed consent to
genetic testing. Marfan syndrome was excluded by sequencing of
FBN1 . Also DiGeorge syndrome was excluded by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁcation (MLPA). Moreover MLPA
revealed heterozygously deleted one probe in BMP4 . Sequencing
of probe area showed unknown variant rs897543876(NM_001202.6:c.-144C>T). Brother and daughter of proband alsocarried rs897543876.
Discussion and conclusion: rs897543876 is unknown variant
which appears in 0.012 %-0.014 % worldwide and predicted asAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
182
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608variant with moderate pathogenici ty according to prediction tools.
The variant is located in 5´UTR and may downregulated expression of
BMP4 . However, future studies are necessary for con ﬁrmation of
rs897543876 pathogenic role. Acknowledgment: MH CZ —DRO FNOL
00098892, IGA UP LF_2020_007, IGA UP LF_2020_018, TACRTN01000013, No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000868, LM2018132,
A-C-G-T, CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_026/0008448.
Z. Capkova: None. J. Petrkova: None. P. Capkova: None. L.
Punova: None. M. Prochazka: None. J. Srovnal: None.
P05.002.D Malignant ventricular arrhythmia in a Czech
representative cohort of sudden cardiac death (SCD) victimsand cardiac arrest survivors (CAS) aged 1 - 65 years: results of
a candidate gene panel-based sequencing strategy
Pavel Votypka
1, Petra Peldova1, Stepanka Pohlova-Kucerova2,
Marketa Kulvajtova3, Petr Peichl4, Marek Sramko4, Andrea Gregor-
ova5, Terezia Tavacova6, Jana Petrkova7, Martin Dobias8, Petr
Tomasek9, Vlastimil Vancura10, Milan Macek Sr.1, Milan Macek Jr.1,
Jan Janousek11, Josef Kautzner4, Alice Krebsova4
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague,Czech Republic,2Department of Forensic Medicine, University
Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic,3Institute
for Forensic Medicine, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,Prague, Czech Republic,4Institute for Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic,5Department of Biology and
Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic,
6Children´s Heart Center, Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic,71st Department of Internal Medicine - Cardiology and
Laboratory of Cardiogenomics, Faculty Hospital Olomouc and
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic,811Institute of Forensic
Science and Medical Law, Faculty Hospital Olomouc and PalackýUniversity, Olomouc, Czech Republic,9Department of Forensic
Medicine, University Hospital Bulovka., 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,10Department of
Cardiology, Faculty Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic,11Chil-
dren´s Heart Centre, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and
Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction : Hereditary cardiomyopathy and arrhythmic syn-
dromes are associated with an increased risk of malignant
ventricular arrhythmia leading to SCD or cardiac arrest. Genetic
testing con ﬁrms clinical / autopsy diagnosis and enables strati ﬁed
care.
Patients and Methods : Altogether 166 CAS (71 female and 97
males) and 76 SCD victims (25 female and 51males) wereanalysed. In the CAS group 103 cases have dg. of idiopathicventricular arrhythmia (iVF), 34 arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
(ACM; of which 27 right -/ 7 left predominant) and 2 have
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The SCD group comprises 11cases with post mortem dg. of hypertrophic - (HCM) /dilated-(DCM), 16 arrhythmic cardiomyopathy (ACM), 20 sudden arrhyth-
mic death (SADS) and 18 sudden unexplained death cases (SUD).
Massively parallel sequencing (MiSeq platform; Illumina.com)utilised a custom-made panel with 100 candidate genes (SOPHiAGenetics; Switzerland). Presence of Class 4-5 variants was validated
by Sanger sequencing and via family segregation analyses.
Results : The cumulative detection rate of Class 4-5 variants in
CAS was in 49/166 (30 %) and in SCD victims 18/76 (22 %). The
most commonly affected gene was PKP2 (12/67 variant-positive
cases), followed by KCNH2 (8/67), RYR2 (7/67), TTN (7/67) and
SCN5A (6/67).
Conclusion : In a representative Czech cohort, cardiac arrest
could be frequently explained by a molecular cause. Malignantarrhythmias in CAS and SCD victims are mainly due to pathogenic
variants in genes associated with ACM, LQT2, CPVT and LQT3.
Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant Nr.
NV18-02-00237.
P. Votypka: None. P. Peldova: None. S. Pohlova-Kucerova:
None. M. Kulvajtova: None. P. Peichl: None. M. Sramko: None. A.
Gregorova: None. T. Tavacova: None. J. Petrkova: None. M.
Dobias: None. P. Tomasek: None. V. Vancura: None. M. Macek
Sr.:None. M. Macek Jr.: None. J. Janousek: None. J. Kautzner:
None. A. Krebsova: None.
P05.004.B Analysis of the effect of periodontopathogens on
the molecular mechanisms of atherosclerosis. Systematic
review
Talia Yolanda Marroquin
1, Sandra Guauque-Olarte2
1Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Pasto, Colombia,2Universi-
dad Cooperativa de Colombia, Medellin, Colombia.
Introduction: The role periodontal pathogens in atherosclerosis
has not been fully understood. The aim of this systematic review
was to describe the effect of periodontopathogens on themolecular mechanisms involved in atherosclerosis.
Materials and methods: This systematic review followed the
Cochrane and PRISMA guidelines. Screened databases werePubMed, Science Direct, and Lilacs. Original studies publishedfrom January 2015 to August 2020 about periodontitis and
atherosclerosis were included. A tool for quality assessment, based
on STROBE checklist, was applied.
Results: A total of 722 records were collected, 33 papers were
selected for full-text reading. Porphyromonas gingivalis,Tannerella
forsythia, Fusobacterium nucleatum ,a n d Treponema denticola ,w e r e
able to disseminate from the oral cavity and invade atheroscleroticplaque in humans. In mice sera, these bacteria signi ﬁcantly increased
the expression of 25 genes or proteins belonging to apoptosis, TLR
signalling, TGF-beta, in ﬂammation, and angiogenesis pathways. Ten
papers reported that P. gingivalis and Eikenella corrodens signiﬁcantly
increased the expression of 42 biomarkers associated with athero-
sclerosis development and progression pathways such as apoptosis,
cytochrome-c, in ﬂammation, entdothelin, B cell activation, vascular
endothelial growth factor, cell adhesion, and toll like receptorpathways, in HAECs, HUVECs, and AoSMCs. Filifactor alocis signiﬁ-
cantly increased angiogenesis-related biomarkers. P. gingivalis
signiﬁcantly decreased the expression biomarkers associated with
antiapoptotic mechanisms in HCAECs, HASMSs, HUVECs.
Conclusions: Data-analysis revealed the signi ﬁcant effect of
some periodontopathogens on proatherogenic mechanisms. Net-work analysis will be performed on this data. It is important tostudy the effect of other periodonthopathogens in atherogenesis.
SGO received funding by CONADI and TYM by Minciencias.
T.Y. Marroquin: None. S. Guauque-Olarte: None.
P05.005.C Somatic mosaicism of human coronary artery cells
in atherosclerosis
Aleksei Zarubin , Anton Markov, Maria Nazarenko
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Accumulation of somatic mutations is usually
associated with aging, and age-associated diseases, e.g., athero-sclerosis. We assessed the scale and cell speci ﬁcity of thisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
183
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608phenomenon in the human coronary arteries affected by
atherosclerosis using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data.
Materials and Methods: We used public dataset
(PRJNA544957). Brie ﬂy, coronary arteries from four explanted
heart affected by atherosclerosis were dissociated and used forscRNA-seq. Sample datasets were pooled for clustering and cell
type determination. Single cells were genotyped using cellSNP-
lite. Total cell genotype served as reference for every sampleseparately. We counted the number of cells with somaticmutations in each cluster.
Results: The maximal proportion of mosaic cells was speci ﬁcf o r
plasma cells (53.9%). Somatic variants were found to a greater extentin genes of HLA receptor family and cytochrome b-245. Smooth
muscle cells were the second clust er in terms of somatic mosaicism
frequency (13.5%). They also contained alterations in HLA genes, but
also in the genes of metallothione in and apolipoprotein D. Somatic
heterogeneity of macrophages wa s found in actin and tubulin genes,
in addition to genes of previously described cell types. At the same
time, the proportion of cells conta ining two or more somatic variants
among smooth muscle cells was signi ﬁcantly less (0.3%) than in
plasma cells (30%).
Conclusion: We have discovered somatic mosaicism in
coronary artery cells affected by atherosclerosis. Different celltypes have different levels of mosaicism. At the same time, thereare genetic variants both shared by all cells and speci ﬁc for
individual cell types.
A. Zarubin: None. A. Markov: None. M. Nazarenko: None.
P05.006.D A Polygenic Risk Score for Atrial Fibrillation in a
Hispanic/Latino Population
Brandon Chalazan
1, Christina Lee2, Valerie Morrill2, Sara Darbar3,
Aylin Ornelas-Loredo3, Arvind Sridhar4, Martha Daviglus3, Patrick
Ellinor2, Dawood Darbar3
1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,2Broad
Institute, Boston, MA, USA,3University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA,
4University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
Background: Previous genetic studies for atrial ﬁbrillation (AF)
have identi ﬁed common and rare variants associated with AF.
Recently, polygenic risk scores (PRSs) have been developed for AFalmost exclusively in patients of European ancestry. Here, we
performed a candidate single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on
a large cohort of Hispanic/Latino individuals determine thecombined impact of genetic variants.
Purpose: To generate a PRS to estimate the risk of AF in a
Hispanic/Latino cohort.
Methods: We prospectively enrolled 713 participants from the
UIC AF Registry and UIC Cohort of Patients, Family and Friends.
The cohort was genotyped for the top 9 known AF risk alleles and
a PRS was developed using these SNPs. The cohort was strati ﬁed
into quartiles of low: 0-20%; intermediate: 20-80%; and high: 80-100% genetic risk.
Results: The study cohort consisted of 625 Hispanic/Latino
subjects with a mean age 46.0 ± 13.5 years and 57% were male.Patients in the intermediate and high genetic risk group wereassociated with a 2.50-fold (odds ratio [OR] 2.50; 95% con ﬁdence
interval [CI]: 0.92-6.81; P =0.07) and 2.70-fold (OR 2.70; 95% [CI]:
1.13-6.43; P =0.02) increase in AF risk compared to the low risk
group.
Conclusions: We show that a PRS is capable of predicting and
risk stratifying AF patients in Hispanic/Latinos populations. Furtherstudies will explore the impact of additional AF loci on riskstrati ﬁcation and determine if PRSs can be integrated into clinical
practice.
B. Chalazan: None. C. Lee: None. V. Morrill: None. S. Darbar:
None. A. Ornelas-Loredo: None. A. Sridhar: None. M. Daviglus:
None. P. Ellinor: None. D. Darbar: None.
P05.007.A Mendelian randomization suggests a causal effect
of abdominal obesity on postprandial lipemia
Malene Revsbech Christiansen
1, Torben Hansen1, Thorkild I. A.
Sørensen1,2, Niels Grarup1, Mario García Ureña1, Dmitrii Borisevich1,
Jean-Michel Oppert3, José Alfredo Martínez Hernandéz4,5, Ellen
Blaak6, Tuomas Oskari Kilpeläinen1
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
Copenhagen N, Denmark,2Department of Public Health, Section of
Epidemiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
3Nutrition Department, Pitie-Salpêt rière Hospital, Assistance Publique
Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne University, Paris, France,4Department of
Nutrition, Food Sciences, and Physiology, Center for Nutrition Research,University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain,5Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Instituto of
Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,6Department of Human Biology,
NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Introduction : High postprandial lipem ia is associated with an
increased risk of cardiovascular disease, independent of fasting lipid
levels. Abdominal and gluteofem oral fat handle lipoproteins
differently, which could affect postprandial lipemia and thuscardiovascular risk. We aimed to study the causal in ﬂuences of body
fat distribution on postprandial lipemia after a high fat meal, using
Mendelian randomization.
Materials and methods : A total of 764 adults with obesity from
seven European countries consumed a liquid high fat meal.
Postprandial concentrations of triglycerides, glycerol, free fatty
acids, and the cholesterol component of remnant-like particles(RLP), LDL and HDL were measured for 3 hours. Waist-hip ratioadjusted for BMI (WHR
adjBMI ) was instrumented using a genetic
score of 442 independent WHR adjBMI -associated genetic variants.
Two-stage least squares regression analyses were used to assesscausal associations of WHR
adjBMI with postprandial lipid levels.
Linear regression analyses were used to assess associations of
waist circumference and hip circumference adjusted for BMI
(WC adjBMI and HC adjBMI ) with postprandial lipid levels.
Results : Instrumental variable analyses suggested that
WHR adjBMI is causally associated with higher postprandial lipemia
after a high fat meal, including higher postprandial levels oftriglyceride (P =0.044) and RLP cholesterol (P =0.020). WC
adjBMI
and HC adjBMI showed directionally opposite effects: WC adjBMI was
associated with higher levels of triglyceride and RLP cholesterol
and HC adjBMI with lower levels (P for difference =1.67x10-5and
5.64x10-4, respectively).
Conclusion : Our results suggest that higher abdominal fat
deposition is causally associated with higher postprandial lipemia.
Furthermore, gluteofemoral fat deposition may show the oppositeeffect.
Funding: MRC (NNF17SA0031406), TOK (NNF20OC0063707), DB
(NNF17CC0026760)
M.R. Christiansen: None. T. Hansen: None. T.I.A. Sørensen:
None. N. Grarup: None. M.G. Ureña: None. D. Borisevich: None.
J. Oppert: None. J. Martínez Hernandéz: None. E. Blaak: None.
T.O. Kilpeläinen: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
184
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P05.008.B A FAIR Brugada Syndrome data repository to
facilitate cardiogenetic research
Marta M. Tébar Ruiz1,2, Dorien Daneels1,3, Gudrun Pappaert4, Elyssa
Cannaerts1, Thomy de Ravel1, Carlo de Asmundis4, Juan Sieira4, Ann
Nowé2,5, Pedro Brugrada4, Catharina Olsen1,2,3, Tom Lenaerts2,5,6,
Sonia Van Dooren1,2,3
1Centre for Medical Genetics, research group Reproduction and
Genetics, research cluster Reproduction, Genetics and Regenerative
Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Universitair Ziekenhuis
Brussel (UZ Brussel), Brussels, Belgium,2Interuniversity Institute of
Bioinformatics in Brussels (IB)2, Brussels, Belgium,3Brussels Inter-
university Genomics High Throughput core (BRIGHTcore), VUB-ULB,
Brussels, Belgium,4Heart Rhythm Management Centre, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZBrussel), Brussels, Belgium,5Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence Lab Brussels, Brussels, Belgium,6Machine Learning
Group, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
Introduction: Brugada Syndrome (BS) is a rare cardiac inheritable
disorder associated with a high-risk of sudden cardiac death,
which may be the ﬁrst symptom, making essential its detection in
pre-symptomatic individuals. Drug-induced ECG monitoring andgenetic testing provide powerful early-warning systems. However,
in approximately 70% of the cases no causative variant(s) can be
identi ﬁed. In addition, comparisons across multiple centres are
currently dif ﬁcult as so far, no registry with clinical information and
causative genetic variants has been made available to the
research community. In this study we provide a ﬁrst structured
repository for BS, following FAIR data principles and dataprotection regulations, in order to facilitate comparisons andfurther clinical, genetic and AI-driven research.
Methods and results: Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZB) has
collected data for BS families since 1992. We manually curatedclinical data of patients who consented further research (157
individuals). In addition, we (re-)classi ﬁed variants for mutations
found in the BS and primary cardiac arrhythmia associated genesusing Hofman (PMID: 23963746) and ACMG classi ﬁcation guide-
lines (PMID: 25741868), to highlight differences in classi ﬁcation
algorithms and validate the used methodology.
Conclusions: Combining clinical and genetic data is essential to
ﬁnd phenotype-genotype correlations, especially in cases like BS
where different causative variants may lead to different severity
grades. This new UZB BS repository is intended to boost the
integration of data analysis coming from different groups, ensuring abetter understanding and diagnosis of BS patients.This initiative is
supported by IMAGica IRP project grant of the Vrije Universiteit
Brussel.
M.M. Tébar Ruiz: None. D. Daneels: None. G. Pappaert: None.
E. Cannaerts: None. T. de Ravel: None. C. de Asmundis: None. J.
Sieira: None. A. Nowé: None. P. Brugrada: None. C. Olsen: None.
T. Lenaerts: None. S. Van Dooren: None.
P05.009.C Mutations in structural genes in Brugada Syndrome
Marianna Farnè
1, Rita Selvatici1, Cristina Balla2, Mauro Bif ﬁ3, Elia De
Maria4, Cecilia Trabanelli1, Alice Margutti1, Matteo Bertini2, Alessan-
dra Ferlini1, Francesca Gualandi1
1Unit of Medical Genetics, Deparment of Medical Sciences, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2Cardiology Department, University Hospital
Sant ’Anna of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,3Department of Cardiology,
University Hospital of Bologna Sant ’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy,
4Cardiology Unit, Carpi Ramazzini Hospital, Carpi (Modena), Italy.Introduction: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a hereditary disease with
high allelic/genetic heterogeneity and associated with the risk of
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. This clinical
entity is classically described as an arrhythmic condition occurringin a structurally normal heart, but this assumption has beenrecently contradicted by several observations, which suggest a
link between BrS and structural cardiomyopathies.
Materials and methods: We studied a cohort of patients with
spontaneous or drug-induced type 1 EKG pattern, variablyassociated with symptoms and a positive family history by a Next
Generation Sequencing panel approach, including both channe-
lopathies and cardiomyopathies genes.
Results: We identi ﬁed in eleven subjects (13.8%) likely
pathogenic/pathogenic variants in genes associated with arrhyth-
mogenic (AC) or hypertrophic (HCM) cardiomyopathy. Four
mutations were identi ﬁed in the two major HCM genes: missense
changes p. Arg783His and p.Val1213Met in MYH7 , a frameshifting
p.Lys1065Glnfs*12 and a splicing c.1458-1G>A variations in
MYBPC3 . All of these mutations are known being associated to
HCM. Nevertheless, only the patient carrying the MYBPC3 splicing
mutation showed clinical evidence of structural cardiomyopathy.
Conclusions: Our study showed genotypic overlap between BrS
and structural cardiomyopathies, including HCM. This observationsupports Brugada type 1 ECG pattern as a possible early sign of anoccult structural heart disease, with implications in clinical
management and genetic counselling.
M. Farnè: None. R. Selvatici: None. C. Balla: None. M. Bif ﬁ:
None. E. De Maria: None. C. Trabanelli: None. A. Margutti: None.
M. Bertini: None. A. Ferlini: None. F. Gualandi: None.
P05.010.D Congenital heart defects in Noonan syndrome and
PTPN11 muta □onCongenital heart defects in Noonan syn-
drome and PTPN11 mutation
Laura Claudia Popa
1, Nicoleta Andreescu1,2, Simona Farcas2, Adela
Chirita-Emandi1,2, Maria Puiu1,2
1Louis Turcanu Children Hospital, Timisoara, Romania,2Victor Babes
University, Timisoara, Romania.
Background: Noonan syndrome is a common autosomal
dominant RASopathy disorder clinically characterized by facialdysmorphism, congenital heart disease, short stature and
molecularly characterized by mutations in most common genes:
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1, KRAS. Mutations in the PTPN11 are themost frequent causes of Noonan syndrome also the determining
factor of the most serious heart defects with high risk of morbidity.
Aim: The aim of this study is to identify the congenital heart
defects associated with PTPN11 mutations in children from ourhospital in conjunction with the literature reports.
Materials and method: A number of sixteen pediatric patients,
diagnosed with Noonan syndrome were clinically and geneticallyinvestigated at Timisoara Genomic Medicine Centre. The mole-cular testing was performed on MiSeq Illumina platform using
Illumina TruSight Cardio Sequencing Panel kit. From sixteen
patients ’cases for which a mutation was identi ﬁed, there were
twelve in PTPN11 and four in SOS1. In this presentation we focusonly on the heterozygous mutations found in PTPN11.
Results: In the remaining twelve cases, pulmonary valve stenosis
was found in seven cases; atrial septal defect was identi ﬁed in 3
cases, aortic coarctation, aortic regurgitation and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy were each identi ﬁed in two cases, pulmonary
regurgitation, heart failure, aortic d ysplasia, ventricular septal defect
and coronary sinus dilatation were each identi ﬁed in one case.
Conclusion: The high incidence of cardiac abnormalities
suggests that proper cardiac evaluation is important in geneticAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
185
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608counseling, case management, and possibly in the identi ﬁcation
of the responsible gene.
Key words: cardiac defects, Noonan syndrome, PTPN 11.
L.C. Popa: None. N. Andreescu: None. S. Farcas: None. A.
Chirita-Emandi: None. M. Puiu: None.
P05.011.A Limitations in the interpretation of variants of
uncertain signi ﬁcance in cardiomyopathies
Clara Herrero-Forte1,2, María Fenollar-Cortés1,2, Carmen Cotarelo-
Pérez1,2, Victoria Cañadas-Godoy3,2, María Alejandra Restrepo-
Córdoba4,2, Laura Daganzo-Sierro1,2, Emma Soengas-Gonda1,2,
Raluca Oancea-Ionescu1,2
1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Instituto de
Medicina del Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain,2Instituto de Investigación
Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC). Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain,
3Consulta de Cardiopatías Familiar es/Unidad de Arritmias. Servicio de
Cardiología., Madrid, Spain,4Unidad de Insu ﬁciencia Cardiaca y
Cardiopatías Familiares. Servici o de Cardiología., Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in cardiomyopa-
thies has improved the diagnostic yield. However, detecting variantsof uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) could be a pr oblem because those
with high probability of pathogenicity require additional studies in
order to determine their clinical signi ﬁcance.
Materials and Methods: NGS analysis using virtual panel of 50
genes for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) or dilated cardio-
myopathy (DCM) was performed in 102 patients. Sanger sequen-
cing for cosegregation analysis was able in only 6 of 17 VUS withhigh probability of pathogenicity. Alpha-galactosidase and lyso-GL-3 levels were measured to con ﬁrm Fabry disease. Current
scienti ﬁc evidence was reviewed.
Results: 61 patients with HCM: 15 Pathogenic or likely
pathogenic variants (25%) and only 9 VUS were considered with
high probability of pathogenicity (15%). 41 patients with DCM: 5
Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants (12%) and only 8 VUSwere considered with high probability of pathogenicity (20%).Cosegregation analysis didn´t allow to con ﬁrm the pathogenicity
of the 6 VUS with high probability of pathogenicity. An indirect
functional study of Fabry disease con ﬁrmed the pathogenicity in
one case. One VUS with high probability of pathogenicity hasbeen reclassi ﬁed to likely benign due to a new scienti ﬁc evidence
published by other authors.
Conclusions: Cosegregation studies could be useless in those
families with small number of affected relatives. The genetic
characteristics of cardiomyopathies, mainly incomplete pene-
trance, also contributes to a poor performance of the cosegrega-tion studies. Functional studies are more suitable forreclassi ﬁcation of VUS, although they are not usually accessible
in healthcare practice.
C. Herrero-Forte: None. M. Fenollar-Cortés: None. C. Cotar-
elo-Pérez: None. V. Cañadas-Godoy: None. M.A. Restrepo-
Córdoba: None. L. Daganzo-Sierro: None. E. Soengas-Gonda:
None. R. Oancea-Ionescu: None.
P05.012.B OBSCN as a candidate gene for apical hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
Busra Unal
1,2, Nihat Bugra Agaoglu1,2, Ozlem Akgun Dogan3,2,
Levent Doganay1,2,4, Mehmet Agirbasli5
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Umraniye Teaching and Research
Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey,2GLAB
(Genomic Laboratory), Health Directorate of Istanbul, İstanbul,Turkey,3Department of Pediatric Genetics, Umraniye Teaching and
Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey,
4Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Umraniye
Teaching and Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences,İstanbul, Turkey,5Department of Cardiology, Goztepe Teaching and
Research Hospital, Istanbul Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(AHCM) involving the distal
portion of the left ventricle is a relatively rare form of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy(HCM) with genetic heterogeneity. Recent mole-
cular genetics studies have shown that pathogenic mutations in
genes coding sarcomere/Z-band components, including titin/connectin and its associate proteins, plays a role in the etiology.Among these genes, OBSCN stands out as a strong candidate and
encodes the obscurin, a protein associated with titin/connectin.
We present a 58 years old female patient with a likely pathogenic(LP) variant in the OBSCN in clinical exome analysis(CES) to
elucidate the etiology of AHCM. Next-generation sequencing was
performed on the NextSeq500 platform using the virtual panel forApical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(AHCM). We reported aheterozygous LP variant on OBSCN by attributing PVS1, PM2
criteria. (NM_001098623 GRCh37:hg19: Chr1:228560464 exon 94
c.21989_22002del p. Lys7330Argfs*8).This variation creates aframeshift and causes an amino acid substitution of lysine toarginine at codon 7330(PVS1). This variant is not present in
population databases(PM2). There weren`t any other pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants associated with HCM. In theirexperimental study, Borisov et al. demonstrated that obscurin
activity varies and is an important mediator during myocardial
hypertrophy. Although this is the ﬁrst case report in the literature
of an LP variation in OBSCN in an apical HCM patient, new patients
and functional studies are needed to show its association with the
disease.
B. Unal: None. N.B. Agaoglu: None. O. Akgun Dogan: None. L.
Doganay: None. M. Agirbasli: None.
P05.013.C A novel missense mutation of TNNI3K associated
with cardiac conduction disease
Ilyas Ahmad
1,2, Stephanie Tennstedt1,2, Shafaq Ramzan3,1, Shahid
Mahmood Baig3, Jeanette Erdmann1,2
1Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck,
Germany,2DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research)
partner site Hamburg / Kiel / Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany,3National
Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE),
Faisalabad, Pakistan.
Cardiac conduction disease (CCD), which causes altered electrical
impulse propagation in the heart, is a serious life-threatening
condition with high morbidity and mortality rates. In majority of
CCD, the synchronous activity of impulse-generating nodes andimpulse-conduction is undermined for the normal heartbeat. CCDexhibit genetic and clinical heterogeneity with diverse underlying
pathomechanisms. In this study, we investigated a consangui-
neous Pakistani family having four affected individuals with heartarrhythmia followed by ventricular septal defect in only oneindividual. We applied whole exome sequencing (WES) and co-
segregation analysis on DNA samples from all available individuals
which revealed a novel recessive biallelic mutation (NM_015978.2:c.1531T>C: p.S511P) in the highly conserved kinase domain in
cardiac troponin I-interacting kinase ( TNNI3K ) gene. The missense
variant was absent from ethnicity matched healthy controls andavailable public databases. The mutated residue is highlyconserved, and its substitution is predicted to be pathogenic by
in silico prediction methods. Furthermore, molecular dynamicsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
186
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608simulation studies of the dimer suggests that p.S511P has an
indirect effect on the orientation of the monomers facing each
other, in the direction of a more energetically unfavorable
orientation. Since the orientation of the monomers with respectto each other plays a crucial role in the function of the protein,therefore, we hypothesize that TNNI3K -S511P might negatively
affect the kinase activity of the protein. In conclusion, this study
reports a novel recessive mutation p.S511P in TNNI3K and expands
the spectrum of TNNI3K protein in the pathogenicity of CCD.
Keywords: CCD, TNNI3K
I. Ahmad: None. S. Tennstedt: None. S. Ramzan: None. S.M.
Baig: None. J. Erdmann: None.
P05.015.A Diagnostic yield of WES-based gene panels in
patients with congenital structural heart defects - a multi-center study
Marrit M. Hitzert
1,Rosalie L. Neijzen2, Dennis Dooijes2, Yvonne J.
Vos1, Rosa L. E. van Loon2, Wilhelmina S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,
2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) affect 1% of live
births. A monogenetic cause can be identi ﬁed in 5% to 10% of
patients. WES-based gene panels are widely used, while there isno consensus on which genes to include and which patients couldbene ﬁt most. We evaluated the diagnostic yield of WES-based
gene panels in CHD patients.
Patients: We retrospectively evaluated the results from WES-
based gene panels in CHD patients in the Netherlands at theUniversity Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) and the University
Medical Center Utrecht (UMCU). Inclusion lasted from 2013
(UMCU) and 2017 (UMCG) up until April 2020. We collectedclinical data including phenotype and family history of CHD.
Results: A total of 328 patients were included with most
patients having a left-sided (n =117; 35.7%) or conotruncal heart
defect (n =94; 28.7%). In 3/117 and 8/94 patients a (likely)
pathogenic variant was demonstrated. Total diagnostic yield was
comparable between the UMCG and the UMCU (6.2% and 6.0%,
respectively) and was higher in syndromic than non-syndromicpatients (12.5% vs. 5%; P=0.038).
Conclusions: Our diagnostic yield of CHD gene panels as used
in clinical practice (6%) is comparable to the previously reported
yield in study settings (5% to 10%), and is highest in syndromicpatients.
Cardiac phenotype Familial
Y/NSyndromic
Y/NGene DNA variant P/
LP
Left atrial isomerism,
PAHN Y DNAH11 c.5778 +1G>A P
DNAI1 c.48 +2dupT P
Right atrial
isomerism, right-
sided aortic arch,
AVSD, (sub)valvularPSY Y GDF1 c.681C>A, p.
(Cys227*)P
GDF1 c.681C>A, p.
(Cys227*)P
Dextrocardia, right
isomerism,univentricular heart,
AVSD, TAPVRN Y PKD1L1 c.2027C>T, p.
(Pro676Leu)LP
PKD1L1 c.5728C>T, p.
(Arg1910Trp)LP
TGA, VSD N N GDF1 c.681C>A, p.
(Cys227*)P
Truncus arteriosus,
VSDN N NKX2-6 c.455dupA, p.
(Gln153Alafs*?)P
NKX2-6 c.455dupA, p.
(Gln153Alafs*?)P
PLD1 PCardiac phenotype Familial
Y/NSyndromic
Y/NGene DNA variant P/
LP
c.2191A>T, p.
(Arg731*)
CEP290 c.133_136delCAAG,
p.(Gln45Lysfs*3)P
Truncus arteriosus,
interruption of theaortic archN ? GAT6 c.1417_1426del, p.
(Lys473Glyfs*8)P
Tetralogy of Fallot N N FLT4 c.89C>T, p.
(Pro30Leu)LP
GDF1 c.681C>A, p.
(Cys227*)P
PS, VSD Y Y EP300 c.3739T>C, p.
(Cys1247Arg)LP
Truncus arteriosus N N CRELD1 c.959delA, p.
(Gln320Argfs*25)LP
Tetralogy of Fallot N Y GLI3 c.642delC, p.
(Met215*)LP
CRELD1 c.1103T>A, p.
(Leu368*)LP
Truncus arteriosus N N HAND1 c.410_411delinsA, p.
(Arg137fs)P
PS, VSD N N JAG1 c.1278del, p.
(Cys427fs)P
AVSD Y Y MYH11 c.4882A>C, p.
(Lys1628Gln)LP
BAV, TAAD Y N GDF1 c.681C>A, p.
(Cys227*)P
BAV N N FOXC2 c.1402dupG, p.
(Glu468Glyfs*?)LP
HLHS, BAV Y Y PTPN11 c.1505C>T, p.
(Ser502Leu)P
HLHS N Y PTPN11 c.179G>C, p.
(Gly60Ala)LP
ASD Y Y ACTC1 c.904T>A, p.
(Ser302Thr)LP
HLHS, incomplete
AVSD, primum
septum defect,narrower AoV,hypoplasia aortic arcwith COAY Y PTPN11 c.1529A>C, p.
(Gln510Pro)P
HLHS with mitral
valve atresia,
hypoplastic aortic
arch, PDA ASDN N NOTCH1 c.3177del, p.
(Val1060fs)P
M.M. Hitzert: None. R.L. Neijzen: None. D. Dooijes: None. Y.J.
Vos: None. R.L.E. van Loon: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse:
None.
P05.017.C CHDbase: a genetic knowledge base for congenital
heart disease
Weizhen Zhou1, Wenke Li1, Ruby W Wang2,Huayan Shen1, Wen
Chen1, Qingyi Zeng1, Hao Wang1, Meng Yuan1, Ziyi Zeng1, Jinhui
Cui1, Fred Y Ye2, Zhou Zhou1
1Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Fuwai Hospital, Beijing,
China,2School of Information Management, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China.
Introduction : Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most
common birth defect, affecting nearly 1 per 100 newborns. CHD
covers broad structural heart malformations and shows a complexgenetic basis. Yet, the susceptibility genes with different strengthsof evidence are scattered in literature without professional data
integration and comprehensive analyses. The whole picture of
CHD genetics and the genotype-phenotype correlations areunclear.
Method : A total of 1,150 publications were systemically
reviewed. Metadata for each study including sample features,
experimental design, and statistical results were collected andfunctional annotations of genes and mutations were performed.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
187
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608The patterns of CHD genes across various types were analyzed
and a database was constructed.
Result : We integrated 1,139 genes, 1,022 copy number
variations and structural variations, 2,641 single-nucleotide varia-tions or small insertions/deletions and 36 linkage regionsassociated with CHD from 1,150 publications. We extracted a
core network of 164 genes using k-core decomposition based on
the protein-protein network and revealed the tissue and devel-opmental stage expression patterns, as well as critical biologicalpathways underlying CHD. Additionally, we re ﬁned CHD subtypes
using genotype-phenotype correlations and six subtypes were
proposed to be more genetically homogeneous. A MySQL-basedonline database ( http://chddb.fwgenetics.org/ ) was developed to
share with the CHD research community.
Conclusion : This genetic database of CHD presented a clear big
picture of CHD genetics, and the atlas of CHD genes and subtypingprovided important implications for mechanism research and
clinical diagnostics and treatment.This work was supported by the
CAMS Initiative for Innovative Medicine (2016-I2M-1-016)
W. Zhou: None. W. Li: None. R. Wang: None. H. Shen: None. W.
Chen: None. Q. Zeng: None. H. Wang: None. M. Yuan: None. Z.
Zeng: None. J. Cui: None. F. Ye: None. Z. Zhou: None.
P05.018.D Mutation burden in patients with small unrepaired
atrial septal defects
Anne Kathrine Møller Nielsen
1, Camilla Nyboe2, Anne Sif Lund
Ovesen2, Sebastian Udholm2, Malthe Mølgård Larsen3, Vibeke
Hjprtdal1, Lars Allan Larsen3
1Rigshopitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark,3University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction: In a recent nationwide cohort study, we have
discovered that patients living with an atrial septal defect (ASD) have
a shorter life expectancy, increased risk of atrial ﬁbrillation,
pneumonia, and psychiatric iss ues compared to the general
population. The pathop hysiological mechanisms are still unknown.
The objective of this study is to investigate if this group of patients is
burdened by mutations in genes associated with ASD.
Methods: We included 147 patients with an unrepaired ASD.
We curated a list of ASD candidate genes, and patients wereanalyzed for genetic variants in these genes, using targeted next
generation sequencing. We ﬁltered for protein altering variants
(PAVs) with minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.01 and predictedpathogenicity using the Combined Annotation Dependent Deple-
tion (CADD) method. The number of rare and pathogenic variants
in cases were compared with variants identi ﬁed in 33,370 controls
of European ancestry.
Results: We identi ﬁed 384 rare (MAF < 0.01) PAVs in 59 genes.
ASD patients were signi ﬁcantly enriched for very rare (MAF <
0.0001) PAVs compared to controls (P =0.0001). The frequency of
PAVs with CADD score ≥30 was signi ﬁcantly higher in ASD
patients, compared to controls (P =0.0042).
Conclusions: Patients with a small, unrepaired ASD were enriched
for rare PAVs within 59 ASD candidate disease genes. Our resultssuggest that recurrence risk may be increased for this group ofpatients and warrants further inve stigations. Funding: This work was
supported by Novo Nordic Foundation (Grant no. NNFSA170030576),
Brd. Hartmanns Fond, Kong Christian den Tiendes Fond, DagmarMarshalls Fond and Eva & Henry Frænkels Mindefond.
A.K.M. Nielsen: None. C. Nyboe: None. A.S.L. Ovesen: None. S.
Udholm: None. M.M. Larsen: None. V. Hjprtdal: None. L.A.
Larsen: None.P05.019.A Role of xenobiotic biotransformation genes in
genetic predisposition of congenital heart diseases
Anna Tsepokina , Svetlana Shmulevich, Anastasia Ponasenko,
Andrey Shabaldin
Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Kemerovo, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Congenital heart diseases are one of the most
common multi-factorial fetal abnormalities caused by a complex
of endo- and exogenous factors. A number of studies have showna signi ﬁcant role of genes encoding enzymes involved in different
phases of xenobiotic metabolism in the congenital heart diseases
pathogenesis.
Material and Methods: In the presented research, 131 children
with congenital heart diseases and 101 women having children withthis pathology were included in the study group. In control group,
103 healthy children and their mothers were included. Single-
nucleotide polymorphisms in the xe nobiotic biotransformation genes
CYP1A1 (rs1048943), CYP1A2 (rs762551), GSTP1 (rs6591256,rs1871042 and rs17593068) were detected by the real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Gene-gene interactions were determined
using the Multifactor Dimensi onality Reduction method.
Results: The frequency distribution of alleles and genotypes in all
studied groups were corresponded to the theoretically expected
according to Hardy-Weinberg equili brium. Comparative analysis of
polymorphisms of CYP1A1 (rs1048943), CYP1A2 (rs762551), andGSTP1 (rs6591256, rs1871042 and rs1793068) genes in the study and
control groups of women and their children did not show statistically
signiﬁcant differences between groups. We obtained no difference in
the frequency of CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and GSTP1 between the study and
control groups. At the same time, the genetic combinations GSTP1
(rs6591256) —GSTP1 (rs1871042) and GSTP1 (rs6591256) —GSTP1
(rs1871042) —CYP1A1 (rs1048943) in women; and GSTP1 (rs1793068)
—GSTP1 (rs6591256) —GSTP1 (rs1871042) —CYP1A1 (rs1048943) —
CYP1A2 (rs762551) in children con tribute to the pathogenesis of
congenital heart diseases. This study was supported by basicresearch project №0546-2019-0002.
A. Tsepokina: None. S. Shmulevich: None. A. Ponasenko:
None. A. Shabaldin: None.
P05.020.B Prediction of coronary artery disease: Do risk factor
genetic risk scores add value?
Julia Ramírez1, Stefan van Duijvenboden2, William J. Young1,
Andrew Tinker1, Pier D. Lambiase2, Michele Orini2, Patricia B.
Munroe1
1William Harvey Research Institute, London, United Kingdom,
2University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction : Coronary artery disease (CAD) is heritable and has a
polygenic architecture. Current genetic risk scores (GRS) for CAD
predict CAD independent from traditional risk factors, however
these scores may not capture all genetically pre-determined risk.We hypothesised that a score including additional GRSs formultiple cardiovascular risk factors, explaining additional biology
underlying CAD, may improve CAD prediction.
Methods : We used data from 52,254 participants in UK-Biobank
without a previous diagnosis of cardiovascular disease. In atraining subset (50%, N =26,127), we identi ﬁed the risk factors
signi ﬁcantly associated with CAD using Multivariable Cox regres-
sion to build three scores, Sc1 including sex, age and traditionalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
188
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608risk factors, Sc2 including Sc1 and a GRS for CAD, and Sc3
including Sc2, and 26 additional GRSs for traditional and
electrocardiogram risk factors.
Results : In an independent test subset (50%, N =26,127) for
CAD, Sc2 had a higher area under the curve (AUC) than Sc1 (0.757versus 0.735, P=7.4 x 10-14). The hazard ratios (HRs) (95%
conﬁdence interval [CI]) for individuals in the top versus bottom
20% of the distribution were 17.2 (10.7 - 27.7) versus 14.9 (9.3 -23.7). Adding the two GRSs that remained independentlyassociated with CAD, GRSs for low-density lipoprotein and for
triglycerides, did not signi ﬁcantly improve risk strati ﬁcation (AUC
of 0.759, P=7.0 x 10
-2, HR [CI] of 16.6 [10.4 - 26.4]).
Conclusion : Our results do not support additional bene ﬁt for
CAD prediction by adding several independent GRSs in addition to
a CAD GRS alone.
J. Ramírez: None. S. van Duijvenboden: None. W.J. Young:
None. A. Tinker: None. P.D. Lambiase: None. M. Orini: None. P.B.
Munroe: None.
P05.021.C Clinical impact of re-evaluating genes and variants
implicated in dilated cardiomyopathy
Sophie L.V.M. Stroeks L. V. M. Stroeks1, Debby M. E. I. Hellebrekers1,
Ingrid P. C. Krapels1, Godelieve R. F. Claes1, Upsana Tayal2, Els K.
Vanhoutte1, Artur van den Wijngaard1, Michiel T. H. M. Henkens1,
James S. Ware2, Stephane R. B. Heymans1, Han G. Brunner1, Job A. J.
Verdonschot1
1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,
2Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
Purpose: Accurate interpretation of variants detected in dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM) is crucial for patient care but has proven
challenging. We applied a set of proposed re ﬁned ACMG/AMP
criteria for DCM, re-classi ﬁed all detected variants in robust genes,
and associated these results to patients´ phenotype.
Methods: The study included 902 DCM probands from the
Maastricht Cardiomyopathy Registry, who underwent genetictesting. Two gene-panel sizes (extended n =48; and robust panel
n=14) and two standards of variant classi ﬁcation (standard
versus the proposed re ﬁned ACMG/AMP criteria) were applied to
compare genetic yield.
Results: A pathogenic variant was found in 17.8% of patients,
and a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) was found in 32.8% of
patients when using method 1 (extended panel (n =48)+stan-
dard ACMG/AMP), compared to respectively 16.9% and 12.9%
when using method 2 (robust panel (n =14)+standard ACMG/
AMP), and respectively 14% and 14.5% using method 3 (robustpanel (n =14)+reﬁned ACMG/AMP). Patients with pathogenic
variants had signi ﬁcantly lower event-free survival compared to
genotype-negative DCM patients.
Conclusion: Stringent gene selection for DCM genetic testing
reduced the number of VUSs whilst retaining ability to detect similarpathogenic variants. The number of genes on diagnostic panels
should be limited to genes which have the highest signal to noise
ratio.
S.L.V.M. Stroeks: None. D.M.E.I. Hellebrekers: None. I.P.C.
Krapels: None. G.R.F. Claes: None. U. Tayal: None. E.K.
Vanhoutte: None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. M.T.H.M.
Henkens: None. J.S. Ware: None. S.R.B. Heymans: None. H.G.
Brunner: None. J.A.J. Verdonschot: None.
P05.022.D Experience of an Italian reference laboratory for a
rare disease: Hereditary Haemorragic TelangiectasiaCarla Olivieri
1, Fabio Pagella2,3, Sara Plumitallo1, Uro šHladnik4,
Elisabetta Buscarini5, Elina Matti3, Anna Sbalchiero1, Guido Man-
fredi5, Giuseppe Spinozzi3, Elisabetta De Sando6, Sara Ugolini3,
Cesare Danesino1
1General Biology and Medical Genetics Unit, Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,2Department
of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,3Depart-
ment of Otorhinolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico SanMatteo, Pavia, Italy,4Unità di Genetica Istituto per le malattie rare
"Mauro Baschirotto" - B.I.R.D. Foundation o.n.l.u.s., Costozza di
Longare (VI), Italy,5UOC Gastroenterologia-Centro di riferimento
HHT, ASST Ospedale Maggiore di Crema, Crema (CR), Italy,6Clinica
Pediatrica, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteoi, Pavia, Italy.
Introduction: Hereditary Haemorragic Teleangiectasia (HHT) is an
autosomal dominant disorder affecting 1:5000-8000 individualsworldwide. Mucocutaneous telangi ectases and Arteriovenous mal-
formations in internal organs (mostly lungs, liver and central nervous
system) are the disease hallmarks. HHT is caused by pathogeneticvariants in ENG,ACVRL1 ,SMAD4 and GDF2 , belonging to the TGF β/
BMPs pathway. We report the experience of our research laboratory
in the last ﬁve years (2015-2020), focusing on mutation analysis.
Materials and Methods: Patients ’samples were collected by
HHT reference centres in Pavia and Crema (CR). Index cases ’
samples were analysed by NGS sequencing panel of the four HHT
causative genes and MLPA; the molecular investigation in patients ’
relatives was performed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: We collected 334 patients ’samples; 99/334 were index
cases. Results are summarized in the table below.
Subjects ACVRL1 ENG SMAD4 Not
FoundIn
progressUnaffected
Index case 99 39
(39.4%)26
(26.3%)1 (1%) 27
(27.3%)6 (6%) -
Patient ’s
relatives234 86 60 - - 8 80
Total patients 333 125 86 1 28 13 80
Conclusions: Our data con ﬁrm that HHT is mostly under-
diagnosed; however, the presence of a reference center enhances
the quality of genetic and clinical results. Moreover, we also
corroborate the previous observation that in our country ACVRL1 is
the major HHT gene. Not found subjects can harbor variants in
intronic or regulatory regions rather than in novel genes. However,
we are collecting WES data to re-analyse these cases. Grant: CO:Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research to the DMM-University of Pavia “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza (2018-2022) ”
C. Olivieri: None. F. Pagella: None. S. Plumitallo: None. U.
Hladnik: None. E. Buscarini: None. E. Matti: None. A. Sbalchiero:
None. G. Manfredi: None. G. Spinozzi: None. E. De Sando: None.
S. Ugolini: None. C. Danesino: None.
P05.023.A Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia: evidence
of a common ancestor in 19 families from Northern Italy
Anna Sbalchiero
1, Yasmin Abu Hweij1, Tommaso Mazza2, Elisabetta
Buscarini3, Fabio Pagella4,5, Elina Matti4, Guido Manfredi3, Giuseppe
Spinozzi4, Sara Ugolini4, Carla Olivieri1
1General Biology and Medical Genetics Unit, Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,2Unit of
Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy,3UOC Gastroenterologia-Centro di
riferimento HHT, ASST Ospedale Maggiore di Crema, Crema (CR),Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
189
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Italy,4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy,5Department of Otorhinolar-
yngology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Introduction: Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) is an
autosomal dominant vascular disorder affecting 1:5000-8000
individuals worldwide. The genes associated with HHT ( ENG,
ACVRL1 ,SMAD4 ,GDF2 ) belong to the TGF- βsignalling pathway.
Evidence for a “Founder Effect ”was demonstrated only few times
in the HHT literature. We found 19 HHT unrelated families, coming
from the region around Bergamo (Northern Italy) and sharing the
same pathogenetic variant: the ACVRL1 in-frame deletion
c.289_294del (p.H97-N98). Here we suggest the presence of acommon ancestor in whom this variant arose and date its origin
about 200 years ago.
Materials and Methods: We analysed 88 subjects from 19
families: 66 disease-variant carriers and 22 unaffected. We used
eight microsatellite markers spanning 3.7Mb surrounding the
ACVRL1 locus. After haplotype reconstruction, the pathogenetic
variant ’s age estimation was carried out with the DMLE +2.3
software package.
Results: We observed a common disease haplotype in 16/19
families. Three families showed evidence of recombination aroundthe ACVRL1 locus. Subsequent analyses suggested that the
mutation occurred about 8 (95% credible set: 6-11) generations
ago, corresponding to about 203 (165-265) years ago.
Conclusions: We hypothesise for the ﬁrst time a “founder
effect ”for a HHT pathogenetic variant in Italy. This information is
also useful to notify the Bergamo Local Health Authority of a
higher incidence of a rare, underdiagnosed disease. This willincrease HHT patients ’awareness and offer them better clinical
care and genetic diagnosis. Grant: CO: Italian Ministry of
Education, University and Research to the DMM-University of
Pavia “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza (2018-2022) ”
A. Sbalchiero: None. Y. Abu Hweij: None. T. Mazza: None. E.
Buscarini: None. F. Pagella: None. E. Matti: None. G. Manfredi:
None. G. Spinozzi: None. S. Ugolini: None. C. Olivieri: None.
P05.024.B Exosomal microRNA biosignature related with
hypertension-associated kidney disease
Ana Ortega
1, Javier Perez-Hernandez2, Olga Martinez-Arroyo1,
Angela L. Riffo-Ramos3, Belen Sanchez-Garcia1, Daniel Perez-Gil4,
Fernando Martinez5, Felipe Chaves1, Josep Redon1, Raquel Cortes1
1Biomedical Research Institute Clinic Hospital - INCLIVA, Valencia,
Spain,2INSERM, U1016, I, Cochin Institute, Paris, France,3Universidad
de La Frontera, Temuco, Chile,4Genomics England, Dawson Hall,
Charterhouse Square, London, United Kingdom,5Medical Research
Institute La Fe Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: Urinary albumin excretion (UAE) is a marker of
cardiovascular risk and renal damage in hypertension. MicroRNAs(miRNAs) packaged into exosomes function as paracrine effectors
in cell communication and the kidney is not exempt. This study
aimed to state an exosomal miRNA signature related tohypertension-associated kidney disease.
Material and Methods: Exosome samples from patients with
hypertension with/without UAE were isolated and characterized.
Three unique small RNA libraries from each subject were prepared(total plasma, urinary, and plasma-derived exosomes) for next-
generation sequencing pro ﬁling. Differentially expressed miRNAs
were over-represented in KEGG pathways, and selected miRNAswere validated by RT-qPCR in a con ﬁrmation cohort.
Results: A signature of 29 dysregulated circulating miRNAs was
identi ﬁed in UAE hypertensive subjects, regulating 21 pathways.Moreover, changes in the levels of 4 exosomes-miRNAs were
validated in a con ﬁrmation cohort and found associated with
albuminuria. In particular, miR-26a, major regulator of TGF- β
signaling, was found downregulated in both type of exosomeswhen compared with healthy controls and to hypertensionnormoalbuminurics ( P< 0.01). Similarly, decreased miR-26a levels
were found in podocyte-derived exosomes after TGF- βstress.
Conclusions: Our results revealed an exosomes miRNA
signature associated to albuminuria in hypertension. In particular,exosomes miR-26a seemed to play a key role in the regulation of
TGF- β, a relevant effector in podocyte damage. These ﬁndings
support the use of exosomes miRNAs as biomarkers ofcardiovascular risk progression and therapeutic tools in earlykidney damage. Funding from Carlos III Health Institute (PI12/
02615, PI19/01796 PI18/01405, CD18/00166 and with ERDF.
A. Ortega: None. J. Perez-Hernandez: None. O. Martinez-
Arroyo: None. A.L. Riffo-Ramos: None. B. Sanchez-Garcia: None.
D. Perez-Gil: None. F. Martinez: None. F. Chaves: None. J.
Redon: None. R. Cortes: None.
P05.025.C Identi ﬁcation of a novel TPM1 variant causing
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in an Indian family
Prabodh Kumar
1, Ganesh Paramasivam2, Tom Devasia2, Mukund
Prabhu2, Maneesh K. Rai3, Prakashini K4, Sandeep Mallya5, Dinesh
Reghunathan1, Krishnananda Nayak6, Rajasekhar Moka1
1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life
Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,
2Department of Cardiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,3Department of
Cardiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Mangalore, India,4Department of Radiodiagnosis and
Imaging, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of HigherEducation, Manipal, India,5Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,
6Department of Cardiovascular Technology, Manipal College of
Health Profession, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal,India.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an inherited cardiovas-
cular disorder characterized by unexplained left ventricularhypertrophy. It affects about 20 million people globally, and its
prevalence is estimated to be more than 1 in 500 in the general
population. We report a case of an Indian family with clinicallydeﬁned HCM. Genetic analysis was performed using a targeted
amplicon panel containing 28 genes on a semiconductor next-
generation sequencer. An autosomal dominant; heterozygousmutation in the TPM1 gene ( α-tropomyosin), NM_001018005.2:
c.203A>G, p.Gln68Arg, was identi ﬁed and validated by Sanger
sequencing in all affected members of the family but was absent
in the unaffected family member. This variant was not reportedin the literature in HCM cases nor described in the generalpopulation databases. We did not detect any other known
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in other genes. α-
tropomyosin is an α-helical coiled-coil dimer that spans the actin
ﬁlament ’sl e n g t ha sac o - p o l y m e r .I tp l a y sac r i t i c a lr o l ei n
sarcomeric contractile regula tion by stabilizing the actin
ﬁlaments and interacting with other actin-binding proteins.
HCM causing TPM1 mutations act in a dominant-negative,
poison polypeptide mechanism, altering this delicate balance
and increasing the myo ﬁlament ’s calcium sensitivity causing
hypercontraction an d hypertrophy. Our ﬁnding adds to the
mutational spectrum of TPM1 , which is an uncommon cause of
HCM. Identi ﬁcation of novel variants or genes causing HCM can
unravel the clinical and genetic heterogeneity in HCM. This workAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
190
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608was supported by DST-SERB grant (EEQ/2019/000477), CSIR-SRF
grant (09/1165(0010)/2019-EMR-I), TIFAC and DST-FIST.
P. Kumar: None. G. Paramasivam: None. T. Devasia: None. M.
Prabhu: None. M.K. Rai: None. P. K: None. S. Mallya: None. D.
Reghunathan: None. K. Nayak: None. R. Moka: None.
P05.026.D Comprehensive genetic study in a young patient
with cardiac interventricular septal hypertrophy
Tsenka Boneva1, Kalina Belemezova2, Ivan Gruev3, Ivanka Dimova4
1UMHAT Alexandrovska, Cardiology clinic, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Genetic
Laboratory, SAGBAL “Dr Shterev ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,3Multidisciplinary
Transport Hospital "Tsar Boris III" –Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Depart-
ment of Medical genetics, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
An isolated hypertrophy of the basal segment of the interven-
tricular septum protruding into the out ﬂow tract of the left
ventricle may be dif ﬁcult to distinguish from genetic hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM). Because of potential life-threateningcomplications associated with a diagnosis of HCM, careful
investigations of patients are needed, including genetic analysis.
We report here a 16-years old patient, diagnosed with septalhypertrophy (>11 mm thickness) and slight tricuspid valve
regurgitation. There was family history for heart-related mortality
from both paternal and maternal side. Next generation sequen-cing was performed to analyze point mutations and deletions/duplications in 125 genes associated with Arrhythmia, Cardio-
myopathies and Sudden Cardiac Death. We detected variants of
unknown signi ﬁcance (VOUS) with the population frequency of
less than 0.1% in 4 genes - listed at the Table below.
Gene Genetic
variantOMIM disease Inheritance
BAG3 c.1673C>T
(p.
Ala558Val)Dominant dilated cardiomyopathy,
Myoﬁbrillary myopathy 6, Charcot-
Marie-Tooth type 2Paternal
DSP c.5062G>A
(p.
Ala1688Thr)Autosomal dominant arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy,
dilated cardiomyopathy with sparse
hair, keratoderma and agenesis of the
teeth, autosomal recessive DCMaternal
JUP c.1379G>A
(p.Arg460His)Autosomal dominant arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy andautosomal recessive Naxos diseaseMaternal
SCN10A c.724T>A (p.
Ser242Thr)Autosomal-dominant neuropathy and
Brugada syndromePaternal
All VOUS were inherited from clinically healthy parents - 2 from
the mother and 2 from the father. This points to a probablepolygenic etiology of the disease, in which the severity of the
disease cannot be accurately determined. Regular assessment of
cardiac function is recommended, along with decreasing in highintensity sport activity.
T. Boneva: None. K. Belemezova: None. I. Gruev: None. I.
Dimova: None.
P05.027.A Molecular genetic testing for hypertrophic and
dilated cardiomyopathy in inherited cardiovascular conditiongenetics service: lessons from a Thai cohort
Objoon Trachoo , Teerapat Yingchoncharoen, Tawai Ngernsritrakul,
Nareenart Iemwimangsa, Bhakbhoom Panthan, Sommon Klum-sathien, Sasima Srisukh, Anucha Mukdadilok, Sitthakom Phusanti,
Angkana Charoenyingwattana, Takol Chareonsirisutthigul, Wasun
Chantratita, Tarinee TangcharoenFaculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and idiopathic
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are the most common referral inInherited Cardiovascular Condition (ICC) Genetics Service. Severalissues have to be discussed with patients and families during
genetic consultation session, including the option for genetic
testing and cardiovascular surveillance in family members.
Materials and Methods: Next-Generation Sequencing data of
all patients affected by HCM and idiopathic DCM in ICC clinic were
analysed using target gene panel to classify variant pathogenicity.
All subjects were asked to contact their asymptomatic ﬁrst-degree
relatives for genetic counselling about their risk and to initiatecardiovascular surveillance.
Results: Sixty subjects (30-HCM and 30-DCM) were enrolled
during 1 January 2014 –31 December 2020. Molecular detection
frequency was 53.33% (33.33% pathogenic/likely pathogenic, 20%
VUS) for HCM and 20% (10% pathogenic/likely pathogenic, 10%
VUS) for DCM. The most prevalent gene attributing to HCM wasMYBPC3 (30%). The others were identi ﬁed in one of these genes-
ACTN2 ,MYL2 ,MYH7 ,TNNI3 ,TPM1 ,TTR and VCL (3.33% each).
Amongst DCM, the variants were detected in TTN truncating
variant (6.67%), MYH7 (6.67%), MYBPC3 (3.33%) and SCN5A (3.33%).
Following clinical surveillance in family members, the detectionfrequency of new pre-symptomatic cases was 9.09% for HCM and
7.14% for DCM.
Conclusions: In our cohort, MYBPC3 was the most prevalent
gene related to HCM. Amongst idiopathic DCM, TTN and MYH7
were the most common. Additionally, our genetics service was
able to detect new cases approximately 1/10 of asymptomaticfamily members. Grants: Thailand Research Fund and Thailand
Centre of Excellence of Life Science.
O. Trachoo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Samitivej
Srinakarin Hospital, Phyathai 2 Hospital, Bumrungrad Hospital,Jetanin IVF, Panthupark Genetics Clinic. A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; Samitivej Sukhumvit Hospital. C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other
in-kind support); Signi ﬁcant; 3billion, Inc. D. Speakers Bureau/
Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);Modest; PTT Public Company Limited. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Genome Star, Co., Ltd., Leader Medical Genetics and Genomics, Co.,Ltd., So ﬁva Genomics Bangkok, Co., Ltd.. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Biomolecular Laboratory, Co., Ltd., Vejthani
Hospital. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; Thonburi
Bumrungmuang Hospital. T. Yingchoncharoen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Bumrungrad Hospital. T. Ngernsritra-
kul: None. N. Iemwimangsa: None. B. Panthan: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Genome Star, Co., Ltd.. S. Klumsathien:
None. S. Srisukh: None. A. Mukdadilok: None. S. Phusanti: None.
A. Charoenyingwattana: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Leader
Medical Genetics and Genomics, Co., Ltd. T. Chareonsirisutthigul:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Panthupark Genetics
Clinic. W. Chantratita: None. T. Tangcharoen: None.
P05.028.B If double is the trouble, the triple is undoable: a
fatal association of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy ( MYH7
pArg719Trp), Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia(LDLR pGlu343Lys) and SARS CoV-2 infection
Nicola Marziliano1,2, Alessandro Medoro2, Roberto Ottaviano1,
Donatella Mignogna2, Mariano Intrieri2, Giuseppe Giuliani1
1ASST-Rhodense, Rho, Italy,2University of Molise, Department of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Campobasso, Italy.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
191
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM; MIM #192600)
and Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia (HeFH; MIM
#144010) are the most common genetic cardiovascular disorders.Both HCM and HeFH can lead to severe heart failure and suddencardiac death. In this report, we describe a case of a young man
who suddenly died after a fatal arrythmia and additionally resulted
positive for SARS-CoV-2 virus with high titer in myocardium.
Methods and Results: The proband is a young man (32-year-
old) who suddenly died during physical exercise. Autopsy ﬁndings
showed increased wall thickness of interventricular septum (IVS;
18 mm) and left posterior wall (LPW; 20 mm) with patchymyocardial disarray. Non-obstructive diffuse coronary arterydisease (CAD) was also observed. Furthermore, the presence of
pulmonary thromboembolism with lymphocytic myocarditis
prompted the search of cardiotropic viruses within the myocar-dium. Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) tested positive for a high
concentration of SARS-CoV-2. Molecular autopsy identi ﬁed two
genetic variants classi ﬁed as pathogenic in the MYH7 (p.
Arg719Trp) and LDLR (p.Glu343Lys) genes. Co-segregation analysis
via Sanger sequencing within the family (N =22) showed that
LDLR mutation was maternally inherited, while MYH7 genetic
lesion was de novo .
Conclusion: Electrical remodeling associated with a genetic
substrate and a concomitant presence of diffuse CAD and SARS-
CoV-2-induced myocarditis might trigger a fatal arrhythmia. This is
of paramount importance for the ﬁrst- or second-degree relatives
in which the identi ﬁcation of the pathogenic substrate, that
renders them vulnerable to an increased risk for life-threatening
cardiac events, including sudden death, might prompt for clinicaland tailored treatments.
N. Marziliano: None. A. Medoro: None. R. Ottaviano: None. D.
Mignogna: None. M. Intrieri: None. G. Giuliani: None.
P05.029.C ‘Sequencing of cardiomyopathy genes in patients
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy reveals enrichment for
rare variants in the genes for arrhythmogenic right ventricularcardiomyopathy ’
Ramil Rinatovich Salakhov
1, Maria V. Golubenko1, Alexey A.
Zarubin1, Elena N. Pavlyukova2, Alexander F. Kanev2, Oleg S. Glotov3,
Diana A. Alaverdian3, Viktoriia V. Tsay3, Nail R. Valiakhmetov1, Maria
S. Nazarenko1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation,
2Cardiology Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation,3City
Hospital No. 40, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused
presumably by mutations in the cardiac sarcomere genes.
However, mutations in other genes can be causal, and some
modifying loci are suggested. In some genes, mutations can leadto different phenotypes, and more than one mutation can beidenti ﬁed in the patient.
Materials and methods: We studied 46 cardiomyopathy genes
with NGS panel “TruSight Cardiomyopathy ”(Illumina) in 12
patients with HCM. The effects of the identi ﬁed variants were
assessed according the ACMG guideline.
Results: 6 pathogenic / probably pathogenic variations in the
cardiac sarcomere genes ( MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, ACTNA, MYOZ2 )
were found, including 3 novel variants. One patient had
pathogenic variant in the gene for Danon disease ( LAMP2 ). In
addition, one patient had premature termination variant in thePKP2 , and the patient with the TNNT2 mutation had additional
frameshift variant in the DSC2 . Mutations in these genes cause
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARV С), whileour patients had clear HCM phenotype. Moreover, we identi ﬁed
several rare (<1% in GnomAD) nonsynonymous variants which
were estimated as benign, likely benign or of uncertain
signi ﬁcance. In particular, more than one patient had these rare
variants in the LDB3, DSP, TMEM43 genes which are known as
genes for ARVD and/or dilated cardiomyopathy.
Conclusion: Accumulation of rare variants in the ARVC genes
has been found in patients with HCM that requires furtherinvestigation. These results highlight the idea of geneticcontinuum for different cardiomyopathy phenotypes.
This study was supported by Grant of the President of Russian
Federation МК-1093.2020.7.
R.R. Salakhov: None. M.V. Golubenko: None. A.A. Zarubin:
None. E.N. Pavlyukova: None. A.F. Kanev: None. O.S. Glotov:
None. D.A. Alaverdian: None. V.V. Tsay: None. N.R. Valiakhme-
tov: None. M.S. Nazarenko: None.
P05.030.D MYH7 p.(Arg1712Gln) is a founder pathogenic
variant in an international large cohort of hypertrophiccardiomyopathy patients
Luisa Marsili
1,2,3, Francesco Russo2, Flavie Ader4,5,6, Marie-Line
Bichon7,8, Laurence Faivre9, Arjan C. Houweling2, Bertrand Isidor7,8,
Ronald H. Lekanne Deprez2, Benoit Mazel9, Sandra Mercier7,8, Gilles
Millat10,11,12, Jan G. Post13, Pascale Richard4,5,14, Irma van de Beek2,
Alexa M. C. Vermeer2, Ludolf G. Boven15, Jan D. H. Jongbloed15, Peter
van Tintelen2,13
1Univ. Lille, Lille, France,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Amster-
dam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3CHU
Lille, Clinique de Génétique, Lille, France,4HU Pitié Salpêtrière-
Charles-Foix, DMU BioGem, Service de Biochimie Métabolique, UF de
cardiogénétique et myogénétique moléculaire et cellullaire, Paris,
France,5Sorbonne Université, UMRS1166 Equipe 1, Paris, France,
6UFR Pharmacie, Faculté de Santé, Université de Paris, Paris, France,
7CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France,
8L’institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, Nantes, France,
9Centre de génétique et FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,
10Laboratoire de Cardiogénétique Moléculaire, Centre de Biologie et
Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,11Institut
NeuroMyoGène, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217, Université ClaudeBernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France,12Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,
13Department of Genetics, University of Utrecht, University Medical
Center, Utrecht, Netherlands,14APHP, Centre de référence pour les
maladies cardiaques héréditaires, Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,15University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen,
Netherlands.
Introduction: The MYH7 c.5135G>A p.(Arg1712Gln) variant has
been identi ﬁed in several hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
patients worldwide and it is classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic on
ClinVar. Using data from a large international cohort, we delineateits associated phenotype, gain more evidence for its pathogeni-
city, and evaluate its founder effect.
Materials and Methods: We retrospectively collected clinical
and genetic data of 22 probands and 74 family members. Todetermine the founder status, haplotypes were reconstructed for
42 patients.
Results: Fifty-three individuals carried the MYH7 p.(Arg1712Gln)
variant, 38 (72%) were diagnosed with HCM. The mean age of
HCM diagnosis was 48.8 years (SD 18.1; range 8-74). The clinical
presentation ranged from asymptomatic left ventricular hyper-trophy to arrhythmias (atrial ﬁbrillation as well as malignant
ventricular arrhythmias). Aborted sudden cardiac death (SCD)
leading to HCM diagnosis occurred in one proband at the age ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
192
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 60868, and family history of SCD was reported by ﬁve (39%) probands.
No heart failure death nor heart transplant were reported. Women
had a generally later-onset disease with 14% of female carriers
diagnosed with HCM at age 50, compared with 54% of malecarriers, and penetrance reaching 95% and 92% at age 70 in menand women, respectively. The disease was fully penetrant at age
75 in both sexes. Haplotype analysis showed a founder origin in
the majority of patients.
Conclusions: Our data showed that MYH7 p.(Arg1712Gln) is a
pathogenic founder variant in HCM and that cardiac screening
should be pursued after the seventh decade in healthy carriers,
especially women.
L. Marsili: None. F. Russo: None. F. Ader: None. M. Bichon:
None. L. Faivre: None. A.C. Houweling: None. B. Isidor: None. R.
H. Lekanne Deprez: None. B. Mazel: None. S. Mercier: None. G.
Millat: None. J.G. Post: None. P. Richard: None. I. van de Beek:
None. A.M.C. Vermeer: None. L.G. Boven: None. J.D.H. Jong-
bloed: None. P. van Tintelen: None.
P05.031.A A new perspective in the study of genetic basis of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Elena V. Filatova
1, Natalia S. Krylova2, Ivan Vlasov1, Maria
Maslova2, Natalia Poteshkina2, Petr A. Slominsky1, Maria Shadrina1
1Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre «Kurchatov
Institute», Moscow, Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: It is now generally accepted that the exact genetic
cause of hypertrophic cardiomyop athy (HCM) is unknown in at least
25% of hereditary cases. To date, a causal relationship with the
development of HCM has been established for 10 genes; for another
20 genes, there are data on individual clinical cases indicating such arelationship. However, the full range of pathogenic variants, leading to
the development of HCM, has not yet been described. In this regard,
the aim of our study was to search for new genes, pathogenic variantsin which may be potentially involved in the pathogenesis of HCM.
Materials and Methods: The study included 98 non-related
patients with HCM. NGS of exons of 4800 genes associated with
the development of various diseases was carried out, andbioinformatic analysis was performed to predict the potentialpathogenicity of variants.
Results: The analysis identi ﬁed 73 potentially pathogenic
variants in 43 genes, for which a connection with the develop-ment of HCM was not previously shown, but which are involved in
the development of other pathologies of the cardiovascular
system. Most of the genes identi ﬁed are involved in the
functioning of the heart in general and the sarcomere inparticular.
Conclusion: Thus, we were able to identify new variants and
genes that may lead to the development of HCM or may beinvolved in the pathogenesis of the disease. This work wassupported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grants
no. 19-015-00343) and the Russian Science Foundation (grants no.
21-75-20120).
E.V. Filatova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre
«Kurchatov Institute». B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Signi ﬁcant; Russian Foundation for Basic
Research, Russian Science Foundation. N.S. Krylova: None. I.
Vlasov: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Institute of
Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre «KurchatovInstitute». M. Maslova: None. N. Poteshkina: None. P.A.
Slominsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Instituteof Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre «Kurchatov
Institute». B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Signi ﬁcant; Russian Science Foundation. M. Shadrina: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Institute of Molecular Genetics ofNational Research Centre «Kurchatov Institute».
P05.032.B The expression level of cytokine genes in the cases
of native heart valves in infectious endocarditis
Maxim Sinitsky, Anna Tsepokina, Maria Khutornaya , Anastasia
Ponasenko
Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Kemerovo, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Infective endocarditis (IE) is a septic in ﬂammation of
the endocardium generally caused by bacteria. Recognition of
microbial patterns, cytokine and acute phase responses, hemos-tasis features and alterations in plasma lipid and calcium pro ﬁle all
have been reported to affect pathogenesis and clinical course of
IE.
Material and Methods: The expression level of IL1B, IL6, IL8,
IL10, IL12A, IL12B, IL18, IL23, IL33, CCL2 , and IL1RL1 has been
investigated using biopsies of native mitral, aortic, and tricuspid
valves obtained during surgical correction of acquired defect from25 patients with infectious endocarditis. Biopsies of native mitraland aortic valve cusps from 12 patients who underwent surgical
correction of acquired heart disease of non-infectious etiology
were used as control. We used quantitative PCR with ﬂuorescent
dye SYBR Green for determination of the cytokine gene expressionlevel.
Results: This study revealed that genes could be subdivided
into three groups: (i) genes with increased expression ( IL1B,IL6
and
IL8); (ii) genes with reduced expression ( IL33 and IL1RL1 ); (iii)
genes with unchanged expression ( IL12A ,IL18,IL23 and CCL2 ). The
IL8gene expression was characterized by the most pronounced
increase (9.83 times versus control), while the IL1RL1 gene
demonstrated the most pronounced decrease in its expression
(4.17 times). Expression IL10 and IL12B genes was negligible in all
samples. This study was supported by basic research project№0546-2019-0002.
M. Sinitsky: None. A. Tsepokina: None. M. Khutornaya: None.
A. Ponasenko: None.
P05.033.C Diagnostic yield of cardiac gene panel testing in
inherited cardiac conditions patients in the Republic ofIreland
Jane L. Murphy
1, Claire W. Kirk1, Terri P. McVeigh2, Luke Kelly3,
Joseph Galvin4, Deirdre Ward5, Terence Prendiville6, Catherine
McGorrian4, Margaret Gallagher4, Helen Connaughton5, Sally Ann
Lynch7
1University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland,2The Royal Marsden
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,3Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin 2, Ireland,4Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin 7, Ireland,5Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin 24,
Ireland,6Children ’s Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland,
7Children ’s Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin 24, Ireland.
Background: Inherited cardiac conditions (ICC), comprising
primarily cardiomyopathies and cardiac ion channelopathies,predispose to sudden cardiac death. Aim: Investigate thediagnostic yield from cardiac gene panel testing undertaken inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
193
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608patients (including molecular autopsy in deceased patients)
referred to three national ICC clinics from 2002 to 2020.
Methods: Data was collected by interrogation of departmental
databases, family charts, and review of molecular geneticdiagnostic reports.
Results: We evaluated molecular genetic results from 835
individuals (461 males, 374 females) from 824 families, including
58 deceased patients who underwent molecular autopsy. Threehundred and ﬁfty patients (42%) carried a single variant; 68
patients (8%) were found to have multiple variants (up to a
maximum of four). The diagnostic yield of at least one actionable
variant (pathogenic/likely pathogenic) was 28%, while at least onevariant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) was detected in 27% of the
cohort. We observed a signi ﬁcant association between female sex
and detection of an actionable variant. The yield of actionable
variants varied by decade of age, ranging from 0% ( ≥80 years) to
41% (0-9 years). Actionable variants were most frequent in those
undergoing a cardiomyopathy panel (35%) and least frequent in
those tested for Brugada syndrome genes (14%). Molecularautopsy yielded an actionable variant in 10% of patients, while30% of the subcohort carried at least one VUS.
Conclusion: Actionable variants were more likely to be
detected in females in our cohort. Despite recent gene curationefforts, the high burden of VUS remains a considerable challengein ICC management.
J.L. Murphy: None. C.W. Kirk: None. T.P. McVeigh: None. L.
Kelly: None. J. Galvin: None. D. Ward: None. T. Prendiville:
None. C. McGorrian: None. M. Gallagher: None. H. Connaugh-
ton: None. S. Lynch: None.
P05.034.D Novel missense variant in KCNA5 gene, p.
Gly183Arg, associated to ventricular ﬁbrillation during acute
myocardial infarction
Ricardo Pan-Lizcano
1,L u c i aN ú ñ e z1,P .P i ñ ó n2,XF l o r e s2,GA l d a m a2,R
Calviño2, J M. Vázquez-Rodríguez3, Manuel Hermida-Prieto1
1Cardiology Research Group, Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de
A Coruña (INIBIC)-CHUAC-UDC, A Coruña, Spain,2Department of
Cardiology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruna
(CHUAC)-INIBIC, A Coruña, Spain,3Department of Cardiology,
Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña (CHUAC)-CIBERCV,Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Uni-
versidad de A Coruña (UDC), A Coruña, Spain.
Introduction: Sudden death (SD) due to ventricular ﬁbrillation
(VF) during acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the leading
causes of death worldwide. It has been suggested that the risk ofSD due to VF in AMI has a multifactorial base, where geneticfactors play an important role. It has been proposed that variants
cardiac excitability genes could play an important role in VF
during AMI.
Methods: Rare genetic variants in 36 genes encoded proteins
related to pathways involved were analyzed by NGS in 12 patients
with FV during AMI. The visualization of the variant was performed
using IGV and the bioinformatic analysis of its possible effect wasperformed with MutationTester, SNAP2, SIFT2, Polyphen and PhD-SNP.
Results: The variant p.Gly183Arg in KCNA5 gene was identi ﬁed
in a 68 years old male. The amino acid substitution c.547G>C inKCNA5 gene produces the variant p.Gly183Arg in the Kv1.5
channel, a voltage-gated potassium channel responsible for the
ultrarapid delayed recti ﬁer potassium current. All bioinformatic
tools used suggested deleterious function of the protein thatpresent the variant.Conclusions: Our results suggest that variants in the KCNA5
gene might be associated with an increased risk of VF in AMI
leading to SD, concurring with previous reports. Thus, it is
essential to use an ambitious strategy, including all genes relatedto cardiac excitability, to clarify the pathophysiological basis of VFin AMI.
Funding acknowledgements: This work was supported by a
grant from Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI18/01737)-FEDER fundsand a non-conditional grant from Abbott Vascular.
R. Pan-Lizcano: None. L. Núñez: None. P. Piñón: None. X.
Flores: None. G. Aldama: None. R. Calviño: None. J.M. Vázquez-
Rodríguez: None. M. Hermida-Prieto: None.
P05.035.A Breakpoints of two duplications in the LDL-
receptor gene in the Czech Republic
Katerina Konecna , Lukas Tichy
Center of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University Hospital Brno,
Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal
dominant disorder associated with elevated levels of low densitylipoprotein cholesterol, leading to increased risk of cardiovascular
disease. The most common cause of FH in the Czech Republic (CR)
is a mutation in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene ( LDLR ).
The LDLR gene contains a high number of Alurepeats, making it
prone to Alu-mediated rearrangements. As a result, out of all
Czech probands with a LDLR mutation, almost 10 % are carriers of
a deletion/duplication spanning whole exons. The most commonrearrangement of the LDLR gene in the CR is a duplication of
exons 2-6 (exon2_6dup), which is also the sixth most common
LDLR mutation in the CR. Duplication of exons 16-18
(exon16_18dup) is the fourth most common rearrangement oftheLDLR gene in the CR.
Materials and Methods: Sequence surrounding the breakpoint
was analyzed by Sanger sequencing in 26 out of 27 known Czechfamilies with exon2_6dup and all 8 known Czech probandscarrying exon16_18dup.
Results: All analyzed families with exon2_6dup carried the
breakpoint c.67 +3545_940 +917dup. All known Czech families
with exon16_18dup carried the breakpoint c.2312-2067_*1216dup. All breakpoints were located inside an Alu
element.
Conclusion: Duplications of exons 2-6 and 16-18 of the LDLR
gene in the Czech population likely arise from one mutation event.
It remains to be determined if this is the case for other
rearrangements of the LDLR gene in the CR. Supported by the
Ministry of Health, Czech Republic, grant number NU20-02-00261.
K. Konecna: None. L. Tichy: None.
P05.036.B Genetic pro ﬁle of left ventricular non-compaction
cardiomyopathy - experience of the Polish reference paedia-
tric centre
Dorota Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Agata Paszkowska1,E lżbieta
Ciara1, Kamila Fr ączak1,M a łgorzata Rydzanicz2, Agnieszka Pollak2,
Piotr Stawi ński2, Alicja Mirecka-Rola1, Lukasz Mazurkiewicz3, Mar-
zena Gawlik1, Dorota Siestrzykowska1, Rafa łPłoski2, Krystyna
Chrzanowska1, Dorota Wicher1, Lidia Zió łkowska1
1Children ’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,2Warsaw
Medical University, Warsaw, Poland,3National Institute of Cardiol-
ogy, Warsaw, Poland.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
194
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Genetically and clinically heterogeneous left
ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is the third most frequent
cardiomyopathy in the pediatric population. Clinical manifestation
varies from mild to severe symptoms of heart failure, thromboem-bolic events and arrhythmias. Despite important clinical observa-tions from over the last 25 years, LVNC etiology still remains
unknown in 30-50% of cases. We present a series of patients
diagnosed with LVNC (mostly isolated at the time of examination)in the 2003-2020 period in the Polish reference paediatric centre.
Materials and Methods : Thirty-two children, mean age 11.2
years were enrolled in this study. Clinical evaluation included:
echocardiography, cardiovascular magnetic resonance, NYHAclass, ECG, 24-hour Holter ECG and family history. Next-generation sequencing (targeted panel of 25 genes) was
performed in all cases.
RESULTS: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in LVNC
associated genes were detected in 57% of patients. Recurrent
autosomal dominant defects were identi ﬁed in HCN4, MYH7,
RBM20 and TTN genes. Additional defects were detected in single
families in: ACTC1, ACTN2, DES, EYA4, HCCS, KCNQ1, PRDM16 and
TAZ genes (Barth syndrome). Heart failure, ventricular/supraven-
tricular arrhythmias, third degree atrioventricular block, WPW
syndrome and sinus bradycardia were the most common clinicalsymptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic evaluation (testing and counseling) is
recommended in each patient with isolated or syndromic LVNC.
The high genetic yield resulted in explanation of molecularetiology in over half of the studied children and collection of
valuable genotype-phenotype data. The study was partially
founded by CMHI grant S177/2018.
D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. A. Paszkowska: None. E.
Ciara: None. K. Fr ączak: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. A. Pollak:
None. P. Stawi ński: None. A. Mirecka-Rola: None. L. Mazurkie-
wicz: None. M. Gawlik: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. R.
Płoski: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. D. Wicher: None. L.
Ziółkowska: None.
P05.037.C Clinical relevance of SCN5A heterozygous muta-
tions in drug-related QT prolongation
Carola Rutigliani
1, Giuseppe Ciconte2, Emanuele Micaglio2, Michelle
Monasky2, Sara Benedetti3, Giorgio Nevio Casari3, Emanuela Teresina
Locati2, Carlo Pappone2
1San Raffaele Medical University, Milan, Italy,2IRCCS Policlinico San
Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy,3IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital,
Milan, Italy.
Drug - related Q -T trait prolongation is a common problem in
several clinical settings: the admnistration of many drugs, ranging
from antidepressants to mood modulating drugs, can be responsible
for such phenotype, according to current knowledge. In spite of thisfrequency, most physicians usually do not investigate the molecularmechanism underlying this phenotype but instead just halt
administration of the culprit drug upon EKG ﬁndings. We describe
4 patients from two unrelated italian families with acute bipolardepression in which Fluoxetine +Olanzapine administration caused
Q-T prolongation. Due to Holter ECG results, a genetic testing for
suspected Long Q -T syndrome (LQTS) has been performed. In each
family a heterozygous SCN5A mutation has been identi ﬁed from
peripheral blood extracted genomic DNA. In particular, in the ﬁrst
family the c.5089T>C has been demonstrated, while in the second
family the c.655C>T heterzygous mutation has been identi ﬁed, both
without mutations in other LQTS genes. In all patients both drugshave been withdrawn and effectively replaced with Duloxetine in
monotherapy; the subsquent clinical workup led to the diagnosis ofLQTS in all four patients. These cases suggest the clinical relevance
of drug interactions in patient harboring SCN5A heterozygous
mutations. In such patients, the risk of adverse drug reactions
towards common psychiatric drugs might be much higher than ingeneral population, requiring further studies.
C. Rutigliani: None. G. Ciconte: None. E. Micaglio: None. M.
Monasky: None. S. Benedetti: None. G. Casari: None. E.T. Locati:
None. C. Pappone: None.
P05.039.A CELSR1 mutations in primary lymphedema
Murat Alpaslan
1, Sandrine Mestre-Godin2, Isabelle Quere2, Guido
Giacalone1,3, Pascal Brouillard1, Miikka Vikkula1
1de Duve Institute, University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium,2CHU de
Montpellier –Hôpital Saint-Eloi, Montpellier, France,3Department of
Lymphatic Surgery, AZ Sint ‐Maarten Hospital, Mechelen, Belgium.
Introduction: Developmental and functional defects in the
lymphatic system are responsible for the occurrence of primarylymphedema (PLE). PLE is a chronic debilitating disease caused by
increased accumulation of interstitial ﬂuid most commonly in the
lower extremities. There is no cure, only symptomatic treatment. Anumber of genes (n =29) have been linked to PLE so far, among
which CELSR1, in which seven probands and their families have
loss-of-function mutations. Previous publications suggest female-limited penetrance.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 755 index patients
from our PLE-cohort for variants in CELSR1, using whole-exome
sequencing (WES), and performed co-segregation studies foravailable family members.
Results: We identi ﬁed 6 mutations predicted to cause loss-of-
function (nonsense, frameshift or splice-site alterations) (0.81% of
cohort), as well as 30 missense variants predicted to bepathogenic (4.63% of cohort) in CELSR1. All index patients with
predicted loss-of-function mutations were female and had PLE on
lower extremities. Among all the affected individuals with any ofthe CELSR1 variants predicted to be pathogenic, 29 were femaleand 10 were male. Eight females and nine males were
asymptomatic carriers of a CELSR1 variant. Two families with
CELSR1 mutations causing a premature stop codon were tested onmRNA level without detecting nonsense mediated mRNA decay.Thus, they rather encode a truncated protein.
Conclusions: CELSR1 variants may explain about 1-5% of PLE.
Yet, many missense variants need functional validation. Our dataunderscore the notion that CELSR1 loss-of-function mutations
have a higher penetrance in females than in males (83% versus 0%
in our series).
M. Alpaslan: None. S. Mestre-Godin: None. I. Quere: None. G.
Giacalone: None. P. Brouillard: None. M. Vikkula: None.
P05.040.B Pathogenic variants affecting the TB5 domain of
ﬁbrillin-1 protein in Marfan syndrome and Geleophysic/
Acromicric Dysplasia patients: from tall to short
Pauline Arnaud
1,2,3, Nadine Hanna1,2,3, Zakaria Mougin3, Geneviève
Baujat4, Valérie Drouin-Garraud5, Salima El Chehadeh6, Laurent
Gouya2, Sylvie Odent7, Guillaume Jondeau2,3,8, Catherine Boileau1,2,3,
Carine Le Goff3
1AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Département de Génétique, Paris, France,
2AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, CRMR Syndrome de Marfan et pathologies
apparentées, Paris, France,3Université de Paris, LVTS, Inserm U1148,
Paris, France,4AP-HP, Hôpital Necker, Département de Génétique,
Paris, France,5CHU Rouen, Service de Génétique, Rouen, France,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
195
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6086CHU Strasbourg, Service de Génétique Médicale, Strasbourg, France,
7CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique clinique, Rennes, France,8AP-HP,
Hôpital Bichat, Service de Cardiologie, Paris, France.
Introduction: The mostly known ﬁbrillinopathy, Marfan syndrome
(MFS), is a multisystem disease with a unique combination of
skeletal, cardiovascular and ocular features. The geleophysic/
acromicric dysplasia (GD/AD), characterized by short stature, shortextremities and joint limitation are described as “the mirror image ”
of MFS. The numerous FBN1 mutations identi ﬁed in MFS are
located all along the gene, leading to the same pathogenetic
mechanism. Interestingly, in the GD/AD patients, the nineteenheterozygous FBN1 mutations all affect the TGF β-binding protein-
like domain 5 (TB5).
Material and methods: Between 1996 and 2021, blood samples
were obtained for more than 5000 consecutive probands referrednationwide to our laboratory for molecular diagnosis of suspected
MFS. The FBN1 gene was originally screened by bidirectional Sanger
sequencing and later by NGS custom capture array.
Results: We identi ﬁed 5 MFS probands carrying 5 distinct
heterozygous mutations affecting the TB5 domain of FBN1. The
clinical data for these 5 probands and their 7 relatives showed that
all the probands displayed a classical form of MFS, with theinvolvement of skeletal, cardiovascular, and/or ophthalmologicalsystems. At the molecular level, the variants were 3 missense
variants and 2 small in-frame deletions. Strikingly, one missense
variant affects an amino acid that was previously involved in GD.
Conclusions: Surprisingly, mutations in the TB5 domain of FBN1
can lead to two opposite phenotypes: GD/AD or MFS suggesting
the involvement of tissue speci ﬁcity mechanism and/or a modi ﬁer
gene. Further functional studies are ongoing to determine theprecise role of this domain in the physiopathology of each disease.
P. Arnaud: None. N. Hanna: None. Z. Mougin: None. G. Baujat:
None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. L.
Gouya: None. S. Odent: None. G. Jondeau: None. C. Boileau:
None. C. Le Goff: None.
P05.041.D Unsuspected somatic mosaicism for FBN1 gene
contributes to Marfan syndrome
Pauline Arnaud
1,2,3, Hélène Morel1,4, Olivier Milleron2,3, Laurent
Gouya3, Christine Francannet5, Antoine Da Costa6, Carine Le Goff2,
Guillaume Jondeau2,3, Catherine Boileau1,2,3, Nadine Hanna1,2
1AP-HP - Hôpital Bichat - Département de Génétique, Paris, France,
2Université de Paris - LVTS - Inserm U1148, Paris, France,3AP-HP -
Hôpital Bichat - CRMR syndrome de Marfan et les pathologies
apparentées, Paris, France,4APHP - Hôpital Saint-Louis - Service de
Génétique Moléculaire Neuro-Vasculaire, Paris, France,5CHU
Clermont-Ferrand - Service de Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand,
France,6CHU Saint-Etienne - Service de Cardiologie, Saint-Etienne,
France.
Introduction: Individuals with mosaic pathogenic variants in the
FBN1 gene are mainly described in the course of familial
screening. In the literature, almost all these mosaic individualsare asymptomatic. In this study, we report the experience of ourteam on more than 5000 Marfan syndrome (MFS) probands.
Materials and Methods: NGS capture technology allowed us to
identify ﬁve cases of MFS probands who harbored a mosaic
pathogenic variant in the FBN1 gene.
Results: These 5 sporadic mosaic probands displayed classical
features usually seen in Marfan syndrome. Combined with theresults of the literature, these rare ﬁndings concerned both single
nucleotide variants and copy number variations.Conclusions: This underestimated ﬁnding should not be
overlooked in the molecular diagnosis of MFS patients and
warrants an adaptation of the parameters used in bioinformatics
analyses. The ﬁve present cases of symptomatic MFS probands
harboring a mosaic FBN1 pathogenic variant reinforce the fact that
apparently asymptomatic mosaic parents should have a complete
clinical examination and a regular cardiovascular follow-up. We
advise that individuals with a typical MFS for whom no singlenucleotide pathogenic variant or exons deletion/duplication wasidenti ﬁed should be tested by NGS capture panel with an adapted
variant calling analysis.
P. Arnaud: None. H. Morel: None. O. Milleron: None. L. Gouya:
None. C. Francannet: None. A. Da Costa: None. C. Le Goff: None.
G. Jondeau: None. C. Boileau: None. N. Hanna: None.
P05.042.D Genotoxic stress in endotheliocytes is associated
with endothelial dysfunction: results of gene expression
analysis
Maxim Sinitsky , Anna Tsepokina, Anton Kutikhin, Daria Shishkova,
Anastasia Ponasenko
Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Kemerovo, Russian Federation.
Introduction: It is known that genotoxic stress can induce
endothelial dysfunction and atherogenesis. The aim of thisresearch was to study the gene expression signature in
endothelial cells exposed to alkylating mutagen mitomycin C
(MMC).
Materials and Methods: Primary human coronary- (HCAEC)
and internal thoracic artery endothelial cells (HITAEC) exposed
to 500 ng/ml MMC (experimental group) and nonexposed
control were used in this research. Expression of DDB1 ,
ERCC4 ,ERCC5 ,VCAM1 ,ICAM1 ,PECAM1 ,SELE ,SELP ,CDH2 ,CDH5 ,
CD34 ,LOX1 ,
SCARF1 ,CD36 ,LDLR ,VLDR ,NOS3 ,PXDN ,CAT,SOD1 ,
SNAI1 ,SNAI2 ,TWIST1 ,GATA4 ,KLF4 ,HEY2 ,ZEB1 genes was
e v a l u a t e db yR T - q P C Ri m m e d i a t e l ya f t e r6h o u r so fc e l lincubation with MMC and 24 hours after elimination of MMC
from cell cultures.
Results: Immediately after 6 hours of MMC exposure we
detected the downregulation of the majority of studied genesexcluding SNAI2 in the experimental group compared to control.
After elimination of MMC from the cell cultures the increased
expression of leucocyte adhesion ( VCAM1 ,ICAM1 ,SELE ),
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition ( SNAI2 ), endothelial
mechanotransduction ( KLF4 ) genes, and the decreased mRNA
level of endothelial differentiation ( PECAM1 ,CDH5 ,CD34 ),
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition ( ZEB1 ) genes was discov-
ered both in HCAEC and HITAEC. Additionally, HITAEC was
characterized by downregulation of oxidative stress ( SOD1 ,PXDN ),
endothelial mechanotransduction ( CDH2 ) molecules, scavenger
receptors ( SCARF1 ,CD36 ) and upregulation endothelial-to-
mesenchymal transition genes ( SNAI1 ,TWIST1 ). In HCAEC, the
increased level of scavenger receptors ( LDLR ,VLDLR ) was detected.
This work was supported by a grant from the President of theRussian Federation for young scientists - candidates of scienceМК-1228.2021.1.4.
M. Sinitsky: None. A. Tsepokina: None. A. Kutikhin: None. D.
Shishkova: None. A. Ponasenko: None.
P05.043.A Mutation spectrum in Kazakhstani sudden cardiac
death victims revealed by targeted next-generation sequen-cing of 96 genes associated with cardiac diseasesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
196
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ainur R. Akilzhanova1, Saule E. Rakhimova1, Ulan A. Kozhamkulov1,
Ulykbek Kairov1, Gulbanu Akilzhanova2, Ayaulym Chamoieva3,
Tolkyn Z. Zhakupova4
1Center for life sciences, National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev
University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan,2Semey Medical University,
Pavlodar Branch, Pavlodar, Kazakhstan,3L. N. Gumilyov Eurasian
National University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan,4Medical University
Astana, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
Introduction: Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is an unexpected death
occurring within the ﬁrst hour of the onset of symptoms. SCD
most commonly occurs in patients with coronary heart disease,whereas inherited cardiomyopathies and primary electrical
disorders prevail in younger SCD victims (up to 30% of all SCD
in the young). The purpose of the study was to elucidate themutational spectrum in Kazakhstani SCD victims revealed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) of 96 genes associated with cardiac
diseases.
Methods: We screened 37 suspected SCD cases (<50 years)
using the customized HaloPlex Target Enrichment System(Agilent) and NGS for 96 genes associated with inherited cardiac
syndromes and cardiomyopathies. 27 cases had non-diagnostic
structural cardiac abnormalities and 10 cases, diagnosed with acardiomyopathy post-mortem. ACMG/AMP guidelines were
applied for variant interpretation of clinical signi ﬁcance.
Results: 31 rare variants were identi ﬁed in 17 (63%) of the
deceased individuals with non-diagnostic structural cardiacabnormalities. Among them pathogenic variants in KCNQ1, KCNJ2,
SCN5A, RYR2 genes were identi ﬁed. The corresponding frequency
in deceased individuals with cardiomyopathies was 35%. The mostabundant mutations observed in MYBPC3, LAMA2, MYH6 andGAA.
Conclusion: Genetic screening revealed variants with likely
functional effects at high rates, in 63% and 35% of the SCD caseswith non-diagnostic and diagnostic cardiac abnormalities, respec-
tively. Targeted NGS screening can support the forensic investiga-
tion and help the cardiologist ’s decision to offer counselling and
clinical evaluation to relatives of young SCD victims. Study wassupported by a grant from the Ministry Education and Science,
Republic of Kazakhstan (AP09563474).
A.R. Akilzhanova: None. S.E. Rakhimova: None. U.A. Koz-
hamkulov: None. U. Kairov: None. G. Akilzhanova: None. A.
Chamoieva: None. T.Z. Zhakupova: None.
P05.046.D First case of homozygous variants in LOX gene due
to a paternal isodisomy in a child with an acute abdominal
aortic aneurysm
Carmen Cotarelo-Pérez
1,2, Raluca Oancea-Ionescu1,2, Clara
Herrero-Forte1,2, Jaime Rodríguez-Alarcón3,2, Diego López-de-Lara4,2,
Maria Fenollar-Cortés1,2
1Unidad de Genética Clínica, Servicio de Análisis Clínicos, Instituto de
Medicina del Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Clinico San
Carlos, Madrid, Spain,3Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica, Instituto del
Niño y Adolescente, Madrid, Spain,4Unidad de Endocrinología
Pediátrica, Instituto del Niño y del Adolescente, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Non-syndromic aortic aneurysms are a heteroge-
neous group of pathologies that present phenotypic variability.Predisposing genetic factors are suspected, although current
genetic knowledge of these pathologies is scarce.
Material and Methods: A 14-year-old man underwent surgery
for type B aortic dissection due to sporadic and nonsyndromicabdominal aortic aneurysm. The histopathological analysis of theabdominal aortic wall was carried out. Next-Generation Sequen-
cing (NGS) using a panel of 17 genes for aortic aneurysms was
performed. Cosegregation studies using Sanger sequencing and
microsatellite were necessary for the correct interpretation of NGSresults.
Results: No pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were
detected in the NGS. However, NGS revealed a loss of hetero-
zygosity on chromosome 5 that include the LOX gene. Sanger
sequencing detected a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance c.773A> T
in apparent homozygosity in LOX gene.The cosegregation study
carried out in his mother did not detect the variant. Although the
study of the father was not possible, the study of microsatellitesrevealed a paternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 5.Histopathological analysis showed myxoid degenerative changes
of the abdominal aortic tissue.
Conclusions: Pathogenic protein-truncating variants have been
widely reported in heterozygosity manner, in adult-onset aneur-
ysms. This is the ﬁrst case with homozygous missense variant in
LOX gene who presents an early onset aneurysm, which is
uncommon for this gene. Taking into account that the currentknowledge about the phenotype-genotype correlation in this
pathology is insuf ﬁcient, the functional study of this variant is
necessary for the correct interpretation of these results andgenetic counselling.
C. Cotarelo-Pérez: None. R. Oancea-Ionescu: None. C.
Herrero-Forte: None. J. Rodríguez-Alarcón: None. D. López-
de-Lara: None. M. Fenollar-Cortés: None.
P05.047.A Novel TRAF2 variant and KDR deletion are
implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterialhypertension
Natalia Gallego
1, Shaun Pienkos2, David Condon2, Alejandro Cruz3,
Nuria Ochoa3, Julián Nevado1, Pedro Arias1, Stuti Agarwal2, Hiral
Patel2, Ananya Chakraborty2, Pablo Lapunzina1, Pilar Escribano3,
Vinicio de Jesús2, Jair Tenorio1
1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), IdiPaz, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine and Department of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA,3Pulmonary Hypertension Unit,
Department of Cardiology, Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre,Madrid, Spain.
Background : Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare
disorder associated with elevation of pulmonary pressures that, if
untreated, leads to heart failure and death. Speci ﬁc genetic
variants increase the incidence of PAH.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was carried out in a
proband with PAH and primary biliary cirrhosis. A custom pipeline
for variant prioritization was carried out to obtain candidate
variants and Copy Number Variants (CNVs). To determine theimpact of TRAF2 in cell proliferation, we performed an MTS assay
on healthy lung pericytes transfected with siRNA speci ﬁc for
TRAF2 . To measure the effect of loss of TRAF2 on NF-kappa-beta
(NF-κB) activity, we measured levels of Phospho-p65-NF- κBi n
siRNA-transfected pericytes using western immunoblotting.
Results
: WES revealed a de novo variant in TRAF2 and a
deletion which encompasses 52 genes, including KDR. TRAF2
encode for immunomodulatory protein that regulate NF- κB
activation. The knockdown of TRAF2 increased NF- κBa c t i v i t yi n
healthy lung pericytes, which correlated with a signi ﬁcant
increase in proliferation. Variants in KDR gene has been
previously described in PAH associated with interstitial lungdisease but as far as we know, no CNVs that include KDR has
been detected in PAH patients.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
197
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions : We have identi ﬁed a variant in TRAF2 and a
deletion which include KDR. We speculate that loss of function in
TRAF2 promotes pulmonary vascular remodeling by overactivation
of the NF- κB signaling activity, however, the deletion can also play
a role in the clinical manifestation, suggesting a digeniccontribution to the PAH phenotype. Grants: PI18/01233, FCHP
unrestricted grant.
N. Gallego: None. S. Pienkos: None. D. Condon: None. A. Cruz:
None. N. Ochoa: None. J. Nevado: None. P. Arias: None. S.
Agarwal: None. H. Patel: None. A. Chakraborty: None. P.
Lapunzina: None. P. Escribano: None. V. de Jesús: None. J.
Tenorio: None.
P05.048.B RPL3L is a novel disease-causing gene in Dilated
Cardiomyopathy d Cardiomyopathy
Maria Sabater Molina1, Joaquina Maria Pan Perez-Villalobos2, Elisa
Nicolas Rocamora1, Mari Carmen Olmo Conesa1, David López
Cuenca1, Moises Sorli2, Francisco J. Castro2, Juan Ramon Gimeno
Blanes1
1Inherited Cardiac Disease Unit. Universitary Hospital Virgen de la
Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain,2Department of Paediatric Cardiology,
Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain.
Background: The genetic cause of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
remains unexplained in a substantial proportion of cases. RPL3Lencodes the 60S ribosomal protein L3-like protein that is highly
expressed in skeletal muscle and heart. Pediatric DCM is a genetic
heterogeneous disorder and the yield of the genetic test stillremains too low. Our aim was to determine the relation betweenRPL3L mutations and the development of DCM.
Methods: RPL3L was sequenced by Sanger technology in 79
DCM probands; all of them with severe DCM. We analyzed thecosegregation of RPL3L variants in the family when relatives were
available.
Results: We identi ﬁed RPL3L variants in 8 affected patients (7
(87.5%) females) from 6 families. Frequency was signi ﬁcantly
higher in DCM probands (6 of 79 [8.9%]) than in gnomAD and
1000G database. 5 patients were carriers in compound hetero-
cigosis and 4 of them were diagnostic at ﬁrst year of life and could
be studied the cosegregation. The fourth was 64 years andpresent dimorphic features. The rest of patients with one RPL3L
mutation were diagnosed at age from 0 to 9 years.
Conclusions: RPL3L is a novel disease causing gene in DCM
accounting for at least 8% of neonatal cases. The RPL3L gene
should be routinely included in dilated cardiomyopathy genetic
testing panels.Table 1. Clinical characteristics in affected carriers ofRPL3L variants.
M. Sabater Molina: None. J. Pan Perez-Villalobos: None. E.
Nicolas Rocamora: None. M. Olmo Conesa: None. D. López
Cuenca: None. M. Sorli: None. F.J. Castro: None. J. Gimeno
Blanes: None.
P05.049.C Low frequency variants in STAP1 associated with
Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Carmen Rodriguez Jimenez
1, Javier Sanguino1, Iluminada García-
Polo2, J.M. Mostaza3, E. Sevilla1, A. Herranz-Cecilia1, A. Carazo1,N .
Gallego4, V. Gómez del Pozo5, L. García-Fernández6, M. Solís7,S .
Rodríguez-Nóvoa1
1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni-
versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Group of dislipemias of geneticorigin and metabolic diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,2Department of Internal Medicine,
Hospital de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,3Internal
Medicine Service, Hospital Carlos III, HULP, Madrid, Spain., Madrid,
Spain,4Next Generation Sequencing Section. Genetics Department,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,
5Next Generation Sequencing Section. Genetics Department, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.of dislipemias of genetic
origin and metabolic diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,6Preanalytic Section. Genetics
Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.,
Madrid, Spain,7Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Department,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. CIBERER, ISCIII,Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Autosomal-dominant hypercholesterolemia (FH,
OMIM#143890) is a common genetic disorder (1:250-1:500)1.
Molecular diagnosis can be con ﬁrmed by the presence of
pathogenic variants in LDLR (low density lipoprotein receptor,
OMIM#606945), APOB (apolipoprotein B, OMIM#107730) and
PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/ kexin, OMIM#607786).
Recent studies suggested the STAP1 (signal transducing adaptor
family member 1, OMIM#604298) as fourth FH gene2. Our
objective was to identify variants in STAP1 in FH patients andthereby improve the genetic diagnosis of FH. Patients and
Methods: The study population included 750 DNA samples from
index patients clinically classi ﬁed as having probable or de ﬁnitive
FH. The samples were analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing(NGS) using a customized panel of 436 genes. Variants of interest
were con ﬁrmed by Sanger Sequencing. Bioinformatic analysis was
performed using algorithms developed by our bioinformatic unit.
Results: Three variants previously reported were found in
heterozygous in three patients in STAP1 two of them with
frequency < 0.03 %. The STAP1:NM_012108.3:c.35G>A :p.(Arg12His),
was conserved, and the in silico predictors showed damage. TheSTAP1:NM_012108.3:c.526C>T :p.(Pro176Ser), was conserved and in
silico predictors showed damage. The STAP1:NM_012108.3:c.120
+6T>C , did not show impact according to splicing predictors.
Conclusions: There is controversy about the role of STAP1 in
FH
3. Some studies have showed lack of cosegregation in some
variants found in STAP1 in FH patients4. In this study we found
three variants previously described in patients with hypercholes-
terolemia. Further studies of cosegregation and functional studiesshould be performed in order to con ﬁrm the role of STAP1 in FH.
C. Rodriguez Jimenez: None. J. Sanguino: None. I. García-
Polo: None. J. Mostaza: None. E. Sevilla: None. A. Herranz-
Cecilia: None. A. Carazo: None. N. Gallego: None. V. Gómez del
Pozo: None. L. García-Fernández: None. M. Solís: None. S.
Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None.
P05.050.D Genetic in ﬂuences on functional outcome after
stroke
Estefanía Alcaide1, Nuria Martínez-Gil1, Geòrgia Escaramís2, Uxue
Lazcano3, Marina Mola-Caminal3, Caty Carrera4, Cristòfol Vives-
Bauza5, Jordi Jiménez-Conde3, Israel Fernández-Cadenas4, Raquel
Rabionet1
1Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, Facultat de
Biologia, IBUB, IRSJD and CIBERER, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain,2CIBERESP, Departament de Biomedicina, Facultat
de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, Institut de Neurociències,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,3Servei de Neurologia,
Hospital Del Mar, Barcelona, Spain,4Hospital de la Santa Creu i de
Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,5Departament de Biologia, Universitat de
les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
198
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Stroke is a leading cause of adult disability. There is
a large variability in the functional outcome after a stroke, partially
regulated by genetic factors. GWAS results highlighted theinvolvement of common or low-frequency variants in PP1 and
PATJ ; however, the role of rare variants in stroke recovery remains
unsolved.
Materials and Methods: We performed a pilot study analyzing
exomes of 90 ischemic stroke cases with extreme functionalrecovery scores three months after stroke (modi ﬁed Rankin Scale
(mRS) 0-1 vs 4-5), matched by age, gender and stroke severity, to
select target genes involved in functional outcome. These targets,as well as selected regions based on previous GWAS results, were
included in a capture assay, and sequenced in 700 additional
ischemic stroke cases from our hospitals. Rare variants with aCADD score>15 (coding) or a funseq2 score>1.5 (regulatory) wereselected for further analysis with a Bayesian-based rare variant
association test (BATI) using the discrete mRs scores (0-6, where 6
indicates death) as outcome.
Results: The pilot study highlighted genes involved in
angiogenesis, immune system and synaptogenesis, such as TEK
orANGPT2 . Targeted resequencing found association of rare
exonic variants in CNTN5 with worse functional outcome (p < 0.02,
100 permutations). Interestingly, the 18 cases carrying CNTN5
missense variants are highly enriched for mRS =6 (p-val < 0.0001).
One of CNTN5 ’s functions is related to synaptogenesis during
nervous system development; nevertheless, further functionalexperiments are needed to understand how CNTN5 mutations
lead to differences in recovery.
Funding: Fundació La Marató (Proj.201726)
E. Alcaide: None. N. Martínez-Gil: None. G. Escaramís: None.
U. Lazcano: None. M. Mola-Caminal: None. C. Carrera: None. C.
Vives-Bauza: None. J. Jiménez-Conde: None. I. Fernández-
Cadenas: None. R. Rabionet: None.
P05.051.A The value of new and old technologies to decipher
a sudden cardiac death case
Georgia Christopoulou
1, Stavroula Samara1, Aikaterini Oikonomaki1,
Eleni Katsoni1, Antigoni Miliou2, Evangelos Oikonomou2, Charalam-
bos Vlachopoulos2,Pantelis Constantoulakis1
1Genotypos MSA, Athens, Greece,21st Department of Cardiology,
Hippokration Hospital, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
Introduction: We present a sudden cardiac death (SCD) case
resolved by post mortem genotyping through clinical-laboratorygeneticists ’collaboration employing new and traditional genomic
technologies.Materials and Methods: A post-mortem negative, blood
sample of a clinically healthy, 19-year-old male with noarrhythmogenicity family history was referred for investigation
of potential genetic background of SCD. Clinical exome sequen-
cing was performed on DNA extracted from the sample, usingSophia Genetics ’Clinical Exome Solution v2. Following prepara-
tions according to the manufacturer ’s protocol, DNA libraries were
sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq-500 genetic analyser. Dataprocessing, variant calling and pre-classi ﬁcation were conducted
by SOPHiA DDM ®bioinformatics pipelines. Multiplex Ligation-
dependent Probe Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) was performed to con ﬁrm
results and investigate family members.
Results: The lack of any medical history in the proband did not
allow targeted genetic investigation, thus a virtual gene panel
consisting of 134 genes related to SCD was analyzed for SNVs/
Indels/CNVs. Copy number variation analysis revealed a hetero-zygous KCNH2 exon 14-15 deletion, further de ﬁned and con ﬁrmed
by MLPA as exon 14-16 deletion. Parental MLPA analysis showed
paternal inheritance. Six apparently healthy paternal relatives
were tested by MLPA, 3 were found to be deletion carriers.
Conclusions: Mutations in KCNH2 are related to longQT2 and
shortQT1 syndromes and SCD. Although there was a benign
medical history, this ﬁnding led to retrospective re-evaluation of
ECGs where consistent aberrations were recognized. The genomicanalysis, not only deciphered the SCD, it led to high-risk family
member discovery thus allowing proper counseling and pre-
ventive measures in the patients ’best interest.
G. Christopoulou: None. S. Samara: None. A. Oikonomaki:
None. E. Katsoni: None. A. Miliou: None. E. Oikonomou: None. C.
Vlachopoulos: None. P. Constantoulakis: None.
P05.052.B Sudden death: Bioinformatic analysis of genetic
variants
Marisol Delea
1, Guillermo Corró2,L e o n e l aL u c e3, Monica C. Fabbro4,
Micaela Galain4, Jorge E. Kolomenski5, Cecilia S. Fernandez4,M o n i c aP .
Bellazzi2, Tania Castro1, Viviana R. Consentino6, Liliana Francipane7,
Sebastian Menazzi7, Florencia Giliberto3, Gustavo Ontiveros8, Liliana B.
Dain1,Carlos D. Bruque2
1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica - ANLIS- Malbrán., CABA,
Argentina,2Hospital de Alta Complejidad- SAMIC - El Calafate, El
Calafate, Santa Cruz, Argentina,3INIGEM, CONICET / Cátedra de
Genética y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Buenos Aires, CABA,
Argentina,4CEGYR, Medicina Reproductiva y genética, CABA,
Argentina,5Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular.
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,Universidad de Buenos
Aires, CABA, Argentina,6Departamento de Neonatología, Hospital
Gandulfo, El Calafate, Santa Cruz, Argentina,7División de Genética,ID SEX AGE AT
DIAGNOSISPHENOTYPE TREATMENT VARIANT
1VARIANT
2CURRENT
SITUATION
1 Female 2 months DCM Pharmacological R4W A94T LVEF 46%
2 Male 2 weeks DCM Pharmacological R161W G27D Exitus3 Female 1.5 months DCM Pharmacological R161W G27D Transplanted
4 Female 2 weeks DCM PharmacologicalTransplant R242W D308N No transplant
rejection
5 Female 65 years DCM > LVNC Short stature,
kyphoscoliosisPharmacological A256T M168V LVEF 20-27%
6 Female 9 years LVNC > DCM Pharmacological D308N LVEF 50%
7 Female 9 years LVNC > DCM Pharmacological D308N LVEF 58%
8 Female 1 month DCM > LVNC Ventricular assist device c.618C>T Transplant wait listAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
199
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martín", Universidad de Buenos
Aires, CABA, Argentina,8Fundación para la Prevención de la Muerte
Súbita, CABA, Argentina.
Introduction: Sudden death in patients over 40 years old is
commonly a result of asteroclerotic occlusion of coronary arteries.
On the other hand, these events in young patients (<35 years) are
usually caused by familial/hereditary genetic diseases (cardiacchannelopathy, cardiomyopathies or aortopathy).
Material and Methods: Patients were tested using exome
sequencing or targeted gene sequencing. The identi ﬁed variants
were evaluated in molecular homology models generated withthe Modeller 9.22 software and stability programs were used topredict ΔΔG caused by residue changes.
Results: Three families with pathogenic variants were reported
in this work. The variant (c345G>C) in the ACTA2 gene was foundin an index patient with aortic root dilation. The index case of the
second family was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and arrhythmia and bears three different mutations: TNNT2(c.842A>T), MYBPC3 (c.2429G>A) and SCN5A (c.5408C>G). Thelast index patient, diagnosed with arrhythmia, carried the variant
(c.1308C>A) in the TRPM4 gene. Changes in protein stability and
protein surface charges were observed by modelling, suggestingthat these mutations may be directly related to the clinicaloutcomes described for each patient.
Conclusion: Variants were analyzed by means of a global study
of genetic variants in several databases, protein structure andprotein stability to determine their possible effects and their
correlation with patients ’phenotypes. The joint analysis of the
families and the bioinformatic approach enabled us to determinepossible effects for genetic variants.
M. Delea: None. G. Corró: None. L. Luce: None. M.C. Fabbro:
None. M. Galain: None. J.E. Kolomenski: None. C.S. Fernandez:
None. M.P. Bellazzi: None. T. Castro: None. V.R. Consentino:
None. L. Francipane: None. S. Menazzi: None. F. Giliberto: None.
G. Ontiveros: None. L.B. Dain: None. C.D. Bruque: None.
P05.053.C Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are
associated with LTBP3 mutations: individual case and litera-
ture review
Zhu Guo Yan
PUMC&CAMS Fuwai hospital, Beijing, China.
Normal 0 7.8 磅0 2 false false false EN-US ZH-CN X-NONE /* Style
Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name: 普通表格;
mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-pad-ding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0cm; mso-para-
margin-bottom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-
size:10.0pt; font-family:"Times New Roman",serif;}
Background: With the rapid development of genetic testing
technology, more and more HTAAD (Heritable thoracic aortic
aneurysm and dissection) -related mutations have been identi ﬁed.
However, many patients with obvious genetic predispositionshave still failed to ﬁnd pathogenic mutations in known genes
associated with aortic disease. Hence, we need to update TAAD ’s
list of disease-related genes, which can help to de ﬁnite causes and
pathogenesis of undiagnosed patients and screen the familymembers of the patients.
Methods: The patient who had no history of hypertension was
rehospitalized after surgery for aortic dissection, he presented
with aortic root aneurysm and aorta dilates in many parts with no
other abnormal signs. The patient was ﬁrst tested with a negative
panel for aortic disease, then we performed the whole exomesequencing (WES)test on the patient, two mutations,c.625dupC(p.Leu209fs) and c.1965delG(p.Arg656fs) in LTBP3 (latent TGF β
(transforming growth factor β)-binding proteins-3) were found.
Conclusion: We found one case where mutations in LTBP3 can
cause thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection, which candemonstrate that LTBP3 is associated with thoracic aortic
aneurysm and dissection. It provides a view for the expansion of
gene spectrum associated with thoracic aortic aneurysms and
dissections, which will be helpful for the clinical diagnosis andclinical intervention.
Z.G. Yan: None.
P05.054.D Telomere length in the pre- and postoperative
period of coronary artery disease patients
Maxim Aidarovich Asanov , Alena Olegovna Poddubnyak, Anasta-
sia Valerievna Ponasenko
Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Kemerovo, Russian Federation.
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death worldwide.
Decreased or lost function of myocardial cells or blood vessels is
the cause of coronary heart disease. Telomeres are located at theends of chromosomes and consist of tandem repeats TTAGGG.
Currently, there are many con ﬂicting research results on the
importance of telomere length (TL) in the development of CAD. Itis important to assess the role of changes and restoration ofleukocyte telomere length in CAD patients before and after
surgery. The study included 60 (59 y.o.) patients with CAD and 52
(54 y.o.) healthy people. DNA isolation was carried out using thestandard phenol-chloroform extraction method. There was a qPCRfor measuring TL. The results of the study showed that the TL in
patients with coronary artery disease before surgery and after 5
years statistically signi ﬁcantly differed from the TL of healthy
people by 7 times (p < 0.05). TL did not differ between patients
before surgery and after 5 years of rehabilitation. The effectiveness
of measuring telomere length as a marker in the pathology ofatherogenesis, in particular ischemic heart disease, is con ﬁrmed by
the results of the ROC analysis. The area under the ROC-curve AUC
=0.998 ± 0.002. During in ﬂammation, the rate of telomere short-
ening is accelerated by increased cell division and increasedoxidative stress, leading to cellular senescence. This phenomenoncontributes to aging of the arteries, which in turn further
exacerbates in ﬂammation. Foundation for the Support of Young
Scientists in the Field of Biomedical Sciences 2021-1
M.A. Asanov: None. A.O. Poddubnyak: None. A.V. Pona-
senko: None.
P05.055.A Genotypic characterization of an Italian cohort of
patients with hereditary transthyretin-related amyloidosis
Mariabeatrice Sanchini
1, Marianna Farnè1, Laura Tonelli1, Alice
Margutti1, Rachele Rossi1, Paola Rimessi1, Marcella Neri1, Claudio
Rapezzi2,3, Francesca Gualandi1, Alessandra Ferlini1
1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2Cardiological Center, S. Anna University
Hospital of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,3Maria Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care
& Research, Cotignola, Italy.
Introduction: Hereditary amyloidosis transthyretin-related
(hATTR) is a rare, late-onset, autosomal dominant disease due to
pathogenic variations, almost invariably missense, in the TTR gene.
Materials and Methods: From 2016 to 2020, hATTR was
genetically identi ﬁed in 95/534 (detection rate 17.8%) patientsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
200
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608coming from Northern and Central Italy Centers. The analyses
were performed by Sanger sequencing. The 63.2% (60/95) of
patients were males while 36.8% (35/95) were females. In 33.7%
(32/95) the analysis was requested as a presymptomatic testing infamilies with already identi ﬁed TTR mutations.
Results: We identi ﬁed 5 known pathogenic/likely pathogenic
missense variation types: p.Ile88Leu (77.9%, N =74), p.Val50Met
(12.6%, N =12), p.Thr139Met (3.2%, N =3), p.Phe84Leu (3.2%, N
=3), p.Val142Ile (N =1). We also detected the missense variant p.
Val114Leu in one patient, which is novel, though the codon 114 is
already known as a site of another missense variation, p.Val114Ala,
classi ﬁed as pathogenic. Many known polymorphisms were also
found in 15 out of 95 positive patients, namely p.Gly26Ser (10patients), p.Thr25Thr (1), c.337-18G>C (2), c.201-31G>A (1), c.70-
7C>T (1). Finally, we found a novel intronic variant of uncertain
signi ﬁcance c.201-76T>A.
Conclusions: p.Ile88Leu (77.9%) is the most frequent TTR
pathogenic variant we have identi ﬁed and it is mainly associated
with a cardiac phenotype. Notably, also the novel variant p.Val114Leu is associated with a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,underlining the importance of the cardiac phenotype in hATTR.
Lastly, we observed an increase requests for TTR genetic testing,
which might be related to the approval of the novel orphan drugs(Patisiran and Inotersen).
M. Sanchini: None. M. Farnè: None. L. Tonelli: None. A.
Margutti: None. R. Rossi: None. P. Rimessi: None. M. Neri: None.
C. Rapezzi: None. F. Gualandi: None. A. Ferlini: None.
P06 Metabolic and Mitochondrial Disorders
P06.001.B Analysis of the phenotype differences in sibs with
alkaptonuria
Andrea Zatkova
1, Andrea Soltysova1,2, Richard Imrich1,3, Helena
Glasova4, Birgitta Olsson5, Mohammed Alsbou6, Lakshminarayan
Ranganath7
1Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava,
Slovakia,2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural
Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia,3National Insti-
tute of Rheumatic Diseases, Piestany, Slovakia,4Pharmacology and
Clinical Pharmacology, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slova-
kia,5Clinical Development, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum, Stockholm,
Sweden,6Faculty of Medicine, Mutah University, Karak, Jordan,
7Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Royal Liver-
pool University Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
Alkaptonuria (AKU) is a rare metabolic disorder caused by
mutations within a gene coding for homogentisate 1,2-dioxygen-
ase ( HGD ). Our recent study demonstrated that nitisinone is
suitable for treatment of AKU and also allowed collecting of adetailed baseline clinical data for the largest cohort of 139 patientswith this rare disease. We performed also the ﬁrst genotype-
phenotype correlation study in this cohort, which showed a small
but statistically signi ﬁcant difference in urinary homogentisic acid
(HGA) excretion (corrected for dietary protein intake) between
variants leading to 1% (G161R) or >30% (M368V, A122V) residual
HGD activity. However, there was no difference in serum HGAlevels or absolute urinary excretion of HGA, or in the tested clinicalsymptoms. Taken together, our data indicated that protein intake
during the life is more important in respect of the patients
phenotype than direct effect of different HGD variants on the
functionality of HGD protein. In this study, we present analysis ofthe clinical data focusing on the manifestation of the disease in sib
pairs present in the cohort, in order to evaluate phenotypical
differences between patients carrying the same genetic variants,thus uncovering other factors in ﬂuencing severity of the disease.
This work was supported by the Slovak National Agency VEGA
(grant No. 02/0040/20).
A. Zatkova: None. A. Soltysova: None. R. Imrich: None. H.
Glasova: None. B. Olsson: None. M. Alsbou: None. L. Ranganath:
None.
P06.003.D Dif ﬁculties in diagnosing alpha-mannosidosis
Gabriela Csereoka
1, Camelia Alkhzouz2,1, Vasilica Plaiasu3
1Children ’s Emergency Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania,2“Iuliu
Hatieganu ”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania,3Department of Clinical Genetics, INSMC “Alessandru
Rusescu ”, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction : Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare inherited lysosomal
storage disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding for
the lysosomal alpha-d-mannosidase, MAN2B1.
Materials and Methods : We report two cases of nonrelative
pediatric patients, aged 17 and 4 years, presenting moderate form
of alpha-mannosidosis, who were admitted to our department in
order to initiate the enzyme replacement therapy. Clinicalexamination was performed, followed by blood sample collection
for biochemical, immunological and hematological analysis and
also imagistic examination. The activity of alpha mannosidase, theidenti ﬁcation of pathogenic variants in MAN2B1 by next-
generation sequencing, and the mannose-rich oligosaccharides
urinary level were determined by external laboratories.
Results : Both patients show the main clinical features of the
disorder.The younger patient presented normal enzyme activity, aheterozygous pathogenic variant and also a heterozygous variant
of uncertain signi ﬁcance, identi ﬁed in the MAN2B1gene, associat-
ing a high level of urinary secretion of mannose -rich oligosac-charides. The older patient has low level of alpha mannosidase
activity. Two variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (homozygous) were
identi ﬁed in MAN2B1 gene.
Conclusions : It is dif ﬁcult to predict genotype/phenotype
relationship in patients affected by alpha- mannosidose. A child ’s
coarse facial features, hearing dif ﬁculties, recurrent infections,
skeletal abnormalities, affected motor skills and intellectualdisability should prompt the physician to investigate thepossibility of a lysosomal storage disease, including alpha-
mannosidosis. This leads to an earlier diagnosis and initiation of
therapy, with the possibility of genetic counseling.
G. Csereoka: None. C. Alkhzouz: None. V. Plaiasu: None.
P06.004.A Mild forms of hypophosphatasia in Northwest
Russia, update
Mikhail Fedyakov , Y. Eismont, T. Ivaschenko, I. Sosnina, Y. Snegova,
S. Scherbak, Y. Barbitoff, A. Shikov, O. Glotov
City Hospital 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare heritable meta-
bolic disorder characterized by defective mineralization of bone
and/or teeth in the presence of reduced activity of unfractionatedserum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The overall prevalence ofsevere HPP is range from 1/100 000 to 1/300 000. Mild forms of
HPP are more frequent than severe forms - expected prevalence
can reach 1/6000 in Western populations. Russian prevalence ofmild and severe HPP is still unknown. Genetic analysis providesdetermining of diagnosis in cases with suspected HPP.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
201
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: We analyzed genomic DNA samples
from 259 unrelated individuals with suspected HPP (inclusion
criteria: low and/or recurrent low levels of ALP, low growth,
recurrent fractures and others). Primers ’system for Sanger
sequencing was designed and validated for coding 2-12 exonsofALPL gene. Exome data of 353 of unrelated individuals (in-house
control group) was used for estimation of prevalence in Northwest
Russia.
Results: Detection rate was 13,5%: 28 in heterozygous and 7 in
compound-heterozygous. 7 novel mutations were detected. Most
frequent pathogenic variant was p.E191K in exon 6. The
prevalence of this mutation was: 2.9% in suspected HPP group(15/518), 0.28% (2/706 chromosome) in home controls, 0.25% ingnomAD.
Conclusions: Mild forms of HPP predominate in Northwest
Russian patients with suspected HPP. Mutation p.E191K in exon 6is 12 times common in patients with low levels of ALP compare
general population.
M. Fedyakov: None. Y. Eismont: None. T. Ivaschenko: None. I.
Sosnina: None. Y. Snegova: None. S. Scherbak: None. Y.
Barbitoff: None. A. Shikov: None. O. Glotov: None.
P06.005.B Screening of ASS1 gene in seven families from
Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Kurdistan with citrullinemia type 1
identi ﬁes rare and novel variant
Melissa Daou
1, Mirna Souaid1, Tony Yammine1, Anthony Nemr1,
Issam Khneisser1, Nabiha Salem1, Maya Rizkallah1, Manal Mezher1,
Adib Moukarzel2, Chantal Farra1,3
1Medical Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Saint-Joseph University,
Beirut, Lebanon,2Department of Pediatrics, Hotel-Dieu de France
University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon,3Department of Medical
Genetics, Hotel-Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Leba-non.
Introduction: Citrullinemia is a rare autosomal recessive urea
cycle disorder caused by argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS)deﬁciency. First classi ﬁed into three types (types I, II, and III)
based on biochemical manifestations, it was later reclassi ﬁed into
types I (CTLN1, MIM# 215700) and II (CTLN2, MIM# 603471) basedon molecular pathogenesis. It is due to variation in the ASS1 gene
located on chromosome 9q43.11. Incidence of variants differs
across populations and ethnic groups. A genotype-phenotype
correlation has been established, although not clearly outlined.
Materials and methods: A total of seven families with
citrullinemia type 1, four of Lebanese origins, and three others
of Syrian, Iraqi, and Kurdish origins were included in our study.Upon informed consent, genomic DNA was isolated fromperipheral blood samples and analysis of ASS1 was carried out.
Results: A novel variant c.286C>A, in exon 5 was described in
one Lebanese family with early-onset and severe clinicalpresentation. Two other homozygous missense variantsc.535T>C, in exon 8 and c.787G>A, in exon 10 were identi ﬁed in
two Lebanese families each presenting with late-onset and mild
manifestations. In the third Lebanese family, c.535T>C andc.787G>A were both present as heterozygous composite variants.In the Syrian, Iraqi, and Kurdish families, the homozygous
c.847G>A, in exon 13 was identi ﬁed and associated with an
early-onset and severe clinical presentation.
Conclusions: A novel variant and three previously reported
variants were identi ﬁed in seven Middle Eastern families, further
delineating the molecular basis and genotype-phenotype correla-tion of citrullinemia type 1.M. Daou: None. M. Souaid: None. T. Yammine: None. A. Nemr:
None. I. Khneisser: None. N. Salem: None. M. Rizkallah: None. M.
Mezher: None. A. Moukarzel: None. C. Farra: None.
P06.006.C a successful treatment with uridine in CAD related
disorders
Alaa AlAyed , Mohammed Almannai
Section of Medical Genetics, Children ’s Hospital, King Fahad Medical
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
CAD related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy is an
autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder caused by
mutation in CAD gene that encode a multifunctional enzymeinvolved in the initial steps of pyrimidine synthesis. This disorderwas recently reported, and evidence suggests a positive response
to treatment with oral uridine. Exome sequencing in one family
identi ﬁed a homozygous, novel and pathogenic variants in CAD
gene in two siblings who presented with developmentalregression after seizure onset. In this report we demonstrated a
successful treatment with oral uridine in term of mobility,
consciousness, communication, and cessation of seizure renderingthis disorder as one of the few treatable neurometabolic diseases.
A. AlAyed: None. M. Almannai: None.
P06.007.D Clinical, biochemical, and genetic features of
patients with congenital disorders of glycosylation in Japan
Nobuhiko Okamoto , Yoshinao Wada
Osaka Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Izumi, Osaka, Japan.
Congenital disorders of glycosylation are heterogeneous diseases
caused by defects in various steps in glycosylation pathways. More
than 100 genetic defects are known in humans. Many of these
defects lead to multi-systemic manifestations, commonly invol-ving the central nervous system. Altered protein glycosylation areclassi ﬁed into N-glycosylation defects, O-glycosylation defects,
and combined defects. A type 1 pattern of N-glycosylation
disorders (CDG-I) is a glycan assembly defect, a type 2 pattern
(CDG-II) is a glycan remodeling defect. Most effective approach to
identifying these N-glycosylation disorders is mass spectrometry
(MS) using either released glycans, intact glycoproteins or proteolyticpeptides as analytes. Among these, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) MS of tryptic peptides derived from transferrin
can be used to reliably identify signature peptides that are
characteristic of CDG-I and II. Additionally, we introduced MS tothe O-glycoform pro ﬁling of apoCIII. In the present study, MALDI-MS
was applied to N- and O-glycosylation disorders. Patients with
multisystem disease of unknown etiology from all over Japan were
included in this study. The genetic diagnosis was made before orafter identifying the glycoform abnormality in this screening.
Glycosylation defects were revealed in 50 samples including
PMM2-CDG, ALG1-CDG, ALG9-CDG, ALG12-CDG, ALG13-CDG,B4GALT1-CDG, SLC35A2-CDG, ATP6V0A2-CDG, TRAPPC11-CDG,NUS1-CDG, and MAN1B1-CDG. Urinary excretion of Hex4 corre-
sponding to Glc3Man was con ﬁrmed in MOGS-CDG. A predomi-
nance of PMM2-CDG was detected as in other countries. Somepatients with glycoform abnormality have none of the knownmolecular defects. Further studies with exome analysis are ongoing.
N. Okamoto: None. Y. Wada: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
202
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P06.008.A Genetics and prevalence of Chronic Progressive
External Ophtalmoplegia (CPEO) in the Italian region Emilia-
Romagna
Leonardo Caporali1, Maria Lucia Valentino1,2, Cristina Fonti1,
Chiara La Morgia1, Rocco Liguori1,2, Roberto D ’Alessandro1, Valerio
Carelli1,2, ER-Mito study group
1IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Introduction: Ptosis with or without chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) is the most common manifestation ofmitochondrial myopathy, with maintenance of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) defect as disease marker. This defect may lead to
qualitative alterations in the form of accumulation of mtDNAmultiple deletions in post-mitotic tissues, or quantitative altera-tions in the form of mtDNA depletion, which may be organ or
tissue-speci ﬁc, secondary to nuclear DNA (nDNA) mutations in
genes involved in the replisome machinery, the nucleotidebalance and the mitochondrial dynamics.
Materials and Methods: 86 patients with CPEO were recruited:
53 patients were screened for nuclear gene associated with CPEO
and 46 for mtDNA rearrangements (single or multiple deletions);59 skeletal muscle biopsies were available for mtDNA molecular
investigations. We evaluated mtDNA deletions by long range PCR
and ddPCR, with characterization of deletion breakpoints, andmtDNA copy number by qPCR.
Results: The CPEO prevalence in Emilia-Romagna was 2.32/
100.000, reaching 5.07 in Bologna province. Single deletion was
found in 37.7% (common deletion in 41.1%), whereas multipledeletions in 8.4%. Genetic defect was detected in 27.9%, beingTWNK the most frequent gene (44.4%), followed by POLG (20.8%),
OPA1 (16.6%), DNA2 (8.3%), DGUOK (4.1%), MGME1 (4.1%),
RNASEH1 (4.1%), RRM2B (4.1%); 6.7 % showed mtDNA depletion,
while 30.5% a higher amount, especially in single deletion cases.
Conclusions: Our results provide the ﬁrst estimates of minimum
prevalence of CPEO, revealing single mtDNA deletion and the mtDNAelicase (TWNK) as major genetic cause.Supported by “Programma di
ricercar Regione-Università 2010-2012 ”(PRUa1RI-2012-008)
L. Caporali: None. M. Valentino: None. C. Fonti: None. C. La
Morgia: None. R. Liguori: None. R. D ’Alessandro: None. V.
Carelli: None.
P06.009.B Positive association between BGLAP Hind III
polymorphism and insulin treatment in type 2 diabetes
mellitus
Yelizaveta Harbuzova , Yaroslav Chumachenko, Olha Obukhova,
Viktoriia Harbuzova
Sumy state university Medical institute, Sumy, Ukraine.
Introduction: According to the current data, bone-derived
undercarboxylated protein osteocalcin (OCN) performs the func-
tion of a hormone regulating the systemic glucose metabolism.OCN enhances insulin expression and increases its sensitivity inperipheral tissues. Therefore, the aim of the research was to
investigate the association between BGLAP HindIII polymorphism
and the need for insulin therapy in patients with type 2 diabetesmellitus (T2DM).
Materials and Methods: Venous blood of 153 Ukrainians with
diagnosed T2DM was collected for the study. During the
treatment, 66 patients (mean age ± SD 63.5 ± 8.03 years) wereprescribed insulin preparations and 87 patients (65.55 ± 8.27years) were observed without insulin. Genotyping was performed
using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragments length
polymorphism analysis (PCR-RFLP). All statistical calculations were
done in SPSS 22.0 software.
Results: Using binary logistic regression it was found the
reduced risk of insulin prescription for C-allele carriers under crude
dominant (Pc =0.016; ORc =0.423; 95%CI =0.21-0.85), over-
dominant (Pc =0.006; ORc =0.335; 95%CI =
0.153-0.736) and
additive (Pc =0.006; ORc =0.33; 95%CI =0.149-0.732) models of
inheritance. Moreover, the associations remained signi ﬁcant under
dominant (Pa =0.018; ORa =0.405; 95%CI =0.192-0.854), over-
dominant (Pa =0.002; ORa =0.271; 95%CI =0.117-0.627) and
additive (Pa =0.003; ORa =0.279; 95%CI =0.12-0.652) models
after the adjustment for age, sex, BMI, smoking, and the presence
of arterial hypertension.
Conclusions: It was found that BGLAP HindIII polymorphism is
associated with decreased risk of insulin treatment in Ukrainians
with T2DM.
Y. Harbuzova: None. Y. Chumachenko: None. O. Obukhova:
None. V. Harbuzova: None.
P06.010.C Study of tumor-supressor genes ’DNA methylation
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Pavlina Gateva1, Ivelina Mihaleva2, Ivanka Dimova3
1Deaprtment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical University -
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Department of Medical
Genetics, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction : The epidemiological data represent a signi ﬁcantly
increased risk of various cancer forms in patients with diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and cancer have many commonrisk factors, but the potential biological link between the two
socially signi ﬁcant diseases has not been studied. When examined
at the cellular level, both diabetes and cancer are genetic diseasescaused by altered gene expression programs. DNA methylation isassociated with cancer development. The data are mainly
epidemiological and histological, and they do not explain the
causes and molecular mechanisms. One possible explanation isthe in ﬂuence of epigenetic modi ﬁcations in genes, important for
oncogenesis.
Materials and methods : We have performed analysis for
promoter methylation of 8 tumor suppressor genes (ATM, BRCA1,CDKN1a, Mlh1, Msh2, Rara, Tp53, Xpc) in blood samples of patients
with T2DM compared with controls with normal glucose
tolerance. Brie ﬂy, we used Human Stress & Toxicity PathwayFinder
EpiTect Methyl II Signature PCR Array (Qiagen Sciences Inc.).
Results : The highest increase of methylated DNA fraction (by
more than 10 times) was detected for promoter methylation of
BRCA1 (increase by 18 times), Msh2 gene (increase by 12 times),and CDKN1a (increase by 10 times). The ﬁrst two genes predispose
to breast/ovarian and colon/endometrial cancer.
Conclusion : It is considered that there is a strong link between
aberrant methylation of the BRCA1 in white blood cells and breastcancer-related molecular changes that indicate the potentialpredisposition of BRCA1 dysmethylation for developing breast
cancer in diabetic patients.
Acknowledgment: BSNF, Contract No КП-06-Н33/10, 2019.
P. Gateva: None. I. Mihaleva: None. I. Dimova: None.
P06.011.D Assessing pathogenicity of novel mitochondrial
DNA variantsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
203
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Andrea Winkler1, Uwe Ahting1, Bettina Lorenz-Depiereux1, Riccardo
Berutti1, Johannes A. Mayr2, Ralf A. Husain3, Andreas Hahn4, Leila
Scholle5, Angela Rosenbohm6, Jasmin Lisfeld7, Maja Hempel7,
Wolfgang Müller-Felber8, Claudia Catarino9, Tim M. Strom1, Thomas
Meitinger1, Thomas Klopstock9, David Thorburn10,11,12, John Christo-
doulou10,11,12, Holger Prokisch1,13, Saskia Wortmann1,2,14, Matias
Wagner1,13
1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical
University München, Munich, Germany,2Department of Pediatrics,
University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg,
Salzburg, Austria,3Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena University
Hospital, Jena, Germany,4Department of Child Neurology, University
of Giessen, Giessen, Germany,5Department of Neurology, University
of Halle/S., Halle, Germany,6Department of Neurology, University of
Ulm, Ulm, Germany,7Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,8Department of
Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurology and Social Pediatrics,
LMU-Campus Innenstadt, University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
9Department of Neurology, Friedrich Baur Institute, University
Hospital of the Ludwig- Maximilians-Universität München, Munich,Germany,10Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Royal Children ’s
Hospital, Victoria, Australia,11Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia,12Victorian Clinical
Genetics Services, Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Royal
Children ’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia,13Institute of Neurogenomics,
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany,14Radboud Center
for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, AmaliaChildren ’s Hospital, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Diagnostics for suspected mitochondrial diseases
can be challenging due to the extremely broad genetic andphenotypic spectrum as well as disease genes on both nuclear
and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Whereas most mtDNA variants
are well known with undoubted pathogenicity the growingfacilitation of next-generation sequencing technologies identi ﬁes
an increasing number of variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) in
the mtDNA. In the present study, we aim to assess thepathogenicity of mtDNA variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance.
Materials and Methods: We cumulated mtDNA variants
reported as variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in routine diagnostic
exome sequencing and targeted mtDNA next generation sequen-cing. Clinical data of the individual patients, such as symptomsand MRI abnormalities, were reviewed. An updated scoring system
as proposed by Yarham et al. as well as the ACMG criteria were
used to assess the variant ’s pathogenicity.
Results: 36 variants were collected of which 19 are listed as
“reported ”in MITOMAP and 17 are novel. Of the 19 variants which
have been reported before seven could be reclassi ﬁed to “likely
pathogenic ”, nine to “likely benign ”and three remained VUS. Of
the 17 novel variants seven were classi ﬁed as “likely pathogenic ”,
four as “likely benign ”and six remained VUS.
Conclusions: We provide evidence for pathogenicity of 14
mtDNA variants and describe six novel variants with potentialcausal association. The reevaluation of previously collected data
provides important evidence for assigning pathogenicity. Colla-
boratively combining data between institutes allows betterunderstanding of mtDNA variants and is valuable for distinguish-ing pathogenic from benign variants.
A. Winkler: None. U. Ahting: None. B. Lorenz-Depiereux:
None. R. Berutti: None. J.A. Mayr: None. R.A. Husain: None. A.
Hahn: None. L. Scholle: None. A. Rosenbohm: None. J. Lisfeld:
None. M. Hempel: None. W. Müller-Felber: None. C. Catarino:
None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. T. Klopstock: None.
D. Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou: None. H. Prokisch: None.
S. Wortmann: None. M. Wagner: None.P06.012.A Urinary extracellular vesicles and their molecular
cargo as possible biomarkers of Fabry nephropathy
Tina Levstek1, Teo Mlin šek1, Marija Holcar1, Katja Gori čar1, Metka
Lenassi1, Vita Dol žan1, Bojan Vujkovac2, Katarina Trebu šak
Podkraj šek1,3
1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Centre for
Fabry Disease, General Hospital Slovenj Gradec, Slovenj Gradec,
Slovenia,3Clinical Institute for Special Laboratory Diagnostics,
University Children ’s Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Fabry nephropathy (FN) has an important impact
on morbidity and mortality in Fabry disease (FD). Currentbiomarkers are associated with late signs of kidney damage, butthey do not predict FN progression. Urinary extracellular vesicles
(uEVs) are secreted by cells lining the urinary tract and have not
been studied in FD so far. Our aim was to evaluate the associationof uEVs and their cargo as possible early biomarkers of FN.
Methods: Small uEVs were isolated by size exclusion chroma-
tography from two urine samples per FD patient (n =21) obtained
5 years apart. We used nanoparticle tracking analysis to determineuEVs size and concentration. We analysed the expression of seven
uEVs miRNAs using miRCURY LNA miRNA PCR Assays, two of
which served for normalisation.
Results: uEVs concentration, size, and expression of miR-
200a-3p, miR-29a-3p, miR-30b-5p, miR-23a-3p, and miR-34a-5p
did not differ signi ﬁcantly between patients with and without
FN at last follow-up. However, expression of uEVs miR-200a-3p
and miR-29a-3p differed signi ﬁcantly between chronological
samples (p =0.013 and p =0.011, respectively). These differ-
ences were no longer signi ﬁcant among patients without FN.
However, when analysing only pat ients with FN, the concentra-
tion of EVs was signi ﬁcantly different (p =0.015) in addition to
the above miRNAs (p =0.021 and p =0.028, respectively). In
patients with FN, uEVs concen tration decreased, while the
relative expression of miR-200a-3p and miR-29a-3p increased inthe 5-year period.
Conclusion: uEVs miR-200a-3p and miR-29a-3p may represent
candidate biomarkers of renal function in FD. Further studies areneeded to con ﬁrm this association.
T. Levstek: None. T. Mlin šek: None. M. Holcar: None. K.
Gori čar:None. M. Lenassi: None. V. Dol žan:None. B. Vujkovac:
D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, andexpert witness); Modest; Sano ﬁGenzyme, Shire (now part of
Takeda), and Greenovation Biotech GmbH. K. Trebu šak Podkra-
jšek:D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia,
and expert witness); Modest; Takeda.
P06.013.B Genetic study of MTHFR and LPA in patients with
familial hypercholesterolemia
Elena Sevilla
1,2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jiménez1,2, Francisco Arrieta3,4,5,
Javier Sanguino1,2, Amanda Herranz-Cecilia1,2, Ana Carazo1,2, Itsaso
Losantos-García6, J M. Montejo-Gadea7, V E. Montaño-Fernández8,M
E. Rubio-Martín8, Ángela Del Pozo9,10,Sonia Rodríguez-Nóvoa1,2
1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni-
versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Group of dislipemias of genetic
origin and metabolic diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain,3Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Ramón
y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,4Ramón y Cajal HealthAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
204
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Research Institute (IRYCIS), Madrid, Spain,5CIBER of Pathophysiology
of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain,6Biostatistics
Unit. Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,7Pre-
analytic Section. Genetics Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz,IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,8Next Generation Sequencing Section. Genetics
Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,
9Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Service, Hospital Universitario La
Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,10CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: High levels of plasma Lipoprotein A [Lp(a)] and
homocysteine are considered cardiovascular disease risk factors1,2.
In patients with Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH), increases inLp(a) and homocysteine levels could contribute to the cumulativeburden of risk factors for atherosclerotic-cardiovascular disease
2.
Herein, we analyze relation of Lp(a) and homocysteine levels and
genetic polymorphisms in LPA and MTHFR genes in patients with
FH.
Patients and Methods: A total of 212 patients with probable or
deﬁnitive FH were included. MTHFR and LPA genes were analyzed
by Next Generation Sequence (NGS) using a customized panel of287 genes.
Results: The genetic analysis showed 22 variants of interest: 5 in
MTHFR and 17 in LPA. Patients with the variant
MTHFR_NM_005957.4:c.665C>T ;p.(Ala222Val) showed higher
homocysteine levels compared with patients without it (p =
0.004); patients carry LPA_NM_005577.2:c.4114C>G :p.(Lys1372Val),
LPA_NM_005577.2:c.4072C>G :p.(Lys1358Val) showed lower levels
of Lp(a) (p =0.010). The variant LPA_NM_005577.2:c.5673A>G :p.
(Ile1891Met) was observed in six patients with high levels of Lp(a).
Conclusions: In this study we found that MTHFR p.(Ala222Val)
and LPA p.(Lys1372Val) and p.(Lys1358Val) variants were asso-
ciated with homocysteine and Lp(a) levels in patients with
hypercholesterolemia. The study of variants in MTHFR and LPA
could help to better predict the cardiovascular events sincehomocystinuria and Lp(a) plasma levels have been considered ascardiovascular risk factors.
E. Sevilla: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. F. Arrieta:
None. J. Sanguino: None. A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. A. Carazo:
None. I. Losantos-García: None. J.M. Montejo-Gadea: None. V.E.
Montaño-Fernández: None. M.E. Rubio-Martín: None. Á. Del
Pozo: None. S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None.
P06.014.C Familial Multiple Lipomatosis - analyses of genetic
etiology by whole genome sequencing and delineation of theclinical phenotype
Julie Bjerrelund
1,2, Martin J. Larsen1,3, Henrik D. Schrøder4, Morten
Frost2, Moustapha Kassem2, Lilian B. Ousager1,3, Anja L.
Frederiksen5,6
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark,2Molecular Endocrinology Unit (KMEB), University
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark,3Department of Clinical
Research, Faculty of Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark,4Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark,5Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg
University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,6Clinical Institute, Aalborg
University, Aalborg, Denmark.
Introduction: Familial Multiple Lipomatosis (FML) is a rare
condition, with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance,
characterized by multiple subcutaneous lipomas. However, the
genetic background remains to be identi ﬁed. In this study we i)
evaluated the clinical phenotypes including histopathologicalanalyses and biochemical parameters and ii) performed extensive
genetic analyses.Materials and Methods: Five families including 10 subjects
with FML and two healthy family members were recruited. A trio-
or single based whole genome sequencing (WGS) (Illumina
NovaSeq 6000 platform) approach, and a standard karyotypingwere undertaken analyzing DNA from peripheral blood. A clinicalinterview, physical examination and biochemical analyses of the
patients, and histopathological analyses of lipomas were
performed.
Results: The patients presented clinical features compatible
with FML presenting few to several hundred con ﬂuent lipomas of
3-4 mm to 14 cm in diameter. Histopathological analyses
demonstrated both lipomas and angiolipomas. No patients haddiabetes or ischemic heart disease. Biochemical pro ﬁles showed
marginally elevated levels of lipids in four patients, p-LDL
cholesterol: 3.8-4.4 mmol/L (ref: <3 mmol/L). No mutual disease-
causing gene was identi ﬁed however, candidate genes involved in
preadipocyte differentiation ( ATF2, CTSB, AKT2) , adipogenesis
(CDH13) , tumour suppressor genes ( PRDM2) , and cell proliferation
(PTPRZ1, TRIM24) , were identi ﬁed in single families. In addition,
normal karyotype was observed in all probands.
Conclusions: In four families with FML we did not uncover a
single mutual genetic background. Ongoing studies, including
additional in-vitro studies of adipocyte differentiation and lipomagene expression, may discover altered signalling pathways anddetail the effects of candidate genes.
J. Bjerrelund: None. M.J. Larsen: None. H.D. Schrøder: None.
M. Frost: None. M. Kassem: None. L.B. Ousager: None. A.L.
Frederiksen: None.
P06.016.A Mutational spectrum and functional analysis of the
HGD gene variants identi ﬁed in large Russian cohort of
patients with alkaptonuria
Igor Bychkov, Andrey Nekrasov , Elena Kamenets, Marina Kurkina,
Georgiy Rychkov, Alexandra Ilyushkina, Aleksandra Filatova, Darya
Guseva, Galina Baydakova, Aleksandr Cheblokov, Mikhail Skoblov,
Ekaterina Zakharova
Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background: Alkaptonuria (AKU) is a very rare genetic disease
caused by mutations in the homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase geneHGD .D eﬁcient activity of this enzyme leads to accumulation of
homogentisic acid (HGA) and ochronosis, the darkening of tissues.
49 patients from unrelated families were suspected for AKU, basedon characteristic clinical and biochemical (the elevated level of
urine HGA) symptoms and were referred for genetic testing.
Results: The homozygous and compound heterozygous
variants in HGD were found in all patients. c.481G>A; p.
(Gly161Arg) mutation was found in 45 of 49 patients and
comprised 72.4% of identi ﬁed alleles, which is probably the
highest frequency of this mutation worldwide. 9 novel variantswere found: 6 missense, 2 splicing and 1 loss of start-codon. Thebioinformatic analysis, protein 3D-modeling and molecular
dynamics simulation were performed for the missense variants
and strongly suggest their pathogenic effect. Rare synonymousc.753C>T (p.Gly251 =) variant was found in 3 cases. cDNA analysis
and minigene assay demonstrated that c.753C>T is spliceogenic
variant, which causes cryptic splice site activation and 23 b.p.frameshifting deletion in vast majority of corresponding mRNAmolecules.
Conclusion: The analysis of the largest Russian cohort of AKU
patients allowed us to established the peculiar mutationalspectrum, characterized by signi ﬁcant prevalence of c.481G>A;
p.(Gly161Arg) mutation. The ﬁrst pathogenic synonymous variant
inHGD was functionally characterized, which draws the attentionAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
205
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608of researchers to this type of mutations. After the detailed
functional analysis and application of ACMG guidelines 9 novel
HGD variants were classi ﬁed as pathogenic or likely pathogenic.
I. Bychkov: None. A. Nekrasov: None. E. Kamenets: None. M.
Kurkina: None. G. Rychkov: None. A. Ilyushkina: None. A.
Filatova: None. D. Guseva: None. G. Baydakova: None. A.
Cheblokov: None. M. Skoblov: None. E. Zakharova: None.
P06.017.B Glycogen Storage Disease diagnosis with Clinical
Exome Sequencing that has CNV detection capabilities
Bülent Uyan ık1, Melike Ersoy2,Sezin Canbek3
1Bezmialem Vakif University Faculty of Medicine Medical Genetics
Department, Istanbul, Turkey,2Bakirkoy Dr Sadi Konuk Research and
Education Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,3Umraniye Research and
Training Hospital Medical Genetics, Fatih, Turkey.
Introduction : Glycogen Storage Diseases arise from an inherited
defect in one of the enzymes responsible for forming glycogen orfor releasing glucose from glycogen as it is needed by the body
during activity and/or between meals. Disruptions in glycogen
metabolism usually result in some level of dysfunction in the liver,muscle, heart, kidney and/or brain. Furthermore, the spectrum of
symptoms observed is very broad, depending on the affected
enzyme. There are around 16 variants of GSD, plus sub-variants,making about 25 in total. A glycogen storage disorder occurs inabout one in 20,000 to 25,000 babies. The future of gene therapy
appears promising for the GSDs, promising to provide more
efﬁcacious therapy for these disorders in the foreseeable future.
Method: We made clinical exome sequencing that con-
tains4493 genes using Illumina NextSeq-500 sequencer with
Sophia Genetics Clinical Exome Solution (CES) kit version-2. All
single nucleotide variations (SNV) and also copy number variations(CNV) have analyzed by Sophia DDM ®Software with ﬁltering
Glycogen Storage Diseasesrelated genes.
Results: In 16 patients CES revealed homozygotes SNV and one
homozygote exonic deletions. In 3 patients have compoundheterozygote SNV. One patient has a hemizygous mutation on X
linked inherited PHKA1 gene. 6 patients who have GSD
preliminary diagnosis but CES made the clear de ﬁnitive diagnosis
as different: In 4 cases has SNV, remain 2 has homozygous exonicdeletions on FBP1and LPIN1 genes.
Conclusion: CES analysis with CNV capability is ef ﬁcient and
can be recommended as ﬁrst-tier method for GlycogenStorage
Disease suspection.
B. Uyan ık:None. M. Ersoy: None. S. Canbek: None.
P06.018.C Novel deletion in PHKA2 gene in glycogen storage
disease type IXa
Amanda Herranz-Cecilia
1,2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jimémez1,2, Carmen
Camarena3, Javier Sanguino1,2, Rocío Rosas Alonso4,5, Ana Carazo1,2,
Juan Manuel Montejo-Gadea6, Ángela Del Pozo7,8, Sonia Rodríguez
Nóvoa1,2
1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department, Hospital Uni-
versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Group of “Dislipemias of Genetic
origin and Metabolic Diseases ”, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain,3Paediatric Hepatology Service, Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Madrid, Spain,4Pharmacogenetic Unit, Genetic Department,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,5Experimental Therapies
and novel biomarkers in cancer, Instituto de Investigación Sanitariadel Hospital La Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain,6Preanalytic Section.
Genetics Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid,Spain,7Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Department, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,8CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid,
Spain.
Introduction: The Glycogen storage disease (GSD) type IX is due
to a de ﬁciency in phosphorylase kinase (PHK, E.C. 2.7.1.38) activity
which incidence is 1:100,000 births being responsible for 25% of
all GSD cases. It is classi ﬁed into two types: liver PHK de ﬁciency
and muscle PHK de ﬁciency, and is caused by mutations in PHKA1 ,
PHKA2 ,PHKB and PHKG2 genes. The liver PHK de ﬁciency is the
most common, pathogenic variants in the PHKA2 gene are
responsible for up to 75% of all cases of GSD IX.
Materials and Methods: A 22-month-old male with clinical
suspicion of glycogenosis type VI or IX was referred to our
laboratory for genetic study of candidate genes by next
generation sequencing (NGS). The child presented giant hepato-megaly, increase in transaminases (AST 1740 IU/L [<95] and ALAT
960 IU/L [<35], hypertriglyceridemia, hypoglycemia, liver biopsy
with massive deposit of PAS-positive material, special “fat cheeks ”
phenotype and delayed walking (19 months).
Results: A novel hemizygous deletion extends from exon 1 to
12 of PHKA2 gene was found by NGS. This deletion is delimited by
sanger sequencing, showing a 62.7Kb deletion in X-chromosome(NC_000023.11:g.18947453_19010180del hg:19), which affectsexons 1 to 12 of the PHKA2 gene and extends upstream to the
promoter region and the adjacent gene ( ADGRG2 ).
Conclusions: The novel deletion identi ﬁed is the ﬁrst partial
deletion that affects the ﬁrst exons and promoter region of the
PHKA2 gene. Deletions in PHKA2 are not frequent, but their study
is necessary for the complete characterization of gene variants inpatients with glycogenosis.
A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. C. Rodríguez-Jimémez: None. C.
Camarena: None. J. Sanguino: None. R. Rosas Alonso: None. A.
Carazo: None. J. Montejo-Gadea: None. Á. Del Pozo: None. S.
Rodríguez Nóvoa: None.
P06.019.D Diagnosis of GM1-Gangliosidosis Type II by WES
analysis
Laura Tonelli
1, Elena Procopio2, Flavia Tubili2, Mariabeatrice
Sanchini1, Alessandra Ferlini1, Alberta Leon3, Stefania Bigoni1
1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Clinic of
Pediatric Neurology, Meyer Children ’s Hospital, Florence, Italy,
3Research & Innovation SRL, Genetic Laboratory, Padua, Italy.
Introduction: GM1-Gangliosidosis is an autosomal recessive
sphyngolipidoses due to de ﬁciency of lysosomal enzyme
β-galactosidase, encoded by GLB1 . The disease is characterized
by variable degrees of neurodegeneration and skeletal abnorm-
alities. Three clinical forms displaying different severity andvariable residual beta-galactosidase activity are known: Type I(infantile), Type II (late infantile/juvenile) and Type III (adult). To
date, Miglustat, approved for the treatment of other lysosomal
storage disorders, is used as off-label drug in GM1-Type II and it isthe only treatment known to stabilize/slow down the neurologicalprogression.
Materials and Methods: The proband was a 6 year-old female
with a normal psychomotor development until age 3, when shebegan to show language regression, slight impairment of eye
contact and motor skills. Biochemical/hematological tests,
ophthalmologic evaluation, abdominal ultrasound examinationand brain MRI were all normal. FMR1 and MECP2 molecular
analysis, Array-CGH analysis were all negative. The presence of a
psychomotor regression prompted us to proceed with WES (HiSeqAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
206
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6082500 Illumina) for intellectual disabilities in silico gene panel
testing.
Results: AGLB1 compound heterozygous genotype for the
missense pathogenic variants c.152T>A (p.I51N), inherited fromher mother, and c.602G>A (p.R201H), inherited from her father,was detected. Both variants were already reported in patients with
GM1-Type II, leading to 3-5% of residual enzyme activity. The
proband was referred to the speci ﬁc Center for drug administra-
tion options.
Conclusions: WES allowed an early diagnosis of GM1-
Gangliosidosis which is compulsory for clinical trial enrollment
and for allowing therapeutic approach as the off-label use ofMiglustat.
L. Tonelli: None. E. Procopio: None. F. Tubili: None. M.
Sanchini: None. A. Ferlini: None. A. Leon: None. S. Bigoni: None.
P06.020.A Recurrent hydrops fetalis, a long journey to
diagnosis
Sana Skouri
1, Ines Ouertani1, Soumeya Bekri2, Catherine Caillaud3,
Ridha M ’rad1
1Departement of Medical Genetics, Charles Nicolle Hopistal, Tunis,
Tunisia,2Department of Metabolic Biochemistry, Rouen University
Hospital, Rouen, France,3Biochemical, Metabolomic, and Proteomic
Department, Necker University Hospital Group, Paris, France.
Introduction : Hydrops fetalis affects 1/1700 to 1/3000 pregnan-
cies. It is mainly a non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). Inborn
errors of metabolism account for 1.3% of affected individuals.Lysosomal storage are incriminated in up to 29.6% of NIHF cases.We report the history of a family with recurrent hydrops fetalis
revealing a mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII).
Materials and Methods: The performed analysis were: electro-
phoresis of glycoaminoglycans in amniotic ﬂuid, ß-D-glucuroni-
dase activity in chorionic villus and GUSB gene sequencing in
chorionic villus samples and in maternal blood.
Results: This is the case of a consanguineous couple with the
history of an unclassi ﬁed NIHF.
Aﬁrst prenatal diagnosis was performed for a second case of
fetalis hydrops. The glycoaminoglycans pro ﬁle in the amniotic
liquid was abnormal, though not speci ﬁc of a particular MPS. The
fetopathological examination was strongly suggestive of MPS VII.
An increased nuchal translucency motivated a second prenatal
diagnosis, showing an accumulation of dermatan sulfate andchondroitin sulfate. The combination of these ﬁndings supported
the hypothesis of an underlying MPS VII. This diagnosis was ﬁnally
conﬁrmed, in another case of NIHF, by the absence of beta-D-
glucuronidase activity in the amniotic ﬂuid.
For the last pregnancy, molecular analysis revealed a novel
variant in the exon 7 of the GUSB gene, c.1157A>G (p.Tyr386Cys)
predicted to be deleterious.
Conclusion: This case highlights how challenging investigating
NIHF etiology could be. Accurate diagnosis of lysosomal storage
disorders like MPS VII is essential to give the family an adequate
genetic counselling.
S. Skouri: None. I. Ouertani: None. S. Bekri: None. C. Caillaud:
None. R. M ’rad: None.
P06.021.B Mutations in MCAT cause a nuclear LHON-like optic
neuropathy
Sylvie Gerber
1, Christophe Orssaud2, Josseline Kaplan1,Jean-Michel
Institut Imagine Rozet11Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163,
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and Paris Descartes University,
75015 Paris, France., PARIS, France,2Unité Ophtalmologie, Hôpital
Européen Georges-Pompidou HEGP, 75015 Paris, France & Centre deRéférence des Maladies Rares en Ophtalmologie (OPHTARA). Serviced’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris,
France., PARIS, France.
Pathologic variants in the malonyl- CoA-acyl carrier protein transacy-
lase ( MCAT ) a nuclear gene encoding a mitochondrial protein
involved in fatty acid biogenesis have been reported in a unique
family from China including two siblings affected with an insidiousoptic nerve degeneration in childhood, leading to blindness in theﬁrst decade of life. Here, analyzing 51 families with negative
molecular diagnosis tests from a cohort of 200 families with
hereditary optic neuropathy (HON), we identi ﬁed two novel MCAT
mutations in a female patient who presented with acute, sudden,
bilateral, yet asymmetric, central visual loss at the age of 20-years.
This phenotype is reminiscent of the maternally-inherited Leberhereditary optic neuropathy (LHON ), the existence of which has been
described only very recently along with causative variants in NDUFS2
and DNAJC30 ,r e s p e c t i v e l y .O u r ﬁnding expands the phenotypic
presentation of MCAT mutations and the genetic heterogeneity ofnuclear LHON-like phenotypes. Although MCAT pathologic variants
are very uncommon, this gene should be investigated in HON
patients, irrespective of the disease presentation.
S. Gerber: None. C. Orssaud: None. J. Kaplan: None. J.I. Rozet:
None.
P06.022.C Biallelic variants in SPART cause a mitochondrial
dysfunction and cell cycle arrest in Troyer Syndrome
Chiara Diquigiovanni
1, Antje Kampmeier2, Elisabetta Cuna3, Nicola
Rizzardi3, Irene Liparulo3, Francesca Bianco4, T. G. Haack5,M .
Bertrand5, K Khuller2, A. Kuechler2, Christian Bergamini3, Elena
Bonora4
1University of Bologna, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
DIMEC, Bologna, Italy,2Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany,
3Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology (FaBit), Bologna, Italy,
4Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, DIMEC, Bologna, Italy,
5Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Angewandte Genomik,
Tübingen, Germany.
Mutations in SPART (OMIM *607111) cause Troyer syndrome
(OMIM #275900), a recessive form of spastic paraplegia resulting in
lower extremity spasticity and weakness, degeneration of
corticospinal tract axons, short stature, and cognitive defects.SPART encodes for Spartin, a multifunctional protein consisting of
an N-terminal domain, interacting with microtubules for protein
trafﬁcking, and a C-terminal senescence domain. We previously
found that a loss-of-function mutation in SPART caused mitochon-
drial dysfunctions characterized by Complex I impairment andaltered pyruvate metabolism. Performing whole-exome sequen-
cing two novel compound heterozygous missense variants were
identi ﬁed in SPART , in a patient presenting muscle weakness and
short stature. The patient ’sﬁbroblasts showed an altered
mitochondrial network, decreased OXPHOS activity, increased
mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial membrane
potential, vs. control ﬁbroblasts. Consistent with Complex I
impairment, an increase in NADH levels, extracellular pyruvate
and glycolytic metabolism was observed in mutant cells. Since
Spartin interacts with GRP75, modulating the import of mitochon-drial proteins, we performed co-immunoprecipitation assay in thepatient ’sﬁbroblasts, and found that there was no interactionAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
207
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608between GRP75 and the mutant SPART. Immuno ﬂuorescence
staining in control and patient-derived ﬁbroblasts revealed also a
marked nuclear localization of Spartin in the mutant cells, whereas
in controls it was evenly distributed in the cells. Noticeably, cellcycle analysis revealed that patient ’sﬁbroblasts were retained in S
phase. In summary, we report that biallelic missense variants in
SPART lead to a different cellular distribution of the protein, might
alter import and assembly of nuclear-encoded mitochondrialproteins, and converge in a severe mitochondrial dysfunction.
C. Diquigiovanni: None. A. Kampmeier: None. E. Cuna: None.
N. Rizzardi: None. I. Liparulo: None. F. Bianco: None. T.G. Haack:
None. M. Bertrand: None. K. Khuller: None. A. Kuechler: None. C.
Bergamini: None. E. Bonora: None.
P06.023.D <Functional analysis of novel HNF1A variants found
in MODY patients in Slovakia>
Terezia Valkovicova
1, Zuzana Dobiasova1, Juraj Stanik2,1, Martina
Skopkova1, Daniela Gasperikova1
1Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia,22nd Department
of Pediatrics, National Institute of Children ’s Diseases and Faculty of
Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
HNF1A-MODY is a type of monogenic diabetes caused by
heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the transcription factorHNF1 α. Due to the increased number of novel variants in the
HNF1A gene, the functional characterisation of variants on protein
level is necessary for better prediction of their pathogenicity. We
performed functional analysis of 6 novel variants and 2 variantspreviously described as VUS identi ﬁed in 9 Slovak families.
Transactivation activity using luciferase assay, DNA-binding using
EMSA, and nuclear localisation using immuno ﬂuorescence of
mutated HNF1 αwere compared with the wild-type HNF1 αand a
set of positive and negative controls. Four variants (p. Tyr163Asn,
p. Pro224Leu, p. Leu232Pro, and p. Asn270Ser) located in the DNA
binding domain (DBD) of HNF1 αrevealed signi ﬁcantly reduced <
40% transactivation activity of the WT-HNF1 α. One DBD-variant (p.
Asn140Asp) had activity decreased only to ~61% and all 3 tested
variants located in the transactivation domain (p. His469Tyr, p.
His483Arg, p. Gln541His) retained more than 80% activitycompared to the WT-HNF1 α. Three DBD-variants had decreased
DNA binding ability (<40% of the WT-HNF1 α), only the p.
Pro224Leu variant had ~100% binding. Nuclear localisation was
not signi ﬁcantly altered in any of examined mutated proteins. We
have con ﬁrmed the pathogenicity of four novel HNF1A variants
located in the region encoding HNF1 α-DBD domain using
functional studies. In three cases, decreased transactivationactivity could be explained by decreased DNA binding. None ofthe tested variants located in the transactivation domain were
found to have effect on the HNF1 αactivity. Supported by: VEGA
0211/18, VEGA 0131/21
T. Valkovicova: None. Z. Dobiasova: None. J. Stanik: None. M.
Skopkova: None. D. Gasperikova: None.
P06.024.A Functional characterization of 3 ’UTR LDLR variants
in Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Javier Sanguino
1,2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jiménez1,3, Jose María
Mostaza4, Elena Sevilla1,2, Amanda Herranz-Cecilia1,2, Ana Carazo1,2,
Olga Pernía5,6, Carlos Rodríguez-Antolín5,6, Inmaculada Ibáñez5,6,
Sonia Rodríguez-Nóvoa1,2
1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni-
versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Group of dislipemias of geneticorigin and metabolic diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain,3Group of dislipemias of genetic origin and metabolic
diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
4Internal Medicine Service, Hospital Carlos III, HULP, Madrid, Spain,
5Epigenetics laboratory, INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La PAZ,
Madrid, Spain,6Experimental Therapies and novel biomarkers in
cancer, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital La Paz
(IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH;MIM#143890) is
mainly caused by pathogenic variants in LDLR gene (>90% of
cases1) and variants in APOB ,PCSK9 and LDLRAP1 (10% of cases).
However, variants in these genes are only found in 60-80% ofpatients with a de ﬁnitive diagnosis of FH2. Most of variants are
located in exonic regions. In this study, we selected and
performed in vitro characterization of variants in non-codingregion 3 ’UTR of LDLR , a non-canonical region not screened in
routine and that could contribute to genetic diagnostic.
Materials and methods: Analysis of the region 3´UTR LDLR of
patients remitted to our center was performed by NGS using acustomized panel of 198 genes. Variants with population
frequency less 0,5%, were selected for in vitro characterization.
The 3 ’UTR LDLR variants were generate into the expression vector
LDLR _NM_000527-Human-cDNA-luciferase reporter by site-
directed-mutagenesis and transfected in cell line HepG2. 3 ’UTR
LDLR expression was quanti ﬁed by luminescence assay
3.
Results: Five 3 ’UTR LDLR variants were selected for character-
ization. The variant at LDLR ,c.*653G>C showed a 40% less
luciferase activity than WT. LDLR ,c.*19G>A ,c.*503C>T ,c.*517C>A
and c.*1227C>T did not show signi ﬁcant differences in luciferase
activity with respect to wild type (WT).
Conclusions: In this study, we found that c.*653G>C variant
reduce the expression of LDLR being probably the cause of the
hypercholesterolemia in our patient. The 3 ’UTR region of LDLR
gene should be explored in order to ﬁnd variants with the
potential for reducing the expression of LDLR. Further studies
should be performed to clarify the involved mechanism.
J. Sanguino: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. J. Mostaza:
None. E. Sevilla: None. A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. A. Carazo:
None. O. Pernía: None. C. Rodríguez-Antolín: None. I. Ibáñez:
None. S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None.
P06.025.B The rs113883650 variant of SLC7A5 (LAT1) gene
may alter brain vulnerability to hyperphenylalaninemia
Miroslaw Bik-Multanowski , Kinga Bik-Multanowska, Iwona Betka,
Anna Madetko-Talowska
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
Introduction: In the individuals diagnosed with phenylketonuria
(PKU) brain damage can be caused by the absence of effectivedietary treatment. Nevertheless, several reports exist describinginterindividual differences of the brain vulnerability to the toxic
inﬂuence of hyperphenylalaninemia. This might result from
alteration of the kinetics of phenylalanine across the blood-brainbarrier, which is regulated by the LAT1 transporter.
Patients and Methods: We assessed the effect of carriership of
the common variant rs113883650 of the SLC7A5 (LAT1) gene on
brain phenylalanine content. We used magnetic resonancespectroscopy to measure the intensity of the brain phenylalanine
signal in a group of 30 PKU patients aged 12-25 years. Next, we
compared the results obtained in carriers of the rs113883650variant with the wild-type individuals.
Results: Genotyping of the SLC7A5 (LAT1) gene identi ﬁed 17
wild type individuals, 12 heterozygotes and one homozygote withAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
208
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608regard to the rs113883650 variant. On the day of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy examination, all the patients revealed
very high blood phenylalanine concentration that is typical
for untreated PKU. The mean intensity of the brain phenylalaninesignal was signi ﬁcantly higher in the carriers of the rs113883650
variant compared to the wild-type individuals (p =0.0022).
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings show that carriership of the
rs113883650 variant of the SLC7A5 gene has a potential toincrease the concentration of brain phenylalanine in PKU patientswith severe hyperphenylalaninemia. This could to some extent
explain the unusually mild clinical course in some untreated
patients. The study was sponsored by the National Science Centre,Poland (project number 2018/29/B/NZ5/01215).
M. Bik-Multanowski: None. K. Bik-Multanowska: None. I.
Betka: None. A. Madetko-Talowska: None.
P06.026.C ZOEMBA: combining metabolomics and genomics
data to solve the unsolved
Machteld M. Oud
1, Saskia N. van der Crabben2, Elise A. Ferreira2,
Marielle Alders2, Judith J. Jans3, Nanda M. Verhoeven3, Karlien L. M.
Coene1, Leo A. J. Kluijtmans1, Udo F. H. Engelke1, Eduard Struys2,
Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers1, Saskia B. Wortmann1, Hans R. Waterham2,
Mirjam Langeveld2, Clara D. M. van Karnebeek1
1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Amsterdam UMC, Amster-
dam, Netherlands,3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
Introduction : Inherited metabolic disorders (IMD) are rare
disorders caused by defects in biochemical processes. Earlydiagnosis of IMDs is key as many are amenable to treatment.
Despite diagnostic advances, ~50% of patients remain undiag-
nosed. ZOEMBA is a Dutch multicenter study of our UMDconsortium that aims to establish a diagnosis in 500 IMD patients
via integrated multi-omics analysis.
Materials and Methods : Patient inclusion criteria are: clinical or
biochemical suspicion of an IMD and no diagnosis after extensivegenetic and metabolic work-up. Deep phenotyping, WES re-
analysis, WGS analysis and untargeted metabolomics will be
performed. Leads resulting from metabolomics are checked in thegenomics dataset and vice versa to pinpoint the underlyingpathophysiology.
Results :I nt h e ﬁrst year, we enrolled 21 patients with a
carefully characterized IMD phenotype for whom WES re-analysis and untargeted metabolomics was performed. Re-
analysis of WES data has yielded a diagnosis in two patients. In a
girl with neuroregression, WES re- analysis revealed two bi-allelic
variants in a recently identi ﬁed disease gene TMPRSS9 .S e c o n d l y ,
WES re-analysis for an adult male has revealed two homozygous
variants in ApoE that most likely explain the patient ’s phenotype.
Conclusions : We were able to show the bene ﬁt of deep
phenotyping and WES re-analysis with a yield of 10%. We aim toenroll 500 patients and complete the dataset with WGS and
metabolomics data to explore the added value of these
technologies. Altogether, this will enable us to discover novelgenes, phenotypes and evaluate the usefulness of integratedmulti-omics data in clinical practice.
M.M. Oud: None. S.N. van der Crabben: None. E.A. Ferreira:
None. M. Alders: None. J.J. Jans: None. N.M. Verhoeven: None.
K.L.M. Coene: None. L.A.J. Kluijtmans: None. U.F.H. Engelke:
None. E. Struys: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. S.B. Wortmann:
None. H.R. Waterham: None. M. Langeveld: None. C.D.M. van
Karnebeek: None.P06.027.D Novel missense variant in the INSR gene in Russian
patient with metabolic condition: correction of the diagnosis
Natalya V. Tarasenko
1,2, Nadezda P. Babushkina1, Tatiyana V.
Saprina2, Tatiyana A. Milovanova2, Kseniya V. Trubchenko2, Maria V.
Golubenko1, Maria S. Nazarenko1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, RussianFederation,2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: We have performed clinical exome sequencing in a
patient with preliminary diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes of
the young subtype 2 (MODY2, OMIM 125851). Onset of the
disease occurred at the age of 36 with episodes of hyper- andhypo-glycaemia.
Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from the blood
leucocytes of the patient. Massive parallel sequencing was
performed on NextSeq550 (Illumina) with Clinical Exome Solu-tion™exome panel (SOPHiA GENETICS). Data analysis and variant
annotations were done with SOPHiA AI ™and SOPHiA DDM ™
(SOPHiA GENETICS).
Results: No pathogenic mutations were revealed in the genes
which are casual for MODY subtypes (OMIM 606391 - HNF4A ,
HNF1A ,GCK,PDX1 ,HNF1B ,NEUROD1 ,KLF11 ,CEL,PAX4 ,INS,BLK,
ABCC8 ,KCNJ11 ,APPL1 ,PCBD1 ,TRMT10A ). However, there were
several variants in other genes that require further investigation. Inparticular, heterozygous nonsynonymous substitution in the INSR
gene (GRCh37/hg19, chr19 (19p13.2):7174702, c.DNA: c.1015T>C,
protein: p.Cys339Arg) was identi ﬁed, and it was con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing. This substitution is absent in ExAc databaseand has been classi ﬁed as variant with uncertain signi ﬁcance. To
conﬁrm absence of the variant in the populations, we have
genotyped population samples of European origin (N =327) and
of Asian origin (Tuvinians and Yakuts, N =224) consisting of
peoples living in Siberia. There were no occurrence of this
substitution in the samples.
Conclusion: It is known that INSR mutations may cause several
genetic syndromes. Heterozygous status for the Cys339Arg variant
together with clinical symptoms suggests that the patient has
autosomal dominant familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia type5 (OMIM 609968).
N.V. Tarasenko: None. N.P. Babushkina: None. T.V. Saprina:
None. T.A. Milovanova: None. K.V. Trubchenko: None. M.V.
Golubenko: None. M.S. Nazarenko: None.
P06.028.A Pancreatic expression of genes connected to
glucose metabolism - nutrigenetic regulation
Ivelina Mihaleva , Margarita Strokova, Eliana Dimova, Pavlina
Gateva, Ivanka Dimova
Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background: Ketogenic diet (KD) is low-carbohydrate, high-fat
diet used for different health-related effects. It has positive effectson cardiovascular parameters, affects body adiposity and
improves features of metabolic syndrome in humans. Although
studies evaluating the ef ﬁcacy and metabolic effects of KD have
increased recently, the effects of macronutrient-controlled dietsremain controversial. The objective of our study was to analyze
the expression levels of genes related to glucose metabolism/
insulin action, in pancreas of mice fed with KD with and withoutVitamin D for 1 month compared to mice on normal diet.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
209
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and methods: Separation of two groups of mice of at
least n =10 on a standard diet and on a KD +/- Vitamin D. After 1
month, RNA was isolated from pancreas and after reverse
transcription, the following genes were analyzed by real-timePCR: INS,GCK,ABCC8 and KCNJ11 .
Results: We established a signi ﬁcant decrease in the pancreatic
expression levels for all genes, especially Insulin gene, after KD.
Gene Relative pancreatic expression (RQ)
Ins1 0.1
ABCC8 0.21
KCNJ11 0.32
Gck 0.54
After KD with Vitamin D, we revealed an increase in pancreatic
expression of Insulin gene compared to group of KD only (RQ =
0.35), not reaching the level in controls.
Conclusion: KD signi ﬁcantly reduces the insulin expression in
the pancreas, which could be increased by administration of
Vitamin D.
Acknowledgement: BSNF, Contract No КП-06-Н33/10, 2019.
I. Mihaleva: None. M. Strokova: None. E. Dimova: None. P.
Gateva: None. I. Dimova: None.
P06.030.C The Chylomicronemia Syndrome: a case of familial
partial lipodystrophy type 3 associated with a pathogenic
variant in PPARG
Sonia Rodriguez-Novoa1, Carmen Rodríguez Jiménez1, Javier San-
guino1, A. Viejo-LLorente2, A.E. Kerguelén-Fuentes2, D. Hernández-
Maraver2, A. Barros-Campos3,P. Martínez-Hernández4
1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni-
versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Group of dislipemias of genetic
origin and metabolic diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain,2Apheresis Unit, Hematology Depart-
ment, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain,
3Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, IdiPAZ, Hospital
Universitario La Paz /& CIBERER, Unit 753, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.,Madrid, Spain,4Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: The Chylomicronemia Syndrome (QS) is character-
ized by severe hypertriglyceridemia (>1000 mg/dL or >11.3 mmol/L), abdominal pain, recurrent acute pancreatitis, eruptive xantho-
mas, and lipemia retinalis. Its causes are variable including
secondary forms of hypertriglyceridemia, (multifactorial chylomi-cronemia syndrome-MFCS); LPL de ﬁciency (familial chylomicrone-
mia syndrome, FCS), or familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD). We
present the case of a patient with QS associated with FPLD.
Patient and methods: A 22-years-old African American female,
was referred due to severe hypertriglyceridemia and eleven
episodes of acute pancreatitis (the ﬁrst one at age 15 yrs), with
highest and lowest triglycerides levels of 6009 mg/dl (67.9 mmol/L) and 129 mg/dL (1.46 mmol/L), respectively. She had generalizedacanthosis nigricans (neck, axillae, elbows, groins and knees), BMI
21.38kg/m2, and reduced fat in the face, upper and lower
extremities. She was treated with low-fat diet, insulin, ﬁbrates,
omega-3 fatty-acids and several sessions of apheresis duringpancreatitis episodes. Adherence to diet was irregular, she drank
beer intermittently, and during the last year she also used oral
contraceptives for six months. Targeted NGS analysis wasperformed with a customized panel including 500 genes related
with metabolic diseases.
Results: A heterozygous missense pathogenic variant in PPARG ,
NM_015869.4:c.452A>G, p.(Tyr151Cys), previously associated withFPLD type 3, was identi ﬁed.
Conclusion: Patients with PPARG mutations may develop
lipodystrophy due to defective adipocyte differentiation. In
previous studies, the p.(Tyr151Cys) PPARG variant showed
impaired DNA-binding capacity and hence reduced transcriptionalactivity. Although FPLD is a rare condition, it should be taken into
consideration in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia and
recurrent pancreatitis.
S. Rodriguez-Novoa: None. C. Rodríguez Jiménez: None. J.
Sanguino: None. A. Viejo-LLorente: None. A. Kerguelén-
Fuentes: None. D. Hernández-Maraver: None. A. Barros-
Campos: None. P. Martínez-Hernández: None.
P06.031.D The utility of reverse phenotyping: A case of
lysinuric protein intolerance presented with childhoodosteoporosis
Enise Avci Durmusalioglu
1, Esra Isik1, Durdugul Ayyildiz Emecen1,
Damla Goksen Simsek2, Samim Ozen2, Huseyin Onay3, Melis Kose1,
Tahir Atik1, Sukran Darcan2, Ozgur Cogulu1,Ferda Ozkinay1
1Pediatric Genetics Subdivision, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey,2Department of Pediatric
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University,
Izmir, Turkey,33Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.
Introduction: Childhood osteoporosis is often a consequence of a
chronic disease or its treatment. Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI),
a rare secondary cause of the osteoporosis, is an autosomalrecessive disorder with clinical features ranging from nearly
normal growth with minimal protein intolerance to severe
multisystemic involvement. This disorder is caused by biallelicmutations in the SLC7A7 gene. Due to the clinical variability of the
disease, diagnosis can be dif ﬁcult; with misdiagnosis also a
possibility. We report a case diagnosed to have LPI using a Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel and evaluate the utility ofreverse phenotyping.
Case Report: Aﬁfteen-year-old-boy with an initial diagnosis of
osteogenesis imperfecta, was referred to our clinic due to a
number of atypical ﬁndings accompanying to osteoprosis such as
splenomegaly and bicytopenia, He was the ﬁrst child of
nonconsanguineous parents; however, his parents originated
from the same village. On physical examination, he had asthenicbody build and splenomegaly. His laboratory tests showedleukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated serum lactate dehydro-
genase and ferritin levels. Bone marrow aspiration revealed a
hemophagocytosis. A NGS panel (TruSight One Sequencing Panel)was performed and a novel homozygous mutation of c.257G>A (p.Gly86Glu) in SLC7A7 gene (NM_001126106.2) was detected. A
reevaluation of patient ’s past medical history and phenotypic
features revealed that he avoided eating protein-rich food whileexperiencing recurrent diarrhea attacks during infancy. Laboratorytests showed excess urinary excretion of cationic amino acids
supporting lysinuric protein intolerance.
Conclusion: Reverse phenotyping using a targeted gene panel
shortens the diagnostic process in patients with mild phenotypes.
E. Avci Durmusalioglu: None. E. Isik: None. D. Ayyildiz
Emecen: None. D. Goksen Simsek: None. S. Ozen: None. H.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
210
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Onay: None. M. Kose: None. T. Atik: None. S. Darcan: None. O.
Cogulu: None. F. Ozkinay: None.
P06.032.A Extended phenotype studies in carriers and
potentially affected individuals of selected lysosomal storage
diseases among the participants of the Estonian Biobank
Ellen Rebecca Kruuse1, Marili Palover1, Margit Nõukas1, Tiit
Nikopensius1, Neeme Tõnisson1,2
1Estonian Biobank, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia,2Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
Background: Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are individually
rare, but collectively constitute a considerable part of hereditarymetabolic diseases. Due to low prevalence and phenotypic
variability of individual LSDs, they may be underdiagnosed or
misdiagnosed, especially in atypic late onset cases.
We have selected a subset of LSDs based on the availability of
speci ﬁc enzyme replacement therapy: Pompe disease ( GAA gene),
Fabry disease ( GLA gene), Gaucher disease ( GBA gene) and
Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I ( IDUA gene).
The aim of this study is to: i) identify individuals with a possible
genetic risk for LSDs, ii) assess the phenotype by enzyme analysis
in biobank participants and iii) to disclose relevant ﬁndings to
individuals at genetic risk for LSDs.
Results: By using ’genotype- ﬁrst’approach, we screened the
cohort of Estonian Biobank (n =150K) for pathogenic or
potentially pathogenic variants in the respective genes. Weidenti ﬁed 11 individuals with potentially clinically relevant
ﬁndings: 1 compound heterozygote and 5 alternative homo-
zygotes for the GAA, 1 alternative homozygote for the GBA and 4
hemizygotes for the GLA gene.
Conclusions: We have set up a framework for re-contacting
biobank participants, in order to determine the phenotype by
clinical diagnoses and enzyme activity analyses and return ofgenetic information upon consent. LSDs are a heterogenousgroup of diseases, that would bene ﬁt from further studies using
the biobank data.
This work was supported by EU project 2014-2020.4.01.15-0012, by
Estonian Research Council (PUT PRG555 to NT) and by SP1GI18534grant from Sano ﬁAventis Ltd .
E. Kruuse: None. M. Palover: None. M. Nõukas: None. T.
Nikopensius: None. N. Tõnisson: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Sano ﬁAventis Ltd.
P06.035.D Modern approaches to the diagnosis of Methylma-
lonic academia/aciduria
Vita Antsupova
1, Iryna Lastivka2, Larysa Sheiko3, Ljudmila Brisevac3,
Iana Ushko1, Volodymyr Davydiuk4
1Bohomolets National medical university, Kyiv, Ukraine,2Bukovinian
State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine,3Shupyk National
Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine,
4National Pirogov Memorial Medical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine.
Introduction: Methylmalonic acidemia/aciduria (MMA) is a
genetically heterogeneous inherited disease from the group of
organic acidemias. Clinically manifests metabolic ketoacidosis,
mental and physical retardation. Differential molecular diagnosisof MMA is important for the choice of treatment tactics.Materials and Methods: A clinical case of methylmalonic
acidemia. Routine and modern biochemical diagnostic methods
(tandem mass spectrometry (TMS), gas chromatography (GC), high
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)) were used toestablish the diagnosis; molecular genetic research.
Results: An 18-month-old girl was referred to a geneticist.
Preliminary diagnosis "Metabolic disorders of unclear genesis,
ketoacidotic syndrome, neuroarthritic constitution, anemia of theﬁrst degree." The girl underwent a comprehensive examination,
which included determination of the pro ﬁle of blood acylcarni-
tines by TMS, blood amino acids by HPLC; determination of renal
excretion of organic acids by GC; determination of the level oflactate, blood ammonia, glycemic pro ﬁle; molecular genetic
research. An increase in the concentration of propionylcarnitine,
glycine, cystine and Proline was detected in the blood; the
presence of methylmalonic acid in the urine. A molecular geneticstudy was performed, a mutation in c.655A>T (p.Asn219Tyr) of the
MUT gene was detected. Final diagnosis: Methylmalonic acidemia
vitamin B12-intact form.
Conclusions: Diagnosis of MMA presents certain dif ﬁculties due
to the clinical heterogeneity of symptoms and nonspeci ﬁc
manifestation of the disease. For the diagnosis of MMA, the most
informative are the data of the pro ﬁle of blood acylcarnitines and
the determination of the presence of MMC in the urine. The ﬁnal
diagnosis is based on the results of molecular genetic studies.
V. Antsupova: None. I. Lastivka: None. L. Sheiko: None. L.
Brisevac: None. I. Ushko: None. V. Davydiuk: None.
P06.036.A A novel homozygous missense mutation in UQCR-
C2associated with severe encephalomyopathy, mitochondrialcomplex III assembly defect and activation of mitochondrial
protein quality control
Daniela Burska
1, Lukas Stiburek1, Jana Krizova1, Marie Vanisova1,
Vaclav Martinek2, Tomas Honzik1, Jiri Zeman1, Hana Hansikova1,
Marketa Tesarova1
1Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in
Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic,22Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
The mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) complex III (CIII)
associates with complexes I and IV (CI and CIV) into super-
complexes. We identi ﬁed a novel homozygous missense mutation
(c.665G>C ;p.Gly222Ala) in UQCRC2 coding for structural subunit
Core 2 in a patient with severe encephalomyopathy. The structural
data suggest that the Gly222Ala exchange might result in analtered spatial arrangement in part of the UQCRC2 subunit, whichcould impact speci ﬁc protein-protein interactions. Accordingly, we
have found decreased levels of CIII and accumulation of CIII-
speci ﬁc subassemblies devoid of UQCRC1, UQCRC2, and UQCRFS1
subunits in the patient ’sﬁbroblasts. The lack of UQCRC1 subunit-
containing subassemblies could result from an impaired interac-
tion with mutant UQCRC2
Gly222Alaand subsequent degradation of
both subunits by mitochondrial proteases. Observed elevatedamount of matrix CLPP protease suggests the activation of themitochondrial protein quality control machinery in UQCRC2-
Gly222Ala ﬁbroblasts. Data revealed a rate-limiting character of
CIII availability for the supercomplex formation, accompanied by adiminished amount of CI. Furthermore, we found impaired
electron ﬂux between CI and CIII in skeletal muscle and ﬁbroblasts
of the patient. The ectopic expression of wild-type UQCRC2 inpatient cells rescued maximal respiration rate, demonstrating thedeleterious effect of the mutation on MRC. Our study expands the
phenotypic spectrum of CIII Core protein de ﬁciency, providesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
211
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608insight into the assembly pathway of human CIII, and supports the
requirement of assembled CIII for a proper accumulation of CI. This
work was supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic
(grants AZV 17-30965A, NV19-07-00149, RVO VFN 64165) .
D. Burska: None. L. Stiburek: None. J. Krizova: None. M.
Vanisova: None. V. Martinek: None. T. Honzik: None. J. Zeman:
None. H. Hansikova: None. M. Tesarova: None.
P06.037.B Prevalence and clinical prediction of mitochondrial
disorders in a large neuropediatric cohort
Amelie T. van der Ven1, Jessika Johannsen1, Matias Wagner2,
Konstantinos Tsiakas1, Tatjana Bierhals1, Fanny Kortüm1, Davor
Lessel1, Theresia Herget1, Katja Kloth1, Jasmin Lisfeld1, Tasja Scholz1,
Nadia Obi1, Saskia Wortmann2, Holger Prokisch2, Christian Kubisch1,
Jonas Denecke1, René Santer1, Maja Hempel1
1UKE Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,2TUM Munich,
Munich, Germany.
Introduction: Mitochondriopathies constitute a clinically impor-
tant subgroup of (neuro-)pediatric disorders. Early identi ﬁcation of
mitochondriopathies is desirable due to a potentially rapid clinicaldecline and the availability of treatment options in selected
conditions. Identi ﬁed patients should preferentially be selected for
expedited genetic diagnostics yielding molecular diagnosis withina few days in comparison to several weeks when conducted in aroutine clinical setting. We here determined the prevalence of
molecularly con ﬁrmed mitochondriopathies in a large cohort of
undiagnosed neuropediatric patients and compared an estab-lished clinical rating tool (MDC) as well as a newly composed,simpli ﬁed version of the existing tool (MDC-NP) in regard to their
predictive capabilities.
Methods: 491 unrelated children with neurological symptoms
underwent a comprehensive diagnostic work-up including exome
sequencing. Identi ﬁed disease-genes were dichotomized depend-
ing on relevance to mitochondrial function. Rating tools wereapplied using standardized phenotype information collected foreach patient.
Results: The molecular solve rate within our cohort was 51%. In
12% of solved cases, a mitochondriopathy-associated gene wasfound to harbor the disease-causing variant. The MDC scorepredicted the underlying mitochondriopathy-associated genotype
with a sensitivity of 0.59 (0.41-0.75) and a speci ﬁcity of 0.99 (0.96-
1.00). The newly composed MDC-NP-tool, in contrast, exhibited asigni ﬁcantly higher sensitivity (0.83; 0.65-0.93) and a speci ﬁcity of
0.96 (0.92-0.98).
Conclusion : Mitochondriopathies constitute a numerically
signi ﬁcant subgroup of neuropediatric patients. We introduce
the MDC-NP score as simpli ﬁed and sensitive bedside screening
tool for rapid identi ﬁcation of children with mitochondriopathies.
Exome Sequencing was partially funded by BMBF and GENOMIT(mitoNET 01GM1113C and 01GM1207 to H.P.).
A.T. van der Ven: None. J. Johannsen: None. M. Wagner:
None. K. Tsiakas: None. T. Bierhals: None. F. Kortüm: None. D.
Lessel: None. T. Herget: None. K. Kloth: None. J. Lisfeld: None. T.
Scholz: None. N. Obi: None. S. Wortmann: None. H. Prokisch:
None. C. Kubisch: None. J. Denecke: None. R. Santer: None. M.
Hempel: None.
P06.038.C A novel mutation of PDP1 gene in a pediatric patient
Flavia Anne-Elise Szekely
1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Cristian Zim-
bru3, Nicoleta Andreescu2, Maria Puiu21Emergency Clinical County Hospital “Pius Branzeu ”, Timisoara,
Romania,2Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy “Victor Babes ”, Regional Center of Medical Genetics Timis,
Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu ”, part of ERN
ITHACA, Timisoara, Romania,3Center of Genomic Medicine, Uni-
versity of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes ”, 4. Department of
Automation and Applied Informatics Politehnica University, Timi-
soara, Romania.
Introduction : Mitochondrial diseases are a group of heteroge-
neous inherited metabolic diseases, caused by a dysfunction of
the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Mitochondria is an intracel-lular organelle, which produce the energy molecule storageadenosine triphosphate. We aim to present a novel pathogenic
variant in PDP1 gene in a pediatric patient.
Material and methods: A 2-year-old female patient presented
two episodes of coma due to metabolic acidosis associated with
high level of lactic acid, hyperglycemia, hypothermia, without
inﬂammatory syndrome. Acylcarnitine pro ﬁles were altered in the
patient. Biological sample (blood) was collected and NextGeneration Sequencing was performed, using Illumina TruSight
One sequencing panel, which includes 4813 genes.
Results: Next generation sequencing analysis revealed a homo-
zygous missense variant NM_001161780.1 (PDP1):c.1288C>T. Thestopgain variant is previously unreported, has very low frequency in
population and creates a premature stop codon NP_001155252.1:p.
(Arg430Ter), thus has been classi ﬁed as pathogenic.
Conclusion : PDP1 gene encodes pyruvate dehydrogenase
phosphatase (PDP1), which is one of the two PDP isoforms. The
role of this gene is to regulate the activity of the mitochondrialmultienzyme pyruvate dehydrogenases complex (PDC). Pyruvatedehydrogenase phosphatase de ﬁciency (PDHPD), caused by
homozygous mutation in the PDP1 gene, is characterized by
neonatal/infantile and childhood lactic acidosis, elevated plasmaalanine, delayed psychomotor development, epileptic encephalo-pathy and hypotonia. There are few case reports suggesting the
importance of this enzyme complex malfunction as triggers for
lactic acidemia with elevated serum lactate levels. The homo-zygous stopgain variant identi ﬁed in PDP1 gene, is a novel cause
associated with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex de ﬁciency.
F. Szekely: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. C. Zimbru: None.
N. Andreescu: None. M. Puiu: None.
P06.039.D Novel FARS2 variants in patients with early onset
encephalopathy with or without epilepsy associated with longsurvival
Giulia Barcia, Marlene Rio, Zahra Assouline, Coralie Zangarelli,
Charles-Joris Roux, Pascale de Lonlay, Julie Steffann, IsabelleDesguerre, Arnold Munnich, Jean-Paul Bonnefont, Nathalie Boddaert,
Agnès Rötig, Metodi D. Metodiev, Benedetta Ruzzenente
Institute Imagine, Paris, France.
Mitochondrial translation is essential for the biogenesis of the
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) thatsynthesizes the bulk of ATP for the cell. Hypomorphic and loss-of-function variants in either mitochondrial DNA or in nuclear genes
that encode mitochondrial translation factors can result in
impaired OXPHOS biogenesis and mitochondrial diseases withvariable clinical presentations. Compound heterozygous or
homozygous missense and frameshift variants in the FARS2 gene,
that encodes the mitochondrial phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase, arecommonly linked to either early-onset epileptic mitochondrialencephalopathy or spastic paraplegia. Here, we expand the
genetic spectrum of FARS2-linked disease with three patientsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
212
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608carrying novel compound heterozygous variants in the FARS2
gene and presenting with spastic tetraparesis, axial hypotonia and
myoclonic epilepsy in two cases.
Grant Numbers: AFM-TELETHON, nr. 19876, nr. 22529, nr. 22251;
ANR, GENOMIT ANR-15-RAR3-0012-07
G. Barcia: None. M. Rio: None. Z. Assouline: None. C.
Zangarelli: None. C. Roux: None. P. de Lonlay: None. J. Steffann:
None. I. Desguerre: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Bonnefont:
None. N. Boddaert: None. A. Rötig: None. M.D. Metodiev: None.
B. Ruzzenente: None.
P06.040.A Mitochondrial bioenergetics and cardiolipin re-
modeling deregulation in mitochondrial trifunctional protein
(TFP) de ﬁciency
Eduardo Vieira Neto1,2, Meicheng Wang1,2, Yudong Wang1,2, Tamil
S. Anthonymuthu1,3,4,5, Hülya Bayir1,3,4,5, Jerry Vockley1,6
1University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,2UPMC Children ’s Hospital
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,3Children ’s Neuroscience Institute,
UPMC Children ’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,4Safar
Center for Resuscitation Research, University of P ittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA,5Center for Free Radical and Antioxidant Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,6Center for Rare Disease Therapy, UPMC
Children ’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Introduction: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (TFP) catalyzes
three steps in fatty acid β-oxidation. Mutations in α(HADHA )o r β
(HADHB ) subunits can result in general TFP de ﬁciency, while the
HADHA p.Glu510Gln mutation accounts for isolated 3-hydroxyacyl-
CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) de ﬁciency. The αsubunit has also
monolysocardiolipin acyltransferas e activity required for cardiolipin
(CL) re-modeling. This study aimed to characterize mitochondrial
bioenergetics and CL content in ﬁbroblasts from TFP/LCHAD
deﬁciency patients.
Materials and Methods: Mitochondrial bioenergetics were
assessed by oxygen consumption rate with a Seahorse XFe96Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Mitochondria phospholipids (includingCL) were measured by LC-MS/MS. Acylcarnitine pro ﬁles were
determined by ESI-MS/MS.
Results: All patient ﬁbroblasts had lower rates of maximal
respiration, and spare respiratory capacity, while basal and ATP-linked respiration rates were variable, compared to controls. Levels
of mature CLs in mitochondria were decreased, while those of
monolyso-CLs were increased. The changes in CLs and monolyso-CLs differed among cells. All mutant cells had higher levels than
control of the acylcarnitine marker C16-OH.
Conclusions: There was a clear reduction of mitochondrial
respiration in patient ﬁbroblasts, although some were able to
meet their baseline energy demand. Isolated LCHAD de ﬁciency
ﬁbroblasts had an abnormal CL pro ﬁle as did two other cells - one
with a splicing mutation in HADHA , and the other with a small
deletion in HADHB leading to shift in reading frame. This study
indicates that there is a correlation between CL pro ﬁles and
mitochondrial bioenergetics in cells with HADHA and HADHB
mutations, a ﬁnding that offers new potential therapeutic options
for patients.
E. Vieira Neto: None. M. Wang: None. Y. Wang: None. T.S.
Anthonymuthu: None. H. Bayir: None. J. Vockley: None.
P06.041.B Re-evaluation of gene pathogenicity for MODY
Thomas W. Laver
1, Matthew N. Wakeling1, Olivia Knox1, Kevin
Colclough2, Caroline Wright1, Sian Ellard1, Andrew T. Hattersley1,
Michael N. Weedon1, Kashyap A. Patel11University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom,2Royal
Devon & Exeter NHS foundation trust, Exeter, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Sequencing data for large control populations and
disease cohorts are needed to accurately assess the pathogenicityof genes causing rare monogenic disorders. Concern has been
raised for BLK,KLF11 and PAX4 as causes of MODY - a dominant
form of monogenic diabetes. In this study we re-evaluatedwhether BLK,KLF11 and PAX4 cause MODY.
Materials and methods: We examined case level genetic
evidence (variant frequency in population and co-segregation
with diabetes) for all published variants in BLK,KLF11 and PAX4 .
We performed a gene burden test for ultra-rare non-synonymousvariants (MAC =1) in 1227 probands with MODY and 185,898
control individuals from the population-based UKBiobank study.
We also assessed HNF1A and HNF4A variants (well-established
causes of MODY) and conducted multiple sensitivity analysis
(different control cohorts, synonymous variant enrichment) to
validate our results.
Results: The published variants showed poor co-segregation
with diabetes (combined LOD scores: BLK 1.16, KLF11 1.2, PAX4
<1.2) in contrast to well established genes ( HNF1A 9.63, HNF4A
15.05). The early published variants in these genes are common ingnomAD v2.1.1: 9/11 variants above the disease prevalence (1.08in 10,000). Ultra-rare non-synonymous variants were not enriched
in a MODY cohort compared to the UKbiobank cohort (PTVs
P>0.05, missense P>0.1 for all three genes) in contrast to well
established genes ( P< 2.79E-06 for HNF1A and HNF4A ). Sensitivity
analyses using different control cohorts and synonymous variants
supported our results.
Conclusions: Rare variants in BLK,KLF11 and PAX4 do not cause
MODY and should not be included in diagnostic testing for MODY.
T.W. Laver: None. M.N. Wakeling: None. O. Knox: None. K.
Colclough: None. C. Wright: None. S. Ellard: None. A.T.
Hattersley: None. M.N. Weedon: None. K.A. Patel: None.
P06.042.C Mitochondrial Membrane Protein - Associated
Neurodegeneration: a rare variant and a dif ﬁcult diagnosis
Alexandru Caramizaru1, Mihai Cucu2, Cristina Durac1, Raluca
Tutunaru1, Andrada Gheorghe1, Bianca Petre-Mandache1, Amelia
Dobrescu2
1CRGM Dolj, Craiova, Romania,2CRGM Dolj, UMF Craiova, Craiova,
Romania.
Introduction: Mitochondrial Membrane Protein-Associated Neu-
rodegeneration (MPAN) is one of the major forms of NBIA, with anestimated worldwide prevalence of about 1/1,000,000 (less than80 cases reported to date). MPAN is caused by mutations in the
C19orf12 gene (19q13.11). A founder mutation (c.204_214del11; p.
Gly69ArgfsX10) has been described in Eastern Europe.
Materials and Methods: We aim to present the case of a 22
year old male patient who initially presented with walking
difﬁculties, trauma caused by falling and bilateral optic atrophy.
The onset was around 13-14 years of age. Progressively, thesymptomatology also included equilibrium problems, moderatespasticity, distal amiotro ﬁc motor de ﬁcit of the upper and lower
limbs, bilateral amiotrophy of the quadriceps muscle, bilateral pes
cavus, mild scoliosis, postural tremor and writing dif ﬁculties. EMG
showed a motor axonal neuropathy and MRI revealed a
hypodense aspect of the grey nuclei. Furthermore, molecular
analyses were performed.
Results: An NGS panel for CMT genes and HSPB1, BSCL2, GARS
and REEP1 was negative. A homozygous variant (nonsenseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
213
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608substitution) in the C19orf12 gene, (p.Leu72) Chr19(GRCh37):
g.30193863A>C, was identi ﬁed through WES.
Conclusions: When approaching a neurodegenerative pathol-
ogy characterized by a non-speci ﬁc combination of signs and
symptoms, the association of particularities such as opticalatrophy and hypodensity of grey nuclei could be a key for the
diagnosis, and could further prevent long and expensive genetic
tests. The identi ﬁcation of an unreported C19orf12 homozygous
mutation (c.215T>G) in a patient without any family history ofconsanguinity suggests the possibility of a novel variant
characteristic to the population in this region.
A. Caramizaru: None. M. Cucu: None. C. Durac: None. R.
Tutunaru: None. A. Gheorghe: None. B. Petre-Mandache: None.
A. Dobrescu: None.
P06.043.D Mitochondrial DNA mutations do not impact early
human embryonic development
Kalliopi Chatzovoulou
1, Anne Mayeur2, Nadine Gigarel1, Fabienne
Jabot-Hanin1, Laetitia Hesters2, Arnold Munnich1, Nelly Frydman2,
Jean-Paul Bonnefont1, Julie Steffann1
1Imagine Institute, Paris, France,2Antoine Beclere Hospital, Clamart,
France.
Introduction: mtDNA mutations are a frequent cause of
devastating metabolic disorders. Their presence might inducefertilization defects or embryo development failure in oocytes or
preimplantation embryos, respectively. Whether a metabolic
rescue through an increase of mtDNA amount in mutant embryostakes place during cleavage-stage human embryonic develop-ment remained unclear.
Materials and Methods: Preimplantation genetic testing was
performed for 55 couples. In total, 165 embryos at risk of carryinga non-metabolic, non-mitochondrial genetic disorder (control
group), and 16 embryos at risk of carrying a mtDNA mutation
(mitochondrial group), were included. mtDNA amount wasquanti ﬁed on DNA from blastomeres by real-time PCR. Embryonic
quality was evaluated at day-3 and day-4/5. Embryonic viability
was de ﬁned as the ability of an embryo to implant and give a
viable pregnancy.
Results: Maternal age and antral follicle count were similar
between control and mitochondrial groups, except from anti-
Müllerian hormone levels. Maternal age was not correlated to the
blastomere mtDNA copy number. No signi ﬁcant difference in
either quality or viability between control and mitochondrial
embryos was found. A signi ﬁcant variability of the mtDNA amount
between sister blastomeres was observed in both embryonicgroups. No modi ﬁcation of the blastomere mtDNA amount was
found when the mother carried a mtDNA mutation. Finally,
mtDNA copy number was not correlated to mutant loads.
Conclusions: A pathogenic mtDNA mutation does not modify
the mtDNA metabolism in human cleavage-stage embryos,suggesting the absence of negative selection at this stage.
Funding: This work was supported by the “Association Française
contre les Myopathies ”.
K. Chatzovoulou: None. A. Mayeur: None. N. Gigarel: None. F.
Jabot-Hanin: None. L. Hesters: None. A. Munnich: None. N.
Frydman: None. J. Bonnefont: None. J. Steffann: None.
P06.045.B A case of Mucopolysaccharidosis type 2 in a girl
Nataliia Samonenko
1,2, Nataliia Tro ﬁmova1, Nataliia Mytcyk1,
Svetlana Kormoz1, Irina Gregul1, Nataliia Olhovich1, Nataliia
Pichkur1, Olena Okhotnikova2, Nataliia Gorovenko31National Specialise Children Hospital, Kyiv, Ukraine,2P.L. Shupyk
National Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine,
3Institute of Genetic and Regenerative Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Background: Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) is one of a
group of hereditary metabolic diseases. Hunter syndrome a
genetically associated to the de ﬁciency of the iduronate
2-sulfatase enzyme (IDS). It is an X-linked recessive disorder andoccurs predominantly in males. IDS is responsible for thebreakdown of glycosaminoglycans. Decreased activity of IDS
results accumulation of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate in
multiple organs of the body.Manifestations of the MPS II in girlsare extremely rare and are associated with the inactivation of onechromosome (Lyonization effect).Case Report: Herein we present
an 3,5 years old girl admitted with mental and speech
developmental disorders, behavioral disorders, changes in appear-ance, contractures of the joints, umbilical hernia, scoliosis, short
stature, hepatosplenomegaly. Examination revealed bilateral
secretory otitis, conductive deafness, tunnel syndrome. This girlis the ﬁrst in the family. She has a younger healthy brother. From 1
month old it was observed by doctors with macrocephaly,
umbilical hernia. At the age of 8 m, stiffness of joints was already
observed. Developmental delay was at 1,5 years old. Theexamination revealed a signi ﬁcant increase in the excretion of
glycosaminoglycans with dermatan sulfate in urine. Iduronate
sulfatase activity is absent.Molecular genetic work-up heterozy-
gous c.797_798del gene IDS (p.(Pro266Leufs*75). No genemutations were detected in the mother or father.
Discussion: Mucopolysaccharidosis type 2 can occur in girls. In
the presence of speci ﬁc symptoms should not forget about
additional diagnosis and exclusion of this type of MPS. The girlwas diagnosed with a new mutation for the family.
N. Samonenko: None. N. Tro ﬁmova: None. N. Mytcyk: None.
S. Kormoz: None. I. Gregul: None. N. Olhovich: None. N. Pichkur:
None. O. Okhotnikova: None. N. Gorovenko: None.
P06.046.C Revisiting clinical presentation of Egyptian patients
with mucopolysaccharidoses
Solaf Elsayed
1, Rabah Shawky1, Walaa Yousef2, Abdullah Abdullah1
1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of medicine, Ain Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt,2Pediatrics Department, Faculty of medicine,
Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
Introduction: Early recognition of red- ﬂag symptoms and signs
of potential patients with Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) is
mandatory for timely diagnosis and management. Culturaldifferences could have an impact of which symptom trigger thepatient to seek medical advice. The aim of the study was to
highlight early symptoms and signs in Egyptian patients with MPS
and to assess their main clinical features. Patients and methods:
Data were retrieved from MPS patients ’ﬁles and recent clinical
examination and investigations were also done.
Results: The study included 40 patients (27 male and 13
females) from 32 families. Their age ranged between one and 30years with median age of 7 years. The most common type foundwas MPS type III (37.5%). Median age of diagnosis was 3.8 years ±
2.03. Mean diagnostic delay was 1.71 ± 1.53 years (signi ﬁcantly
longer in type IV patients). Hepatomegaly was the most commonpresentation in type I and VI while “rachitic ”like bones was the
main presentation in type IV. Speech delay and behavioral
changes was the presenting symptom in type III patients whilebehavioral changes and snoring was most common in type II.Previous affected sibling was the trigger to seek medical advice in
30% of patients with type II.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
214
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusion: Red-ﬂags symptoms and signs may differ in
relation to culture believes and fears. Unlike previous studies,
hepatomegaly was a main concern in our patients due to the high
prevalence of viral hepatitis while skeletal deformities are not! aschildhood rickets is not rare in Egyptian population.
S. Elsayed: None. R. Shawky: None. W. Yousef: None. A.
Abdullah: None.
P06.047.D Molecular basis of Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA
(MorquioA syndrome): a review and classi ﬁcation of GALNS
gene variants and reporting of 68 novel variants
Alessandra Zanetti1, Francesca D ’Avanzo1, Moeenaldeen AlSayed2,
Ana Carolina Brusius-Facchin3, Yin-Hsiu Chien4, Roberto Giugliani5,
Emanuela Izzo6, David Kasper7, Hsiang-Yu Lin8, Shuan-Pei Lin8,
Laura Pollard9, Akashdeep Singh6, Rodolfo Tonin10, Tim Wood9,
Amelia Morrone10, Rosella Tomanin1
1Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Lysosomal Disorders,
Department of Women ’s and Children ’s Health, University of Padova;
Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica Città della Speranza,
Padova, Italy,2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre;
Faculty of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
3Medical Genetics Service/HCPA, DR BRASIL Research Group/HCPA,
and INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil,4Department of Medical Genetics
and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
5Department of Genetics/UFRGS, Medical Genetics Service/HCPA, DR
BRASIL Research Group/HCPA, and INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil,
6BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA,7ARCHIMED Life
Science GmbH, Leberstraße 20, Vienna, Austria,8Division of Genetics
and Metabolism, Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Research,MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,9Biochemical Diagnostic
Laboratory, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, USA,
10Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Pediatric Neurology Unit
and Laboratories, Meyer Children ’s Hospital; Department of Neuros-
ciences, Psychology, Pharmacology and Child Health, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.
Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (Morquio syndrome type A, MPS IVA) is
a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by
mutations in the N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase ( GALNS ) gene.
Reduced/absent GALNS enzyme activity causes impaired degra-dation of chondroitin-6-sulfate and keratan sulfate and their
accumulation in tissues. MPS IVA is a clinically heterogeneous
disorder, whose presentation varies from a classical rapidlyprogressing to a nonclassical form. Delayed diagnosis and late
introduction of appropriate management are common. The study
objective was to collect, analyze, and uniformly summarize allpublished GALNS gene variants, thus updating the previous review
(Morrone A. et al. Hum Mutat . 2014;35(11):1271-1279). Moreover,
previously unpublished genotypes, communicated by 7 reference
laboratories worldwide were included in the analysis. Data wereanalyzed with respect to most common alleles, geographicdistribution, level of homozygosity, and genotype-phenotype
correlation. All variants were classi ﬁed according to their
pathogenicity as suggested by the ACMG/AMP. Including thosepreviously published, we identi ﬁed 446 unique variants, among
which 68 were novel, in 1190 subjects (including newborn
screening positive subjects). Variants distribution included mis-
sense (65.0%), nonsense (8.1%), splicing (7.2%), small deletions(del)/insertions(ins) (7.0%), intronic (4.0%), and large del/ins and
complex rearrangements (3.8%). Half (50.4%) of the patients were
homozygous, 37.1% were compound heterozygous, and 10.7%had only 1 variant detected. In silico analyses were performed to
evaluate the pathogenicity of novel variants. All variants were
submitted to the ClinVar database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/ ) to make them publicly available. Mutation updates are
essential for the correct molecular diagnoses, genetic counselling,
and disease management for MPS IVA.
A. Zanetti: None. F. D ’Avanzo: None. M. AlSayed: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-ness); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Shire, Sano ﬁGen-
zyme. Other; Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Shire, Sano ﬁ
Genzyme. A. Brusius-Facchin: None. Y. Chien: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Modest; Sano ﬁ.D .
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and
expert witness); Modest; Biogen, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc,Novartis, Sano ﬁ, Takeda. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Amicus, Sano ﬁ.R. Giugliani: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Modest; Allevex, Idorsia, JCR,Lysogene, Orphan Disease Center, Sano ﬁ, Takeda, Ultragenyx. D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and
expert witness); Modest; Amicus, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc,JCR, RegenXBio, Sano ﬁ, Takeda, Ultragenyx, Janssen, Novartis. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Amicus, BioMarin Pharma-
ceutical Inc, Orphan Disease Center, Sano ﬁ, Sobi, Takeda,
Ultragenyx, Denali, Inventiva, JCR, RegenXBio, Sigilon. Other;Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sano ﬁ, JCR, Takeda, Ultra-
genyx. E. Izzo: None. D. Kasper: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; ARCHIMED Life Science GmbH. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; ARCHIMED Life Science GmbH. H. Lin: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sano ﬁ-Genzyme, Takeda. D. Speak-
ers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert
witness); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sano ﬁ-Genzyme,
Takeda. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioMarin Pharma-ceutical Inc, Sano ﬁ-Genzyme, Takeda. Other; Modest; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc, Sano ﬁ, Takeda. S. Lin: None. L. Pollard: None.
A. Singh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharma-ceutical Inc. R. Tonin: None. T. Wood: F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Amicus- Fabry. A. Morrone: None. R. Tomanin: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultantand pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.
P06.048.B Niacin therapy improves clinical outcomes with the
normalization of metabolic abnormalities in a patient with
partial NAXD de ﬁciency
Joshua Manor
BCM, Houston, TX, USA.
Introduction: Inﬂammation, the driving force behind chronic
diseases in humans, is both initiated and repressed by enzymes
that utilize NAD(P)
+/NAD(P)H. The highly conserved 2-enzyme
NAD(P) +repair pathway eliminates toxic NAD(P)HX metabolites
that accumulate in in ﬂammatory stress. De ﬁciency of either NAXD
or NAXE depletes the NAD+pool and results in fever-triggered
fatal encephalopathic crises (MIM 618321 and 617186,respectively).
Case presentation: An adolescent with early-onset progressive
weakness was admitted for exacerbation of symptoms andpsychosis following fever. At presentation he could not ambulate,required positive pressure ventilation assistance, could not handle
oral secretions or extend his neck. Chromosomal microarrayAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
215
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608showed a microdeletion of NAXD exons 1-2, and exome
sequencing revealed a novel NAXD SNV predicted to affect both
a splice donor site and the mitochondrial pre-sequence tag but
leaving the NAXD endoplasmic reticulum and cytosolic isoformsintact.
Results: At time of acute illness, plasma clinical untargeted
metabolomics from our patient showed signi ﬁcant alterations in
nicotinamide/NAD+metabolism (z score negative 4-6), along with
a footprint of peroxisomal-mitochondrial axis dysfunction: altera-tions of TCA cycle metabolites, branched chain amino acids (z
score negative 2-3), plasmalogens, phospholipids, and lysopho-
spholipids (z score negative 2-4). Supportive care and niacinsupplementation resulted in normal ambulation and musclestrength, no respiratory support, complete normalization of
metabolic abnormalities and decrease in creatine kinase from
17,000 to 700 U/L.
Conclusions: Defects in cofactor repair are likely underdiag-
nosed. Niacin supplementation can reduce in ﬂammatory stress
and provide preventative therapy to reduce morbidity andmortality associated with NAD
+depletion in NAD(P)HX repair
pathway de ﬁciency.
J. Manor: None.
P06.049.B Clinical utility of a sponsored gene panel testing
program for pediatric epilepsy and CLN2 disease diagnosis:
Results from 10,853 tests
Tiffany Yar Pang1, Rebecca Truty Truty2, Dianalee A. McKnight2,
Britt Johnson2, Ana Morales2, Sara L. Bristow2, Emanuela Izzo1,
Guillermo Seratti1, Sookyong Koh3, Elaine C. Wirrell4, John J.
Millichap5, Swaroop Aradhya2
1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA,2Invitae, San
Francisco, CA, USA,3Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA,4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA,5Ann and Robert H. Lurie
Children ’s Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2 disease) is a rare,
inherited, neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder caused
by de ﬁcient TPP1 activity. CLN2 disease often presents with
epilepsy between 2 and 4 years of age, accompanied by history oflanguage delay; however, diagnostic delays are common. Behindthe Seizure ®(BTS) is a US-based, sponsored testing program for
children with suspected genetic epilepsy, initiated with the goal to
help lower the age of CLN2 disease diagnosis. Individuals wereeligible for testing through BTS if they were aged 24-60 months
with unprovoked seizure onset at/after 24 months (Dec 2016-Feb
2019) or, following program expansion, aged 0-60 months (Feb2019-Jan 2020) or 0-108 months (Jan-Nov 2020) with unprovokedseizures onset at any age. Between Dec 2016 and Nov 2020, a total
of 10,853 tests were conducted through BTS. The molecular
diagnostic yield was 13.7% overall (n =1485; 102 genes) and
0.18% for TPP1 (n=20). In the subset of individuals tested through
BTS who were aged 24-60 months with seizure onset at or after 24
months (n =3,263), the molecular diagnostic yield was 7.9%
overall (n =259) and 0.61% for TPP1 (n=20). Mean age at CLN2
disease diagnosis through the BTS program was 3.64 years, whichis earlier than the natural history reported average of 5 years. TPP1
was the highest positive yield gene for autosomal recessive
disorders. These ﬁndings demonstrate that the use of broad
epilepsy gene panel tests can facilitate the earlier diagnosis of
CLN2 disease, and simultaneously identify other genetic causes of
epilepsy.
T.Y. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarinPharmaceutical Inc. R. Truty: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. D.A.
McKnight: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; Invitae. B. Johnson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;Invitae. A. Morales: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. S.L. Bristow: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; Invitae. E. Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. G. Seratti: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. S.
Koh: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceu-
tical Inc. E.C. Wirrell: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.
J.J. Millichap: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Modest; UCB Pharma,
Mallinkrodt, Xenon, NIH, Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy,
Disruptive Nutrition. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakersbureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; American
Academy of Neurology, Up-To-Date, Mallinkrodt, BioMarin Phar-
maceutical Inc, Greenwich, Sunovian. F. Consultant/AdvisoryBoard; Modest; UCB Pharma, Esai, Xenon, Ionis, Upsher-Smith,Praxis, Sarepta, Disruptive Nutrition. S. Aradhya: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;Invitae.
P06.050.C Diagnostic yield and clinical utility of genetic
testing in children with seizure onset after two years of age:update over 3-year program in Europe and Middle East
Akashdeep Singh
1, Kimberly Gall2, Emanuela Izzo1, Kirsi Alakurtti2,
Eija H. Seppala2, Lotta Koskinen2, Juha Koskenvuo2, Tero-Pekka
Alastalo2
1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA,2Blueprint Genetics,
San Francisco, CA, USA.
Neurologic and metabolic disorders with epileptic seizures are
among the most common genetic disorders presenting inchildhood. A molecular diagnosis for patients with epilepsy may
allow for etiologically based treatment and management. This
program offers genetic testing to patients with epilepsy in Europeand the Middle East. The goals of the program are to determine, inpediatric epilepsy patients between 2-5 years of age, molecular
diagnostic yield and the impact on diagnosing neuronal ceroid-
lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2). CLN2 is a severe, rapidly-progressiveneurodegenerative disease with seizure onset at or after 2 years ofage. An NGS-based epilepsy panel including Copy number variant
(CNV) detection was used. Variant interpretation was performed
according to ACMG guidelines. The results from 748 patients withﬁrst seizure at or after 24 months, and one additional clinical
ﬁnding are reported. Median age at testing was 38 months while
the median age at ﬁrst seizure was 27 months. The average delay
from ﬁrst seizure to genetic testing was 9 months. A genetic
diagnosis was established in 146 patients for a molecular
diagnostic yield of 19.5%. CNVs were reported in 15% ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
216
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608diagnosed patients and 32% of the CNVs identi ﬁed were
intragenic. The frequent molecular diagnoses included SCN1A (n
=17), MECP2 (n=13) and TPP1 (CLN2 )( n=12). CLN2 cases
received a molecular diagnosis at an average age of 3 years 11months, 1-2 years earlier than natural history data. At least 93(63.6%) of diagnosed patients had a disorder that has targeted
treatment, evidence for optimizing treatment, or on-going clinical
trials.
A. Singh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. K. Alakurtti:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
E.H. Seppala: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P06.051.D Mild neurocognitive and psychosocial outcome
despite late-diagnosis of classical phenylketonuria (case
report)
Marie-Claire Paulin
1, Mouna Ben Amor2,3, Lynn Ryan2, Mathieu
Mallet2, Marie-Eve Cormier2
1Stan Cassidy Rehabilitation Centre, Horizon Health Network,
Fredericton, NB, Canada,2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dr.-
Georges-L.-Dumont, Réseau de Santé Vitalité, Moncton, NB, Canada,
3Centre de Formation Médicale du Nouveau-Brunswick, Université de
Moncton, Moncton, NB, Canada.
Introduction: Classical phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic
condition that impairs the metabolism of phenylalanine andrequires lifelong dietary treatment for normal development. PKU is
known to cause brain damage and impairment, including
moderate to severe intellectual disability, if not treated promptly.Here, we present the case of a late PKU-diagnosed 40-year-oldcollege-educated woman who has mild neurocognitive
impairments.
Materials and Methods: Single gene analysis for the PAH gene
was performed by Next Generation Sequencing. Regular blood-
phenylalanine analyses as well as objective and subjective
psychometric assessments of intellectual potential, executivefunction and mental health were conducted.
Results: Genetic analyses revealed compound heterozygous
mutations (IVS1 +5g>T and p.P281L) in the PAH gene. This
genotype has been previously reported in patients with classicPKU. Blood phenylalanine levels in our patient ranged from 896 to2257 μmol/L since diagnosis at the age of 30 (except during her
second pregnancy). Despite such toxic levels, this patient only has
mild neurocognitive and psychosocial impairments. She does notmeet the criteria for even a mild intellectual disability.
Conclusion: Increasingly more cases of untreated or late-
diagnosed PKU patients with no major cognitive impairment are
reported in the literature. While late-diagnosed PKU is unusual, thediagnosis should be considered in cases of unexplained learning
challenges, psychiatric symptoms, or neurocognitive impairment,
even if mild, especially if the patient was born during a period orplace where neonatal PKU screening was not systematicallyconducted. More research is needed to explain the variability in
the severity of cognitive impairment in certain PKU patients.M. Paulin: None. M. Ben Amor: None. L. Ryan: None. M.
Mallet: None. M. Cormier: None.
P06.053.B Expanding the clinical spectrum of primary coen-
zyme Q10 de ﬁciency type 6: the ﬁrst case with
cardiomyopathy
Lisette Leeuwen , Charlotte M. A. Lubout, Hessel P. Nijenhuis, Linda
C. Meiners, Yvonne J. Vos, Johanna C. Herkert
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Primary coenzyme Q10 de ﬁciency (primary COQ10
deﬁciency) is a mitochondrial respiratory chain disease caused by
biallelic variants in: COQ2 ,COQ4 ,COQ6 ,COQ7 ,COQ8A ,COQ8B ,
COQ9 ,PDSS1 orPDSS2 . The clinical manifestations and age at
onset are highly variable. Primary coenzyme Q10 de ﬁciency type 6
(primary COQ10 de ﬁciency-6,MIM#614650) is characterized by
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and sensorineural deafness.
Methods: We included a 19-month-old patient with dilated
cardiomyopathy. Clinical data of the patient were collected from
the medical record. Copy-number variation analysis was per-
formed using SNP-array. Exome sequencing (ES) was performedusing a parent-offspring trio approach. Literature search was
performed(Pubmed).
Results: Our patient presented with cardiorespiratory insuf ﬁ-
ciency due to dilated cardiomyopathy at age 19 months.Additionally, she was found to have proteinuria, microcephaly
and mild developmental delay. There was no history of hearing
loss, vision problems, movement disorder, or epilepsy. Parents
were consanguineous (second cousins). Family history wasnegative for cardiac diseases. SNP-array was normal. Whole ES
revealed a homozygous pathogenic variant, c.763G>A,p.
(Gly255Arg), in COQ6 , for which both parents were heterozygous.
Primary COQ10 de ﬁciency-6 has previously been reported in 29
patients but cardiomyopathy has not been reported. Although not
reported in primary COQ10 de ﬁciency-6, cardiomyopathy has
been described in 26 patients with other types of primary COQ10deﬁciency.
Conclusions: This case expands the clinical spectrum of primary
COQ10 de ﬁciency-6 and underscores the importance of screening
for multiple system disease, including cardiac evaluation, in thesepatients. Genes involved in primary COQ10 de ﬁciency, including
COQ6 , should be included in gene panels for pediatric
cardiomyopathy.
L. Leeuwen: None. C.M.A. Lubout: None. H.P. Nijenhuis:
None. L.C. Meiners: None. Y.J. Vos: None. J.C. Herkert: None.
P06.054.C Rare types of the mutations cause pyruvate
carboxylase de ﬁciency in 2 patients
Polina Tsygankova
1, Nikita Beskorovainiy1, Marina Minzhenkova1,
Vyacheslav Tabakov1, Lyudmila Bessonova1, Vera Zarubina2, Natalia
Pechatnikova2, Marina Kurkina1, Igor Bychkov1, Ekaterina
Zakharova1
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Morozov Children ’s City Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federa-
tion.
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in pyruvate carboxylase (PC)
gene cause a wide spectrum of recessive phenotypes, ranging
from the early fatal encephalopathy to the adult benign form.Clinical presentation of the PC-de ﬁciency is not speci ﬁc, frequent
mutations are not described for the PCgene, thus, the wholeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
217
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608exome (WES) and genome (WGS) sequencing could help to ﬁnd
rare cases of this metabolic disease.
Results: Two patients were suspected for having pyruvate
metabolism disorder based on the urine organic acids pro ﬁle and
clinical picture. In a patient 1, 6 y.o. o boy with ataxia,hypoglycemia, episodes of lactic acidosis WGS showed hetero-
zygous missense variant c.1372A>G; p.(Asn458Asp) in the PCgene
and the loss of heterozygosity on PCcDNA. Additional bioinfor-
matic analysis with Manta tool revealed soft-clipped readsmapped to chromosomes 11 and 1, so a reciprocal translocation
which disrupts the 5 ’prime end of the PCgene including exons 1
and 2 was proposed. The translocation was validated via FISH-analysis and PCR with ﬂanking primers. The segregation was
conﬁrmed. The second patient, 13 y.o. girl with psychomotor
delay, hepatopathy, episodes of lactic acidosis, ketonuria, had
novel homozygous intronic variant c.1983-116C>T revealed onWES. The cDNA analysis from blood cells established three
aberrant mRNA isoforms due to exonization of intron 17
sequences in the vast majority of PCtranscripts.
Conclusion: After routine gene sequencing in case of suspicion
of PC-de ﬁciency WES and WGS with deep bioinformatic analysis
could be needed.
P. Tsygankova: None. N. Beskorovainiy: None. M. Minzhen-
kova: None. V. Tabakov: None. L. Bessonova: None. V.
Zarubina: None. N. Pechatnikova: None. M. Kurkina: None. I.
Bychkov: None. E. Zakharova: None.
P06.055.D SLC25A42-associated mitochondrial encephalo-
myopathy report of additional founder cases and functionalcharacterization of a novel deletion
Mazhor Salem Aldosary
1, Shahad Baselm1, Maha Abdulrahim1,
Rawan Al-Mass1, Maysoon Alsagob2, Zainab AlMasseri1, Rozeena
Huma1, Laila AlQuait1, Tarfa Al-Shidi1, Eman Al-Obeid1, Albandary
AlBakheet1, Basma Alahideb1, Lujane Alahaideb1, Alya Qari1, Robert
Taylor3, Dilek Colak1, Moeenaldeen AlSayed1, Namik Kaya1
1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,2King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,3Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
SLC25A42 is the main transporter of Coenzyme A into mitochon-
dria. To date, 15 subjects are reported due to one of two, bi-allelic
homozygous missense variants in the SLC25A42 as a cause of
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy; 14 subjects are of Saudi origin
and share the same founder variant, c.871A>G:p.Asn291Asp. The
remaining singleton is German carrying a variant at canonicalsplice site, c.380 +2T>A. In this study, we describe the clinical
manifestations and disease course in an additional six Saudi
patients whose blood samples were assessed by Affymetrix ’s
axiom autozygosity mapping, and whole exome sequencing. Aftera comprehensive ﬁltering process, two variants of SLC25A42 were
conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing and fully segregated in the
tested family members. While ﬁve patients have the Saudi founder
p.Asn291Asp variant, one subject has a novel deletion. Functionalanalyses on ﬁbroblasts obtained from this patient revealed that
the deletion causes signi ﬁcant decrease in mitochondrial oxygen
consumption and ATP production compared to healthy indivi-
duals. Moreover, extracellular acidi ﬁcation rate revealed signi ﬁ-
cantly reduced glycolysis, glycolytic capacity, and glycolytic
reserve as compared to controls. There were no changes in the
mitochondrial DNA content of patient ﬁbroblasts. Immunoblotting
revealed signi ﬁcantly diminished protein expression due to the
deletion. Our study expands the molecular spectrum of this
condition and provides further evidence of mitochondrialdysfunction as a central cause of pathology. Finally, this disorder
should be included in the differential diagnosis of any patient with
unexplained motor and speech delay, recurrent encephalopathy
with metabolic acidosis, intermittent or persistent dystonia, lacticacidosis, and basal ganglia lesions.
M.S. Aldosary: None. S. Baselm: None. M. Abdulrahim: None.
R. Al-Mass: None. M. Alsagob: None. Z. AlMasseri: None. R.
Huma: None. L. AlQuait: None. T. Al-Shidi: None. E. Al-Obeid:
None. A. AlBakheet: None. B. Alahideb: None. L. Alahaideb:
None. A. Qari: None. R. Taylor: None. D. Colak: None. M.
AlSayed: None. N. Kaya: None.
P06.056.A A recessive mutation in TFAM causes mtDNA
depletion associated with primary ovarian insuf ﬁciency,
seizures, and hearing loss
Farid Ullah
1,2, Waqar Rauf1, Kamal Khan2, Sheraz Khan1, V Oliveira3,
K Bell4, M Tariq1, S Bakhshalizadeh4, T Philippe5, A Sinclair4,E
Tucker4,SH e6, S M. Baig1, E E. Davis7
1National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering
(NIBGE-C), Faisalabad; Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied
Sciences (PIEAS), Islamabad, Pakistan,2Stanley Manne Children ’s
Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children ’s Hospital of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, Chicago, IL, USA,3Department of
Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Animal Science and Food Engineer-ing, University of São Paulo, Pirassununga, São Paulo, Brazil,
4Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Royal Children ’s Hospital
and Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne
VIC, Melbourne, Australia,5Department of endocrinology and
reproductive medicine, center for rare endocrine and gynecologicaldiseases, Sorbonne Université Pitié Salpétrière Hospital, Paris, France,
6BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China,7Stanley Manne Children ’s
Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children ’s Hospital of
Chicago, Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
Mitochondrial diseases are common, genetically heterogeneous
disorders in both pediatric and adult populations. They are causedby defects in the processes of oxidative phosphorylation,
apoptosis, and failure of essential bioenergetic supply to
mitochondria. TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial) is akey component of the mitochondrial replisome machinery thatmaintains mtDNA transcription and replication. Here, we present
two affected individuals from a consanguineous Pakistani
pedigree that presented with primary ovarian insuf ﬁciency (POI)
and seizures. We performed whole exome sequencing on parents
and affected siblings and found a recessive missense variant in
TFAM , c.694C>T (p.Arg232Cys), that segregated with disease.
Notably, this DNA change is identical to a recently reportedsporadic case of similar ethnic origin who displays POI, seizures,
and sensorineural hearing loss. In patient derived skin ﬁbroblasts,
we observed depletion of mtDNA and signi ﬁcant alteration in the
respiratory function and morphology of mitochondria. Moreover,we observed reduced numbers of nucleoids with signi ﬁcant
changes in nucleoid size or shape in patient cells compared to
matched controls. Next, we investigated the effect of tfam loss in a
zebra ﬁsh model. Knock out (KO) mutants recapitulate the mtDNA
depletion and ovarian dysgenesis reminiscent of patient pheno-
types. Together, our genetic and functional data indicate that
TFAM plays a pivotal role in the development of gonads. Thus, ourﬁndings expand the list of mitochondrial disease phenotypes and
helps guide disease management and diagnosis
F. Ullah: None. W. Rauf: None. K. Khan: None. S. Khan: None.
V. Oliveira: None. K. Bell: None. M. Tariq: None. S. Bakhshali-
zadeh: None. T. Philippe: None. A. Sinclair: None. E. Tucker:
None. S. He: None. S. M. Baig: None. E. E. Davis: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
218
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P06.057.B Circulating DNA methylation biomarkers for type 2
diabetes diagnosis from saliva
Manuela Hofner1, Ulrike Kegler1, Klemens Vierlinger1, Anja Buh-
mann1, Michael Leutner2, Walter Pulverer1, Alexandra Kautzky-
Willer2, Christa Noehammer1
1AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Molecular Diagnostics
Unit, Vienna, Austria,2Medical University of Vienna, Clinical Division
of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction: Saliva is a readily and repeatedly available body
ﬂuid, which can be obtained via non-invasive, painless collection.
The aim of this study was to de ﬁne salivary extracellular vesicle-
derived epigenetic biomarkers suitable for type 2 diabetes
diagnosis.
Methods: After evaluation of several isolation kits for saliva-
derived extracellular vesicles we performed a proof of principle
study, comparing DNA methylation pro ﬁles in saliva and serum
extracellular vesicles from healthy individuals. For our type 2diabetes DNA methylation discovery study cell-free saliva wascollected from a diabetic patient cohort (type 2 diabetes, pre-
diabetes, gestational diabetes, healthy) and extracellular vesicles
thereof prepared. Genome-wide DNA methylation pro ﬁling was
performed using extracellular vesicle-derived DNA on Illumina
EPIC arrays.
Results: After having identi ﬁed the best suited method for
extracellular vesicle isolation from saliva we could successfullyshow the feasibility of using saliva as a potential diagnostic matrix
in our comparative pro ﬁling study, as the DNA methylation
proﬁles in healthy probands showed a big overlap between
serum- and saliva-derived extracellular vesicles. In addition, wewere able to successfully run a type 2 diabetes genome-wide DNA
methylation discovery study from salivary extracellular vesicle-
derived DNA and identi ﬁed potential DNA-methylation based
candidate biomarkers.
Conclusions: This study once more demonstrated saliva to be a
most promising sample matrix for disease diagnostics. Further-more genome-wide pro ﬁling technologies such as methylation
bead arrays could be successfully applied to cell-free body ﬂuids
despite low amounts of circulating DNA present there.
Funding: The presented research was supported by the
Austrian research promotion agency (FFG project 849816).
M. Hofner: None. U. Kegler: None. K. Vierlinger: None. A.
Buhmann: None. M. Leutner: None. W. Pulverer: None. A.
Kautzky-Willer: None. C. Noehammer: None.
P06.058.C VARS2-linked mitochondrial disease - an emerging
phenotypic spectrum
Raquel Gouveia , Márcia Rodrigues, Oana Moldovan, Ana Berta
Sousa
Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction: Bi-allelic variants in VARS2 , a nuclear gene coding
for valyl-tRNA synthetase, cause autosomal recessive combined
oxidative phosphorylation de ﬁciency type 20 ( MIM#609060 ),
characterized by a variable combination of mitochondrialencephalopathy, developmental delay, hypotonia, epilepsy, cardi-omyopathy and structural brain anomalies, usually with a neonatal
onset and severe disease course.
Case Report: Family 1: A 23-year-old man, who was healthy
until age 11, presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures,evolving with persistent intentional tremor, and mild learningdisability. He had an elder sister with laryngomalacia requiring
tracheostomy in childhood, and late-onset epilepsy; and a
younger brother with cerebral palsy after cardiac arrest at 3
months, hypotonia, and hyperlactacidemia. They both hadhypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), which resolved sponta-neously. All three siblings had bilateral basal ganglia calci ﬁca-
tions.Family 2: A female neonate, with a prenatal diagnosis of
HCM, died at 40 days from hyperlactacidemia and severe HCM.
She was the ﬁrst child of non-consanguineous parents. Her
mother was again pregnant, and a fetal echocardiogram had been
suggestive of right ventricular hypertrophy.
Results: Reanalysis of WES data from case 1 revealed two
compound likely pathogenic heterozygous variants in VARS2 gene:
c.1258G>A, p.(Ala420Thr) and c.1100C>T, p.(Thr367Ile). Combined
heterozygosity for two variants in VARS2 was also identi ﬁed in case
2 by clinical exome sequencing: c.1258G>A, p.(Ala420Thr) andc.1079C>T, p.(Ala369Val). Targeted analysis con ﬁrmed the fetus
was affected.
Conclusions: These cases illustrate the intra- and extra-familial
spectrum of variability associated with VARS2 variants, including
milder phenotypes that complicate genetic counselling, especially
in the prenatal setting.
R. Gouveia: None. M. Rodrigues: None. O. Moldovan: None. A.
B. Sousa: None.
P06.059.D Functional analysis of the PCCA and PCCB genes
variants, predicted to affect splicing
Igor Bychkov, Artur Galushkin , Aleksandra Filatova, Andrey
Nekrasov, Marina Kurkina, Galina Baydakova, Alexandra Ilyushkina,
Mikhail Skoblov, Ekaterina Zakharova
Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Mutations in the PCCA and PCCB genes result in
propionic acidemia (PA) - rare autosomal recessive metabolicdisease. In most cases the symptoms of PA manifest in the earlyneonatal period and without treatment quickly become life-
threatening. Thus, the fast and proper genetic diagnosis plays an
important role in patients` management. During the analysis ofpublic repositories of PA mutations, we faced the problem ofincorrect classi ﬁcation of splicing variants, which is inconsistent
with ACMG/AMP recommendations. Also, there is a part of
variants, which are classi ﬁed as missense or synonymous variants
of uncertain signi ﬁcance, being highly spliceogenic.
Materials and methods: After analyzing of ClinVar and HGMD
databases for PA mutations 23 variants were selected, some ofwhich were located in splicing sites, but lack the functionalcharacterization at mRNA level and those, classi ﬁed as missense or
synonymous, but were bioinformaticaly predicted as spliceogenic.
To characterize the effect of these variants at mRNA level theminigene assay was performed.
Results: We characterized the splicing alterations for 14 variants
(PCCA:c.183 +4del4, с.468+1G>A, c.717-2A>G, c.1187T>G; (p.
Val396Gly), с.1284+2dup, c.1353 +5delG, c.1353 +5_1353 +9del,
c.1643+1_1643 +2dup, c.1899 +2_1899 +3insCT, c.2040G>A; (p.
Ala680=), c.2119-9A>G; PCCB: c.543G>C; (p.Leu181 =), c.655-
2A>G, c.1091-8_1091-3del). For the cases where the splicingoutcome didn ’
t disrupt the mRNA reading frame, we characterized
the affected structures on a protein level.
Conclusion: The performed functional analysis allowed us to
characterize the splicing outcome for 14 PA variants and reclassifythem according to ACMG/AMP guidelines.
I. Bychkov: None. A. Galushkin: None. A. Filatova: None. A.
Nekrasov: None. M. Kurkina: None. G. Baydakova: None. A.
Ilyushkina: None. M. Skoblov: None. E. Zakharova: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
219
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P07 Immunology and Hematopoietic System
P07.001.A Molecular basis of thalassemia in Dobrogea,
Romania
Anca Mitroi1,2, Costel Brinzan1,2, Mariana Aschie1, Adriana Apostol1,
Gerogeta Cozaru1,2
1Emergency Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Constanta,
Romania,2Ovidius University, Constanta, Romania.
Introduction : Thalassemia is a group of hemoglobin disease
caused by a reduction or absence in the synthesis of beta or alphaglobins chain that results in a group of hereditary anemia ofvarying clinical severity.
Material and methods : 71 patients laboratory suspected with
thalassemia were studied for characterization with as eitherheterozygous or homozygous for beta and alpha thalassemia.
Molecular analysis was done by PCR and reverse-hybridization in
order to detect 22 of mutations most commonly associated withbeta-thalassemia (Mediterranean type) and 21 of mutation cover-ing >90% of α-globin defect.
Results : 28% of cases have mutations of alpha or beta globins
gene and only 4% of cases have concomitant mutation in alphaand beta globins gene. 13% of patients have mutation for alphathalassemia represented by: - α
3.7gene deletion (6%), ααα3.7gene
triplication (6%) and α2polyA-2(1%). Only one patient was
homozygous for - α3.7gene deletion. 19% of patient of patients
have mutation for beta thalassemia represented by: IVS1.100
[G>A] (6%), IVS 2.745[C>G] (6%), IVS 1.6[T>C] (4%), cd8[-AA](2%)
and IVS2.1[G>A](1%). Only one patient was homozygous for IVS1.6[T>C].
Conclusion : In our study the most frequent mutation for beta
thalassemia was IVS1.100 [G>A] and IVS 2.745[C>G] similar with
other studies. The mutations cd8[-AA] and IVS2.1[G>A] were notidenti ﬁed in former studies. Regarding mutation responsible for
alpha thalassemis there are not other published studies in
Romania.
A. Mitroi: None. C. Brinzan: None. M. Aschie: None. A.
Apostol: None. G. Cozaru: None.
P07.003.C Genetic diagnoses in paediatric rheumatology clinic
Hannah L. Titheradge , Eslam Al-Abadi
Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Patients within paediatric rheumatology clinics
commonly have features of systemic in ﬂammatory disease. This
is more commonly multifactorial in nature, however increasingly
monogenic diagnoses are made. An accurate diagnosis is
important to optimise patient management.
Method: We review the outcomes from the ﬁrst 3 years of a
newly formed paediatric rheumatology and genetic multi-
disciplinary clinic. Where indicated genomic testing was performed
to try to identify a monogenic cause for the patient ’s clinical
problems. Patients seen had diagnoses of SLE, periodic feversyndrome and atypical juvenile idiopathic arthritis in the main.
Results: We review the diagnoses made from genomic testing
in this patient group and the impact on management. Patientdiagnoses have included monogenic auto-in ﬂammatory disease,
complement de ﬁciency, Fabry disease, XXX syndrome,
camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome andarthropathy secondary to tufting enteropathy.Conclusion: This highlights the importance of a genetic
diagnosis, which can positively in ﬂuence patient management
and also signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuences family planning discussions for
the patient and their families.
H.L. Titheradge: None. E. Al-Abadi: None.
P07.004.D Diagnostic performance of NGS panel genetic
testing in patients suspected for autoin ﬂammatory syndrome
Gorjan Milanovski
1, Meri Kirijas1, Boban Dobrevski1, Teodora
Brnjarchevska Blazevska1, Olivija E ﬁnska Mladenovska1, Olgica
Sibinovska1, Todor Arsov1, Katarina Stavrikj2, Kristina Mironska2, Beti
Gjurkova2, Aleksandar Petlichkovski1
1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-
Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje,Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Ss. Cyril and Methodius
University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-Skopje, PHI University Clinic for
child diseases, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: Autoin ﬂammatory syndrome (AIS) constitutes a
heterogenous group of disorders de ﬁned by recurrent episodes of
systemic in ﬂammation in the absence of pathogens, autoantibodies
and/or self-reactive lymphocytes. We report initial results from our
experience with NGS gene panel testing for AIS.
Materials and methods: Nineteen pediatric and four adult
patients with clinical suspicion of AIS were referred for genetictesting. DNA samples were analyzed on Ion Torrent platform,
using an AmpliSeq AIS gene panel, which included 34 genes
(ASAH1, CARD14, DDX58, ELANE, IFIH1, IL10RA, IL10RB, IL1RN,
IL36RN, LPIN2, MEFV, NLRC4, NLRP12, NLRP3, NOD2, MVK, PLCG2,PSMB8, SAMHD1, RBCK1, SLC29A3, RNASEH2B, ADAR, RNASEH2A,
RNASEH2C, TNFAIP3, TNFRSF11A, TNFRSF1A, NLRP1, OTULIN,
TMEM173, HAX1, PSTPIP1, TREX1) . Variant calling and interpretation
of pathogenicity was performed using the IonReporter v.5.14
variant analysis software and the ACMG criteria.
Results: The diagnostic yield of our gene panel in 23 unrelated
patients was about 10% - 2/23 patients had a likely pathogenicvariant, both in the MEFV gene (c.2084A>G and c.2282G>A)
associated with familial Mediterranean fever. A “signi ﬁcant ”VUS
variant in a gene consistent with the clinical phenotype wasidenti ﬁed in additional 10% of cases, one in NLRP12 gene
(c.1054C>T) and TNFRSF1A (c.434A>G).
Conclusion: These ﬁndings are comparable with those from the
literature and support the use of this type of genetic testing in AIS,as it helps in establishing the diagnosis of these dif ﬁcult to
diagnose and rare conditions.
G. Milanovski: None. M. Kirijas: None. B. Dobrevski: None. T.
Brnjarchevska Blazevska: None. O. Eﬁnska Mladenovska: None.
O. Sibinovska: None. T. Arsov: None. K. Stavrikj: None. K.
Mironska: None. B. Gjurkova: None. A. Petlichkovski: None.
P07.005.A Relationship between BCR-ABL1 FISH patterns,
clonal evolution, and response in CML patients in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Erna Islamagic
1, Sabira Kurtovic2, Azra Hasic1, Amina Kurtovic-
Kozaric3
1Faculty of Science, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina,2Hematology
Clinic, Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia
and Herzegovina,3Clinical Pathology, Cytology and Human Genetics,
Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia andHerzegovina.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
220
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: BCR-ABL1 FISH was part of routine diagnostic
procedure for chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients; however,
prognostic impact of the various signal patterns has not been
widely analysed. The aim of the study was to correlate differentBCR-ABL1 FISH pattern types to survival probabilities and response
in CML patients.
Materials and Methods: In this study, FISH results and clinical
data for CML-CP patients (n =83) treated in the period 08/2005-12/
2019 in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina were evaluated.Patients were categorised based on the pattern type into Group 1
(single patterns 1R1G2F, 1R1G1F, 2R1G1F, 1R2G1F, n =71) and
Group 2 (complex patterns, n =12). Patients ’variables included TKI
treatment (imatinib and/or nilotinib), OS, cytogenetic (CCyR) andmolecular responses (MMR, MR
4,a n dM R5). Survival probabilities
were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method (log-rank test).
Results: We analysed 83 patients with median follow-up of 76.5
months. Patients with single and complex patterns were on
imatinib (45% vs. 33%), nilotinib (20% vs. 8%), switched from
imatinib to nilotinib (24% vs. 59%), or did not receive TKI therapy(11% vs. 0%). At 60 months, OS was signi ﬁcantly different between
Group 1 and Group 2 (83% vs. 25%, p =0.012). Additionally, CCyR
rates at 60 months were 76% vs. 0% (p =0.013) and MMR rates
were 72% vs. 0% (p =0.042). No signi ﬁcant differences were
found in achievement of MR4or MR5in analysed groups (p =
0.107 and p =0.256, respectively).
Conclusions: Our study showed that complex BCR-ABL1 FISH
patterns were associated with worse response and progression inCML patients in Bosnia.
E. Islamagic: None. S. Kurtovic: None. A. Hasic: None. A.
Kurtovic-Kozaric: None.
P07.007.C Identi ﬁcation of the molecular etiology in con-
genital hemolytic anemias beyond hemoglobinopathies usinga targeted next-generation sequencing panel
Tahir Atik
1, Esra Isik1, Yesim Aydinok1, Mehmet Fatih Orhan2, Yesim
Oymak3, Zeynep Karakas4, Nazan Sarper5, Canan Albayrak6, Nihal
Karadas1, Ibrahim Eker7, Selma Unal8, Ozgur Cogulu1, Ferda
Ozkinay1
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir,
Turkey,2Sakarya University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Sakarya, Turkey,3Dr. Behcet Uz Children ’s Hospital,
Division of Pediatric Hematology, Izmir, Turkey,4Istanbul University
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey,
5Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Kocaeli, Turkey,6Ondokuz Mayis University Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Samsun, Turkey,7Afyon Kocatepe
University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Afyon,Turkey,8Mersin University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Mersin, Turkey.
Aim: Congenital hemolytic anemias (CHA) are a group of disorders
showing genetic heterogeneity caused by mutations in genes
encoding proteins involved in the production or structure of
erythrocytes. Despite advances in next generation sequencingtechnologies, approximately 60% of patients with CHA can bemolecularly diagnosed. This study aims to evaluate the utility of a
targeted NGS panel in CHA.
Method: Eighty-seven CHA cases from 84 families referred to
our center for molecular analysis were enrolled in the study.
Participating physicians recorded patients ’demographics, family
history, and laboratory test results onto the database afterreceiving informed consent from the patients/legal representa-tives. Molecular analysis was performed using an NGS panel
including 4811 genes (TruSight One Disease ®Panel by Illumina). Inthe panel, 66 genes associated with CHA were evaluated
concerning diagnostic compatibility with the patients ’clinical
and laboratory presentation.
Results: The molecular diagnostic rate of this targeted NGS
panel of 66 genes was 62% (54 of 87 cases). In the 54 cases havinga molecular diagnosis, 57.4% (n =31) were diagnosed with red
cell membrane protein defects and 42.6% (n =23) with enzyme
deﬁciencies. We found 48 different disease-causing variants in 12
genes (ANK1, SPTB, SPTA1, SLC4A1, EPB41, ABCB6, AK1, BPGM,G6PD, HK1, and PKLR). Twenty-three of the variants were novel.
Conclusion: In this study, we achieved a high molecular
diagnostic rate. A targeted NGS panel provides a correct anddeﬁnitive diagnosis of patients with CHA. It is essential for the
appropriate treatment of those patients.
T. Atik: None. E. Isik: None. Y. Aydinok: None. M. Orhan:
None. Y. Oymak: None. Z. Karakas: None. N. Sarper: None. C.
Albayrak: None. N. Karadas: None. I. Eker: None. S. Unal: None.
O. Cogulu: None. F. Ozkinay: None.
P07.010.B NGS-based diagnosis of congenital erythrocytosis:
extended targeted NGS and identi ﬁcation of novel candidate
genes
Aleša Kristan
1, Jana Tomc1,2, Tadeja Re žen2, Tanja Kunej3, Rok
Količ4, Andrej Vuga4, Martina Fink5,S a šaA n žej Doma5, Irena
Prelo žnik Zupan5,6, Tadej Paji č5,7, Nata ša Debeljak1
1Medical Centre for Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
2Centre for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,Slovenia,3Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,4Kemomed Research
and Development, Kemomed Ltd, Kranj, Slovenia,5Clinical Depart-
ment of Hematology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,6Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,7Clinical Institute of
Genomic Medicine, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,Slovenia.
Introduction: Congenital erythrocytosis is a rare haematological
disorder with abnormally high erythrocyte count. The diagnosticsis highly challenging due to the heterogenic genetic background.
Patients are usually screened for variants in nine genes involved in
erythropoiesis and oxygen homeostasis regulation, however inonly 30% the genetic cause is identi ﬁed. Our aim was to extend
current genetic testing of patients with idiopathic erythrocytosis
and to discover new disease-driven pathways and genes.
Material and Methods: Targeted NGS covering 24 erythrocy-
tosis and 15 haemochromatosis-associated genes was performed
on 40 patients, selected based on the national diagnostic
algorithm for erythrocytosis. Additional disease-driven mechan-isms were explored through a review of the literature and severaltools, including Reactome, String and GeneCards.
Results: Targeted NGS identi ﬁed the pathogenic variant in one
patient, c.1609G>A (p.Gly537Arg) in the EPAS1 gene, responsible
for the development of hereditary erythrocytosis type 4. Geneticscreening of other patients revealed several VUS below 1% in the
European population, that could be the single cause for
erythrocytosis or could have a combine effect. In silico weidenti ﬁed several new pathways, containing genes involved in
epigenetic modi ﬁcations, sumoylation and nuclear-cytoplasmic
shuttling, which might in ﬂuence the mechanisms of disease
development.
Conclusion: Targeted NGS revealed one pathogenic variant and
several VUS, that require further functional assessment. However,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
221
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608the inclusion of novel genes in current diagnostic solutions or
broader approaches, like WGS or WES, are needed for prompt and
accurate diagnosis of congenital erythrocytosis. ARRS grant L3-
9279, P1-0390 and Young Researcher funding.
A. Kristan: None. J. Tomc: None. T. Re žen: None. T. Kunej:
None. R. Koli č:None. A. Vuga: None. M. Fink: None. S. An žej
Doma: None. I. Prelo žnik Zupan: None. T. Paji č:None. N.
Debeljak: None.
P07.011.C A case report of an atypical FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion
in a patient with hypereosinophilia
Sadiye Ekinci1, Güldane Cengiz Seval2, Halil Gürhan Karabulut1,
Arzu Vicdan1, Seher Yüksel3,Işınsu Kuzu3, Günhan Gürman2, Timur
Tuncal ı1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara University Faculty of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey,2Department of Hematology, Ankara
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey,3Department of
Pathology, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion, which originates from an
interstitial deletion in 4q12, is observed in diverse eosinophilia-associated hematologic disorders. In FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion
protein, the JM domain of PDGFRA that is known to serve as an
autoinhibitory function is deleted and the tyrosine kinase regioncomes under the control of FIP1L1 promoter causing aconstitutive kinase activation. Here, we present a case with
hypereosinophilia in whom an atypical FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion
pattern in bone marrow specimen was detected. The case was a77 years-old-male with hypereosinophilia for four years and withmild cutaneous symptoms. In pathological examination, it was
conﬁrmed that there was no bone marrow in ﬁltration that might
be seen in secondary eosinophilia and in other hematologicalneoplasms. Two previous analyses from peripheral blood samples
failed to show the existence of FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion.
Materials and Methods: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used for the detection of FIP1L1-
PDGFRA rearrangement and the result was con ﬁrmed by sanger
sequencing.
Results: Direct sequencing of the RT-PCR product revealed that
normally spliced FIP1L1 exon 10 fused with PDGFRA sequencefollowing the genomic breakpoint within PDGFRA exon 12.
Interestingly, an-inframe deep intronic sequence of 30 bp derived
from FIP1L1 intron 10 was observed between the two genes in thefusion transcript.
Conclusions: For cases in which the fusion cannot be detected
from the peripheral blood, bone marrow analysing should beconsidered, given the fact that patients with FIP1L1-PDGFRAfusion bene ﬁt from imatinib treatment.
S. Ekinci: None. G. Cengiz Seval: None. H.G. Karabulut: None.
A. Vicdan: None. S. Yüksel: None. I. Kuzu: None. G. Gürman:
None. T. Tuncal ı:None.
P07.012.D MEFV gene mutation frequency in Georgian FMF
patients
Dodo Agladze
1,2,3, Lali Margvelashvili2, Saba Iordanishvili4, Maka
Ioseliani5, Teimuraz Mikeladze6, Hasmik Hayrapetyan7, Tamara
Sarkisian7, Oleg Kvlividze3
1Research Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Pediatric
Surgery Center KidCo, Tbilisi, Georgia,3School of Medicine, New
Vision University, Tbilisi, Georgia,4Petre Shotadze Tbilisi Medical
Academy, Tbilisi, Georgia,5New Hospitals, Tbilisi, Georgia,6CaucasusMedical Center, Tbilisi, Georgia,7Center of Medical Genetics and
Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia.
Introduction: Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal
recessive hereditary disorder caused by mutation in MEFV gene.
Higher prevalence has been estimated in populations with
Mediterranean ancestry (Armenian, Arab, Italian, Jewish, Greek
and Turkish). Prevalence of FMF has not been assessed inGeorgian population; however, it is estimated to be high sinceGeorgia borders Turkey and Armenia. The study aims to analyze
the frequency of MEFV mutations in individuals suspected for FMF
and determination of SAA1 polymorphism in diagnosed patients,
in order to estimate FMF prevalence in Georgia.
Material and methods: 118 Georgian individuals suspected for
FMF were screened for MEFV gene mutation variants M694V,
V726A, M680I(G/C), M680I(G/A), F479L, E148Q, M694I, R761H,P369S, 1692del, K695R, A744S using PCR methods. SAA1
polymorphism was analyzed in con ﬁrmed patients.
Results: From 118 patients, FMF cases were con ﬁrmed in 45
(38.1%), while 22(18.6%) carried a single MEFV mutation. From 112
alleles with detected mutations, frequency distribution of MEFV
mutations is as follows: M694V 56.3%, M680I(G/C) 11.6%, V726A
10.7%, E148Q 7.1%, R761H 6.3%, M694I 3.6%, F479L 2.7%, K695R1.8%. 4 variants(M680I(G/A), P369S, 1692del and A744S) were notdetected. From affected 45 individuals, homozygous forms were
detected in 33.3% (M694V 31.1%, M680I(G/C) 2.2%) of the cases. 5
affected individuals (11.1%) showed α/αpolymorphism of SAA1
gene.
Conclusion: Based on study results the most frequent MEFV
gene mutation is M694V. Mutation frequency distribution of MEFV
gene in Georgian patients is similar to Armenian and Turkishpopulations. This suggests the importance of prevalence analysis
of FMF in Georgian population.
D. Agladze: None. L. Margvelashvili: None. S. Iordanishvili:
None. M. Ioseliani: None. T. Mikeladze: None. H. Hayrapetyan:
None. T. Sarkisian: None. O. Kvlividze: None.
P07.014.B A novel variant in SERPING1 is associated with a
recessive form of hereditary angioedema in a consanguineous
Brazilian family
Luana Sella Motta Maia
1, Fernanda Leonel Nunes2, Marina
Mendonça Dias2, L. Karla Arruda2, Bettina Burger1, Sven Cichon1,3
1University of Basel and University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland,
2University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil,3Institute of
Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Jülich, Germany.
Introduction: Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is characterized by
recurrent episodes of severe and often life-threatening, non-pruritic
subcutaneous and submucosal edema. Different clinical and genetic
subtypes exist, and the most common forms (HAE types I/II) arecaused by dominant variants in the SERPING1 gene, resulting in C1-
inhibitor (C1-INH) de ﬁciency. C1-INH is a multifunctional serine
protease inhibitor (serpin) that controls proteases in multiple
important plasmatic pathways including in ﬂammation. Its de ﬁciency
leads to uncontrolled activation of the kinin-kallikrein systemresulting in an extended generation of bradykinin.
Materials and Methods: Two sisters from consanguineous,
unaffected parents were severely affected by HAE since adoles-cence (13 yrs.) and young adulthood (28 yrs.). No other member of
this large, Brazilian family presented any symptoms of HAE. We
extracted gDNA from whole blood of 34 family members andsequenced the coding region of the SERPING1 gene.
Results: In both symptomatic sisters, we found a homozygous
missense variant in exon 6 (c.964G>A), resulting in an amino acidAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
222
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608exchange (p.Val322Met). Fourteen family members (including the
sisters ’parents) were heterozygous carriers of the variant. Careful
clinical re-examination of these individuals excluded any HAE
symptoms.
Conclusions: HAE I/II typically is an autosomal dominant
condition caused by more than 600 described SERPING1 variants,
and there are only very few reports of HAE variants acting in a
recessive fashion. The novel recessive variant identi ﬁed in several
members of our Brazilian family gives us the unique opportunityto study the functional effect of the C1-INH p.Val322Met variant on
the control of the kinin-kallikrein system.
L. Sella Motta Maia: None. F. Leonel Nunes: None. M.
Mendonça Dias: None. L. Arruda: None. B. Burger: None. S.
Cichon: None.
P07.015.C Two new cases diagnosed with Hermansky-Pudlak
Syndrome
Ceren Alavanda1, Esra Arslan Ates2, Bilgen Bilge Geckinli1, Senol
Demir2, Hamza Polat1, Fatma Uguzdogan1, Mehmet Ali Soylemez1,
Pinar Ata1, Ahmet Arman1
1Marmara University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Depart-
ment, Istanbul, Turkey,2Marmara University Pendik Research and
Training Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey.
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive
pleiotropic disease. Its predicted prevalence is 1-9/1.000.000. It is
characterized with oculocutaneous albinism(OCA), bleeding dia-
thesis(BD), and in ﬂammatory bowel disease(IBD). Among ten
different subtypes, HPS-1 is the most common and severe form.Pulmonary ﬁbrosis can be seen in HPS-1, HPS-2, and HPS-4
patients. HPS-related gene products take part in BLOCs (biogen-
esis of lysosome-related organelle complexes) and are importantfor biogenesis of melanosome and platelet dense granules. Thirty-
seven and fourty-nine-year-old unrelated male patients with the
clinical diagnosis of HPS were referred to our clinic. Their parentsboth had consanguineous marriages. Younger patient had OCA,BD, nystagmus and IBD. Additionally, he had mental retardation
(MR) and renal failure. He had no history of lung disease. A-CGH
was performed due to MR, which is an unexpected ﬁnding in HPS,
and was found to be normal. Older patient also had OCA, BD,nystagmus and IBD. Unlike the ﬁrst patient, this patient had
normal intelligence and was diagnosed with pulmonary ﬁbrosis at
the age of 44. HPS-related genes were sequenced atIllumina NovaSeq Platform. Homozygous c.972delC (p.
Met325Trpfs*6) and c.1189delC (p.Gln397Serfs*2) mutations in
the HPS1 gene were detected in the ﬁrst and second patient,
respectively. Both were recurrent mutations, previously associatedwith HPS type 1. Herein we report clinical and genetic ﬁndings of
two patients with HPS. Although HPS is rare syndrome clinical
ﬁndings are typical for diagnosis. Identifying the subtype with
molecular studies is important for patient ’s follow-up. Our patients
will contribute the phenotype-genotype correlations in this
syndrome.
C. Alavanda: None. E. Arslan Ates: None. B. Geckinli: None. S.
Demir: None. H. Polat: None. F. Uguzdogan: None. M.
Soylemez: None. P. Ata: None. A. Arman: None.
P07.016.D Analysis of IL2, IL10 genes polymorphisms in
seronegative to herpesviruses children with recurrent respira-
tory infection
Yulia Makarova , Angela Alexandrova, Elena Mashkina, Olga
LyangasovaSouthern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Background: Features of the clinical course and the persistence of
herpesvirus infections are associated with both the heterogeneityof the pathogen and the person immune status. Cytokine genesand their SNPs affect the resistance to herpesvirus infections and
features of the viral persistence. In the current work, we
investigated the SNPs of the IL10, IL2 and their association with
the immune status of recurrent respiratory infection (RRI) children.
Material and methods: DNA samples isolated from the
peripheral blood of 76 RRI children were used. ELISA was used
for detection of IgG to CMV and EBV. Allele-speci ﬁc PCR was used
to analyze the rs2069762 and rs1800896. The method of ﬂow
cytometry was used to determine different types of lymphocytes.
Results: Signi ﬁcant differences in the frequencies of genotypes
for the polymorphism -1082G>A of the IL10 gene between
seronegative children and children with IgG to EBV were found.
The genotype -1082AA IL10 was dominated in group of
seronegative children. A direct correlation was established
between the number of B cells and the GG genotype of theIL10 gene in children with EBV and CMV (<0,05). The inverse
correlation was found between the GG genotype and the number
of NK cells in children with EBV and CMV (<0,05).
Conclusion: Features of the genotype for cytokine genes can
affect the ratio of different classes of the immune system cells and,
accordingly, the formation of immunity to herpes viruses. This
study was funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Educationof the Russian Federation #0852-2020-0028.
Y. Makarova: None. A. Alexandrova: None. E. Mashkina:
None. O. Lyangasova: None.
P07.017.A Retrospective review of genetic testing for inher-
ited bone marrow failure syndromes
Elina Hirvonen
1, Päivi Kokkonen1, Emma Mårtensson1, Hatice
Duzkale1, Joe Jacher2, Alicia Scocchia2, Kim Gall2, Zoe Powis2, Inka
Saarinen1, Johanna Sistonen1, Juha Koskenvuo1, Lotta Koskinen1,
Tero-Pekka P. Alastalo2
1Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Espoo, Finland,
2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA,
USA.
Introduction: Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS)
are characterized by aplastic anemia, congenital malformations,and increased risk to develop malignancies. Determining the
molecular etiology allows for personalized patient management,
surveillance, and recurrence risk estimation. Next-generationsequencing (NGS) panel testing is a powerful diagnostic tool.Broad inclusion of genes associated with IBMFS along with copy
number variation (CNV) analysis is expected to signi ﬁcantly
contribute to diagnostic yield.
Materials and Methods: To determine the diagnostic ef ﬁcacy
of a broad panel test, we reviewed results from IBMFS patients
who underwent Bone Marrow Failure Syndrome panel testing. The
135-gene test included sequence variant, CNV, and targetednoncoding variant analysis. CNV analysis included a proprietarymethod for exon-level CNVs. Variant interpretation followed
ACMG guidelines.
Results: Molecular diagnosis was established in 18.6% (82/442) of
patients. CNVs contributed to the diagnosis of 17.1% patients; 64.3%
of CNVs were intragenic. Diagnostic variants were identi ﬁed in 34
genes, with 44% identi ﬁed in a single patient. The most common
genes in diagnostic reports included FANCA (20.7%) associated with
Fanconi anemia and SBDS (14.6%) associated with Shwachman-
Diamond syndrome. Although variant calling in the SBDS gene isAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
223
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608complicated by segmental duplication, sequence variants were
identi ﬁed and con ﬁdently mapped to the SBDS gene.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that NGS panel testing
with CNV detection contributes to the diagnostic yield among IBMFSpatients. Pathogenic variants in SBDS were a common ﬁnding and
testing of this gene should be considered when ordering genetic
testing on individuals with, or suspected to have, an IBMFS.
E. Hirvonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics, a Que st Diagnostics Company. P. Kokkonen:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics,
a Quest Diagnostics Company. E. Mårtensson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest
Diagnostics Company. H. Duzkale: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Geneti cs, a Quest Diagnostics
Company. J. Jacher: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics In c, a Quest Diagnostics Com-
pany. A. Scocchia: A. Employment (full o rp a r t - t i m e ) ;S i g n i ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company. K. Gall: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics
Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company. Z. Powis: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest
Diagnostics Company. I. Saarinen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Geneti cs, a Quest Diagnostics
Company. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company.
J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full o rp a r t - t i m e ) ;S i g n i ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company. L. Koskinen:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics,
a Quest Diagnostics Company. T.P. Alastalo: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest
Diagnostics Company.
P07.018.B PMA induces both common and distinct genes and
pathways across heterogeneous promonocytic cell lines
Duncan A. Cosser , Kelda C. Perumal, Asavela O. Kama, Nikki L.
Gentle
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Introduction: Monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages
exhibit extensive heterogeneity with respect to their phenotypesand functions. This is mirrored in vitro by the promonocytic cell
lines commonly used to study the monocyte-to-macrophage
transition. We therefore sought to characterise the RNA abun-dance pro ﬁles of three such cell lines, in order to identify genes
and pathways core to this process, as well as those uniquely
involved in each cell line.
Materials and Methods: RNA sequencing data was obtained
across three time points to examine differences in the RNA
abundance pro ﬁles of HL60, U937, and THP-1 cells treated with
and without phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) to inducedifferentiation to a macrophage state. Differential gene expressionanalysis across time points was performed using DESeq2 v1.30.0
and pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes within each
cell line was performed using clusterPro ﬁlerv3.18.1.
Results: We identify genes uniquely expressed within both the
differentiated and undifferentiated states of each cell line, as well
as a core set of genes that characterise the change in RNA
abundance associated with PMA-induced monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation. Pathway analysis of these gene sets
reveals the transcription factors and chromatin remodelers
involved in this process.
Conclusions: A core RNA abundance signature is associated
with PMA-induced differentiation of promonocytic cell lines to a
macrophage state. However, differentiation of different cell linesalso induces distinct changes in the antiviral pro ﬁle of each
individual cell line.
KP (grant number 130622), DC and NG (grant number 122000)
are supported by the National Research Foundation.
D.A. Cosser: None. K.C. Perumal: None. A.O. Kama: None. N.L.
Gentle: None.
P07.019.C Two diseases, one patient. The importance of
cytogenetic and FISH in Hematology
Filipa Seixas , Pedro Sousa, Regina Arantes, Marta Souto, Patricia
Ferraz, Osvaldo Moutinho, Manuel Cunha, Rosário Pinto Leite
Centro Hospitalar Trás os Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal.
Myelodysplastic syndrome is an inef ﬁcient cellular process of
hematopoiesis. It is a syndrome of cellular proliferation and
apoptosis, and it ’s manifested by a hypercellular bone marrow
with cytopenias and affects multiple lineages. This syndromestarts with a genetic mutation in a multipotent hematopoieticprogenitor cell.This clinical report is about a female, 82 years old,
without relevant personal history, who has normochromic
normocytic anemia with hemoglobin of 8.2 g/dL. The endoscopicstudy with a biopsy of duodenal polyp, showed a follicular
lymphoma. To study follicular lymphoma we performed a bone
marrow study to rule out the presence of atypical lymphocytesand bone marrow involvement. Through the morphology,cytogenetics and FISH studies, myelodysplastic syndrome was
diagnosed. Also, the t(14;18) was executed, which is specif for
follicular lymphoma.In conclusion, this patient had one clone ofdel(11)(q22q35) and another with del(5)(q12q33) con ﬁrmed by
FISH. The FISH analysis to t(14;18) was negative. Isolated deletion
of chromosome 5q (frequency 72%) or del11q (represent 4% of
cases) both have a good prognosis.In the literature, these patientshave been treated with 5q- isolated syndrome, therefore the
patient was proposed to start treatment with Lenalidomide.The
presence of these two distinct diseases is an uncommon situation.Cytogenetics plays a signi ﬁcant role in supporting hemato-
oncology allowing an accurate diagnosis and consequently
targeted therapy
F. Seixas: None. P. Sousa: None. R. Arantes: None. M. Souto:
None. P. Ferraz: None. O. Moutinho: None. M. Cunha: None. R.
Pinto Leite: None.
P07.020.D Immunological pro ﬁling of patients with rare short
stature, optic nerve atrophy, and Pelger-Huet anomaly (SOPH)
syndrome
Leonid Zhozhikov1, Ayaan Ivanov1, Roza Ivanova1,2, Aitalina
Sukhomyasova1,2, Filipp Vasilev1, Nadezda Maksimova1
1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, North-
Eastern Federal University (NEFU), Yakutsk, Russian Federation,
2Republican Hospital #1, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Pathogenic variant in the neuroblastoma ampli ﬁed
sequence ( NBAS ) gene was described in the Yakut population as a
cause of short stature, optic-nerve atrophy, and the Pelger-Huet
anomaly of granulocytes (SOPH) syndrome with autosomalrecessive inheritance (OMIM #614800). Other mutations in NBAS
gene have been reported to cause multisystemic disorders with a
wide range of phenotypes including recurrent acute liver failure,
skeletal dysplasia, eyes pathologies and immunological abnorm-alities. Although SOPH patients developed a frequent respiratoryinfection, immunological parameters were not examined.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
224
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: Sampling was carried out from
unrelated Yakut patients with SOPH syndrome and healthy
individuals. The percent and number of immunocompetent cells
were determined by ﬂow cytometry. Immunoglobulin serum
levels were determined using ELISA kits. In experiments, we usedthe equipment of NEFU ’s Center for Collective Use.
Results: Serum immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, IgG, IgE) were
signi ﬁcantly reduced in SOPH patients in comparison with
controls, CD4+and CD8+T cells amounts were unremarkable.
Patients with SOPH syndrome were characterized by low
percentage and number of CD16+CD56+NK cells and slightly
lower levels of CD19+B cells.
Conclusions: We suggest that impaired immunological features
contribute to recurrent infections in SOPH patients. We would like
to emphasize that physicians should pay attention to immuno-
deﬁciency in SOPH patients to start appropriate treatment.
Functional analysis of the mutational impact on immunocompe-
tent cells is essential to understand the pathophysiology of NBAS
disorders. Grant references: This work was supported by theMinistry of Education and Science of Russian Federation (ProjectNo. FSRG-2020-0014).
L. Zhozhikov: None. A. Ivanov: None. R. Ivanova: None. A.
Sukhomyasova: None. F. Vasilev: None. N. Maksimova: None.
P07.021.A Epidemiological of Nosocomial Infection and
antimicrobial resistance pattern among different groups ofbacteria isolated from some hospitals Jeddah, KSA
Molook Al-Ghamdi
1, Effat Al-Judaibi1, Mohammed Al-Rashede2,
Awatif Al-Judaibi1
1university of jeddah, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,2Maternity and Children
Hospital Almosadya, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Nosocomial infections can be described as those that occur within
48 hours of entry to hospital, 3 days of discharge or 30 days of
surgery. These infections lead to high morbidity and mortality,prolonged hospital stays, increased use of antibiotics, andincreased costs of healing process. Our study was aim to
investigate the prevalence, distribution, and antimicrobial sus-
ceptibility rates of MDR bacteria in patients with NI from somehospitals in Jeddah city. Bacterial identi ﬁcation and susceptibility
testing were performed using modern methods from the
microbiology section. The results revealed that based on the
percentage distribution of the specimens, the highest number ofisolates for E. coli ,K. pneumoniae and S. aureus . Was from urine
and HVS for E. coli , from urine and blood for K. pneumoniae and
from HVS and wound for S. aureus . In order to control and reduce
the prevalence of these infection within healthcare settings. werecommend for the importance of surveillance and effective
infection control strategies to be implemented among the
hospitals and healthcare facilities in Saudi Arabia.
M. Al-Ghamdi: None. E. Al-Judaibi: None. M. Al-Rashede:
None. A. Al-Judaibi: None.
P07.022.B The impact of persistent infections and human
genetic variation on chronic in ﬂammation
Flavia Hodel
1,2, Olivier Naret1,2, Pedro Marques-Vidal3, Peter
Vollenweider3, Jacques Fellay1,2,4
1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, Lausanne, Switzer-
land,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland,
3Service of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Lausanne
University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,Switzerland,4Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Introduction - Several human pathogens are able to establish
chronic, sometimes life-long infections. Even if they are consid-ered latent in the majority of cases, these infections can trigger
some degree of local or systemic immune response, resulting in a
chronic state of low-grade in ﬂammation. There remains an
incomplete understanding of the potential contribution of theinteractions between persistent infections and human genetic
variation on chronic low-grade in ﬂammation.
Material and methods - We searched for potential associations
between seropositivity for a total of 24 persistent pathogens andthe plasma levels of the in ﬂammatory biomarker C-reactive
protein (CRP), using data collected in the context of the UK
Biobank and the CoLaus Study, two large population-basedcohorts of European ancestry. We performed linear model
analyses for each antigen, including as covariates the demo-
graphic and clinical factors associated with CRP as well aspolygenic risk scores for CRP (PRS-CRP), calculated separately oneach cohort.
Results: We observed increased CRP levels with each increase
in PRS-CRP quartiles. We also found evidence for an involvementofChlamydia trachomatis (p=0.004), Helicobacter pylori (p=
0.018), Cytomegalovirus (p =0.025) and Kaposi ’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus (p =0.041) infection in the determination
of increased plasma levels of CRP.
Conclusions - The results of this study improve our under-
standing of the relationship between chronic, subclinical infec-
tions and human health. These could lead to better diseaseprediction models and to the identi ﬁcation of potential novel
targets for diagnostic or therapeutic development. Grant refer-
ence: #175603 (Swiss National Science Foundation)
F. Hodel: None. O. Naret: None. P. Marques-Vidal: None. P.
Vollenweider: None. J. Fellay: None.
P07.023.C Identi ﬁcation of copy number variants relevant to
primary immunode ﬁciency from exome sequencing data
Rensheng Wan
1, Maximilian Schieck1, Winfried Hofmann1, Philipp
H. B. Knopf1, Michele Proietti2,1, Andres Caballero Garcia de Oteyza2,
Thomas Illig1, Bodo Grimbacher2,1, Doris Steinemann1
1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,2University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Introduction: Primary antibody de ﬁciencies (PADs) comprise a
group of heterogeneous disorders with defects in B celldevelopment or function. A genetic cause is often suspected,however pathogenic sequence variants are typically found in less
than 30% of PAD patients. This study focuses on copy number
variants (CNVs) and whether the diagnostic yield might beimproved by routine CNV detection.
Materials and Methods: Potential CNVs were called with the
ClinCNV algorithm from whole exome sequencing (WES) data
from 200 PAD patients. Stringent ﬁltering based on 430 loci
related to PID, internal quality control parameters, and thedatabase of genomic variants. Independent validation of CNVs
was done by SNP-array.
Results: A total of 24 CNVs in 23 patients were validated. This
suggests presence of potentially clinically meaningful CNVs in
11.5% of this PAD cohort. Two patients had heterozygous
microdeletions in chromosome 22q11.2 . Abnormal lymphocyte
proliferation, hypogammaglobulinemia, and autoimmune hemo-lytic anemia observed in both patients seem accountable to
22q11.2 microdeletion. Two patients had homozygous deletions ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
225
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608ICOS exons 2 and 3, representing a known founder variant.
Consistent with ICOS de ﬁciency, patients had hypogammaglobu-
linemia, splenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia. Another 19
patients had CNVs in a broad range of PID-related genes, e.g.LRBA, TNFAIP3, PSTPIP1, MEFV, FANCA, TYK2, and IKBKG .
Conclusions: CNV analysis from WES data has potential to
increase the diagnostic yield in the PAD cohort substantially.
Functional analysis of newly identi ﬁed CNVs needs to follow.
Grants: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Ger-
many ’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2155 - Projektnummer
390874280.R. Wan holds a DAAD scholarship.
R. Wan: None. M. Schieck: None. W. Hofmann: None. P.H.B.
Knopf: None. M. Proietti: None. A. Caballero Garcia de Oteyza:
None. T. Illig: None. B. Grimbacher: None. D. Steinemann: None.
P07.024.D PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen-initiated
inﬂammatory responses
Akari Suzuki , Takumi Shibuya, Kazuhiko Yamamoto
RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan.
Previously, peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 (PADI4) was
identi ﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
by genome-wide association studies. Peptidyl citrulline is a target
antigen of anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPAs), and onlyPADs (translated protein from PADI genes) can provide peptidylcitrulline via modi ﬁcation of protein substrates. Also the distribu-
tion of PADI4 and PADI2 has overlap in immune cells. The aim of
this study is to investigate the relationship between PADI4 geneand PADI2 gene in the progression of RA. To clarify thephysiological function of PADI4 and PADI2 in RA, we used
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), known as a RA model mouse. We
examined that localization of PAD4 and PAD2 protein wasindicated by immunohistochemistry in CIA mice. We also
measured expression of Padi genes and various in ﬂammatory
cytokines in immune cells by real-time TaqMan assay and ELISA,respectively. We generated PADI4 −/−and PADI2 −/−mice and
performed experimental arthritis. We demonstrated that the
clinical disease score was signi ﬁcantly decreased in PADI4 −/−
mice and PADI4 expression was induced by CII immunization. InPADI4−/−mice sera, serum anti-type II collagen (CII) IgM, IgG, and
inﬂammatory cytokine levels were also signi ﬁcantly decreased
compared with those in wild-type mice sera. Interestingly, PADI2
expression was compensationally induced in CD11b +cells of
PADI4-/- mice. We examined that the clinical disease score of CIA
mimce and expression levels of Padi genes in PADI2 −/−CIA mice.
It appears that PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen-initiatedinﬂ
ammatory responses. We are currently working on a double
knockout mouse.
A. Suzuki: None. T. Shibuya: None. K. Yamamoto: None.
P07.025.A Genotyping of Russian patients with RA using the
targeted NGS panel
Ekaterina A. Vetchinkina1, Dmitriy S. Mikhaylenko1,2, Ekaterina B.
Kuznetsova1,2, Ekaterina A. Alekseeva1, Irina V. Bure1, Marina V.
Nemtsova1,2
1First Moscow State Medical University named I.M. Sechenov,
Moscow, Russian Federation,2Research Center for Medical Genetic,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune
disease characterized by synovial in ﬂammation and destruction ofcartilage and bone. RA is considered as a multifactorial disease
triggered by a genetic predisposition and environmental factors.
Unfavorable alleles of various genes have a relatively small
inﬂuence on the disease risk when they appear individually, but in
combination, they predispose an individual to RA development.
Materials and methods: Genotyping of 85 SNPs and 6 complete
genes was performed using NGS on a target panel (IAD177464_185)
in 125 patients with RA. The allele frequencies from the GnomADbase for Caucasian were used as control. Statistical analysis wasperformed by STATISTICA version 13.5.0. The result values were
corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.
Results: According to our data, the alleles HLA-DRB1*04, HLA-
DRB1*01, HLA-B27, PTPN22 (rs2476601), TNF (rs1800629), TPMT(rs2842934), IL4 (rs2243250) and genotypes HLA-DRB1*04*04,
HLA-DRB1*01*16, PTPN22 (rs2476601), TPMT (rs2842934) were
signi ﬁcantly associated with the development of the disease in
patients. We investigated of associations with clinical criteria
(DAS28-CRP, HAQ-DI, CDAI) and biochemical factors (ACPA
formation, RF, CRP). We have shown that the PADI4 genotypes(rs11203367, rs2240340, rs11203366, rs874881) are signi ﬁcantly
associated with the baseline levels of DAS28-CRP, HAQ-DI, CDAI,
genotypes IL23R (rs7530511), TNFRSF1A (rs748004, rs2228144)
with the level of ACPA, the genotypes DHODH (rs3213422), MTHFR(rs180113) with the concentration of CRP, and the genotypesIL2RA (rs2104286), IRAK3 (rs11541076) and IL4R (rs1801275) with
the level of RF.
Conclusions: Application of targeted NGS panel contributes to
expanded genotyping to identify risk groups among Russian
patients with RA.
E.A. Vetchinkina: None. D.S. Mikhaylenko: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of Science and HigherEducation of the Russian Federation, Ref. No. RFMEFI60518X0003.
E.B. Kuznetsova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the RussianFederation, Ref. No. RFMEFI60518X0003. E.A. Alekseeva: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of Science and
Higher Education of the Russian Federation, Ref. No. RFME-
FI60518X0003. I.V. Bure: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the RussianFederation, Ref. No. RFMEFI60518X0003. B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Grant from theRussian Science Foundation, Ref. No. 20-75-10117. M.V. Nemt-
sova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of
Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, Ref. No.RFMEFI60518X0003.
P07.026.B A very rare case of immunode ﬁciency with
autoin ﬂammation
Mihaela T. Bataneant
1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Estera Boeriu2,
Mihaela Baica2, Andreea Beloia2, Patricia Urtila2
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes", Romania,
Romania,2University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes",
Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction: Infection with recurrent fever is very suggestive for
primary immunode ﬁciency, but immunode ﬁciency associated with
autoin ﬂammation is very rare recognized. Case presentation. A 1 year
old female, from non-consanguineous parents and no signi ﬁcant
family history was admitted for suspicion of immunode ﬁciency. Since
3 months of age, after the vaccination, she presented at each 2-3weeks fever, vomiting and diarrhea for 5-10 days. Clinical examrevealed a Down sd. like face, psychomotor delay, microcephaly.
Laboratory tests showed a microcytic hypochromic anemia withAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
226
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608normal ferritin con ﬁrmed as sideroblastic anemia by bone marrow
aspiration, variable leucocyte(2 200 - 8000/μL), neutrophil(630-4500/
μL) and lymphocyte count(1180-3500/μL), negative coprocultures
and coproantigenes, hypogammag lobulinemia(1,7%), a C reactive
protein >100 mg/L. Down sd., celiac d isease, hypothyroidism, cystic
ﬁbrosis, Schwachmann-Diamond sd, IBD were excluded. Immunolo-
gical explorations showed low IgA, IgG and IgM, poor response to
vaccination, B lymphopenia and low switched memory B cells. Takingin account the early onset, hypog ammaglobulinemia and periodic
fever with the similar picture we performed WES that revealed
double heterozigous c.608 +1G > T/c.1246A > G missense mutation
in TRNT1 gene causing SIFD (sideroblastic anemia with B cellimmunode ﬁciency, periodic fever and developmental delay). She
started immunoglobulin substitution. Due to severe prognosis and
because 2 patients were successfully bone marrow transplantated we
take in discussion to perform BMT in this case.
Conclusion: SIFD is a very rare immunode ﬁciency, 33 patients
being reported until present. It must be suspected in each case of
periodic fever with the similar picture associated with hypogam-maglobulinemia and developmental delay, genetic explorationbeing crucial.
M.T. Bataneant: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. E. Boeriu:
None. M. Baica: None. A. Beloia: None. P. Urtila: None.
P07.027.C Biological miR-146a-TRAF6 axis is associated with
lupus ﬂares and renal ﬁbrosis progression
Olga Martinez-Arroyo
1, Ana Ortega1, Javier Perez-Hernandez2, Ana
Flores1, Josep Redon3, Maria J. Forner3, Raquel Cortes1
1Biomedical Research Institute Clinic Hospital - INCLIVA, Valencia,
Spain,2INSERM, U1016, I, Cochin Institute, Paris, France,3Universitary
Clinic Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: Urinary exosomes, especially microRNAs (miRNAs)
packaged within, are ideal sources of renal damage markers. We
investigated the association between exosomal miR-146a, (anti-inﬂammatory regulator) and disease activity, proteinuria and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) ﬂares over a 36-month follow-
up period.
Methods: We isolated urinary exosomes from 41 SLE patients,
27 with lupus nephritis (LN) and 20 healthy controls, and exosomalmiR-146a, quanti ﬁed by the real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (RT-qPCR), was correlated with histological features
in 13 renal biopsies. We also analysed the association between theexosomal miR-146a and TNF receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6
axis).
Results: Exosomal miR-146a showed an inverse association with
circulating C3 and C4 complement components, proteinuria, andwith histological features such as chronicity index. This marker was
able to identify LN with an AUC of 0.82 (p =0.001). Basal exosomal
miR-146a was associated with disease activity and proteinuriachanges and was an independent marker of 36-month follow-upﬂares (OR 7.08, p =0.02). Pathway analysis identi ﬁed IRAK1 and
TRAF6 as miR-146a target genes. Finally, in vitro experiments
suggested that miR-146a exerts a protective effect throughnegative regulation of in ﬂammation by suppressing IRAK1 and
TRAF6.
Conclusions: Urinary exosomal miR-146a levels are correlated
with lupus activity, proteinuria and histological features, discrimi-nating patients with LN and being a good baseline marker of SLE
ﬂares. We have identi ﬁed a relevant biological miR-146a-TRAF6
axis association in LN renal ﬁbrosis progression. Funding from
Carlos III Health Institute (PI18/01405, CD18/00166) and with ERDF.O. Martinez-Arroyo: None. A. Ortega: None. J. Perez-
Hernandez: None. A. Flores: None. J. Redon: None. M.J. Forner:
None. R. Cortes: None.
P07.028.D Association toll-like receptor TLR2 and TLR9 gene
polymorphism and carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in
children with recurrent respiratory infections
Inna Pokudina , Elizaveta Peshehodko
Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Recurrent respiratory infections (RRI) in children
represent a social issue. RRI are mainly caused by viruses, however,
their course is often complicated by Staphylococcus aureus
infections. Toll-like receptors play an important role in theactivation of the immune system by regulating the production
of antimicrobial peptides and in ﬂammatory cytokines. This study
aimed to explore the association between the gene polymorph-isms of TLR2, TLR9 and the nasopharyngeal carriage of Staphylo-
coccus aureus in children with RRI.
Material and methods: The polymorphisms TLR2 (Arg753Gln )
and TLR9 (T-1237C ) were genotyped in 48 children with RRI ( ≥4
episodes in the year) 2-10 years old. 20 children were with known
S. aureus nasopharyngeal carrier status and 18 noncarriers (control
group). Genomic DNA was extracted from blood of participants,genotyping was performed using RT-PCR.
Results: No differences were found between carriers and
noncarriers regarding the allelic ( χ2=0,84; р=0,358) and geno-
type ( χ2=0,926; р=0,63) distribution of the TLR2 . For the
polymorphism of TLR9 , statistically signi ﬁcant differences were
found in the distribution of allele ( χ2=8.161; p =0.005) and
genotypes ( χ2=7.538; p =0.024) frequencies. Сarriage of domi-
nant homozygous Т/ТTLR9 trait increases the likelihood to protect
against S. aureus (OR=0,11; 95 % CI 0,02-0,63), heterozygous Т/С
increases the risk (OR =5,85; 95 % CI 1,03-32,79).
Conclusion: Our study indicated the potential role the
polymorphisms TLR9 (T-1237C) as the genetic marker of predis-
position to Staphylococcus aureus carriage. This study was funded
by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian
Federation #0852-2020-0028.
I. Pokudina: None. E. Peshehodko: None.
P07.029.A Molecular spectrum of Von Willebrand Disease
Type 3
Esra Isik1, Durdugul Ayyildiz Emecen1, Kaan Kavakli1, Fahri Sahin1,
Enise Avci Durmusalioglu1, Canan Albayrak2, Melike Evim3, Ekrem
Unal4, Fatma B. Belen5, Neslihan Karakurt6, Ozgur Cogulu1, Ferda
Ozkinay1, Tahir Atik1
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey,2Ondokuz May ıs
University Faculty of Medicine, Samsun, Turkey,3Uluda ğUniversity
Faculty of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey,4Erciyes University Faculty of
Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey,5Başkent University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey,6Sancaktepe Prof. Dr. İlhan Varank Training and
Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
Aim: Von Willebrand disease (VWD) is the most common inherited
bleeding disorder caused b y patogenic variants in VWF gene. The
prevalence of VWD is reported between 0.1-1%. The disease is
classi ﬁed into 3 subtypes due to the qualitative or quantitative
disorder of von Willebrand factor. Pathogenic variants can beAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
227
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608detected via a VWF sequence analysis, in 65% of Type 1 and 80% of
Type 3 patients. In this study, molecular spectrum of 29 patients from
28 different families followed up with VWD type 3 was evaluated.
Material and Method: 29 patients from 28 different families
with a pre-diagnosis of VWD were included in the study. Theclinical features and laboratory ﬁndings of patients were obtained
from their hospital records. The VWF gene was sequenced by the
next generation sequence analysis method. The detected variantswere investigated in HGMD (Human Genome Mutation Database)and EAHAD-CFDB (EAHAD Coagulation Factor Variant Databases).
ACMG criteria were used to evaluate the pathogenicity of variants.
Results: In our study, 17 of the patients were female. In VWF
gene analysis, 21 different variants associated with the VWD type3 were identi ﬁed and nine of them were frameshift, ﬁve missense,
ﬁve nonsense and two splice site mutation. Seven (c.3533delC,
c.1898G>A, c.6589delG, c.1486G>T, c.6239delA, c.480delG,c.2733dupT) of the variants had not been previously reported in
the literature.
Conclusion: By de ﬁning seven novel mutations, this study
enriched to the molecular spectrum of VWD type 3, while alsoproviding a further insight for genetic counselling.
E. Isik: None. D. Ayyildiz Emecen: None. K. Kavakli: None. F.
Sahin: None. E. Avci Durmusalioglu: None. C. Albayrak: None.
M. Evim: None. E. Unal: None. F.B. Belen: None. N. Karakurt:
None. O. Cogulu: None. F. Ozkinay: None. T. Atik: None.
P07.030.B New "ural" variants of BTK-gene in Russian patients
with agammaglobulinemia
Svetlana Deryabina
1,2,3, Elena Vlasova4, Irina Tusankina1,2
1The Ural Institute of Immunology and physiology, Ekaterinburg,
Russian Federation,2Federal State Autonomous Educational Institu-
tion of Higher Education «Ural Federal University named after theﬁrst President of Russia B.N.Yeltsin, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation,
3Medical Center “Health Care of Mother and Child ”, Ekaterinburg,
Russian Federation,4Sverdlovsk Regional Children Clinical Hospital,
Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation.
Background: X-linked agammaglobulinemia is a primary disorder
of humoral immunity, the main symptom of which is a de ﬁciency
of B cells. The BTK gene associated with pathology has more than500 mutations, including single base pair substitutions, splicing
defects, and small deletions and insertions. Since 2014 seven
patients with a de ﬁciency of the B-cell were received molecular
genetic con ﬁrmation for this congenital error of immunity. One
child was diagnosed in ﬁrst year of life, two children were
examined at 2 years old, another 4 at the age of 5 years.Periodically respiratory diseases occurred in childhood of thisbabies did not alert district doctors, only acute clinical manifesta-
tions of the disease they were sent a case to immunologist.
Results: We identi ﬁed 7 causative genetic variants by the
targeted sequencing of the BTK-gene. Four mutations previously
reported in the BTKdatabase and three variants out of 7 detected
are new*. Table 1. Results of the molecular genetic study of
patients with XLA
No. patient New variant of BTK-gene (GRCh38, NM_000061)
1 c.1051_1052insA (p.Gln297AlafsTer26)*
2 c.928_929insA (p.Ser310LysfsTer13)*
3 c.64_76del13(delCCTCTAAACTTCA), (p.P22fsTer28)*
Conclusion . Seven patients has a molecular veri ﬁcation for the
diagnosis X-linked agammaglobulinemia. Four families (4 mothers,
1 aunt, 2 siblings) were issued a conclusion on the family variant
of the pathology inheritance. This information allow parents tocarry out prenatal diagnosis of X-linked disease in the fetus during
the next pregnancy, and siblings have have important information
for planning their families in the future.
S. Deryabina: None. E. Vlasova: None. I. Tusankina: None.
P08 Intellectual Disability
P08.001.C Increasing the diagnostic yield of copy number
variation using an exonic aCGH
Neus Baena , Elisabeth Gabau, Núria Capdevila, Juan Pablo Trujillo,
Carmen Mata, Anna Ruiz, Nino Spataro, Miriam Guitart
Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, SABADELL, Spain.
Introduction: The increase in resolution and coverage of aCGH is
of particular importance for genes implicated in neurodevelop-
mental disorders that are subject to copy number variation (CNV).The aim is to evaluate the diagnostic yield achieved using anexonic aCGH platform and to determine the rate of missed cases
between two different platforms.
Material and Methods: An 60k aCGH (Agilent Technologies)
wasﬁrst used as a ﬁrst tier test for neurodevelopmental disorders
from 2013 to 2019. In 2020 we have incorporated a high-
resolution exon targeted aCGH of 180k (Oxford Gene Technology,
OGT).
Results: Using the OGT technology aCGH the diagnostic yield
increased from 10.6% to 15%. A 3.4% of cases would not have
been diagnosed using the low density platform. It corresponds to14 cases (11 deletions and 3 duplication). The size of CNV rangesbetween 2.2 kb to 243 kb. All these case were con ﬁrmed using
customized MLPA. Among those cases, some are of particular
interest: exon 45 deletion in DMD gene, exon 2 deletion of TMLHE
and downstream CN5-ECR1-CN9 enhancers deletion of SHOX .
Conclusions: Increasing aCGH resolution to single exons led to
detection of small CNVs in known disease genes, some intragenic
CNVs can easily be missed using a lower resolution array. Ourﬁndings highlight the importance of high-resolution aCGH and
the critical analysis of aCGH data surrounding genes that are
involved by genomic variation.
N. Baena: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevila: None. J.
Trujillo: None. C. Mata: None. A. Ruiz: None. N. Spataro: None.
M. Guitart: None.
P08.002.D Re ﬁning the phenotype and expanding the
genotype of Xia-Gibbs Syndrome (OMIM #615829)
Ana Teresa Serrano Antón
1,2, María José Sánchez Soler1,2, Mary
Ballesta Martínez1,2, Vanesa López González1,2, Lidia Rodríguez
Peña1,2, Encarna Guillén Navarro1,2
1Sección de Genética Médica. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de
la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,2Grupo Clínico Vinculado al
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome (XGS, OMIM#615829) results
from de novo truncating variants within the AHDC1 gene. About
100 patients worldwide have been identi ﬁed. The spectrum of
manifestations comprises hypotonia, developmental delay, intel-
lectual impairment, brain structural anomalies, sleep dif ﬁculties,
growth/feeding issues and dysmorphic facial features. Thephenotype is still expanding.
Material and Methods: Retrospective descriptive study of
patients with XGS diagnosis at clinical genetics service of Spanish
tertiary-level hospital.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
228
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: We describe four males, ages between 7 and 24 years,
born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. During pregnancy,
structural ultrasounds were normal. All presented with hypotonia,
developmental delay (2/4 absent expressive speech) and variableintellectual disability. All show stereotypic demeanor, three withbehavior disorder. Brain structural anomalies were demonstrated
in everyone by MRI: cortical dysplasia, asymmetric ventriculome-
galy, hydrocephaly and fossa posterior anomalies. Whole patientswith strabismus, two refractive error added. Cryptorchidism in 3/4.Two exhibit patellar subluxations. One manifested feeding
difﬁculties with growth failure at infancy and nocturnal snoring.
Facial features, nonspeci ﬁc, in all: depressed nasal bridge, thin
upper lip and horizontal eyebrows. Whole exome sequencing(WES) revealed de novo heterozygous truncating variants at
AHDC1 gene: two nonsense (c.2260C>T and c.2062C>T) and two
frameshit (c.2641_2644dupGCCC and c.2565delT), none of thempreviously reported.
Conclusions: We report on four new cases of XGS. Hypotonia,
intellectual impairment, stereotypic demeanor, brain structuralanomalies and strabismus compose their phenotype. Sleep/feeding dif ﬁculties appear in only one. Moreover, dysmorphism
do not demonstrate a recognizable pattern. This emphasize WES
to identify new cases and to provide additional clinical andmolecular data.
A. Serrano Antón: None. M. Sánchez Soler: None. M. Ballesta
Martínez: None. V. López González: None. L. Rodríguez Peña:
None. E. Guillén Navarro: None.
P08.003.A Clinical and molecular characteristics of 44 Tunisian
patients with Angelman Syndrome
Hana Fredj
1, Asma Azaza2, Lilia Kraoua1, Ahlem Achour1, Hedia
Klaa3, Ichraf Kraoua3, Melek Trigui1, Rym Meddeb1, Ines Ouertani1,
Neila Belghith1, Faouzi Maazoul1, Ridha Mrad1, Madiha Trabelsi1
1Department of Congenital and Hereditary Diseases, Charles Nicolle
Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia,2Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, University of
Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia,3Department of Child and Adolescent Neurology,
Institute Of Neurology Mongi Ben Hmida, Tunis, Tunisia.
Introduction: Angelman syndrome (AS) (NM_105830) is a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by developmentaldelay, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, movement
or balance disorder, seizures and characteristic abnormal behavior.
AS is caused by the loss of expression of the maternal copy of theUBE3A gene in 15q11.2-q13 imprinted region. Many genetic
mechanisms are involved, of which the most frequent was the
deletion of the maternally inherited 15q11.2-q13 region.
Materials and Methods: Clinical and genetic analyses of a
cohort of 44 patients, referred to our Department of Congenital
and Hereditary Diseases from 2004 to 2020. MS-PCR was
performed for diagnostic con ﬁrmation while FISH, microsatellites
study and UBE3A gene sequencing were realized to genetic
mechanism determination.
Results: We noted one familial form with 6/44 affected cases
and 38/44 sporadic ones. The sex ratio was 1,44. The averageage at the ﬁrst presentation was 4 years and at the diagnosis
conﬁrmation was 4.5 years. All patients had developmental
delay, severe speech impairment and characteristic behavior.
Seizures and ataxia were noted in 81.8 and 72.7% of patients,
respectively. The physical examination revealed hypopigmenta-
tion (72.7%), an evocative facial dysmorphia. 70.4%, microce-
phaly (63.6%) and strabismus (68% ). The follow-up was possible
for only 59% of patients. The ge netic mechanisms were 15q11-
q13 microdeletion (30/44), UBE3A mutations (8/44) and maternal
DUP15 (3/44).Conclusion: We studied the largest cohort of AS in Tunisia. A
better knowledge of AS clinical features will allow an earlier
diagnosis and an adapted care.The determination of the genetic
mechanism re ﬁnes the genetic counselling.
H. Fredj: None. A. Azaza: None. L. Kraoua: None. A. Achour:
None. H. Klaa: None. I. Kraoua: None. M. Trigui: None. R.
Meddeb: None. I. Ouertani: None. N. Belghith: None. F.
Maazoul: None. R. Mrad: None. M. Trabelsi: None.
P08.004.B Haploinsuf ﬁency of ARFGEF1 is associated with
developmental delay, intellectual disability and epilepsy withvariable expressivity
Quentin Thomas
1,2,3, Thierry Gauthier4, Dana Mara ﬁ5,6, Thomas
Bernard7,8, Marjolaine Willems9, Sébastien Moutton1,3, Bertrand
Isidor7,8, Benjamin Cogné8,7, Solène Conrad7,8, Romano Tenconi10,
Maria Iascone10, Arthur Sorlin1,3,11, Alice Masurel1,3, Tabib Dabir12,
Adam Jackson13, Siddharth Banka13,14, Julian Delanne1, James R.
Lupski5,15,16, Nebal W. Saadi17,18, Fowzan S. Alkuraya19,20, Fatema Al
Zahrani19, Pankaj B. Agrawal21,22, Eleina England23, Jill A. Madden24,
Jennifer E. Posey5, Lydie Burglen25,26, Diana Rodriguez27, Martin
Chevarin3, Sylvie Nguyen28, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them3,28, Yannis
Duffourd3, Philippine Garret3, Ange-Line Bruel3, Patrick Callier3,28,
Nathalie Marle3, Anne-Sophie Denomme-Pichon3,28, Laurence
Duplomb3,28, Christophe Philippe28,3, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,1,29,
Jérôme Govin4, Laurence Faivre1,3,30, Antonio Vitobello3,28
1Genetics Center, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne University
Hospital, Dijon, France,2Department of Neurology, Dijon Bourgogne
University Hospital, Dijon, France,3Inserm UMR1231 team GAD,
University of Burgundy and Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,4Institute
for Advanced Biology, Centre de Recherche UGA, INSERM U1209CNRS
UMR5309, Site Santé, La Tronche, France,5Department of Molecular
and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,
6Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University,
Safat, Kuwait,7Service de génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes,
France,8Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l ’institut du thorax,
Nantes, France,9Unité INSERM U 1051, Département de Génétique
Médicale, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,10University of
Padova, Laboratorio Genetica Medica Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy,
11Functional Unit of Innovative Diagnosis for Rare Diseases, Dijon
Bourgogne University Hospital, Dijon, France,12Medical genetics
Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK BT9 7AB, Belfast, Ireland,
13Division of Evolution & Genomic Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University ofManchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,14Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, St Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom,15Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA,16Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,17College of Medicine,
University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq,18Children Welfare Teaching
Hospital, Baghdad, Iraq,19Department of Genetics, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
20Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine,
Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,21Divisions of Newborn
Medicine and Genetics & Genomics, Manton Center for OrphanDisease Research, Boston, MA, USA,22Department of Pediatrics,
Boston Children ’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA,
23Center for Mendelian Genomics, Program in Medical and Popula-
tion Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
USA,24The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Division of
Genetics & Genomics; Boston Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,
25Centre de Référence des Malformations et Maladies Congénitales
du Cervelet, et Département de Génétique, AP-HP.Sorbonne Uni-
versité, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France,26Developmental BrainAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
229
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Disorders Laboratory, Imagine Institute, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris,
France,27APHP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trous-
seau, UPMC Université, Inserm U676, Paris, France,28Functional Unit
of Innovative Diagnosis for Rare Diseases, Dijon BourgogneUniversity Hospital, Dijon, France,29Centre de référence Dé ﬁciences
Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Dijon Bourgogne University Hospital,
Dijon, France,30Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et
Syndromes Malformatifs, Dijon Bourgogne University Hospital, Dijon,France.
Introduction: ADP Ribosylation Factor Guanine nucleotide
Exchange Factors (ARFGEFs) are a family of proteins implicatedin cellular traf ﬁcking between the Golgi apparatus and the plasma
membrane through vesicle formation. Amongst them, ARFGEF1/
BIG1, involved in axon elongation, neurite development and
polarization processes, has been previously suggested as acandidate gene for rolandic epilepsy, familial febrile convulsions
and epileptic encephalopathy. However, its implication in human
disease has not been con ﬁrmed so far.
Methods and Results: Through international data sharing, we
identi ﬁed 13 individuals presenting with neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDDs) and carrying heterozygous likely damaging
variants in ARFGEF1 , identi ﬁed as a candidate research gene after
negative clinical exome analyses. These individuals displayedcongruent clinical features of motor developmental delay (12/13),
speech delay (12/13), behavioral disorders (12/13), intellectual
disability (10/13), brain neuroanatomical ﬁndings (7/13), and
epileptic disorders (6/13), although phenotypes were variable,
even within families. While almost half of the cohort carried de
novo variants, at least 40% of variants were inherited from mildly
affected parents, clinically reevaluated by reverse phenotyping.Our functional assays show that the mechanism underlining
ARFGEF1 -related conditions is consistent with haploinsuf ﬁciency.
Conclusions: Overall, these results show that pathogenic
variants in ARFGEF1 are responsible for sporadic and familial
cases of NDDs with variable expressivity. In this respect, some
individuals carried rare variants found in the Genome Aggregation
Database - gnomAD, indicating that phenotypes may be verymild. Eventually, ARFGEF1 should be routinely screened in
unsolved cohorts of individuals presenting with neurodevelop-
mental disorders with or without epilepsy.
Q. Thomas: None. T. Gauthier: None. D. Mara ﬁ:B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Medical Genetics Research Fellowship Program. T. Bernard: None.
M. Willems: None. S. Moutton: None. B. Isidor: None. B. Cogné:
None. S. Conrad: None. R. Tenconi: None. M. Iascone: None. A.
Sorlin: None. A. Masurel: None. T. Dabir: None. A. Jackson:
None. S. Banka: None. J. Delanne: None. J.R. Lupski: E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; 23andMe. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Regeneron Genetics Center. N.W. Saadi: None. F.
S. Alkuraya: None.
F. Al Zahrani: None. P.B. Agrawal: None. E.
England: None. J.A. Madden: None. J.E. Posey: None. L. Burglen:
None. D. Rodriguez: None. M. Chevarin: None. S. Nguyen: None.
F. Tran Mau-Them: None. Y. Duffourd: None. P. Garret: None. A.
Bruel: None. P. Callier: None. N. Marle: None. A. Denomme-
Pichon: None. L. Duplomb: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-
Robinet: None. J. Govin: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Vitobello:
None.
P08.005.C Inherited ARID1B variants: evidence of non-
pathogenicity or variable expression?
P.J. van der Sluijs1, M. Alders2, A Dingemans3, E Gerkes4, B.W. van
Bon5, J.C. Dempsey6, D Doherty6,7, I Miller8, J.A. Rosenfeld9,10,S
Moortgat11, K Parbhoo12, M Pastore12, D Regier8, B Schmalz12,TSmol13, K.E. Stuurman14, B.B.A. de Vries3, S.E. Hickey12,15,I
Maystadt*11, G.W.E. Santen*1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, Netherlands,2Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,4Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,5Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,6Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA,7Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle
Children ’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA,8Genetics and
Metabolism, Children ’s National Hospital, Washington, WA, USA,
9Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,10Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston,
TX, USA,11Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de
Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium,12Division of Genetic & Genomic
Medicine, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA,
13Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine, CHRU de Lille-Hôpital
Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France,14Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,15Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University
College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
ARID1B is one of the most frequently mutated genes in intellectual
disability (~1%). Most variants in ARID1B are readily classi ﬁed,
since pathogenic variants are usually de novo and truncating.
Recently we have shown that the ARID1B phenotype can include
normal IQ values, suggesting that a pathogenic variant may beinherited from a very mildy affected parent. We also found thatsome regions seem to be devoid of ARID1B mutations suggesting
that truncating variants here may not lead to ARID1B haploinsuf-
ﬁciency. Thus, for some truncating variants, in particular those
which are inherited, it may be dif ﬁcult to make the distinction
between non-pathogenic variants or pathogenic variants with
variable expression. We collected patients with potentiallytruncating variants which could not be readily classi ﬁed because
of inheritance or the location of the variants, and performed DNA
methylation analysis. In total, 12 patients were included. With
clinical and DNA methylation studies we were able to con ﬁdently
classify most variants. We thus identi ﬁed 5 families with
transmitted pathogenic variants con ﬁrming highly variable
expression. We also provide further evidence of an alternative
start-site, which is located between cDNA position 363-521, andformulate guidelines for the interpretation of ARID1B variants.
*shared last author
P. van der Sluijs: None. M. Alders: None. A. Dingemans: None.
E. Gerkes: None. B. van Bon: None. J. Dempsey: None. D.
Doherty: None. I. Miller: None. J. Rosenfeld: None. S. Moortgat:
None. K. Parbhoo: None. M. Pastore: None. D. Regier: None. B.
Schmalz: None. T. Smol: None. K. Stuurman: None. B. de Vries:
None. S. Hickey: None. I. Maystadt*: None. G. Santen*: None.
P08.006.D Clinical phenotype associated with ARID2 patho-
genic variants: a report of twelve new cases and literaturereview
Clara Houdayer
1, Alban Ziegler1, Céline Bris1, Alice Goldenberg2,
Antoine Bonnevalle2, Mélanie Fradin3, Christèle Dubourg3, Marie
Vincent4, Benjamin Cogné4, Sandra Whalen5, Boris Keren5, Christel
Tauvin6, Arthur Sorlin6, Ange-Line Bruel6, David Geneviève7, Rebecca
Procopio8, Karen Gripp8, Jennifer Schleit9, Brice Mendelsohn9, Olivier
Patat10, Marine Tessarech1, Agnès Guichet11, Dominique Bonneau11,
Bertrand Isidor4, Estelle Colin1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
230
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University
Hospital, Angers, France,2Department of Genetics and Reference
Centre for Developmental Disorders, Rouen University Hospital,
Rouen, France,3Department of Genetics, Rennes University Hospital,
Rennes, France,4Department of Genetics, Nantes University Hospital,
Nantes, France,5Department of Genetics, APHP, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Paris, France,6Department of Genetics, Dijon University Hospital,
Dijon, France,7Department of Genetics, Montpellier University
Hospital, Montpellier, France,8Division of Medical Genetics, AIdu
Pont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA,9Division of Medical
Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA,10Depart-
ment of Genetics, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France,
11Department of Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers,
France.
ARID2 (AT-rich interaction domain 2) is a newly described disease-
causing gene encoding a protein belonging to the SWI/SNF
complex, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex
which regulates DNA accessibility at the nucleosome andfacilitates DNA transcription, replication and repair. ARID2 acts as
a tumor suppressor and has also been involved in intellectual
disabilities including "SWI/SNF-related intellectual disability dis-
orders" (SSRIDDs). Furthermore, it has been shown very recentlythat ARID2 haploinsuf ﬁciency is associated with enhanced RAS-
MAPK activity. To date, twenty-two individuals have been reported
with intragenic ARID2 mutations or deletions at chromosome
12q12-13.11, where ARID2 is located. These individuals share
common features including intellectual disability, hypotonia,
behavioral disorders, short stature, and dysmorphic features that
may overlap with those of RASopathies. In order to furtherdelineate the ARID2 phenotypic spectrum, we report a cohort of
twelve unrelated individuals harboring ARID2 deletion or patho-
genic variants and we compare their features with those
previously described. The clinical characteristics of individualsfrom this series seem to be more moderate, in particular, someindividuals had mild or even absent intellectual disability and they
had more moderate growth abnormalities. Behavioral problems,
anxiety and attention-de ﬁcit hyperactivity disorder appear to be
common features of this condition.
C. Houdayer: None. A. Ziegler: None. C. Bris: None. A.
Goldenberg: None. A. Bonnevalle: None. M. Fradin: None. C.
Dubourg: None. M. Vincent: None. B. Cogné: None. S. Whalen:
None. B. Keren: None. C. Tauvin: None. A. Sorlin: None. A. Bruel:
None. D. Geneviève: None. R. Procopio: None. K. Gripp: None. J.
Schleit: None. B. Mendelsohn: None. O. Patat: None. M.
Tessarech: None. A. Guichet: None. D. Bonneau: None. B. Isidor:
None. E. Colin: None.
P08.007.A Investigating the "dark" genome reveals the ﬁrst
family with Partington syndrome in Cyprus
Constantia Aristidou
1,2, Athina Theodosiou3,2, Elena Spanou-
Aristidou1, Violetta Christophidou-Anastasiadou4,1,2, Carolina Sis-
mani3,2, George A. Tanteles1,2
1Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,2The Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine,
The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
3Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Department of Clinical
Genetics, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus.
We present a large four-generation family having multiple
affected male individuals with a var iable intellectual disability
(ID), hand dystonia and epilepsy phenotype, segregating
in an X-linked manner. Extensive genetic testing includingwhole-exome and whole-genome sequencing (short-read) were
inconclusive.
In this study, NGS data was revisited by focusing on poorly
covered, GC-rich ( “dark ”) genomic areas, particularly on the
X-chromosome (chrX), to potentially reveal unidenti ﬁed
clinically-relevant variants. Speci ﬁcally, forty-three previously
reported low-coverage chrX protein-coding regions were cross-
checked against twenty-nine chrX genes/diseases highly asso-ciated (p < 0.05) with ID (HP:0001249) and focal dystonia(HP:0004373) according to the Phenomizer tool. The resulting
regions were manually inspected with IGV to identify candidate
variants. Finally, Sanger sequencing was used to con ﬁrm familial
co-segregation of ﬁndings.
Two low-coverage regions resulted from the cross-check;
chrX:25013469-25013696 and chrX:111744737-111744820 (hg38)
overlapping the ARX (aristaless-related homeobox) and ALG13 genes,
respectively. The former was of particular interest as it overlaps a
mutation hotspot associated wit h non-syndromic or syndromic
X-linked ID, including the hand dystonia-related Partington syn-drome. Visual inspection of whole- genome data revealed a recurrent
ARX pathogenic variant NM_139058.3:c.441_464dup, p.Ala148_A-
la155dup ( ARXdup24), which was never ﬂagged by downstream NGS
analyses but was nevertheless con ﬁrmed in all affected males. The
non-affected mothers were ARXdup24 carriers, while the non-
affected fathers, other non-affected relatives, and healthy unrelated
control were ARXdup24 negative.
In conclusion, the pathogenic ARXdup24 variant was unmasked
supporting genotype-phenotype correlation in the ﬁrst Partington
syndrome family in Cyprus. Investigating the “dark ”genome and
utilizing Phenomizer for diagnostic assistance are highlighted toidentify clinically-relevant variants in unsolved cases/families.
C. Aristidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. E. Spanou-
Aristidou: None. V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou: None. C.
Sismani: None. G.A. Tanteles: None.
P08.008.B Diagnosis in the era of NGS and variant reclassi ﬁca-
tions: a case of genetic disease or not?
Amelia Dobrescu
1, Alexandru Caramizaru2, Cristina Durac2, Raluca
Tutunaru2, Andreea Catana3
1CRGM Dolj, UMF Craiova, Craiova, Romania,2CRGM Dolj, Craiova,
Romania,3UMF Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj, Romania.
Introduction: In the past years, we have witnessed a remarkable
technological evolution in genetic testing. However, from a
clinician ’s point of view, it is still dif ﬁcult to manage a patient
with neuromotor developmental delay and to determine thegenetic or non-genetic nature of the disease.
Materials and Methods: We report the case of a 10 year old
patient who presented with a regression in neuromotor develop-
ment at age one. Later on, further aspects emerged: ASD, ADHD,delayed motor and language development, intellectual andlearning disability, generalized seizures, focal epilepsy, tic dis-
orders and sleep problems. Multiple genetic investigations were
performed.
Results: T h ek a r y o t y p ew a sn o r m a l( 4 6 , X Y ) ,a sw a st h en u m b e r
of CGG repeats. CGH-array showed a 391 kb gain on chromo-
some X, but the CNV was not considered pathogenic. WES
identi ﬁed two heterozygous varian ts in the ASXL2 gene, both
classi ﬁed as VUS, and the diagnosis of Sashi-Pena syndrome was
possible. Three years later, after the family decided to perform a
prenatal diagnosis for a new pregnancy, the diagnosis of Sashi-Pena syndrome for the index patient was also excluded due tothe fact that the two ASXL2 variants were reclassi ﬁed as likely
benign.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
231
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: A few questions remain unanswered regarding
this case. Do the clinical aspects have a genetic cause? Is a test like
whole genome sequencing needed? Could there also be a
reclassi ﬁcation for the CNV discovered by CGH-array? Should we
offer genetic counseling based on the information we have, orrefrain and wait for more evidence to become available?
A. Dobrescu: None. A. Caramizaru: None. C. Durac: None. R.
Tutunaru: None. A. Catana: None.
P08.009.C A new case of Bainbridge-Ropers syndrome
Ilona Jaszczuk1, Izabela Winkler2, Agnieszka Sobczy ńska-Tomas-
zewska3, Aleksandra Pietrzyk3, Monika Lejman4, Wiktor Wojcza-
kowski5, Dorota Koczkodaj1
1Department of Cancer Genetics with Cytogenetic Laboratory,
Medical University, Lublin, Poland,2St’Johns Center Oncology, Lublin,
Poland,3MedGen Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland,4Genetic
Diagnostics, Department of Pediatric Hemathology, Oncology andTransplantology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland,5Department of
Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Lublin,
Poland.
Introduction: Bainbridge- Ropers syndrome (BRPS; OMIM #
615485) is a rare developmental disorder characterized by
psychomotor and speech delays, intellectual disability and autismspectrum disorders, ﬁrst described in 2013. Additional clinical
features include hypotonia, feeding dif ﬁculties, postnatal growth
failure and dysmorphic facial features. The underlying cause of the
syndrome is constitutive variants in the ASXL3 gene. We present
an 10-old girl with recognized Bainbrigde- Ropers syndrome andconﬁrmed variant in the ASXL3 gene.
Materials and methods: During diagnostic procedure analysis
of karyotyping, MLPA test (P-245), comparative genomic hybridi-zation to microarray (aCGH) study and sequencing a panel of 372
genes (NGS) correlated with short stature, dysmorphic features
and mental retardation were performed.
Results: The cytogenetic analysis showed normal balanced
female karyotype 46,XX. Molecular analyses with MLPA and aCGH
methods did not reveal any genome imbalances. NGS analysis
allowed identi ﬁcation of new heterozygotic variant p.Glu367Glyf-
sTer17 (c.1095_1096delAA) in the ASXL3 gene. This variant is
reported in dbSNP database (rs1599562180) and ClinVar Database
as likely pathogenic. Mutation was con ﬁrmed using Sanger
sequencing. Molecular analysis of p.Glu367GlyfsTer17 was alsoperformed for proband ’s parents but mutation was not identi ﬁed,
what con ﬁrmed de novo character of variant of ASXL3 gene.
Conclusions: In the case of patients with intellectual disability
and autism spectrum disorders, BRPS should be considered in thedifferential diagnosis. Research using the NGS technique facilitates
and accelerates the diagnosis of patients with delayed psycho-
motor and speech development, ASD and dysmorphic features.Patients with BRPS require multidirectional care with theindividualization of the learning process.
I. Jaszczuk: None. I. Winkler: None. A. Sobczy ńska-Tomas-
zewska: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. M. Lejman: None. W.
Wojczakowski: None. D. Koczkodaj: None.
P08.010.D WAC Related intellectual disability: presentation of
ﬁve new patients
Clothilde ORMIERES
1, Marlène RIO1, Jeanne AMIEL1, Severine
DRUNAT2, Sophie RONDEAU3, Céline HUBER4, Valérie CORMIER
DAIRE1,41Service de Génétique clinique, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker Enfants
Malades, Paris, France,2Service de génétique moléculaire, AP-HP,
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France,3Service de biologie moléculaire,
AP-PH, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France,4Université de
Paris, Laboratory of Molecular and Physiopathological Bases ofOsteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR 1163, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France.
Background : Deletions encompassing 10p11.23 and de novo
variants in WAC are responsible for DeSanto-Shinawi syndrome,
described for the ﬁrst time in 2012 and reported less than 20 cases
so far.
Methods : We report here the clinical and molecular character-
ization of 5 unrelated patients, 4 with loss-of-function WAC
variants and 1 with a deletion encompassing 10p11.23. Clinical
data were obtained by retrospective ﬁle analysis, clinics and
formal neuropsychological evaluation.
Results : Clinical ﬁndings included hypotonia (4/5), develop-
mental delay (5/5), intellectual disability (3/5), behavioral problems(3/5), eye abnormalities (5/5), sleep problems (2/5), attentiondeﬁcit-hyperactivity (3/5), anxiety (5/5), MRI abnormalities (2/5),
short stature (3/5), feeding dif ﬁculties (1/5), hypogammaglobuli-
nemia (1/5) growth hormone de ﬁciency (1/5), kidney abnormal-
ities (1/5), cardiopathy (1/5). All patients have dysmorphic features.We identi ﬁed one de novo deletion 60 kb 10p11.23 encompassing
WACand four new heterozygous de novo WAC variants, including
two nonsense, and two frameshift variants. All were predicted tocause loss of function either through nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay or protein truncation.
Conclusions : Our series improves clinical description of WAC-
related intellectual disability. Patients presented with recognisablecharacteristic facial dysmorphism and a variable neurocognitive
phenotype. Interestingly intellectual disability was quite variable
while behavioral and attention disorders were consistentlyobserved. Functional studies are necessary to improve theunderstanding of the pathogenicity of WAC variants.
C. Ormieres: None. M. Rio: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Drunat:
None. S. Rondeau: None. C. Huber: None. V. Cormier daire:
None.
P08.011.A BICRA-based neurodevelopmental disorder: Two
additional case reports and computational analysis of facial
gestalt
Axel Schmidt
1, Tzung-Chien Hsieh2, Alexej Knaus2, Sophia Peters1,
Elisabeth Mangold1, Martina Kreiß1, Janbernd Kirschner1, Hartmut
Engels1, Peter M. Krawitz2
1University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
Recently, de novo loss-of-function and missense variants in the
gene BICRA were described as causative for a novel autosomal-dominant neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) in twelve patients.
Using trio exome sequencing in individuals with NDDs, we
identi ﬁed two children with rare heterozygous de novo loss-of-
function BICRA variants (frameshift and nonsense). Child 1 wasborn small for gestational age and presents with microcephaly,
speech delay, ectopic renal tissue and dysmorphic stigmata
including epicanthal folds, a broad nasal bridge and upslantingpalpebral ﬁssures. Child 2 postnatally developed short stature with
pronounced microcephaly, developmental delay, incomplete right
bundle branch block, and facial dysmorphisms (broad nasalbridge, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, epicanthal folds). Of note,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
232
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608child 2 also has a molecularly con ﬁrmed spinal muscular atrophy,
which was treated by Nusinersen followed by Onasemnogene
abeparvovec. To compare the facial phenotypes of the present
patients and the seven published patients with available facialimages, we applied the GestaltMatcher algorithm. This analysisrevealed overall similarities between the patients with two
noteworthy clusters of similar facial gestalts: one with two
individuals (missense variant and small deletion) and one clusterwith six individuals including our patients (frameshift, nonsense,and small deletion variants). In summary, the phenotypes of the
two children reported here ﬁt well with the features of the
recently reported BICRA-based NDD such as developmentaldelays, microcephaly, short stature and genitourinary and cardiacabnormalities. In addition, GestaltMatcher successfully detected
similarities of facial features between patients. Therefore, our
report solidi ﬁes the BICRA-based NDD as a distinct disease entity.
A. Schmidt: None. T. Hsieh: None. A. Knaus: None. S. Peters:
None. E. Mangold: None. M. Kreiß: None. J. Kirschner: None. H.
Engels: None. P.M. Krawitz: None.
P08.012.B A homozygous truncating variant in CCDC186 in an
individual with epileptic encephalopathy
Melanie Brugger
1, Fiona Becker-Dettling2, Theresa Brunet1, Tim
Strom1, Thomas Meitinger1, Susanna Müller3, Kristina Huß2, Eberhard
Lurz4, Ingo Borggräfe2,5, Matias Wagner1,6
1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany,2Division of Pediatric
Neurology, Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Depart-ment of Pediatrics, Dr. von Haunersches Childrens Hospital, LudwigMaximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
3Institute of
Pathology, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Munich,
Germany,4Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Dr. von Hau-
nersches Childrens Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University of
Munich, Munich, Germany,5Comprensive Epilepsy Center Ludwig
Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany,6Institute of
Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH, GermanResearch Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
Introduction: A disease association of biallelic variants in
CCDC186 , a downstream effector of RAB2 involved in dense core
vesicle traf ﬁcking, has been previously suggested, but only a
single patient has been described in the literature. Previous
studies in C. elegans and rat insulinoma cells illustrate the
importance of CCDC186 (or its orthologue CCCP-1) for formation
and cargo sorting of dense core vesicles in neurons, (neuro)
endocrine and exocrine cells.
Material and Methods: We performed exome sequencing of a
female patient presenting with epileptic encephalopathy and her
parents at the Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of
Munich, Germany. Clinical investigations and treatment of thepatient was performed at the Dr. von Haunersches ChildrensHospital in Munich, Germany.
Results: The 2-year old female patient born form consangui-
neous parents presented with severe developmental delay,microcephaly and epileptic encephalopathy with no ability to sitand lacking visual ﬁxation of objects. Seizures and EEG were
refractory to several antiepileptic drugs and steroids. Additionally,
failure to thrive and feeding dif ﬁculties requiring a percutaneous
feeding tube as well as exocrine and possible endocrine
pancreatic dysfunction were present. Trio exome sequencing
identi ﬁed the homozygous loss-of-function variant c.767C>G; p.
(Ser256Ter) in the candidate gene CCDC186 (NM_018017.2).
Conclusions: We provide detailed clinical information on a
patient with a biallelic truncating variant in CCDC186 and illustratethe phenotypic similarities to the previously reported patient.
Thus, we further strengthen an association of CCDC186 biallelic
variants with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder.
M. Brugger: None. F. Becker-Dettling: None. T. Brunet: None.
T. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. S. Müller: None. K. Huß:
None. E. Lurz: None. I. Borggräfe: None. M. Wagner: None.
P08.013.C CDC25B biallelic variants cause short stature,
microcephaly, intellectual disability, developmental delay,
facial dysmorphism and microphthalmia
Muhammad Ansar
1,2, Fabienne Pituello3, Sohail A. Paracha4, Sophie
Bel-Vialar3, Emmanuelle Ranza2,5, Federico A. Santoni2,6, Muhammad
T. Sarwar4, Jawad Ahmed4, Eric Agius3, Stylianos E. Antonarakis2,7,8
1Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel,
Switzerland,2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,3Centre de Biologie du
Developpement, Centre de Biologie Integrative, Universite de Toulouse,CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France,4Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan,5Medigenome, Swiss
Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland,6Department of
Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University hospital ofLausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,7Service of Genetic Medicine,
University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,8iGE3 Institute of
Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
There are many rare autosomal recessive disorders for which the
exact molecular etiology remains unknown. Consanguinity that
results in large genomic regions of homozygosity facilitates thedetection of novel gene-disease links. Here, we report three affectedindividuals (two siblings and one cousin) with short stature,
microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, developmental delay,
hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and microphthalmia, from a Pakistaniconsanguineous family in which we have identi ﬁed homozygosity
for p.(Arg350Pro) in the CDC25B gene (Genbank NM_021873.3) that
segregated with the disease phenotype. CDC25B (Cell Division Cycle25B), a member of the CDC25 family of phosphatases, is a tyrosineprotein phosphatase, which induces the mitotic progression and
activates the cyclin dependent kinase CDC2 by removing two
phosphate groups. Experiments in chick embryos showed that themutant protein (CDC25B with Pro350) affects the cell cycle andneurogenesis. The genetic evidence in the family and functional
experiments in chick embryos indicate that the homozygous
pathogenic variant in CDC25B are likely the cause of a recessive
syndrome with short stature, microcephaly, severe intellectual
disability and developmental delay.
M. Ansar: None. F. Pituello: None. S.A. Paracha: None. S. Bel-
Vialar: None. E. Ranza: None. F.A. Santoni: None. M.T. Sarwar:
None. J. Ahmed: None. E. Agius: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None.
P08.014.D <New heterozygous mutation in CDK13 gene in a
child with developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features,
and congenital heart defect.>
Ruya M. Bafaqih , Azhar Maghribi, Zohor Azher
Medical genetics department, Faculty of Medicine, Umm al-qura
university, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
CDK13 is a protein-coding gene for a member of the cyclin-
dependent kinases family
1. Heterozygous pathogenic mutations
in CDK13 are inherited in an autosomal dominant mannercharacterized by congenital heart defects, dysmorphic facialAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
233
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608features, and intellectual developmental disorder2. We present
data relating to a child investigated for global developmental
delay, intellectual disability, malformations of the heart and great
vessels, autistic traits, and attention de ﬁcit hyperactivity disorder.
The whole-exome sequencing test identi ﬁed in the CDK13 gene a
heterozygous variant p. (Asp855Glu). To our knowledge, this
variant is not reported before, and it is absent in the general
population in the control databases. In silico analysis, predict adeleterious effect of this variant. Based on the ACMG guidelines,this variant is classi ﬁed as a likely pathogenic variant. There are no
variants identi ﬁed in other genes in this child; this gene can most
likely explain this child ’s phenotype. To our knowledge, there are a
few cases reported with a mutation in cdk13 with the same clinicalfeature. References:1 - Greifenberg, A. K., D. Hönig, K. Pilarova, R.
Düster, K. Bartholomeeusen et al ., 2016 Structural and Functional
Analysis of the Cdk13/Cyclin K Complex. Cell Rep 14 :320-331. 2-
Bostwick, B., 1993 CDK13-Related Disorder in GeneReviews( ®),
edited by M. P. Adam, H. H. Ardinger, R. A. Pagon, S. E. Wallace, L. J.
H. Bean et al . University of Washington, Seattle Copyright © 1993-
2020, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is aregistered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle.
All rights reserved., Seattle (WA).
R.M. Bafaqih: None. A. Maghribi: None. Z. Azher: None.
P08.015.A Inherited variants in CHD3 demonstrate variable
expressivity in Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome
Jet van der Spek
1,2, Joery den Hoed3,4, Lot Snijders Blok1,2,3, Alexander
J. M. Dingemans1,2, Dick Schijven3,4, E. Martina Bebin5,S t e f a n i eB e c k -
Wödl6, Gea Beunders7, Natasha Brown8, Melanie Brugger9,T h e r e s a
Brunet9, Philippe M. Campeau10,11,G o r a n Čuturilo12,13, Tobias B.
Haack6, Irina Hüning14, Ralf A. Husain15, Benjamin Kamien16,C h r i s t i n a
M. Lill14,17,18,J a n i n eM a g g6,A l e šMaver19, Danielle C. Monteil20,
Charlotte W. Ockeloen1, Christopher Richmond8, Eva M. C. Schwai-
bold21, Marleen E. H. Simon22,S t e f ﬁSpranger23,T i o n gT a n8, Michelle L.
Thompson24, Ella Wilkins8,25, Marjolein H. Willemsen1,L i s e n k aE .L .M .
Vissers1,2,S i m o nE .F i s h e r2,3, Tjitske Kleefstra1,2
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Donders Institute for Brain, Cogni-
tion and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Language and Genetics,
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
4International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences,
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
5University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA,
6Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,7University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands,8Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Victoria,
Australia,9Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical
University Munich, Munich, Germany,10CHU Sainte-Justine Research
Center, Montreal, QC, Canada,11Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of
Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada,12University Children ’s Hospital
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,13Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,14Institute of Human Genetic, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,15Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena
University Hospital, Jena, Germany,16King Edward Memorial
Hospital, Subiaco, Australia,17Lübeck Interdisciplinary Platform for
Genome Analytics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,18Ageing
Epidemiology Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom,19Centre for Mendelian Genomics, Clinical
Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
20Naval Medical Center Portsmouth, Portsmouth, VA, USA,21Institute
of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany,
22Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands,23Praxis für Humangenetik-Bremen, Bremen,Germany,24HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL,
USA,25Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Victoria, Australia.
The number of genetic diagnoses in individuals with neurodeve-
lopmental syndromes has greatly increased over the past decade.Whereas de novo occurrence strongly supports pathogenicity of a
variant in commonly used diagnostic pipelines for next generation
sequencing, inheritance from a seemingly healthy parent gen-erally downgrades it. However, variable penetrance and expres-sivity challenge this paradigm.
De novo CHD3 variants cause Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome
(SNIBCPS; MIM#618205). Here, we identi ﬁed nineteen families with
an inherited CHD3 variant, likely explaining the proband ’s
phenotype (12 predicted pathogenic missense and 7 predicted
loss of function variants). We observed no difference between the
phenotype of probands with de novo and inherited CHD3 variants,
including developmental delay/intellectual disability (100%),
speech delay (100%) and facial dysmorphisms. Carrier parents
had a milder or absent phenotype.
In addition to clinical phenotyping we performed several
analyses. First, we established a facial analysis model and showed
that facial characteristics of probands with an inherited CHD3
variant signi ﬁcantly overlapped with those of de novo cases.
Secondly, we used an Human Phenotype Ontology basedcomputational comparison to objectively demonstrate the simi-
larity between de novo and inherited cases. Thirdly, we found that
healthy individuals with CHD3 stop-gain variants have lowered
CHD3 transcript and CHD3 protein levels. Lastly, we evaluated the
effect of rare CHD3 variance on a population level, using UK
biobank data.
Taken together, our data demonstrate variable expressivity for
SNIBCPS, and exemplify that rare inherited variation in genes
described with de novo variants in neurodevelopmental syn-
dromes, can be causal due to yet underreported variableexpressivity.
J. van der Spek: None. J. den Hoed: None. L. Snijders Blok:
None. A.J.M. Dingemans: None. D. Schijven: None. E.M. Bebin:
None. S. Beck-Wödl: None. G. Beunders: None. N. Brown: None.
M. Brugger: None. T. Brunet: None. P.M. Campeau: None. G.
Čuturilo: None. T.B. Haack: None. I. Hüning: None. R.A. Husain:
None. B. Kamien: None. C.M. Lill: None. J. Magg: None. A.
Maver: None. D.C. Monteil:
None. C.W. Ockeloen: None. C.
Richmond: None. E.M.C. Schwaibold: None. M.E.H. Simon:
None. S. Spranger: None. T. Tan: None. M.L. Thompson: None.
E. Wilkins: None. M.H. Willemsen: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None.
S.E. Fisher: None. T. Kleefstra: None.
P08.018.D Novel variant in DDX3X causes syndromic DDX3X
related neurodevelopmental disorder
Kamil ėŠiauryt ė1, Kristina Grigalionien ė2,3, Algirdas Utkus2,A u šra
Matulevi čienė2
1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Department of Human and
Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,3Centre for Medical
Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius,Lithuania.
Introduction: DDX3X related neurodevelopmental disorder
(DDX3X -NDD) is a very rare entity, with less than 200 cases
described in literature, caused by mutation in DDX3X gene
(Xp11.4). Characteristic features of DDX3X -NDD include mild to
severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, behavioral problems,movement disorders, dysmorphic features.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
234
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and methods: A girl, 9 years of age, from unrelated
parents, presents with severe intellectual disability, mostly absent
speech, muscle hypotonia, stereotypical movements, ataxic gait,
convergent strabismus, occasional seizures. Notable phenotypicfeatures include prominent arched eyebrows, low nasal tip, thickupper lip, high and narrow palate, misaligned teeth, distal
hypotrophy of leg muscles, hypermobile small joints, lax skin,
pronounced signs of puberty. Girl also exhibits hyperactivebehavior, episodes of unprovoked laughter. SNP-CGH assay andother screening tests showed no pathology.
Results: Exome sequencing revealed heterozygous frameshift
variant leading to premature stop codon NM_001356.5:c.1629_1630dupAT (NP_001347.3:p.(Phe544TyrfsTer8) in DDX3X
gene. This variant was not reported in population databases
(1000G, ExAC, GnomAD) and literature previously. Variant is
classi ﬁed as pathogenic in Varsome database and appears highly
deleterious after in silico analysis.
Conclusion: The frameshift variant in DDX3X gene should be
considered as a cause for intellectual disability in girls. However,characteristic features of DDX3X -NDD are unspeci ﬁc and hardly
distinguishable from other intellectual disability syndromes,
posing challenge to clinicians. Exome sequencing is an indis-
pensable tool to reach the ﬁnal diagnosis and gather further
evidence on very rare disorders.
K.Šiauryt ė:None. K. Grigalionien ė:None. A. Utkus: None. A.
Matulevi čienė:None.
P08.019.A Gene spectrum in Russian patients with develop-
mental delay, and/or epilepsy, and/or microcephaly via next-generation sequencing
Victoria Zabnenkova , Tatiana Cherevatova, Anna Orlova, Polina
Gundorova, Olga Mironovich, Oxana Ryzhkova
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background: The diagnosis of developmental delay, epilepsy and
microcephaly is complicated by the variability of the phenotypicmanifestation. Patients may have combined dysmorphic features,
intellectual disability, and seizures. NGS is an effective strategy for
genetic analysis in this complex condition.
Materials and methods: DNA samples of 501 patients with
developmental delay, and/or epilepsy, and/or microcephaly have
been analyzed with WES(265, IDT) and CES(236, Roche).
Results: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were
identi ﬁed in 84 genes in 107 patients (107/501, 21,4%). 14 genes
have met two or more times: SCN1A ,ARID1B ,AP4B1 ,ATP1A3 ,
ANKRD11 ,CDKL5 ,IQSEC2 ,KIF11 ,KMT2D ,LZTR1 ,MECP2 ,NALCN ,
POG2 ,SMARCA2
. Interestingly, the c.1160_1161delCA(p.
Thr387ArgfsTer30) mutation was found three times in a hemi/
homozygous state in the AP4B1 gene(NM_006594.5), previously
described as cause of spastic paraplegia (OMIM 614066). Also,there were two different mutations affecting the same codon1181 in the NALCN gene(NM_052867.4). According to the type of
inheritance the ﬁndings were divided as follows: 4 cases - X-linked,
30 cases - autosomal recessive, 73 cases - autosomal dominant(including de novo ). Promising variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
are registered in 138 genes. There is a group of genes encoding
proteins of ion channels ( KCN1 ,KCNB1 ,KCNE2 ,KCNH2 ,KCNJ10 ,
KCNQ3 ,KCNT1 ,SCN2A ,SCN3A ,SCN8A ,SCN9A ) in these ﬁndings.
Variants occur not only in patients with epilepsy, but also in those
with developmental delay due to epileptic encephalopathy.
Conclusion: The results of this study demonstrate signi ﬁcant
genetic heterogeneity among patients with developmental delay,epilepsy, microcephaly, identify additional phenotypes, and
expand the mutation spectrum.V. Zabnenkova: None. T. Cherevatova: None. A. Orlova: None.
P. Gundorova: None. O. Mironovich: None. O. Ryzhkova: None.
P08.020.B With or without highly restricted-Down syndrome
critical region (HR-DSCR). report of two new partial trisomy 21cases and review of the recent literature
Maria Chiara Pelleri
1, Chiara Locatelli2, Teresa Mattina3,M a r i aC l a r a
Bonaglia4, Francesca Piazza1, Pamela Magini5, Francesca Antonaros1,
Giuseppe Ramacieri1, Beatrice Vione1,L o r e n z aV i t a l e1,M a r c oS e r i6,
Pierluigi Strippoli1, Guido Cocchi7, Allison Piovesan1, Maria Caracausi1
1Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine
(DIMES), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Neonatology Unit, St.
Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy,4Cytogenetics Laboratory, Scienti ﬁc
Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini (Lecco), Italy,5Medical
Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy,6Medical
Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi P olyclinic, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
7Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), Uni versity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is caused by the presence of an
extra copy of full or partial human chromosome 21. Partial trisomy
21 (PT21) is an invaluable model for the study of genotype-
phenotype correlation in DS. In particular, a 34-kb highly restrictedDS critical region (HR-DSCR) has been identi ﬁed as the minimal
region whose duplication is shared by all PT21 subjects diagnosed
with DS, while it is absent in all PT21 non-DS subjects reported in the
literature up to 2017.
Materials and Methods: We report clinical data and cytoge-
netic characterizations of two PT21 children never described
before. Moreover, we performed a systematic bibliographic search
for new PT21 reports recently published to further investigate theassociation between the presence of three copies of the HR-DSCR
and the DS diagnosis.
Results: Clinical and cytogenetic analyses of the two PT21
children reported here revealed specular features: one case withthe HR-DSCR among the duplicated regions is diagnosed with DS,
while the other without the HR-DSCR duplication has no DS
diagnosis. As demonstrated by clinical data and cytogenetic mapcorrelation also including PT21 reports recently published, weconﬁrmed the presence of duplicated HR-DSCR in all DS subjects
and its absence in all non-DS individuals.
Conclusions: The results are fully consistent with the hypoth-
esis that the HR ‐DSCR is critically associated with DS diagnosis. No
exception to this pathogenetic model was found. Further studies
are needed to detect genetic determinants likely located in theHR-DSCR and possibly responsible for core DS features, inparticular intellectual disability.
M. Pelleri: None. C. Locatelli: None. T. Mattina: None. M.
Bonaglia: None. F. Piazza: None. P. Magini: None. F. Antonaros:
None. G. Ramacieri: None. B. Vione: None. L. Vitale: None. M.
Seri: None. P. Strippoli: None. G. Cocchi: None. A. Piovesan:
None. M. Caracausi: None.
P08.023.A Molecular analysis of a novel donor splice site
variant in DYNC1H1
Gunda Petraityt ė,ŽivilėMald žienė, Violeta Mik štienė, Evelina
Siavrien ė, Tautvydas Ran čelis, Vaidutis Ku činskas, Egl ėPreik šaitien ė
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
235
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Cytoplasmic dynein 1 is a cytoskeletal motor
transporting various cargos in cells and playing speci ﬁc roles
such as empowering neurotrophic signaling important for
neuronal survival. DYNC1H1 (MIM#600112) gene encodes a heavy
chain 1 of the cytoplasmic dynein. Heterozygous mutations of thisgene are linked to neuromuscular (MIM#158600, MIM#614228)
and neurodevelopmental disorders (MIM#614563). Here we
describe a study performed to investigate the pathogenicity of anovel intron variant in DYNC1H1 .
Materials and Methods: A male, 14 years of age, was referred
for genetic assessment for intellectual disability and abnormality
of cerebral cortex. WES was applied to analyse DNA of theproband and both parents. The DNA of healthy brother wasanalysed by Sanger sequencing. To determine the effect of
identi ﬁed splice site variant on mRNA structure, total blood mRNA
of the proband was isolated, template cDNA was synthesized, andSanger sequencing was performed.
Results: Analysis of DNA samples revealed heterozygous donor
splice site variant NC_000014.9(NM_001376.5):c.6405 +1G>C in
DYNC1H1 gene as de novo in the proband ’s DNA. In silico , this
altered donor site probably affects mRNA splicing. PCR of
proband ’s cDNA resulted in two different fragments. Sanger
sequencing revealed retaining intron 31 in one of them,presumably leading to a frameshift and premature stop codontruncating motor region of the protein (NP_001367.2:p.
(Ile2136LeufsTer20)).
Conclusions: The molecular analysis of the donor splice site
variant NC_000014.9(NM_001376.5):c.6405 +1G>C in DYNC1H1
revealed disrupted mRNA splicing which leads to truncated and
probably dysfunctional protein causing neurodevelopmentalphenotype of the proband.
The work was funded by the Research Council of Lithuania (No.
S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179).
G. Petraityt ė:None. Ž. Mald žienė:None. V. Mik štienė:None.
E. Siavrien ė:None. T. Ran čelis: None. V. Ku činskas: None. E.
Preik šaitien ė:None.
P08.024.B Development delay in paediatric patient with
deletion on chromosome 15q26.2
Milica Pesevska
1, Violeta Anastasovska1, Elena Sukarova-
Angelovska1, Dragica Nestoroska1, Gordana Ilieva1, Sandra
Panovska2
1Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss.Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Department of
Human Genetics, Avicena Diagnostic, Skopje, Skopje, Macedonia, TheFormer Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: Subtelomeric chromosomal regions are gene rich.
Approximately 2.5% of the patients with mental retardation withor without association of dysmorphic features have deletions inthese segments.
Materials and Methods: We performed a aCGH analysis in
paediatric patient using the CytoScan_750k Array platform(Affymetrix) which comprises 550 k non-polymorphic and 200 kSNP markers by the Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) Software
(v4.0).
Results: We present a 4-year old girl with following dysmorphic
signs - downward corners of the mouth and large oral opening,
saddle nose with wide nasal root, retracted eye bulbs, triangular
pointed eyebrows, asymmetrical placement of the eyelid, smalleropening of the lid, asthenic pointed forehead, short philtrum,small chin and sparse hair. She had development delay with ﬁne
rough motoric skills without signi ﬁcant hypotonia and signs ofhyperactivity with poor vocabulary. Height and weight were under
3
thpercentile. Karyotype analysis was normal as well as FISH
analysis for 4p-deletion performed by suspicions for Wolf-
Hirschorn syndrome. aCGH analysis showed pathological deletionof 5,025 kb segment on 15q26.2 (14 OMIM genes) and additionalduplication of 4,179 kb segment on the 1p36.33 chromosome (57
OMIM genes) according to ClinVar and OMIM database. The genes
IGFR1, MEF2A, CHSY1, and TM2D3 in the deleted region could bedelineated according to patient phenotype.
Conclusions: The deletion on 15q26.2 may lead to the
description of clinically recognizable syndrome associated with
development delay. Further examinations should be performedfor including other genes in the pathological condition.
M. Pesevska: None. V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova-
Angelovska: None. D. Nestoroska: None. G. Ilieva: None. S.
Panovska: None.
P08.025.C Solve-RD: the ITHACA perspective
A-S Denommé-Pichon*
1,2, E. de Boer*3,4, A Jackson*5, E Benetti*6,S
Banka5,7, G Casari8,9, A Ciol ﬁ10, J Clayton-Smith5,7, B Dallapiccola10,K
Ellwanger11,12, L Faivre2,13, C Gilissen3,14, H Graessner11,12,TB .
Haack11, A Hammarsjö15, M Havlovicova16, A Hoischen3,14,17,A
Hugon18, T Kleefstra3,4, A Lindstrand15, E López-Martín19, M Macek
Jr.16, L Matalonga20, M Morleo9, V Nigro9,8, A Nordgren15,M
Pettersson15, M Pinelli9, S Pizzi10, M Posada19, F C. Radio21,A
Renieri6,22,23, C Rooryck24, L Ryba16, M Schwarz16, M Tartaglia10,C
Thauvin1,2,13, A Torella8,9, A Trimouille25, P Votypka16, K Vyshka18,26,B
Zurek11,12, A Verloes18,27, A Vitobello*1,2,Lisenka Vissers*3,4
1Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique des maladies rares,
FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,2UFR Des
Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne UMR1231 GAD «
Génétique des Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon, France,3Dept of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,6Med Biotech
Hub and Competence Center, Dept of Medical Biotechnologies,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,7Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Manchester, United Kingdom,8Dipartimento di Medicina di Pre-
cisione, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli",
Napoli, Italy,9Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli,
Italy,10Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,11Institute of Medical
Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany,12Centre for Rare Diseases, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany,13Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference
for Development disorders and intellectual disabilities, FHU TRANS-
LAD and GIMI Institute, University Hospital Dijon, Dijon, France,
14Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,15Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,16Dept of Biology and Medical
Genetics, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic,17Dept
of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases,Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,18Dept of Genetics, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Paris, France,
19Institute of Rare Diseases Research, Spanish Undiagnosed Rare
Diseases Cases Program & Undiagnosed Diseases Network Interna-tional, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,20CNAG ‐CRG,
Centre for Genomic Regulation, The Barcelona Institute of Science
and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,21Genetics and Rare Diseases
Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome,
Rome, Italy,22Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
23Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
236
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Italy,24University Bordeaux, MRGM INSERM U1211, CHU de
Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France,
25Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Service de Génétique
Médicale, CHU Bordeaux –Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France,
26CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques en Droit ”,
Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,27INSERM UMR 1141 "NeuroDi-
derot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
Solve-RD is a Horizon2020 supported EU ﬂagship project aiming to
solve rare diseases for which a molecular cause is not yet
established. European Reference Network (ERN) Intellectual
disability, TeleHealth And Congenital Anomalies (ERN-ITHACA) isone of four core ERNs contributing to this project. Here wedescribe our achievements so far.
(i) Unsolved exome negative patients
Over 5,200 data sets consisting of phenotypic and genomic
information have been internationally shared in the Genome-
Phenome Analysis Platform for systematic re-analysis. This has
resulted in ~6-8% of novel diagnoses. Additionally, for 9 candidatedisease genes, Solve-RD researchers have been matched withfunctional scientists via ‘Rare Diseases: Models and Mechanisms
(RDMM) ’-Europe to study the molecular mechanism of disease.
(ii) ITHACA-speci ﬁc cohorts
We are collecting genetically unsolved patients for the following
syndromes: Moebius/Poland, Goldenhar, Wildervanck, Baraitser-
Winter, primary microcephalic dwar ﬁsm, MURCS, RAS-opathies
and ‘Rett-like ’-phenotypes. For these cohorts, the ﬁrst short-read
genomes are being performed.
(iii) Ultra-rare patients
All ~80 Health Care Providers in ITHACA are collecting (ultra-)
rare unsolved patients. Though phenotypic jamborees, 100families are selected for WGS.
(iv) Unsolvable syndromes
We aim to unravel the genetic etio logy of Aicardi, Gomez-Lopez-
Hernandez, Pai, OAFNS and Hallermann-Streiff syndrome. Hereto, amulti-omics approach is planned for, including long-read genomes,
transcriptomics, epigenomics, deep-WES and metabolomics on
multiple tissues per patient-parent trio. First analyses are ongoing.
The Solve-RD project has enabled ITHACA data sharing and
clinical patient selection at a pan-European level. We expect to
facilitate diagnoses for unsolved patients, and to elucidate the
molecular underpinning of ITHACA-related unexplainedsyndromes.
A. Denommé-Pichon*: None. E. de Boer*: None. A. Jackson*:
None. E. Benetti*: None. S. Banka: None. G. Casari: None. A.
Ciolﬁ:None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. K.
Ellwanger: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Gilissen: None. H.
Graessner: None. T.B. Haack: None. A. Hammarsjö: None. M.
Havlovicova: None. A. Hoischen: None. A. Hugon: None. T.
Kleefstra: None. A. Lindstrand: None. E. López-Martín: None. M.
Macek Jr.: None. L. Matalonga: None.
M. Morleo: None. V.
Nigro: None. A. Nordgren: None. M. Pettersson: None. M.
Pinelli: None. S. Pizzi: None. M. Posada: None. F.C. Radio: None.
A. Renieri: None. C. Rooryck: None. L. Ryba: None. M. Schwarz:
None. M. Tartaglia: None. C. Thauvin: None. A. Torella: None. A.
Trimouille: None. P. Votypka: None. K. Vyshka: None. B. Zurek:
None. A. Verloes: None. A. Vitobello*: None. L. Vissers*: None.
P08.026.D Contiguous gene deletion of MSH6 and FBXO11.
Presenting a large family with Lynch syndrome and FBX011 -
related intellectual developmental disorder
Malene Lundsgaard1, Uffe B. Jensen2, Anja Ernst3, Henrik Okkels3,
Rikke Christensen2, Thomas Balslev4, Lone Sunde1, Charlotte K.
Lautrup1,21Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,3Department of Molecular
Diagnostics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,4Depart-
ment of Paediatrics, Viborg Regional Hospital, Viborg, Denmark.
Introduction: MSH6 and FBXO11 are located at chromosome
2p16.3 with overlapping 3 ’UTR ends by 33 bp. MSH6 -related
Lynch syndrome is well-described however fewer than 50 patientswith FBXO11 -related intellectual developmental disorder with
dysmorphic facies and behavioral abnormalities (IDDFBA) have
been reported. Most represent de novo cases detected by trio-
whole exome sequencing (trio-WES). Only one familial FBXO11
case has been reported. We present a large family with a 0,1Mb
deletion involving MSH6 and the 3 ’UTR end of FBXO11 .Clinical
ﬁndings: The proband is a three year old boy with speech- and
motor delay, hypotonia, low-set ears with a closed helix, thin
upper lip vermillion, long philtrum and paternal family history of
both intellectual disability and Lynch syndrome caused bydeletion of MSH6 . Chromosomal microarray revealed the familial
0,1Mb deletion on 2p16.3 involving MSH6 and trio-WES was
without pathogenic variants.
Results: Review of the family revealed that 7/8 family members
with the deletion had variable degrees of learning disabilities and3/8 had psychiatric disturbances. The proband ’s gestalt was similar
to that reported in IDDFBA patients; however, the features were
not consistent in relatives. Revisiting chromosomal microarraydata indicated that deletion involves the terminal 3 ’UTR of
FBXO11 , con ﬁrmed by CNV analysis of the onco-gene panel
(SWEBRCA).
Conclusion : The terminal deletion of FBXO11 most likely
explains the IDDFBA-phenotype seen in this family. Due to
limitations in trio-WES analyses, a small CNV might be missed
and an inherited FBXO11 variant will also be missed when
searching for de novo variants.
M. Lundsgaard: None. U.B. Jensen: None. A. Ernst: None. H.
Okkels: None. R. Christensen: None. T. Balslev: None. L. Sunde:
None. C.K. Lautrup: None.
P08.028.B Electrophysiological and proteomic investigations
of an Ftsj1-de ﬁcient mouse model for intellectual disability
Lars Jensen , Marian Baldus, Simone Venz, Heike Junker, Viola von
Bohlen und Halbach, Oliver von Bohlen und Halbach, Andreas Kuß
University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
Inherited intellectual disability (ID) is a genetically very hetero-
geneous disorder. Though mutations in each gene are relativelyrare, several genes involved in charging and modi ﬁcations of tRNA
molecules have been found mutated in ID-patients. tRNAs
transport amino acids to the ribosome but are also involved in avariety of other cellular processes. The underlying molecularcauses for the observed ID phenotype is at present not well
understood. Inactivating FTSJ1 mutations have been found in
several families with non-syndromic ID. FTSJ1 is an evolutionarilyconserved, ubiquitously expressed tRNA-methyltransferase thattargets a subset of tRNAs. We have previously established a mouse
model for FTSJ1 de ﬁ
ciency and found altered energy metabolism,
increased pain threshold in addition to learning defects in Ftsj1deﬁcient mice. To investigate neuronal function at the cellular
level we now performed electrophysiological experiments, indu-
cing long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal neurons frommutant and wild-type mice. We observed signi ﬁcantly weaker LTP
in Ftsj1-de ﬁcient animals than in control littermates. We then usedAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
237
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608protein extracts from whole brain preparations to generate
protein abundance pro ﬁles using 2D-PAGE coupled with mass
spectrometry for peptide identi ﬁcation and identi ﬁed peptides
corresponding to 25 unique proteins with >1.5-fold difference inabundance, including alpha-Tubulin. Functional annotation ana-lysis of these proteins showed, among others, enrichment for the
GO term “cytoskeletal protein binding ”. Our results suggest that
Ftsj1 de ﬁciency leads to a loss of synaptic strength in hippocampal
neurons, which may contribute centrally to the ID phenotypeobserved in FTSJ1 de ﬁcient individuals and pinpoints interesting
novel functional aspects of FTSJ1.
L. Jensen: None. M. Baldus: None. S. Venz: None. H. Junker:
None. V. von Bohlen und Halbach: None. O. von Bohlen und
Halbach: None. A. Kuß: None.
P08.029.C Next generation sequencing of a genes panel for
the study of Mexican patients with global developmental
delay
María de la Luz Arenas-Sordo
1,2, Paola Linares-Mendoza1, Karina
Peñuelas-Romero1, Javier Martínez-Martínez1
1Instituto Nacional de Rehablitacion, Mexico City, Mexico,2Uni-
versidad Nacional autónoma de México, México City, Mexico.
Introduction: GDD is de ﬁned as a signi ﬁcant delay in 2 of the
major developmental domains (gross/ ﬁne motor,speech/lan-
guage, cognition, social/personal, and activities of daily living),although most affected patients have impairment evident in all 5
of the domains. The diagnosis is reverved for children under 5
years og age. The prevalence estimates between 1 and 3% ofchildren. Around 25-50% of GDD cases can be secondary togenetic causes.
Materials and Methods: An exome of 506 genes was done in
20 patients, after discarded other causes through karyotype,metabolic screening, and MRI. The patients were studied with
detail in their phenotype and with a neurological evaluation.
Results: Of the 20 patients studied, 14 were female and 6 male.
None reported consanguinity and just 1 had inbreeding. Onepatient has a brother with the same condition. Some of them have
dysmorphia, short stature, epilepsy, microcephaly, deafness, etc.
Metabolic screening and karyotype were normal in all patients.Some MRI showed not speci ﬁc alterations. The exome found
variants in: TYR, ZNF423, ALDH18A1, POMPT1 and CA6 , all in
heterozigous way. Also a CNV ’s in the NSUN2 gene that caused
deletion of 33.39 kb (chr.5) and one non-related ﬁnding, variant in
G6PD gene (c.934G>C; p.Asp312His).
Conclusions: In these preliminary results, we found a deletion
in the NSUN2 gene as the cause of GDD and the other genescould be related with it. It is necessary to study the other variantsthat we found, in the multiple existing databases and make some
predictions with different computer systems.
M. Arenas-Sordo: None. P. Linares-Mendoza: None. K.
Peñuelas-Romero: None. J. Martínez-Martínez: None.
P08.031.A Genotype-phenotype effects of the X-linked GSPT2
gene: severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy inpatients with missense variants versus mild developmental
delay in patients with deletions
Gea Beunders
1, Evert Kas1, Sue White2,3, Kristin M. Abbott1, Yvonne
J. Vos1, Cleo C. Diemen1
1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands,2University of Melbourne, Mel-
bourne, Australia,3Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne,
Australia.Introduction: Recently, a new x-linked intellectual disability
syndrome was described, caused by deletions of Xp11.22 with
the smallest region of overlap including CENPVL1 ,CENPVL2 ,
MAGED1 and GSPT2 .GSPT2 was suggested as the causal gene
for the intellectual disability. GSPT2 encodes eRF3b that, together
with eRF3a (encoded by GSPT1 ), is forming a complex with eRF1.
This complex is composing a crucial role in translation terminationand nonsense mediated decay.
Patients & methods: We describe family one, highly suggestive
of X-linked inheritance, with three affected boys and two obligate
carriers (unaffected females); and family two, with one affectedboy. The overlapping clinical features in the four affected boys are:central and obstructive apneas, severe epilepsy, profound
developmental delay, a secondary microcephaly, mild a-speci ﬁc
dysmorphic features and edema. The three boys from family onedied in infancy. Whole Exome Sequencing was performed in the
two index patients.
Results: Missense variants in the GTP-ase domain of GSPT2 were
found in both index patients. In family one, the variant segregatedwith the phenotype and was found in two affected boys, two
carrier females and was not found in one unaffected male.
Conclusions: GSPT2 missense variants seem to cause a severe
x-linked epileptic encephalopathy, whereas larger deletionsincluding GSPT2 cause a milder intellectual disability. We
hypothesize that the missense variants described here cause an
altered eRF3 complex that hampers the translation terminationand/or nonsense mediated decay more than a deletion of the
gene does. Functional studies are underway to proof this
hypothesis.
G. Beunders: None. E. Kas: None. S. White: None. K.M. Abbott:
None. Y.J. Vos: None. C.C. Diemen: None.
P08.032.B Mosaic copy number gain chr1p35.1p33 causing a
severe phenotype with intellectualdisability and
macrocepahly
Maria Puiu
1, Alexandra Mihailescu2, Adela Chirita-Emandi1
1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy
“Victor Babes ”, Regional Center of Medical Genetics Timis, Clinical
Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu ”, part of ERN
ITHACA, TIMISOARA, Romania,2Center of Genomic Medicine,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes ”, TIMISOARA,
Romania.
Duplications involving the 1p35p33 chromosomal region are very
rare, associating global developmental delay, craniofacial dys-morphism, heart malformations and growth failure.
Material: A 3-year-old girl, presenting with hypotonia, global
developmental delay, macrocephaly, frontal bossing, openedanterior fontanelle, ﬂat nasal bridge, hypertelorism, ptosis,
prognathism, spaced teeth, bilateral simian crease, clinodactyly,
cavovarus, large head and chest compared to lower body, ataxic
gait, no language, behavioral issues (stereotypes, anxiety, handﬂapping, bruxism) and slow weight gain.
Results: She was diagnosed with atrial septal defect. Brain MRIs
at age 1 year and 3 years revealed normal brain structure, withouthydrocephalus/ventriculomegaly. SNP array: [GRCh37]chr1p35.1p33(33920586_50612250) x3[0.7] showed 16,7 Mb copy
number gain, mosaic clone 70%. The copy number gain was de
novo. The region contains several autosomal dominant transmis-sion genes: GJB3, KCNQ4 associated with neurosensory deafness,COL9A2 - epiphyseal dysplasia, COL8A2 - corneal dystrophy/ aortic
malformations, SLC2A1 - Dystonia/epilepsy. However, the implica-
tions of copy number gainof these genes cannot be accuratelyassessed. Only 2 patients with similar gains are reported inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
238
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608decipher.sanger.ac.uk(ID:353680;401008).One of these patients
also presented polydactily.
Conclusion: Pathogenicity in copy number gains are dif ﬁcult to
understand. Evenmore if the number of patients reported is verysmall and mosaic, multicentric collaboration is crucial for under-standing the phenotype and prognosis.
M. Puiu: None. A. Mihailescu: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None.
P08.034.D DDX3X syndrome phenotype heterogeneity a case
report and literature review
Rossella Colantuono
1, Maria Chiara Rocco1, Dario Di Salvio2, Maria
Tessitore1, Lucia Nazzaro3, Domenico Viggiano1, Maria Teresa Falco3,
Giorgia Mancano4, Tjitske Kleefstra5, Lot Snijders Blok5, Matteo Della
Monica6, Pietro Vajro1, Daniela Melis1
1Pediatrics, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola
Medica Salernitana", University of Salerno, Baronissi (SA), Italy,
2Pediatrics, University of Naples “Federico II ”, Napoli, Italy,3“San
Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona ”University Hospital, Salerno,
Italy,4Meyer University Hospital, Firenze, Italy,5Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,6Department of Medical and Laboratory Genetics,
Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy.
About 25-50% of intellectual disability (ID) is genetically deter-
mined, and X-linked ID (XLID) is a major pathogenic cause. De
novo mutations of the DDX3X gene account for 1-3% of ID in
females. The 3q29 duplication has a quite overlapping phenotype
and low penetrance, possibly in ﬂuenced by "second hit" genetic
aberrations.
Case report: We describe a normal height, slightly obese
female patient with ID, language impairment, facial dysmorph-
isms, macrocephaly, scoliosis, skin abnormalities, brain abnormal-ities (septum pellucidus and cavum vergae cysts),
hepatosplenomegaly, hypertransaminasemia and hepatic steato-
sis. Exome sequencing identi ﬁed in the patient a heterozygous de
novo pathogenic variant (c.1463G> A; p.Arg488His) in DDX3X
gene. A 229 Kb 3q29 microduplication, not overlapping the critical
region for 3q29 duplication syndrome, was previously detected by
CGH array in the patient and her healthy mother.
Literature Review: review of ID cases caused by DDX3X
variants and 3q29 duplications to compare their genetic and
phenotypic spectra vs. our patient.
Results: Microcephaly and low weight were often associated
with the DDX3X spectrum, whereas obesity, hepatic involvement
and macrocephaly were reported. The same DDX3X variant of our
patient was previously reported only in one case with somephenotype differences (low weight, corpus callosum hypoplasia,ventricular enlargement, cleft lip/palate). Microduplications of
3q29 may present generalized obesity.
Conclusions: We report a patient with DDX3X variant and
atypical phenotype. Clinical variability could be explained by a"second hit" genetic aberration and we suppose a possible role of
the 3q29 microduplication previously detected in the patient and
her mother, thus hampering correct categorization.
R. Colantuono: None. M. Rocco: None. D. Di Salvio: None. M.
Tessitore: None. L. Nazzaro: None. D. Viggiano: None. M. Falco:
None. G. Mancano: None. T. Kleefstra: None. L. Blok: None. M.
Della Monica: None. P. Vajro: None. D. Melis: None.
P08.035.A Multiple major anomalies and microcephaly predict
the detection of pathogenic copy number variations inpatients with moderate and severe global developmental
delay/intellectual disability
Jelena Ruml Stojanovic
1, Marija Mijovic1, Aleksandra Miletic1,
Brankica Bosankic1, Hristina Petrovic1, Goran Cuturilo1,2
1University Children ’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia,2Faculty of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: Moderate and severe forms of intellectual disability
and global developmental delay are genetically and clinically
heterogeneous entities. Evaluation of genetic cause is oftenchallenging, and many patients undergo a “diagnostic odyssey ”.
Deﬁning the clinical parameters in correlation with pathogenic
copy number variations could enable better selection of patients
for chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) and speed up thediagnostic process.
Materials and Methods: The present study included 110
children with the diagnosis of moderate or severe global
developmental delay/intellectual disability, present either solelyor with diverse additional ﬁndings. CMA was performed in all
patients. Correlation of clinical parameters and CMA results was
assessed using Pearson chi-square and Fisher ’s Exact tests.
Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed
in 26,4% (29/110) of patients, variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in
12,7% (14/110) of patients, while the rest had normal result or
benign variant identi ﬁed (60,9%, 67/110). Statistical analysis
revealed that patients with multiple congenital anomalies and/ormicrocephaly were more likely to have pathogenic copy number
variation identi ﬁed.
Conclusion: There were several attempts in literature to de ﬁne
clinical parameters that could predict the presence of pathogenicCMA result in patients with global developmental delay/intellec-
tual disability and the results are inconsistent. Present data
suggest CMA as a method of choice in children with multiplecongenital anomalies and/or microcephaly. Study with a larger
number of patients, or meta-analysis of previously performed
studies, could give more precise insight in correlation ofphenotypic features and pathogenic CMA results in this speci ﬁc
group of patients.
J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M. Mijovic: None. A. Miletic: None.
B. Bosankic: None. H. Petrovic: None. G. Cuturilo: None.
P08.036.B High diagnostic yield using a 460 gene panel in
patients with intellectual disability
Nino Spataro
1, Miriam Guitart1, Elisabeth Gabau2, Nuria Capdevila2,
Juan Pablo Trujillo-Quintero2, Laura Capel1, Neus Baena1, Anna Ruiz1
1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc Taulí Hospital
Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT.
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain,2Paediatric
Unit. ParcTaulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d ’Investigació i Innovació
Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell,
Spain.
Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) affects 1-3% of the
population and is de ﬁned by de ﬁcits in intellectual functioning
and adaptive behavior with onset before age 18 years. Approxi-
mately, 70% of ID cases are due to genetic factors, among thosede novo pathogenic variants in dominant genes account for themajority of cases.
Material and methods: We developed a dominant and
X-linked ID gene panel including 460 genes. The panel was testedAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
239
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608on 223 patients affected by ID and with negative aCGH.
Sequencing was performed in an Illumina MiSeq System; a
customised bioinformatic pipeline was developed for discovery,
annotation and ﬁltering of SNVs, indels and CNVs. Sanger
sequencing on parental samples was used for segregation analysisof candidate variants.
Results: A diagnostic yield of 30,9% was obtained after target
high depth sequencing. 74,2% of pathogenic variants were denovo while 15% were inherited, of which 50% were in X-linkedgenes. For the remaining pathogenic variants segregation analysis
was not possible. The implemented bioinformatic pipeline allows
a high detection rate of pathogenic variants minimizing thedetection of variants of unknown signi ﬁcance.
Conclusion: The diagnostic yield of our customised ID panel is
higher than that of aCGH. We propose the use of our ID panel as
ﬁrst tier diagnosis in unexplained ID patients. Even though exome
sequencing may yield a higher diagnostic rate, the use of an ID
panel is cost effective, time saving and minimize the detection of
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance.
N. Spataro: None. M. Guitart: None. E. Gabau: None. N.
Capdevila: None. J. Trujillo-Quintero: None. L. Capel: None. N.
Baena: None. A. Ruiz: None.
P08.037.C THUMPD1 is a new cause of syndromic intellectual
developmental disorder
Martin Broly
1, Bertrand Isidor1,2, Thomas Besnard1,2, Declan
O’Rourke3, Julia Baptista4,5, Sian Ellard4,5, Mohammed Almannai6,
Hashem Mais Omar7, Ferdous Abdulwahab7, Hanan Shamseldin7,
Saeed Al-Tala8, Fowzan S Alkuraya7,9, Alberta Leon10, R.L.E. van
Loon11, Alessandra Ferlini12, Mariabeatrice Sanchini12, Stefania
Bigoni12, Mitchell O ’Connell13, Bogdan Polevoda13, Kamel Awayda13,
Stéphane Bézieau1,2, Benjamin Cogné1,2
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France,
2Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l ’institut du thorax, Nantes,
France,3Department of Neurology, Children ’s Health Ireland at
Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland,4Exeter Genomics Laboratory, Royal
Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom,
5Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter
Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom,6Section of Medical
Genetics, Children ’s Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,7Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomics
Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,8Pediatrics Department, Armed Forces Hospital, Khamis
Mushait, Saudi Arabia,9College of Medicine, Alfaisal University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,10Research & Innovation (R&I Genetics) Srl,
Genetic Laboratory, Padua, Italy,11Department of Genetics, Uni-
versity of Utrecht, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,Netherlands,12Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,13Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for RNA Biology, University ofRochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
Introduction: tRNA-modi ﬁcations such as methylation via tRNA-
methyltransferase (TRMT1) or NOP2/Sun RNA Methyltransferase 2(NSUN2) have been implicated in au tosomal recessive intellectual
developmental disorder (ARIDD) . THUMPD1 carries a thiouridine
synthases, methylases and pseud ouridine synthases (THUMP) RNA-
binding domain involved in tRNA acetylation. Recently, this gene wasproposed as a candidate gene for ARIDD. Here we present a series of
8 patients showing syndromic int ellectual disability with homo-
zygous or compound hetero zygous THUMPD1 variants.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was
performed on blood-derived DNA samples following each center ’sNext Generation Sequencing (NGS) pipeline. Exome data were
interpreted in agreement with local practices. Phenotypes were
reported by each attending physician.
Results: We describe 8 patients from 5 families, most of them
born from consanguineous parents, carrying rare presumptive lossof function variants in THUMPD1. Common phenotypic ﬁndings
included: microcephaly, global developmental delay, speech
delay, moderate to severe intellectual de ﬁciency, behavioral
abnormalities such as angry outbursts, facial dysmorphism andophthalmological abnormalities.
Conclusions: Given the genotypic and phenotypic similarities
in our case series, we propose that recessive variants in THUMPD1should be considered causal of syndromic intellectual disability.We describe a new neurodevelopmental syndrome with intellec-
tual disability, developmental delay, behavioral abnormalities and
facial dysmorphism.
M. Broly: None. B. Isidor: None. T. Besnard: None. D.
O’Rourke: None. J. Baptista: None. S. Ellard: None. M. Almannai:
None. H. Mais Omar: None. F. Abdulwahab: None. H. Shamsel-
din: None. S. Al-Tala: None. F. Alkuraya: None. A. Leon: None. R.
van Loon: None. A. Ferlini: None. M. Sanchini: None. S. Bigoni:
None. M. O ’Connell: None. B. Polevoda: None. K. Awayda: None.
S. Bézieau: None. B. Cogné: None.
P08.038.D Ef ﬁcient application of next-generation sequencing
for the diagnosis of neurodevelopmental diseases
Irene Madrigal , Maria Isabel Alvarez-Mora, Aurora Sanchez, Laia
Rodriguez-Revenga
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Neurodevelopmental diseases affect 2%-3% of the
general population, and have highly clinical and genetic hetero-
geneity, which complicates the genetic diagnosis. In fact the
genetic defect remains unknown in around 40% of patients. The
application of next-generation sequencing is changing the natureof biomedical diagnosis. This technology has quickly become themethod of choice for searching for pathogenic mutations in rare
genetic diseases.
Material and Methods: In order to identify variants underlying
disease phenotypes, we applied whole-exome or genomesequencing to 59 families with one or several members affected
with intellectual disability.
Results: Identi ﬁcation of disease-causing mutations was
achieved in 42% of studied families (25/59) who could receive a
genetic diagnosis and counselling. All identi ﬁed genes are related
to ID although the 80% of the variants had not been previouslydescribed. Regarding the inheritance, 40% were autosomicdominant, 36% were X-linked, 20% were autosomic recessive
and 4% were imprinting mutations.
Conclusions: The accessibility to next-generation sequen-
cing allows clinicians to save much time and cost in identifyingthe aetiology of rare diseases. The presented cases are excellent
examples that demonstrate the ef ﬁcacy of next-generation
sequencing in rare disease diagnosis. Acknowledgements: Thisstudy was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III [PI12/00879], co- ﬁnanced by Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional
(FEDER) “u n am a n e r ad eh a c e rE u r o p a ”, AGAUR from the
Autonomous Catalan Government [2017 SGR1134] and Funda-ción Alicia Koplowitz (AKOPLOWITZ18_001). The ‘CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras ’is an initiative of the ISCIII. We want to
thank the “CERCA Programme ”from the Autonomous Catalan
Government.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
240
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608I. Madrigal: None. M. Alvarez-Mora: None. A. Sanchez: None.
L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None.
P08.039.A Dominant variants in ITSN1 cause neurodevelop-
mental disorder spectrum
Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Antonio Vitobello1,2, Isabelle Thiffault3, Linda
Manwaring4, Marcia Willing4, Pankaj B. Agrawal5, Allan Bayat6,
Thomas M. Kitzler7,8, Catherine A. Browntein9, Casie A. Genetti10,
Joseph Gonzales-Heydrich11, Parul Jayakar12, Jacob W. Zyskind13,
Zehua Zhu13, Clemence Vachet14, Gena R. Wilson15, Brianna
Pruniski15, Anne-Marie Goyette16, Yannis Duffourd1,2, Christophe
Philippe1,2,17, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,17,2, Laurence Faivre2,17,1
1UMR1231 INSERM, GAD, Dijon, France,2Unité Fonctionnelle
Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,3Center for
Pediatric Genomic Medicine, Children ’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City,
KS, USA,4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO,USA,5Divisions of Newborn Medicine, Genetics and Genomics, The
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children ’s
Hospital, Boston, Boston, MA, USA,6Department of Genetics and
Precision Medicine, Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark,
7Research Institute, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Quebec; Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine,McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada,8Department
of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,
9Divisions of Newborn Medicine, Genetics and Genomics, The
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children ’s
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,10Divisions of Genetics and Genomics,
Department of Pediatrics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,11Department
of Psychiatry, Boston Children ’s Hospital, Manton Center for Orphan
Disease Research, Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston
Children ’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA,12Division of Genetics and Metabolism,
Nicklaus Children ’s Hospital, Miami, FL, USA,13GeneDX, Gaitherburg,
MD, USA,14Service de néphrologie pédiatrique, Centre Hospitalier
Régional Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, France,15Division of
Genetics and Metabolism, Phoenix Children ’s Medical Group,
Phoenix, AZ, USA,16FRCPC, Developmental Pediatrician, Montreal
Children ’s Hospital, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC,
Canada,17Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translation-
nelle et Anomalies du Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospita-lier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France.
We described de novo and inherited missense and truncating
variants in ITSN1 as a novel cause of neurodevelopmental disorder
spectrum in a total of 8 unrelated patients. A review of the
literature identi ﬁed four additional patients from large meta-
analysis studies. ITSN1 plays an important role in brain develop-ment including including development of dendritic spines, corticalmidline connectivity, synaptic vesicle recycling, neuronal migra-
tion, synaptic plasticity and more recently in learning and
memory. We evidenced that missense ITSN1 variants (3/12
variants) without splicing defect predicted are spatially clusteredin C-terminal in an important regional missense constraint.
Missense variants are predicted probably damaging by
PolyPhen-2. GnomAD database reported the intolerance of ITSN1
gene to support missense variants (misZ-score =3.61). Variants
causing premature codon stop (9/12 variants) are located in the
ﬁrst half of the protein. ITSN1 showed a high intolerance to
inactivation reported by GnomAD database with an associated pLI(probability of loss-of-function intolerance) score of 1. Neurologi-
cal disorders were diagnosed in all patients and includedintellectual disability or global developmental delay (8/8) and
autism spectrum disorders (10/11). Seizures free was noted in 2/8
patients. All patients showed speech delay and/or language
impairment (8/8), three displayed a regression. Mainly patientspresented severe behavioural troubles and/or severe psychiatricdisorders. Minor and inconstant dysmorphic features were
observed. We suggest ITSN1 gene is involved in development of
an autism spectrum disorder with variable additional neurodeve-lopmental de ﬁciency, thus con ﬁrming the hypothesis that ITSN1 is
important for brain development.
A. Bruel: None. A. Vitobello: None. I. Thiffault: None. L.
Manwaring: None. M. Willing: None. P.B. Agrawal: None. A.
Bayat: None. T.M. Kitzler: None. C.A. Browntein: None. C.A.
Genetti: None. J. Gonzales-Heydrich: None. P. Jayakar: None. J.
W. Zyskind: None. Z. Zhu: None. C. Vachet: None. G.R. Wilson:
None. B. Pruniski: None. A. Goyette: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C.
Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None.
P08.040.B Expanding the mutational landscape and clinical
phenotype of the YIF1B related brain disorder
Eva Medico Salsench
1, Reza Maroo ﬁan2, Kristina Lanko1, Belén
Pérez Gonzalez3, Obdulia Sanchez-Lijarcio3, Salvador Ibáñez-Mico4,
Antonina Wojcik5, Marcello Vargas5, Audrey Schroeder6, Chin-To
Fong6, Amber Begtrup7, Ibrahim H Kaya8, Mohammad AlMuhai-
zea8,9, Dilek Colak10, Henry Houlden2, Robert-Jan Galjaard1, Namik
Kaya10, Tahsin Stefan Barakat1
1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
2UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,
3Centro de Biología Molecular, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain,4Arrixaca Universitary Hospital, Murcia, Spain,5Gillette
Children ’s Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA,6University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA,7GeneDx, Gaithers-
burg, MD, USA,8AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,9King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,10King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, SaudiArabia.
Intracellular proteins involved in mediating vesicular traf ﬁcking in
eukaryotic cells have been implicated in brain disorders, showingthe relevance of the process for neuronal development in human.YIF1B is an essential protein involved in the anterograde
trafﬁcking from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cell membrane,
and in Golgi apparatus architecture. We recently described aneurodevelopmental disorder caused by recessive variants in
YIF1B , which has now been recognized by OMIM as Kaya-Barakat-
Masson syndrome (KABAMAS, OMIM# 619125). So far, our study(Almuhaizea et al .) and that of Diaz et al . reported 16 affected
individuals from 11 independent families. These individuals
presented with a progressive encephalopathy with various
degrees of movement disorders, microcephaly, and epilepsy. Inall but one family, bi-allelic protein truncating variants wereidenti ﬁed in YIF1B , with only a single bi-allelic missense mutation
assumed to be causative. Here, we describe 6 additional
individuals from 6 families harboring protein altering variants inYIF1B , 4 of which are homozygous or compound heterozygous
missense variants. Interestingly, all YIF1B missense variants
encountered localized in, or close to, the transmembrane
domains, which were previously shown to be essential for YIF1Bfunction. To investigate the function of these missense variants,
we performed site-directed mutagenesis followed by expression
and interaction studies, providing functional evidence from invitro studies that these missense variants impact on YIF1Bfunction. In addition, we compare the clinical phenotype between
all currently known YIF1B cases to further delineate the mutationalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
241
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608landscape and the clinical phenotype associated with this new
disease entity.
E. Medico Salsench: None. R. Maroo ﬁan: None. K. Lanko:
None. B. Pérez Gonzalez: None. O. Sanchez-Lijarcio: None. S.
Ibáñez-Mico: None. A. Wojcik: None. M. Vargas: None. A.
Schroeder: None. C. Fong: None. A. Begtrup: None. I. Kaya:
None. M. AlMuhaizea: None. D. Colak: None. H. Houlden: None.
R. Galjaard: None. N. Kaya: None. T. Barakat: None.
P08.041.C Frameshift variant in SETD5 in a patient presenting
a KBG syndrome
Angela Teresa Abad Perez1, Felix Boschann1, Birgit Jödicke2, Denise
Horn1
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany,2Center for Chronically Sick
Children, Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes,Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute
of Health, Berlin, Germany.
KBG syndrome (KBGS) is a developmental disorder characterized
by distinctive craniofacial features, macrodontia of the uppercentral incisors, skeletal anomalies, short stature and neurologicinvolvement that may include seizures and intellectual disability. It
is caused by sequence variants in ANKRD11 and the 16q24.3 deletion,
which includes ANKRD11 . For a small number of affected individuals,
a causative ANKRD11 variant cannot be detected. Here, we describe a
16-year-old female patient with macrodontia of the upper central
incisors, short stature and develo pmental delay. Hand radiographs
showed a shortening of the 5
thmetacarpal. At age 7, she was
clinically diagnosed with KBGS. Analysis of ANKRD11 revealed no
mutations or deletions of the gen e. Exome sequencing revealed a
heterozygous de novo frameshift-mutation in the SETD5 gene.
Haploinsuf ﬁciency of SETD5 causes intellectual disability with minor
facial dysmorphism and skeletal anomalies (mental retardation,
autosomal dominant 23, MRD23) and is believed to be causative of
the core phenotype of the microdeletion 3p25.3 syndrome. Loss-of-function variants in SETD5 were recently reported in three patients
with an initial KBGS clinical diagnosis. Reevaluation of previously
reported cases revealed a signi ﬁcant clinical overlap between KBG,
MRD23 and microdeletion 3p25.3 s yndromes. (Crippa et al., 2019)
ANKRD11 and SETD5 have been identi ﬁed as chromatin regulators
involved in gene expression. In mouse embryonic stem cells, both
proteins have been shown to physically interact at the molecularlevel. This report provides further evidence that SETD5 mutations can
cause KBGS phenotype. Targeted analysis of SETD5 should be
considered in unsolved KGBS patients.
A.T. Abad Perez: None. F. Boschann: None. B. Jödicke: None.
D. Horn: None.
P08.042.D KCNB1 frameshift variant caused inherited intellec-
tual disability, developmental delay and seizure
Eyyup Uctepe
1, Fatma Nisa Esen2, Sait Tümer2, Ahmet Yesilyurt2
1Acıbadem Labmed/Ankara Tissue Typing Laboratory, Ankara,
Turkey,2Acibadem Labgen Genetic Diagnosis Center, İstanbul,
Turkey.
Introduction: Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily B mem-
ber 1 ( KCNB1 ) encodes Kv2.1 potassium channel. KCNB1 mutationsare known to cause global developmental delay, behavioral
disorders, and various epilepsies. Most variants occur de novo and
rarely inherited. Here, we report a 14-year-old male patient who was
admitted to our clinic with seizures, developmental delay history,and mild intellectual disability. Brain magnetic resonance image(MRI) was normal and electroencephalogram (EEG) showed spike
and sharp-wave complexes emerging in the left hemisphere
parietooccipital areas which paroxysmally generalized.
Materials and Methods: We performed whole exome
sequence analysis (WES) in the proband.
Results: WES identi ﬁed a heterozygous frameshift mutation
c.522delA in exon 1 of KCNB1 (NM_004975.4) predicting a
premature stop codon p.Lys174Asnfs*20 in the proband. Sangersequencing con ﬁrmed the heterozygous c.522delA mutation in
the proband and his mother who had also epilepsy and mild
intellectual disability. His 45 years old mother had usedantiepileptic drugs for 9 years after a seizure episode at 12 years
old. Also, the mother ’s uncle ’s son is nonverbal and has
developmental delay and epilepsy.
Conclusions: Our study shows that frameshift mutation in
KCNB1 gene can cause intrafamilial phenotypic variability and
relatively milder clinical ﬁndings in these patients.
E. Uctepe: None. F.N. Esen: None. S. Tümer: None. A.
Yesilyurt: None.
P08.043.A GenIDA, an international participatory database to
get an insight into the natural history and co-morbidities of
genetic forms of neurodevelopmental disorders
Jean-Louis Mandel
1,2, Pauline Burger1,2, Axelle Strehle1,2, Florent
Colin1,2, Timothée Mazzucotelli1, Nicole Collot1, Amélie Piton1,2,3,
Pierre Parrend2,4, Laurence Faivre5,6, David Geneviève7, Valentin
Ruault7, Thomas Smol8, Roseline Caumes9, Joost Kummeling10,
Charlotte Ockeloen10, Tjitske Kleefstra10, David Koolen10
1IGBMC, Illkirch, France,2Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,3Unité de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,4ECAM Strasbourg-Europe, Schiltigh-
eim, France,5Equipe Génétique des Anomalies du Développement,
Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France,6Centre de
Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement etSyndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU
Dijon et Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,7Université de
Montpellier, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier, CLAD Sud
Languedoc ‐Roussillon, INSERM, Montpellier, France,8CHU Lille,
Institut de Génétique Médicale, RADEME, Lille, France,9CHU Lille,
Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Lille, France,10Department of
Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
GenIDA is an international online project initiated with the aim of
better characterising the clinical manifestations and naturalhistories of genetic forms of intellectual disability with or withoutautism or epilepsy. Clinical information reported and updated by
the proband ’s family using a structured questionnaire, is analysed
to identify new medically signi ﬁcant information for families and
professionals concerned by a given condition. The currentquestionnaire consists of 41 multiple-choice questions exploring
physical parameters, cognitive and behavioural aspects, presence
or absence of neurological manifestations or problems affectingmajor physiological functions (cardiac, respiratory, renal …). Five
open questions explore the families ’perception of manifestations
which most affect health and quality of life of their relative, eventsof adverse reactions to treatments, etc. Currently, the question-naire is available in 7 languages and has been ﬁlled for 1080
patients, the main cohorts being Koolen-de Vries/KdVS (n =210),Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
242
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Kleefstra (147) and KBG (40) syndromes. This allowed identi ﬁcation
of respiratory problems in KdVS not reported previously, and of
differences in behavioural manifestations between the 3 syn-
dromes. Others cohorts have experienced signi ﬁcant growth over
the last year (MED13L: 36, DDX3X: 32; POGZ:10). Comparing sleepand epilepsy aspects for these 6 conditions reveal major
differences. For instance, for POGZ, sleep disorders appear much
more frequent than epilepsy. For KdVS, epilepsy that affectsalmost 50% of patients is of much greater concern than sleepproblems.
Conclusion: The data validate the interest of our participatory
approach: through their direct involvement, families can revealaspects of the pathology that have been underestimated untilnow.
J. Mandel: None. P. Burger: None. A. Strehle: None. F. Colin:
None. T. Mazzucotelli: None. N. Collot: None. A. Piton: None. P.
Parrend: None. L. Faivre: None. D. Geneviève: None. V. Ruault:
None. T. Smol: None. R. Caumes: None. J. Kummeling: None. C.
Ockeloen: None. T. Kleefstra: None. D. Koolen: None.
P08.045.C Deletions in MACROD2 gene and Autism Spectrum
Disorders
Fernando Macho Carballido , Javier Torres Hernández, Maria Luisa
Quintanilla Mata, María Esther Simarro Rueda, Laura Navarro
Casado, Elia López Ballesteros
Hospital General Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD),which are de ﬁned
as a chronic neurological disorder with a strong genetic basis,manifests at an early age with a variety of symptoms related to
social interaction, communication and lack of ﬂexibility in
reasoning and behavior. MACROD2 is a gene involved in DNA
repair, cell signaling, gene transcription, and chromatin remodel-
ing. It is highly expressed in the ventricular zone of the brain
during embryonic development. Deletions of 20p12.1 involvingMACROD2 have been associated with ASD according to several
studies that preliminarily linked this gene to ASD. CASE REPORT
First, in 2012, in a 12-year-old patient diagnosed with ASD, a 400 K
array-CGH was made, resulting in a deletion of 86 Kb in 20p12.1(chr20: 14147320_14234229). This CNV was classi ﬁed as of
uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance and was not considered as the
cause of the disorder. Recently, in another 3-year-old patient with
ASD, a genetic study was carried out using a 180K CGH-array,ﬁnding a 0.265 Mb deletion in 20p12.1 (chr20:
14776880_15041538) in the MACROD2 gene. In both cases, the
deletions were inherited from healthy mothers, so these altera-tions could have incomplete penetrance and high phenotypicvariability.
Discussion: Based on these cases and others previously
reported [Lombardo et al., 2019; Frye et al., 2016], where deletionsin 20p12.1 are found in non-syndromic boys with ASD, it would benecessary to review old cases in which no cause-effect was found
between the deletion and the disorder.
F. Macho Carballido: None. J. Torres Hernández: None. M.
Quintanilla Mata: None. M. Simarro Rueda:
None. L. Navarro
Casado: None. E. López Ballesteros: None.
P08.047.D Functional analysis of TLK2 variants and proximal
interactome support a pathogenic mechanism based on
impaired kinase activity causing alteration of chromatinstability pathwaysLisa Pavinato1,2, Marina Villamor-Payà3, Maria Sanchiz-Calvo3,
Cristina Andreoli4, Marina Gay3, Marta Vilasec3, Gianluca Arauz-
Garofalo3, Andrea Ciol ﬁ5, Alessandro Bruselles6, Tommaso Pippucci7,
Valentina Prota4, Diana Carli8, Elisa Giorgio1,9, Francesca Clementina
Radio5, Vincenzo Antona10, Mario Giuffrè10, Kara Ranguin11, Cindy
Colson11, Silvia De Rubeis12,13,14, Paola Dimartino15, Joseph Bux-
baum12,13,14, Giovanni Battista Ferrero16,17, Marco Tartaglia5, Simone
Martinelli6, Travis H. Stracker3,18, Alfredo Brusco1,19
1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,
2Institute of Human Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine
Cologne, University of Cologne, Köln, Germany,3The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Institute for Research inBiomedicine, Barcelona, Spain,4Department of Environment and
Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy,5Genetics and Rare
Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino GesùIRCCS, Rome, Italy,6Department of Oncology and Molecular
Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy,7Medical Genetics
Unity, Sant ’Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy,
8Department of Pediatrics and Public Health and Pediatric Sciences,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy,9Department of Molecular Medicine,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,10Department of Sciences for Health
Promotion and Mother and Child Care "G. D ’Alessandro", University
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy,11Department of Genetics, Reference
center for Rare Diseases and Developmental Anomalies, Caen,
France,12Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, NY, USA,
13Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York City, NY, USA,14The Mindich Child Health and
Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York City, NY, USA,15Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, Bologna, Italy,16Department of Pediatrics and Public
Health and Pediatric Sciences, Turin, Italy,17Clinical and Biological
Sciences Department, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,18Radiation
Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA,
19Unit of Medical Genetics, "Città della Salute e della Scienza"
University Hospital, Turin, Italy.
The Tousled-Like Kinases 1 and 2 (TLK1 and TLK2) are involved in
many fundamental processes, including DNA replication, cell cycle
checkpoint recovery and chromatin remodeling. Variants in TLK2
were associated with “Mental Retardation Autosomal Dominant
57”(MRD57), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a
highly variable phenotype, including intellectual disability, beha-
vioral abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, epilepsy,
and skeletal anomalies. By whole exome sequencing and array-CGH analysis, we identi ﬁed three unrelated MRD57 cases. Two
were sporadic and caused by a missense change (c.1652A>G; p.
(Asp551Gly)) and a 39-kb deletion encompassing TLK2 , and one
was familial with three affected siblings who inherited a nonsensechange from an affected mother (c.1423G>T; p.(Glu475Ter)). Using
spatial proteomics (BioID) and single-cell gel electrophoresis, we
investigated the proximity interaction landscape of TLK2 and
analyzed the effects of p.(Asp551Gly) and a previously reportedmissense variant (c.1850C>T; p.(Ser617Leu)) on TLK2 interactions,
localization and activity. Proximal interactions between TLK2 and
other factors implicated in neurological disorders, including CHD7,CHD8, BRD4, NACC1, were identi ﬁed. Notably, most of these
interactions were altered by the analyzed missense variants, as
well as TLK2 kinase activity and localization. Furthermore, we
demonstrated a more relaxed chromatin state in lymphoblastoidcells harboring the p.(Asp551Gly) variant compared to control
cells, conferring susceptibility to DNA damage. Overall, our study
identi ﬁed novel patients carrying pathogenic variants con ﬁrming
and further expanding MRD57-related phenotype. By means ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
243
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608interactome and functional analysis, we have molecularly char-
acterized two missense variants, providing new insights on the
pathomechanistic consequences of TLK2 mutations on intellectual
disability and neurodevelopmental disorders.
L. Pavinato: None. M. Villamor-Payà: None. M. Sanchiz-Calvo:
None. C. Andreoli: None. M. Gay: None. M. Vilasec: None. G.
Arauz-Garofalo: None. A. Ciol ﬁ:None. A. Bruselles: None. T.
Pippucci: None. V. Prota: None. D. Carli: None. E. Giorgio: None.
F. Radio: None. V. Antona: None. M. Giuffrè: None. K. Ranguin:
None. C. Colson: None. S. De Rubeis: None. P. Dimartino: None.
J. Buxbaum: None. G. Ferrero: None. M. Tartaglia: None. S.
Martinelli: None. T.H. Stracker: None. A. Brusco: None.
P08.048.B A MT-TL1 variant identi ﬁed by whole exome
sequencing in an individual with intellectual disability,epilepsy and spastic tetraparesis
Elke de Boer1, Charlotte W. Ockeloen2, Leslie Matalonga3, Rita
Horvath4, Solve-RD SNV-indel working group, Richard J. Rodenburg5,
Marieke J. H. Coenen6, Mirian Janssen7, Dylan Henssen8, Christian
Gilissen9, Wouter Steyaert9, Ida Paramonov3, Solve-RD-DITF-ITHACA,
Aurélien Trimouille10, Tjitske Kleefstra1, Alain Verloes11, Lisenka E. L.
M. Vissers1
1Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,3CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,
4Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, John
Van Geest Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Cambridge, UnitedKingdom,5Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Meta-
bolic Laboratory, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,6Department
of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences,Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,7Department of Internal
Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,8Department of
Medical Imaging, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,9Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular LifeSciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,10Laboratoire de
Génétique Moléculaire, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux
–Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux Cedex, France,11Département de
Génétique, APHP Robert DEBRE University Hospital and INSERMU1141, Paris, France.
The genetic etiology of intellectual disability remains elusive in
almost half of all affected individuals. Within the Solve-RD
consortium, systematic re-analysis of whole-exome sequencing
(WES) data from unresolved cases with intellectual disability (n =
1,472 probands) was performed. This re-analysis included variantcalling of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants, although mtDNA
is not speci ﬁcally targeted in WES. We identi ﬁed a functionally
relevant mtDNA variant in MT-TL1 (NC_012920.1:m.3291T>C;
NC_012920.1:n.62T>C), at a heteroplasmy level of 22% in wholeblood, in a 23-year-old male with severe intellectual disability,
epilepsy, episodic headaches with emesis, spastic tetraparesis,
brain abnormalities and feeding dif ﬁculties. Targeted validation in
blood and urine supported pathogenicity, with heteroplasmylevels of 23% and 58% in index, and 4% and 17% in mother,
respectively. Interestingly, not all phenotypic features observed in
the index have been previously linked to this MT-TL1 variant,
suggesting either broadening of the m.3291T>C-associated
phenotype, or presence of a co-occurring disorder. Hence, our
case highlights the importance of underappreciated mtDNAvariants identi ﬁable from WES data, especially for cases with
atypical mitochondrial phenotypes and their relatives in the
maternal line.The Solve-RD project has received funding from the European
Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No 779257.
E. de Boer: None. C.W. Ockeloen: None. L. Matalonga: None.
R. Horvath: None. R.J. Rodenburg: None. M.J.H. Coenen: None.
M. Janssen: None. D. Henssen: None. C. Gilissen: None. W.
Steyaert: None. I. Paramonov: None. A. Trimouille: None. T.
Kleefstra: None. A. Verloes: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None.
P08.049.C A prospective study highlighting the increasing
role of multiple molecular diagnoses in the ﬁeld of rare
diseases
Caroline Racine
1,2,3, Camille Engel2, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,2,
Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Antonio Vitobello1,2, Arthur Sorlin1,2,3, Anne-
Sophie Denommé-Pichon1,2,3, Hana Safraou1,2,3, Sophie Nambot1,3,
Julian Delanne1,3, Aurore Garde1,3, Marie Bournez3, Sébastien
Moutton1,3, Julien Thevenon3, Daphnée Lehalle3, Nada Houcinat3,
Nolwenn Jean-Marçais3, Marjolaine Willems4, Alain Verloes5, Fanny
Laffargue6, Lucile Pinson4, James Lespinasse7, Elodie Lacaze8, David
Geneviève4, Olivier Patat9, Laetitia Lambert10, Marion Gérard-
Blanluet11, Charlotte Benigni10, Orphanomix Physician ’s Group,
Philippine Garret1,2, Christophe Philippe1,2, Yannis Duffourd1,2,
Laurence Faivre1,2,3, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,2,12
1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Genetics of Devel opmental disorders, Université
de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,2Unité
Fonctionnelle "Innovation diagnostique dans les maladies rares"
laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plateau
Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,3Centre de Référence
Maladies Rares "Anomalies du Dével oppement et synd romes malforma-
tifs", FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,4Département de
Génétique Médicale, Maladies rare s et Médecine Personnalisée, CHU de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,5Département de Génét ique, Assistance
Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris,
France,6Service de Génétique Médicale, Cen tre Hospitalier Universitaire
Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France,7Laboratoire de Génétique Chromo-
somique, CH Général, Chambéry, France,8Département de génétique,
CH du Havre, Le Havre, France,9Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital
Purpan, Centre Hospitalier Uni versitaire, Toulouse, France,10Service de
Génétique Clinique, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France,11Service de
Génétique, CHU de Caen, Caen, France,12Centre de Référence Maladies
Rares "Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares", FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU
Dijon, Dijon, France.
Introduction: The utility of next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies in the ﬁeld of rare diseases has already been proven,
improving the molecular diagnosis rate. Among those diagnoses,multiple molecular diagnoses have been reported in the literature,ranging from 3.2% to 7% of positive diagnoses. We here analyze their
characteristics in a study on exome sequencing (ES) data.
Materials and Methods: ES data were obtained from a cohort
of 1859 unrelated patients, referred to our diagnostic laboratoryfor the etiological work-up of intellectual disability and/or
congenital abnormalities. Data were analyzed prospectively from
January 2017 to December 2020.
Results: A molecular diagnosis was raised for 615/1859 patients
(33.1%). Among them, 21 (3.4%) had two pathogenic variants and 20
additional patients had one pathogenic and one variant of unknown
signiﬁcance (VUS) with a high probability of being reclassi ﬁed as likely
pathogenic in the future, raising the rate to 6.7%. Causal copy-number
variants were found in 9/21 patients. Two patients displayed a second
variant involving a distinct disease. Both variants contributed to acomplex phenotype for 10 patients. For the remaining 9, the secondvariant modulated the phenotype. When parental samples wereAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
244
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608available, both variants were found de novo for 1/16 patient, and one
variant de novo for 9/16 patients.
Conclusions: Our results are consistent with the literature since
multiple molecular diagnoses occurred in 3.4% of positive cases –
6.7% if VUS are considered. It suggests their increasing role in rarediseases and the great value of taking them into consideration
within a laboratory diagnostic routine.
C. Racine: None. C. Engel: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A.
Bruel: None. A. Vitobello: None. A. Sorlin: None. A. Denommé-
Pichon: None. H. Safraou: None. S. Nambot: None. J. Delanne:
None. A. Garde: None. M. Bournez: None. S. Moutton: None. J.
Thevenon: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Houcinat: None. N. Jean-
Marçais: None. M. Willems: None. A. Verloes: None. F.
Laffargue: None. L. Pinson: None. J. Lespinasse: None. E.
Lacaze: None. D. Geneviève: None. O. Patat: None. L. Lambert:
None. M. Gérard-Blanluet: None. C. Benigni: None. P. Garret:
None. C. Philippe: None. Y. Duffourd: None. L. Faivre: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None.
P08.050.D MYT1L-associated neurodevelopmental disorder: a
clinical and molecular description of 37 new cases and
literature review
Juliette Coursimault1, Anne-Marie Guerrot1, Michelle Morrow2, Bert
Callewaert3, Sarah Vergult3, Laurence Faivre4, Frédéric Tran Mau-
Them4, Ange-Line Bruel4, Estelle Colin5, Marine Tessarech6, Mathilde
Nizon7, Benjamin Cogne7, Bertrand Isidor7, Cyril Mignot8, Diane
Doummar9, Boris Keren8, Stéphanie Valence9, Delphine Héron8,
Françoise Devillard10, Charles Coutton11, Marlène Rio12, Karine
Poirier12, Elise Schaefer13, Bénédicte Gérard14, Gwenaël Le Guyader15,
Frédéric Bilan15, Wendy Chung16, Rebecca Hernan16, Austin Larson17,
Kelly Nori17, Sarah Stewart17, James Wheless18, Salima El Cheha-
deh13, Beth Pletcher19, Christina Kresge19, Margaret Helm20, Laurence
Colleaux12, Anne-Sophie Alaix12, Jeanne Amiel12, Sophie Rondeau12,
Roseline Caumes21, Thomas Smol22, Sabine Sigaudy23, Alexandra
Afenjar8, Christine Coubes24, Christine Poitou25, Thierry Frébourg1,
Pascale Saugier-Veber1, Gaël Nicolas1, François Lecoquierre1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, Depart-
ment of Genetics and reference center for developmental disorders,
FHU G4 Génomique, F-76000, Rouen, France,2GeneDX, 207 Perry
Parkway Gaithersburg, MD 20877, Gaithersburg, MD, USA,3Center
for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Department of
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,4Service de
Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, CHU Dijon, Dijon,France,5Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University
Hospital, Angers, France UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM 1083 and PREMMI,
Mitovasc Institute, Angers, France,6Department of Biochemistry and
Genetics,Angers University Hospital, Angers, France UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM 1083 and PREMMI, Mitovasc Institute, Angers, France,7CHU
Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France,8APHP.
Sorbonne Université, Département de Génétique, Groupe HospitalierPitié-Salpêtrière-Hôpital Trousseau, Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences
Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France,9APHP.Sorbonne
Université, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris,
France,10Service de génétique et procréation CHU Grenoble Alpes,
Grenoble, France,11Genetic Epigenetic and Therapies of Infertility,
Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Institut National de la Santé et de
la Recherche Médicale U1209, Centre National de la Recherche
Scienti ﬁque UMR 5309, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France,
12Department of Genetics, IHU Necker-Enfants Malades, University
Paris Descartes, Paris, France,13Service de génétique médicale,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Institut de Génétique Médicaled’Alsace, Strasbourg, France,14Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,15Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Poitiers, Service de Génétique, BP577,86021, Poitiers, France,16Columbia University Irving Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA,17University of Colorado, School of Medicine and
Children ’s Hospital, Aurora, CO, USA,18Division of Pediatric
Neurology, University of Tennessee, Health Science Center, Memphis,TN, USA,19Division of Clinical Genetics, Rutgers New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ, USA,20Maine Medical Partners, Pediatric
Specialty Care Genetics, Portland, ME, USA,21Institut de Génétique
médicale, Clinique Guy de Fontaine, Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France,
22Pôle Biologie Pathologie Génétique, Centre de Biologie Pathologie
Pierre-Marie Degand, Lille, France,23Département de Génétique
Médicale, Hôpital Timone Enfant, Marseille, France,24Département
de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée,CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France,25Service de Nutrition, Hôpital
de la Pitié Salpêtrière - AP-HP, Paris, France.
Introduction: Pathogenic variants of the myelin transcription
factor-1 like ( MYT1L) gene cause a syndromic neurodevelopmental
disorder and include missense, premature termination codon
(PTC) variants and 2p25.3 microdeletions. Despite a strongenrichment in de novo mutations in developmental disorders or
autism trio studies, the clinical characterization and phenotype-
genotype correlations are scarce and only 21 patients with
missense or PTC variants have been reported so far.
Materials and Methods: We collected clinical and genetic
information of 37 new patients with (likely) pathogenic MYT1L
variants through datasharing resources and collaborations and
performed a comprehensive meta-analysis with already publisheddata (total =58 patients).
Results: Weﬁrst con ﬁrmed that the main phenotypic features
of the MYT1L- related disorder are developmental delay (95%),
intellectual disability (ID, 68%), overweight or obesity (59%),behavioral disorders (100%) and epilepsy (22%). In addition, 32%
of the patients presented learning disorders without ID and 19%
presented in infancy feeding dif ﬁculties, which were not reported
before. We further describe the inconstant dysmorphic features(69%) and present the weight evolution of 21 patients. We show
that patients harboring highly clustered missense variants within
the 2
ndand 3rdzinc ﬁnger domains are not clinically distinguish-
able from patients with truncating variants. We report the ﬁrstde
novo missense variants outside the 2nd and 3rd zinc ﬁnger
domains, which nevertheless remain the target domains for most
pathogenic missense variants.
Conclusion: We provide an updated description of clinical and
genetic data of the MYT1L- associated neurodevelopmental
disorder, hence improving diagnosis and clinical management ofthese patients. Fundings: RIN2018
J. Coursimault: None. A. Guerrot: None. M. Morrow: None. B.
Callewaert: None. S. Vergult: None. L. Faivre: None. F. Tran
Mau-Them: None. A. Bruel: None. E. Colin: None. M. Tessarech:
None. M. Nizon: None. B. Cogne: None. B. Isidor: None. C.
Mignot: None. D. Doummar: None. B. Keren: None. S. Valence:
None. D. Héron: None. F. Devillard: None. C. Coutton: None. M.
Rio: None. K. Poirier: None. E. Schaefer: None. B. Gérard: None.
G. Le Guyader: None. F. Bilan: None. W. Chung: None. R.
Hernan: None. A. Larson: None. K. Nori: None. S. Stewart: None.
J. Wheless: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. B. Pletcher: None. C.
Kresge: None. M. Helm: None. L. Colleaux: None. A. Alaix: None.
J. Amiel: None. S. Rondeau: None. R. Caumes: None. T. Smol:
None. S. Sigaudy: None. A. Afenjar: None. C. Coubes: None. C.
Poitou: None. T. Frébourg: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. G.
Nicolas: None. F. Lecoquierre: None.
P08.051.A Microdeletions at 19p13.11 in four individuals with
neurodevelopmental delay
Melissa Rieger1, Sébastien Moutton2, Sarah Verheyen3, Michael
Speicher3, Bruno Leheup4, Celine Bonnet5, Katharina Steindl6,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
245
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Beatrice Boneda6, Anita Rauch6, Mandy Krumbiegel1, André Reis1,
Ulrike Hüffmeier1
1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,
2CPDPN, Pôle mère enfant, MSPBordeaux Bagatelle, Talence, France,
3Institute of Human Genetics, Diagnostic and Research Center for
MolecularBioMedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria,
4Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France,
5Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHRU Nancy, Nancy, France,
6Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren,
Switzerland.
Introduction: Chromosomal microarrays (CMA) have been used
to investigate the etiology of developmental disorders/intellectual
disability (DD/ID) for more than a decade. The pangenomic
approach allowed to identify numerous microdeletion andmicroduplication syndromes in undiagnosed patients and con-tributed to increased diagnostic rate and to better de ﬁne
genotype phenotype correlations. Few cases with copy number
variants at 19p13.11 and scarce clinical information have beenpreviously described. Most of them were identi ﬁed by molecular
genetic testing due to intellectual disability.
Material and methods: Using CMA, microdeletions at chromo-
some band 19p13.11 were detected in four independentindividuals presenting with a DD/ID phenotype. The group was
gathered through Decipher and internal collaborations.
Results: All four patients presented with variable neurodeve-
lopmental and speech delay as well as behavioral and sleepingdifﬁculties. Moreover, they partly showed cardiovascular, skeletal,
and various other malformations. Most common overlapping
dysmorphic features were a prominent nose, a thin uppervermilion, and a short neck. Dysmorphic features were rathersubtle and non-speci ﬁc and therefore not considered as a
recognizable facial gestalt. The analyzed parents did not carry
the deletions, indicating a de novo occurrence. The deletion sizesranged between 0.7 –1.5 Mb, located between Megabases 18-21
and contained a variable number of protein-coding genes (n =25-
48). For none of the genes in the shortest region of overlap therewas enough evidence to qualify them as candidates for theneurodevelopmental delay.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings support a locus on 19p13.11
associated with neurodevelopmental disorder and variablemalformations.
M. Rieger: None. S. Moutton: None. S. Verheyen: None. M.
Speicher: None. B. Leheup: None. C. Bonnet: None. K. Steindl:
None. B. Boneda: None. A. Rauch: None. M. Krumbiegel: None.
A. Reis: None. U. Hüffmeier: None.
P08.052.B EIF3F -related neurodevelopmental disorder: re ﬁn-
ing the phenotypic and expanding the molecular spectrum
Ulrike D. Hüffmeier
1, Cornelia Kraus1, Miriam S. Reuter1, Steffen
Uebe1, Mary-Alice Abbott2, Syed A. Ahmed3, Kristyn L. Rawson4,
Eileen Barr5, Hong Li5, Ange-Line Bruel6, Laurence Faivre6, Frédéric
Tran Mau Them6, Christina Botti7, Susan Brooks7, Kaitlyn Burns8,
Isum Ward8, Marina Dutra-Clarke9, Julian A. Martinez-Agosto9, Hane
Lee9, Stanley F. Nelson9, UCLA California Center for Rare Disease9, Pia
Zacher10, Rami Abou Jamra10, Chiara Klöckner10, Julie McGaugh-
ran11, Jürgen Kohlhase12, Sarah Schuhmann1, Ellen Moran13, John
Pappas13, Annick Raas-Rothschild14, Maria J. Guillen Sacoto15,
Lindsay B. Henderson15, Timothy Blake Palculict15, Sureni V.
Mullegama15, Houda Zghal Elloumi15, Adi Reich15, Samantha A.
Schrier Vergano16, Erica Wahl17, André Reis1,Christiane Zweier1,18
1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,
2Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University ofMassachusetts Medical School –Baystate, Spring ﬁeld, MN, USA,
3Department of Genetics, Southern California Permanente Medical
Group, Kaiser Permanente, Riverside, CA, USA,4Department of
Genetics, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, KaiserPermanente, Riverside, MN, USA,5Department of Human Genetics,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA,6UMR-Inserm
1231 GAD team, Génétique des Anomalies du développement,
Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,7Division of
Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Rutgers Robert WoodJohnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA,8Sanford Health,
Sioux Falls, SD, USA,9Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at LosAngeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA,10Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany,11Genetic
Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Woman ’s Hospital, Brisbane
and School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, St Lucia,Brisbane, Australia,12Synlab Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany,13Clinical Genetics, Hassenfeld Children ’s Hospital at NYU
Langone, NYU Langone, Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY, USA,
14Sackler School of Medicine at Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel,
and Institute of Rare Diseases, Edmond & Lily Safra Children Hospital,
Tel Hashome, Italy,15GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA,16Division of
Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children ’s Hospital of The King ’s
Daughters, Norfolk, VA, USA,17UBMD Pediatrics, Division of Genetics,
Buffalo, NY, USA,18Institut of Human Genetics, Universitätsspital
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
Introduction: An identical homozygous missense variant in EIF3F,
identi ﬁed through a large-scale genome-wide sequencing
approach, was reported as causative in nine individuals with aneurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by variable intellec-tual disability, epilepsy, behavioral problems and sensorineural
hearing-loss.
Material and methods: To re ﬁne the phenotypic and expand
the molecular spectrum of EIF3F-related neurodevelopmentaldisorder, we examined independent patients.
Results: 21 patients were homozygous and one compound
heterozygous for c.694T>G/p.(Phe232Val) in EIF3F. Haplotypeanalyses in 15 families suggested that c.694T>G/p.(Phe232Val)was a founder variant. All affected individuals had developmental
delays including delayed speech development. About half of the
affected individuals had behavioral problems, altered musculartone, hearing loss, and short stature. Moreover, this study suggests
that microcephaly, reduced sensitivity to pain, cleft lip/palate,
gastrointestinal symptoms and ophthalmological symptoms arepart of the phenotypic spectrum. Minor dysmorphic features wereobserved, although neither the individuals ’facial nor general
appearance were obviously distinctive. Symptoms in the com-
pound heterozygous individual with an additional truncatingvariant were at the severe end of the spectrum in regard to motormilestones, speech delay, organic problems and pre- and
postnatal growth of body and head, suggesting some genotype-
phenotype correlation.
Conclusions: Our study re ﬁnes the phenotypic and expands the
molecular spectrum of EIF3F-related syndromic neurodevelop-
mental disorder. Funding: IZKF project E31 to CZ, NIH NationalCenter for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS) UCLA Clinicaland Translational Science Institute (CTSI) grant number
UL1TR001881.
U.D. Hüffmeier: None. C. Kraus: None. M.S. Reuter: None. S.
Uebe: None. M. Abbott: None. S.A. Ahmed: None. K.L. Rawson:
None. E. Barr: None. H. Li: None. A. Bruel: None. L. Faivre: None.
F.T.M. Them: None. C. Botti: None. S. Brooks: None. K. Burns:
None. I. Ward: None. M. Dutra-Clarke: None. J.A. Martinez-
Agosto: None. H. Lee: None. S.F. Nelson: None. U. California
Center for Rare Disease: None. P. Zacher: None. R. Abou Jamra:
None. C. Klöckner: None. J. McGaughran: None. J. Kohlhase:
None. S. Schuhmann: None. E. Moran: None. J. Pappas: None. A.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
246
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Raas-Rothschild: None. M.J. Guillen Sacoto: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. L.B. Henderson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. T. Blake Palculict: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. S.V. Mullegama:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. H. Zghal
Elloumi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. A.
Reich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. S.A.
Schrier Vergano: None. E. Wahl: None. A. Reis: None. C. Zweier:
None.
P08.053.C Investigating consanguineous families from Turkey
to identify autosomal recessive neurodevelopmentaldisorders
Esen Gumuslu1, Evren Gümüs2, Ozlem Oz3, Melis Ozkan4, Kadri
Karaer5, Arif Ekici1, Edibe Pembegul Yildiz4, Nur Aydinli4, André Reis1
1Institute of Human Genetics University Hospital Friedrich-Alexander-
University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,2Sitki Kocman
University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, Mugla,Turkey,3Harran University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics
Department, Sanliurfa, Turkey,4Istanbul University School of
Medicine, Pediatric Neurology Department, Istanbul, Turkey,5Pamuk-
kale University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department,
Denizli, Turkey.
Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders(NDDs) are geneti-
cally and phenotypically highly heterogeneous. Autosomal
recessive (AR) genetic defects are more dif ﬁcult to diagnose and
are thus underreported. In consanguineous marriages, AR genealterations are enriched, but these families also can haveautosomal dominant new mutations and X-linked inherited
variants. We reasoned that studying families with multiple
affected individuals would select for AR inheritance.
Materials and Methods: We recruited 176 patients from 77
consanguineous families with NDDs with two or more affected
individuals through clinical genetic and neuro-paediatric con-sultations from various academic hospitals in Turkey. In a pilotstudy, we report exome sequencing results from a subset of 17
families with 38 affected.
Results: In 12 individuals (32%) from six families we identi ﬁed
previously described pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants insix genes (ADAT3, CLP1, KMT2D, NSUN, PTRH2 and SCNA8A). In 24
individuals we found rare missense variants in established or
candidate genes. Of these, in 9 individuals the phenotype was inaccordance with the literature, bringing number of “solved ”cases
to 21 (55%). In 14 individuals we found multiple rare variants in
genes causing overlapping phenotypes, which makes these casesdifﬁcult to disambiguate. In three families, affected siblings were
discordant for the molecular ﬁndings.
Conclusion: This study has identi ﬁed novel variants in known
(candidate) genes in 55% of individuals allowing broadening ofthe phenotypic spectrum associated with these genes. Themajority of variants are missense and dif ﬁcult to interpret.
Affected individuals often have variants in multiple genes, raising
the question of possibly blended phenotypes.
E. Gumuslu: None. E. Gümüs: None. O. Oz: None. M. Ozkan:
None. K. Karaer: None. A. Ekici: None. E. Pembegul Yildiz: None.
N. Aydinli: None. A. Reis: None.
P08.054.D High diagnostic rate in publicly funded clinical
whole exome sequencing for neurodevelopmental disordersand congenital anomalies: A tertiary center experience with280 probandsBen Pode-Shakked
1,2, Oratl Barel1, Amihood Singer3, Elon Pras1,2,
Lior Greenbaum1,2
1Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel,2Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel,3Community Genetics,
Public Health Services, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) is an important diagnostic tool for
individuals affected by neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) and/ormultiple congenital anomalies (MCA). However, WES cost is often an
obstacle for pursuing this option. We evaluated the yield of publicly
funded clinical WES, performed in a single tertiary referral centerduring a three-year period (2018-2020). All index cases had thefollowing: (1) moderate to severe intellectual disability (ID)
(intelligence quotient [IQ]/developmental quotient [DQ] ≤55); or
(2) mild to moderate ID (IQ/DQ<70) with epilepsy or congenitalanomaly; or (3) MCA. Only subjects with normal chromosomal
microarray analysis results who met inclusion criteria, were offered
to participate. Overall, 280 consecutive families were included. In250 (89.3%) families, the index case had NDD. In 252 of the families(90.0%), a trio WES was performed. Molecular diagnosis was reached
in 115 (41.1%) families, mainly due to de novo mutations (92/115,
80.0%). Disease-causing variants were identi ﬁed in a total of 102
genes, ﬁfteen of which were implicated in more than a single family.
Both paternal and maternal age at pregnancy were older in families
with a de novo mutation, compared to all other cases. Yield was
lower in families with premature birth compared to birth at term.Other demographic and clinical variables (including multiply
affected family, coexistence of epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder,
abnormal brain imaging or microcephaly) were not signi ﬁcantly
associated with WES yield. Taken together, our ﬁndings support WES
utility in a real-world setting, as part of a publicly funded genetic
work-up for NDD and/or MCA.
B. Pode-Shakked: None. O. Barel: None. A. Singer: None. E.
Pras: None. L. Greenbaum: None.
P08.055.A NFIB - associated intellectual disability and/or
speech delay: ﬁrst report of two novel structural variant
disruptions
Constantia Aristidou
1,2, Marselia Pantelidou1,2,LUDMILA KOUSOU-
LIDOU1,2, Athina Theodosiou1,2, Ioannis Papaevripidou1,S oﬁa Kitsiou
- Tzeli3, Niels Tommerup4, Carolina Sismani1
1Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, NICOSIA, Cyprus,2The Cyprus School of
Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Department of Medical
Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece,
4Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
The nuclear factor I (NFI) genes encode a family of transcription
factors essential for multi-organ development during embryogen-
esis. NFIA and NFIX have been implicated in abnormal clinical
phenotype manifestation. NFIB haploinsuf ﬁciency, caused by micro-
deletions and point mutations, has only recently been reported inpatients with variable intellectual disability, macrocephaly, motor
and speech delay. However, NFIB disruptions caused by structural
variants have not been reported. Here we report two independentcases with NFIB disruptions that were identi ﬁed through low-
coverage whole-genome mate-pair sequencing (WG-MPS).
Speci ﬁcally, WG-MPS was applied to map breakpoints in a
female with dysmorphic facial features, speech delay and aAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
247
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608balanced t(4;9)(q26;p24)dn (patient 1), and a male with intellectual
disability and an inv(9)(p22q21.2) inherited from his father with
developmental and speech delay (patients 2,3). PCR primers
ﬂanking the predicted rearrangement junctions and Sanger
sequencing were used to potentially identify clinically-relevantgenes at the breakpoint sites.
The rearrangement breakpoints were re ﬁned to the base-pair
level in all affected individuals. The derivative 9 breakpoint(chr9:14104379-14104385) in patient 1 directly disrupted NFIB
intron 10, while the inv(9) breakpoint (chr9:14451707-14451711),
identically found in patients 2,3, mapped ~138kb upstream NFIB
(NM_001190737.2) (hg38). The remaining breakpoints werelocated in intergenic regions.
In conclusion, this study reports for the ﬁrst time two cases
with overlapping phenotypes carrying structural variants that
d i s r u p td i r e c t l yo ri n d i r e c t l yt h e NFIB gene. Future functional
studies will de ﬁne the underlying molecular mechanisms and
further support the impact of these novel ﬁndings, thus
expanding the current literature on the heterogeneous patho-genicity of NFIB variants.
C. Aristidou: None. M. Pantelidou: None. L. Kousoulidou:
None. A. Theodosiou: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. S. Kitsiou -
Tzeli: None. N. Tommerup: None. C. Sismani: None.
P08.056.B A case report of O-Donnell-Luria-Rodan syndrome
with a novel truncating variant
Pilar Carrasco Salas
1, Rosario Mateos Checa2, Ana Serrano Mira1,
Marina Oliva de Agar3
1Genetic Unit, Clinical Analysis Department, Hospital Juan Ramón
Jiménez, Huelva, Spain,2Neuropediatric Unit, Pediatric Department,
Hospital Juan Ramón Jiménez, Huelva, Spain,3Genetics, Reference
Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: O’Donnell-Luria-Rodan (OLR) syndrome is a neuro-
developmental disorder described recently. In the only studypublished to date, a possible correlation between genotype andphenotype has been proposed. Most individuals with protein-
truncating variants in KMT2E gene appear to present with
generally mild developmental delay and intellectual disability,while patients with missense variants presented with the mostsevere phenotype.
Material and methods: The proband is a girl aged 6 years. In
theﬁrst months of life, she presented with hypotonia, macro-
cephaly and three venous hemangiomas that made suspect
initially a neurocutaneous syndrome. At age one, she started with
treatment refractory epilepsy. Later, gastrointestinal abnormalities,progressive cerebral atrophy and severe development delay (shewas unable to walk or speak) was observed. Due to this complex
phenotype, whole exome sequencing was performed by Sure-
SelectXT Human All Exon V5 (Agilent Technologies, USA). Parents ’
analysis was done by Sanger sequencing.
Results: A heterozygous frameshift variant was identi ﬁed in
KMT2E gene in the proband ((NM_182931.2): c.3487_3488insAT (p.
Arg1163Hisfs*31)). It is a novel variant not previously described.Parents were not carried, being the diagnosis of OLR syndromeconﬁrmed.
Conclusions: We present a case of severe OLR syndrome in a
patient with a truncating variant. This suggests that thedivergence in phenotype of patients with this syndrome is not
related to the type of mutations identi ﬁed, but is more likely a
result of additional genetic or epigenetic factors. The patient hadhemangiomas, a clinical feature not described in other patientsuntil now. Further studies are required to con ﬁrm these two
ﬁndingsP. Carrasco Salas: None. R. Mateos Checa: None. A. Serrano
Mira: None. M. Oliva de Agar: None.
P08.057.C Recessively inherited pathogenic P4HTM gene
variants cause Hypotonia, Hypoventilation, Intellectual Dis-
ability, Dysautonomia, Epilepsy, and Eye Abnormalities
(HIDEA syndrome)
Elisa Rahikkala
1,2,3, Matti Myllykoski4,5, Reetta Hinttala2,4, Päivi
Vieira2,6, Naemeh Nayebzadeh2,4, Simone Weiss7, Astrid S. Plomp8,
Reginald Bittner9, Mitja I. Kurki10,11,12, Outi Kuismin1,2,10, Andrea M.
Lewis13,14, Marja-Leena Väisänen15, Hannaleena Kokkonen15, Jonne
Westermann8,Gűnther Bernert7, Hannu Tuominen16, Aarno Palo-
tie10,11,12, Lauri Aaltonen17, Yaping Yang14,18, Lorraine Potocki13,14,
Jukka Moilanen1,2, Silvana van Koningsbruggen8, Xia Wang14,18,
Wolfgang M. Schmidt9, Peppi Koivunen* contributed equally4,5,
Johanna Uusimaa* contributed equally2,4,6
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu,
Finland,2PEDEGO Research Unit and Medical Research Centre Oulu,
University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland,
3Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland,
4Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,5Faculty of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Oulu Centre for Cell-Matrix
Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,6Department of Children
and Adolescents, Division of Paediatric Neurology, Oulu UniversityHospital, Oulu, Finland,7Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital with G.v. Preyer
Children ’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Vienna, Austria,
8Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,9Neuromuscular Research
Department, Medical University of Vienna, Centre for Anatomy andCell Biology, Vienna, Austria,10Institute for Molecular Medicine
Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki,
Finland,11Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massa-
chusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,12The Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA,13Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA,
14Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA,15Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab
and Medical Research Centre, Oulu University Hospital and University
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland,16Department of Pathology, Oulu University
Hospital, Oulu, Finland,17Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-
Scale Biology Research Program, University of Helsinki and Haartman
Institute, Helsinki, Finland,18Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, USA.
Introduction: A transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase (P4H-TM)
encoded by the P4HTM gene has not yet been associated with any
Mendelian disorder. A new syndrome with hypotonia, intellectualdisability and eye abnormalities (HIDEA) was recently described ina large consanguineous family from Northern Finland. Genome
sequencing resulted in a shortlist of three candidate genes with
potentially pathogenic biallelic variants: TKT,P4HTM and USP4 .
However, the causative gene remained elusive.
Material & methods: International collaboration and whole
exome sequencing (WES) analysis were used to identify new
patients with HIDEA and biallelic potentially pathogenic variants intheP4HTM gene. P4H-TM wild type and variant constructs without
the transmembrane region were overexpressed in insect cells and
analyzed with SDS-PAGE and Western blot.
Results: Five different homozygous or compound heterozygous
pathogenic P4HTM gene variants were identi ﬁed in six new and six
previously published patients presenting with HIDEA. Hypoventi-
lation, obstructive and central sleep apnea and dysautonomiawere identi ﬁed as novel features associated with the phenotype.
Characterization of three of the P4H-TM variants demonstrated
insoluble protein products and, thus, loss-of-function.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
248
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: Biallelic loss-of-function P4HTM variants were
shown to cause HIDEA syndrome. Our ﬁndings enable diagnosis
of the condition, and highlight the importance of assessing the
need for non-invasive ventilatory support in patients. Funding:This study was supported by the Academy of Finland Grants266719 and 308009, the S. Jusélius Foundation, the Emil Aaltonen
Foundation and the Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation to P.K.
E. Rahikkala: None. M. Myllykoski: None. R. Hinttala: None. P.
Vieira: None. N. Nayebzadeh: None. S. Weiss: None. A.S. Plomp:
None. R. Bittner: None. M.I. Kurki: None. O. Kuismin: None. A.M.
Lewis: None. M. Väisänen: None. H. Kokkonen: None. J.
Westermann: None. G. Bernert: None. H. Tuominen: None. A.
Palotie: None. L. Aaltonen: None. Y. Yang: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; The Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine derives revenue from
molecular genetic testing offered at Baylor Genetics.. L. Potocki:
None. J. Moilanen: None. S. van Koningsbruggen: None. X.
Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; The
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor Collegeof Medicine derives revenue from molecular genetic testingoffered at Baylor Genetics.. W.M. Schmidt: None. P. Koivunen*
contributed equally: None. J. Uusimaa* contributed equally:
None.
P08.058.D Phelan-McDermid syndrome: the use of modern
methods of cytogenetic examination in the diagnosis ofautism spectrum disorders
Larysa Sheiko
1, Iryna Lastivka2, Vita Antsupova3, Iana Ushko3,
Ljudmila Brisevac1, Volodymyr Davydiuk4
1Shupyk National Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv,
Ukraine,2Bukovinian State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine,
3Bohomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine,4National
Pirogov Memorial Medical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine.
Introduction: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMD) is one of the
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) syndromes caused by thedeletion of the terminal or interstitial parts chromosome
22q13.3. In the case of the formation of a circular chromosome
without loss of material, the phenotype remains normal, but thereis a risk of microdeletion in the offspring. Patients with PMD areusually seen with a diagnosis of undifferentiated mental retarda-
tion or autism.
Materials and Methods: a clinical case of Phelan-McDermid
syndrome in a child with undifferentiated mental retardation.
Clinical genealogical, syndromic, cytogenetic, molecular genetic
methods were used.
Results: A six-year-old girl with undifferentiated mental
retardation was referred for genetic counseling. Previously
observed by a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, psychiatrist for
microcephaly, delayed statokinetic and psychoverbal develop-ment. Girl phenotype: dolichocephaly, high forehead, ﬂattening of
the middle part of the face, deep-set eyes, full and puffy eyelids,
long eyelashes, hypertelorism, full cheeks, enlarged ears. The child
exhibits autistic behavior. Genetic testing included determinationof the karyotype of the proband and parents by several methods:GTG; FISH with DNA samples WCP1-22, X, Y and FISH with locus
speci ﬁc samples 22SI LSI TUPLE1, 22q13 ARSA. Result: 46,XX,r(22)
(p11.2q13), Phelan McDermid syndrome, recommendations forthe rehabilitation of the child were given. Maternal karyotype: 46,
XX. Paternal karyotype: 46,XY,r(22), gene sequencing is recom-
mended SHANK3.
Conclusions: The use of a complex of modern cytogenetic
methods, FISH with DNA probes, or SHANK3 gene sequencing can
signi ﬁcantly increase the number of diagnosed cases ofgenetically determined mental retardation and increase the
effectiveness of preventive measures.
L. Sheiko: None. I. Lastivka: None. V. Antsupova: None. I.
Ushko: None. L. Brisevac: None. V. Davydiuk: None.
P08.063.A Expanding the phenotype of QRICH1 associated
neurodevelopmental disorder
Smitha Kumble
1,A m a n d aM .L e v y2, Sixto García-Miñaúr3,4,H u aG a o5,
Maria Palomares-Bralo3,4, Marta Pacio-Míguez3,S u m i tP a r i k h6,A l y s s aL .
Ritter7, Kosuke Izumi7,T r e v o rL .H o f f m a n8, Henry Oppermann9,L i s e
Bjerglund10, Jill A. Rosenfeld11,C y n t h i aC u r r y12,L a u r e n c eF a i v r e13,14,
Anja Leiber15, Scott Robinson16, Richard S. Finkel17,18,A m a n d a
Gerard11,19, Julie S. Cohen20, Yili Xie21, Sureni V. Mullegama21,K o n r a d
Platzer9, Maria J. Guillen Sacoto21,A n y aR e v a h - P o l i t i22,23,S a r aM .
Berger24, Anne M. Comi25, Kwame Anyane-Yeboa16, Alice Fiévet26,27,
Cassie S. Mintz28, Reymundo Lozano29,J e n n i f e rE .P o s e y11,M i c h a e l
Ciliberto30, Lillian Howard30, Paul Benke31,S y l v i eO d e n t32, Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon33,34, Mathys Wéber13, Nicholas Ah Mew35, Elsebet
Ostergaard36,37, Alejandro D. Iglesias38,J a y aP u n e t h a11,39,W e n d yK .
Chung40, Natasha Brown1,41, Zeynep Tümer2,37
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children ’s Research
Institute, Melbourne, Australia,2Kennedy Center, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,Copenhagen, Denmark,3Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics,
La Paz University Hospital, Idipaz, Madrid, Spain,4Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, InstitutoCarlos III, Madrid, Spain,5Department of Review Analysis, GeneDx
LLC, Maryland, MD, USA,6Mitochondrial Medicine & Neurogenetics,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA,7Divison of Human Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA,8Regional Department of Genetics, Southern
California Kaiser Permanente Medical Group, Pasadena, CA, USA,
9Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany,10Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital
Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark,11Department of Molecular &
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,
12Genetic Medicine, Dept of Pediatrics, UCSF/Fresno, Fresno, CA, USA,
13Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes
Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon,
France,14Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du
Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,15Depart-
ment of neuropediatrics, Childrens Hospital of Eastern Switzerland,St. Gallen, Switzerland,16Department of Pediatrics, Columbia
University New York, New York, NY, USA,17Nemours Children ’s
Hospital, Orlando, FL, USA,18Center for Experimental Neurother-
apeutics, St. Jude Children ’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA,
19Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA,20Department of
Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Kennedy Krieger Institute,Baltimore, MD, USA,21Clinical Genomics Program, GeneDx, Mary-
land, MD, USA,22Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA,23Precision Genomics Laboratory,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA,
24Departments of Pediatrics, Columbia University New York, New
York, NY, USA,25Kennedy Krieger Institute Hugo Moser Research
Institute, Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA,26GCS SeqOIA, Paris, France,
27Service Génétique des Tumeurs, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,
28Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences and Pediatrics,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY,
USA,29Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Pediatrics and
Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, New
York, NY, USA,30Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA,31Joe DiMaggio Children ’s Hospital,
Hollywood, FL, USA,32CHU Rennes, Hôpital Sud, Service de Génétique
Clinique, Univ Rennes, Centre de référence Anomalies du développe-
ment CLAD-Ouest, ERN ITHACA, Rennes, France,33INSERM UMR 1231Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
249
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Equipe GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,34Unité
Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies
rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,35Rare
Disease Institute, Children ’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA,
36Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark,37Department of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,38Division of Clinical Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Irving Medical Center,New York, NY, USA,39Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA,
40Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University New
York, New York, NY, USA,41University of Melbourne Department of
Paediatrics, Royal Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
Introduction: Nine de novo loss-of-function and a single missense
variant in the QRICH1 gene have previously been reported in
individuals with developmental delay, autism, short stature, facial
dysmorphism and chondrodysplasia. We present 27 additionalindividuals with QRICH1 -related neurodevelopmental disorder to
further delineate the spectrum of clinical features and genetic
variants contributing to this emerging autosomal dominant
syndrome.
Methods: Phenotypic and molecular data from 27 previously
unreported individuals with QRICH1 variants were gathered
through international collaboration and compared to those of
the 10 previously reported individuals.
Results: Frequent phenotypic features included mild to
moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability (70%), facial
dysmorphism (84%), short stature (41%), poor weight gain (41%)and hypotonia (49%). Additional ﬁndings were seizures (24%),
minor structural brain abnormalities (24%) and scoliosis (19%).
Twenty-seven individuals had truncating or splice variants, and 10
had missense variants. Four variants were inherited from a mildlyaffected parent. Individuals with missense variants were morelikely to report early language delay as compared to those with
loss-of-function variants (10/10 vs 14/27, p value =0.005).
Conclusion: In addition to the known neurodevelopmental
features and short stature, we expand the phenotypic spectrum ofQRICH1 -associated disorders to include poor weight gain,
hypotonia, minor structural brain anomalies, scoliosis and seizures.
Inherited variants from mildly affected parents are reported forthe ﬁrst time, suggesting variable expressivity. Aside from
language delay, there were no other statistically signi ﬁcant
phenotypic differences between individuals with missense var-iants as compared to loss-of-function variants. However, additionaldata are required to determine genotype/phenotype correlations.
S. Kumble: None. A.M. Levy: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. H.
Gao: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None.
S. Parikh: None. A.L. Ritter: None. K. Izumi: None. T.L. Hoffman:
None. H. Oppermann: None. L. Bjerglund: None. J.A. Rosenfeld:
None. C. Curry: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Leiber: None. S.
Robinson: None. R.S. Finkel: None. A. Gerard: None. J.S. Cohen:
None. Y. Xie: None. S.V. Mullegama: None. K. Platzer: None. M.J.
Guillen Sacoto: None.
A. Revah-Politi: None. S.M. Berger: None.
A.M. Comi: None. K. Anyane-Yeboa: None. A. Fiévet: None. C.S.
Mintz: None. R. Lozano: None. J.E. Posey: None. M. Ciliberto:
None. L. Howard: None. P. Benke: None. S. Odent: None. A.
Denommé-Pichon: None. M. Wéber: None. N. Ah Mew: None. E.
Ostergaard: None. A.D. Iglesias: None. J. Punetha: None. W.K.
Chung: None. N. Brown: None. Z. Tümer: None.
P08.064.B An asymptomatic male carrying a constitutional
pathogenic MEPC2 variant, identi ﬁed through his daughter
with Rett syndromeMichelle Caudle1, Jacqueline Ogilvie2, John Vincent3, Hanxin Lin4,
Rebecca Lau3, Anna Mikhalov3,Victoria M. Siu1,5
1Medical Genetics Program of Southwestern Ontario, London Health
Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada,2Division of Developmental
Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of Medicine andDentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada,3Family Mental
Health Research Institute, CAMH, Toronto, ON, Canada,4Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Schulich School of Medicineand Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada,5Division of
Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
Introduction: Rett syndrome, an X-linked neurodevelopmental
disorder typically affecting females, is most often caused by de
novo mutations in MECP2 on the paternally inherited allele.
Pathogenic hemizygous MECP2 variants in males are usually
embryonic lethal or cause severe neonatal encephalopathy. Case:
A female child, born at 29 weeks with uncomplicated neonatal
course, presented at 1 year with regression in babbling and lowerlimb spasticity. By 36 months she remained non-verbal anddisplayed mid-line stereotypies. Genetic testing identi ﬁed a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in the MECP2 gene,
NM_001110792.1: c.1195_1246del; p.(Pro399Serfs*5). This 52 bpdeletion in the last exon is expected to result in a frameshift with
premature termination of protein synthesis. Unexpectedly, her
unaffected father was found to be hemizygous for this variant inDNA from blood, buccal swab, saliva, and urine. His unaffectedmother and sister were heterozygous for the variant. Trio whole
exome sequencing of the proband and her parents con ﬁrmed the
MECP2 variant but did not identify any additional pathogenic
variants in other genes. Inexplicably, mRNA analysis of theproband ’s DNA only yielded PCR products ampli ﬁed from the
mutant allele while in the proband ’s father, there was no MECP2
mRNA ampli ﬁcation at all.
Conclusions: While we believe that the frameshift variant is
pathogenic in the proband, we cannot explain why her father is
unaffected. We postulate that the C terminal deletion may havevariable effects or that there may be some modi ﬁer gene(s)
involved. This is the ﬁrst report of an unaffected male carrying a
constitutional mutation in MECP2 .
M. Caudle: None. J. Ogilvie: None. J. Vincent: None. H. Lin:
None. R. Lau: None. A. Mikhalov: None. V.M. Siu: None.
P08.065.C SEMA6B variants cause Intellectual Disability and
alter dendritic spine density in mouse primary hippocampal
neurons
Amélie Cordovado
1, Médéric Jeanne1,2, Veranika Panasenkava1,
Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon3, Boris Keren4, Cyril Mignot4, Lance
Rodan5, Keri Ramsey6, Vahid Bahrambeigi7, Wendy Mitchell8, Jillian R
Ozmore9, Leslie Granger10, Andrea Petersen10, Paige Matheny11,
Margaret Au11, Chanika Phornphutkul12, Joaquín Alejandro Fernán-
dez-Ramos13, Eduardo Lopez-Laso13, Marcella Zollino14, Manuela
Morleo15, Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Rebecca Her-
zog16, Mona Grimmel17, David Mei18, Renzo Guerrini18, Richard
Redon19, Stéphane Bézieau20, Consortium HUGODIMS, Frédéric
Laumonnier1, Annick Toutain1,2, Marie-Laure Vuillaume1,2
1UMR 1253, iBrain, University of Tours, Inserm, Tours, France,
2Genetics Department, University Hospital of Tours, Tours, France,
3Genetics Department, Hospital of Dijon, Dijon, France,4Genetics
Department, Hospital group Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France,
5Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
250
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608USA,6Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Translational Genomics
Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA,7Graduate Program in
Diagnostic Genetics, School of Health Professions, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA,8Neurology
Division Children ’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
9Department of Medical Genetics, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH, USA,10Department of Rehabilitation and
Development, Randall Children ’s Hospital at Legacy Emanuel Medical
Center, Portland, OR, USA,11Division of Genetics and Metabolism,
University of Kentucky HealthCare, Lexington, KY, USA,12Division of
Human Genetics, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University,
Hasbro Children ’s Hospital/Rhode Island Hospital, providence, RI,
USA,13Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University
Hospital Reina Sofía, IMIBIC and CIBERER, Cordoba, Spain,14Institute
of Genomic Medicine, Catholic University, Gemelli Hospital Founda-
tion, Rome, Italy,15Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine
(TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy,16Institute of Systems Motor Science,
University of Lübeck, Center for Brain, Behavior and Metabolism,
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Lübeck, Germany,17Institute of
Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Hertie Institute for ClinicalBrain Research, Tübingen, Germany,18Pediatric Neurology, Neuro-
genetics, and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories, Meyer Children ’s
Hospital-University of Florence, Florence, Italy,19INSERM, CNRS,
Nantes University, University Hospital Center, Thorax Institute,Nantes, France,20Genetics Department, Hospital of Nantes, Nantes,
France.
Introduction: Intellectual Disability (ID) is a common neurodeve-
lopmental disorder frequently caused by monogenic defects. By
conducting whole exome sequencing in a patient presenting withsevere ID and after a call for international collaboration, wecollected 11 SEMA6B de novo heterozygous variants carried by 14
unrelated patients. Clinical features in these patients include
moderate to severe ID, poor language, movement disorder withataxia, and sometimes seizures. To assess the involvement ofSEMA6B in this phenotype, we initiated in vitro functional studies
in HEK cells and in mouse primary hippocampal neurons.
Materials and Methods: Plasmids containing either the wild-
type or three mutated forms of Sema6b (V183L, R372* and W689*)
were overexpressed ﬁrst, in HEK293T cell line to assess the impact
ofthevariants overexpression on Sema6b expression, stability and
subcellular localization and then, in primary neuronal cultures tocharacterize the effect of the variants on morphogenesis and
synaptogenesis.
Results: Sema6b stability and subcellular localization are altered
only by overexpression of the R372* variant. This variant byleading to the formation of a truncated protein, decreases Sema6b
expression and stability and prevents Sema6b from reaching the
plasma membrane. Regarding neuronal cultures, the number ofdendritic spines in particular mature spines is signi ﬁcantly
decreased after overexpression of V183L and W689* variants.
Conclusion: Identi ﬁcation of SEMA6B variants in patients
presenting with an overlapping phenotype combined with invitro functional studies highlights the important role of SEMA6B in
neuronal development notably in spine formation and maturation,
and adds SEMA6B to the list of ID-related genes.
A. Cordovado: None. M. Jeanne: None. V. Panasenkava:
None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot:
None. L. Rodan: None. K. Ramsey: None. V. Bahrambeigi: None.
W. Mitchell: None. J. Ozmore: None. L. Granger: None. A.
Petersen: None. P. Matheny: None. M. Au: None. C. Phorn-
phutkul: None. J.A. Fernández-Ramos: None. E. Lopez-Laso:
None. M. Zollino: None. M. Morleo: None. R. Herzog: None. M.
Grimmel: None. D. Mei: None. R. Guerrini: None. R. Redon:
None. S. Bézieau: None. F. Laumonnier:
None. A. Toutain: None.
M. Vuillaume: None.P08.066.D Delineating the molecular and phenotypic spec-
trum of the SETD1B-related syndrome
Marjolein J. A. Weerts1,Kristina Lanko1, Francisco J. Guzmán-Vega2,
Adam Jackson3, Reshmi Ramakrishnan2, Kelly J. Cardona-Londoño2,
Karla A. Peña-Guerra2, Yolande van Bever1, Barbara W. van Paassen1,
Anneke Kievit1, Marjon van Slegtenhorst1, Nicholas M. Allen4,
Caroline M. Kehoe4, Hannah K. Robinson5, Lewis Pang5, Selina H.
Banu6, Mashaya Zaman6, Stephanie Efthymiou7, Henry Houlden7,
Irma Järvelä8, Leena Lauronen9, Tuomo Määttä10, Isabelle Schrau-
wen11, Suzanne M. Leal11, Claudia A. L. Ruivenkamp12, Daniela Q. C.
M. Barge-Schaapveld12, Cacha M. P. C. Peeters-Scholte13, Hamid
Galehdari14, Neda Mazaheri14, Genomics England Research Con-
sortium, Sanjay M. Sisodiya15, Victoria Harrison16, Reza Maroo ﬁan17,
Siddharth Banka3, Bekim Sadikovic18, Stefan T. Arold2, Tahsin Stefan
Barakat1
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research
Center (CBRC), Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences andEngineering (BESE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia,3Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, St. Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,4Department of Paediatrics, National University of Ireland
Galway, Galway, Ireland,5Exeter Genomics Laboratory, RILD
Building, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
United Kingdom,6Department of Pediatric Neurology, Dr. M.R. Khan
Shishu (Children) Hospital and ICH, Dhaka, Bangladesh,7Department
of Neuromuscular Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London, London, United Kingdom,8Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,9Depart-
ment of Clinical Neurophysiology, New Children´s Hospital, HUSDiagnostic Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital (HUH), Helsinki, Finland,10Disability Services, Joint Authority
for Kainuu, Kajaani, Finland,11Center for Statistical Genetics,
Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Alzheimer ’s Disease and the
Aging Brain, Department of Neurology, New York, NY, USA,
12Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, Netherlands,13Department of Neurology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,14Department of Genetics,
Faculty of Science, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran,
Islamic Republic of,15Department of Clinical and Experimental
Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UnitedKingdom,16Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital,
Southampton, United Kingdom,17Department of Neuromuscular
Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom,18Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
Molecular Diagnostics Division, London Health Sciences Centre,
London, United Kingdom.
SETD1B encodes a lysine-speci ﬁc histone methyltransferase that
methylates histone H3 at position lysine-4 (H3K4me1, H3K4me2,
H3K4me3) and thereby is involved in the regulation of geneexpression. Pathogenic variants in SETD1B have been associated
with a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder including intel-
lectual disability, language delay and seizures. To date, clinical
features have been described for eleven patients with (likely)pathogenic SETD1B sequence variants. We perform an in-depth
clinical characterization of a cohort of 36 unpublished individuals
with SETD1B sequence variants, describing their molecular and
phenotypic spectrum. By means of computational proteinmodelling we predict potential functional effect of SETD1B
variants. Selected variants located in different functional domains
of SETD1B were functionally tested using in vitro and genome-wide methylation assays, con ﬁrming in silico predictions. Our data
present evidence for a loss-of-function mechanism of SETD1B
variants, resulting in a core clinical phenotype of globalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
251
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608developmental delay, language delay including regression,
intellectual disability, autism and other behavioral issues, and
variable epilepsy phenotypes. Developmental delay appeared to
precede seizure onset, suggesting SETD1B dysfunction impactsphysiological neurodevelopment even in the absence of epilepticactivity. Interestingly, males are signi ﬁcantly overrepresented, and
thus we speculate that sex-linked traits could affect susceptibility
to clinical penetrance and the clinical spectrum of SETD1B variants.
Together, this work expands the phenotypic and molecularspectrum associated with SETD1B variants, provides insights into
their functional effects and will ultimately facilitate the counseling
regarding the clinical spectrum of newly diagnosed patients withtheSETD1B -related syndrome.
M.J.A. Weerts: None. K. Lanko: None. F.J. Guzmán-Vega:
None. A. Jackson: None. R. Ramakrishnan: None. K.J. Cardona-
Londoño: None. K.A. Peña-Guerra: None. Y. van Bever: None. B.
W. van Paassen: None. A. Kievit: None. M. van Slegtenhorst:
None. N.M. Allen: None. C.M. Kehoe: None. H.K. Robinson:
None. L. Pang: None. S.H. Banu: None. M. Zaman: None. S.
Efthymiou: None. H. Houlden: None. I. Järvelä: None. L.
Lauronen: None. T. Määttä: None. I. Schrauwen: None. S.M.
Leal: None. C.A.L. Ruivenkamp: None. D.Q.C.M. Barge-Schaap-
veld: None. C.M.P.C. Peeters-Scholte: None. H. Galehdari: None.
N. Mazaheri: None. S.M. Sisodiya: None. V. Harrison: None. R.
Maroo ﬁan: None. S. Banka: None. B. Sadikovic: None. S.T.
Arold: None. T. Barakat: None.
P08.067.A New cases from Spanish population with intragenic
pathogenic variants in
SETD5 gene: re ﬁning the phenotype
and expanding the genotype
María José Sánchez Soler1, Fernando Santos-Simarro2,3, Sixto
García-Miñaúr2,3, Ana Teresa Serrano Antón1, Verónica Seidel4,
Graciela Pi Castán5, Marta Pacio-Míguez2, María Palomares-Bralo2,3,6
1Medical Genetic Section, H. Clinic Universitary V. Arrixaca, IMIB-
Arrixaca, El Palmar, Spain,2Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular
(INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz., Madrid, Spain,
3CIBERER,Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enferme-
dades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,4Medical Genetic Section, Gregorio
Marañón Hospital, Madrid, Spain,5Consulta de Dismorfología,
Hospital Universitario de la Ribera, Alzira, Valencia, Spain,6European
Reference Network Congenital Malformations & Rare Mental
Disability (ERN -ITHACA), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Loss-of-function variants in SETD5 gene cause the
core phenotype of 3p25.3 microdeletion syndrome characterized
by intellectual disability/autism, slow growth, dysmorphic featuresand malformations such as postaxial polydactyly, heart conditionand genitourinary anomalies. However, the prognosis seems to be
milder in cases with intragenic SETD5 variants. Until now, only 15
cases have been described.
Material and methods: Descriptive retrospective collaborative
study of Spanish children with de novo intragenic variants in
SETD5 gene.
Results: 9 cases collected (3 females/6 males). Mean age: 6
years old (1.5-15). Prenatal anomalies: 3/9 single umbilical artery,2/9 growth retardation and nuchal edema. Postnatally: all showed
some neurodevelopment disorder but two presented normal
intelligence and the language skills improved gradually. 2/9hypotonia, 1/9 seizures. Growth was normal in 8/9 cases; 3/9
microcephaly. Congenital malformations: 5/9 had heart disease, 2/
9 genitourinary anomalies and 6/9 digital anomalies (2 poly-dactyly). The main facial features were: trianglar face, arched/thick/unusual eyebrows, low nasal bridge, anteverted/thick nares
and long/smooth philtrum. Molecular data: variants wereidenti ﬁed by exome sequencing; all of them were protein
truncating variants: 4 nonsense, 4frameshift and one affecting a
splice-donor site; 2/9 previously described.
Conclusions: Our results support that hypotonia and micro-
cephaly are uncommon and neurological prognosis is much betterin these cases than in the 3p25.3 deletion syndrome. Digital
anomalies in addition to polydactyly were common so it must be
taken into account.Thus, SETD5 gene haploinsuf ﬁciency should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of KBG, Cornelia de Langeand Cof ﬁn Siris syndrome.
M. Sánchez Soler: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. S. García-
Miñaúr: None. A. Serrano Antón: None. V. Seidel: None. G. Pi
Castán: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. M. Palomares-Bralo:
None.
P08.069.C Investigation of two novel SOX4 mutations found in
patients with intellectual disability
Martin Grosse
1, Tabib Dabir2, Shane McKee2, Stefanie Beck-Wödl3,
Eva Manka4, Alma Küchler1, Christel Depienne1, Frank Kaiser1
1University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany,2Northern Ireland
Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom,3University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,4EZSE, Essen, Germany.
Introduction: SOX4 (OMIM:184430) is a transcription factor with
pleiotropic functions required for developmental processes suchas corticogenesis. Like other SOX proteins, SOX4 contains a highly
conserved high mobility group (HMG) domain that mediates DNA
binding, bending and nuclear traf ﬁcking. Recently patients with
pathogenic variants in SOX4 have been reported for the ﬁrst time.
We aimed to investigate the effects on transcriptional activation of
two novel pathogenic de novo variants in SOX4 identi ﬁed in
patients with intellectual disability.
Material and Methods: Wildtype (wt) or mutant SOX4 were co-
expressed with the known cofactor POU3F2 and transcriptional
activation was tested using a luciferase reporter assay in HEK 293cells. Proper expression of the SOX4 constructs and POU3F2 was
veriﬁed by western blot.
Results: Contrary to wt SOX4, which was able to induce ectopic
luciferase expression when co-expressed with POU3F2, this effectwas abolished for both pathogenic SOX4 variants (Arg61Gln andGlu27*).
Conclusions: We report two novel pathogenic variants in SOX4
abolishing the transcriptional activation of SOX4 in vitro. While thevariant SOX4Glu27* leads to a premature stop and loss of the
functional domains, SOX4Arg61Gln shows an exchange of an
amino acid that is highly conserved in the HMG box of severalproteins. Besides its localization within a predicted bipartitenuclear localization signal, previous investigations have provided
functional evidence for the role of arginine 61 in DNA-binding
afﬁnity of SOX4. Whether the loss of transcriptional activity is
caused by alterations of DNA binding or intracellular localizationof SOX4 is currently investigated.
M. Grosse: None. T. Dabir: None. S. McKee: None. S. Beck-
Wödl: None. E. Manka: None. A. Küchler: None. C. Depienne:
None. F. Kaiser: None.
P08.070.D Compound heterozygous SPATA5 variants in
siblings with intellectual disability, hypotonia and autistic
features
Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella
1, Slavena Atemin2, Tihomir Todorov3,
Hadil Kathom1, Trayan Delchev1, Albena Todorova2Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
252
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital,
Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Genetic Medico-
Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica ”, Department of Medical Chemistry
and Biochemistry, Medical University, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Genetic
Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Variants in spermatogenesis-associated protein 5
gene (SPATA5) are associated with “Epilepsy, Hearing Loss and
Mental Retardation Syndrome ”. SPATA5 protein localizes predo-
minantly in the mitochondria and is proposed to be involved in
mitochondrial remodeling, ATP production and brain
development.
Materials and Methods: A boy aged 11 years (Patient 1) was
born the ﬁrst child to non-consanguineous parents at term. He
was referred to genetic evaluation because of the mental
retardation, hypotonia and autistic features. Patient 2 was a 1-year-old girl and the younger sister of Patient 1.She was referred
to genetic evaluation because of the developmental delay and
low muscle tone. Metabolic and mitochondrial DNA testing resultswere normal in both patients. In an attempt to establish thediagnosis Whole exome sequencing was carried out.
Results: Both patients underwent Whole Exome Sequencing.
The two siblings carried compound heterozygous mutations in theSPATA5 gene: c.554G>A(p.Gly185Glu) and c.1831C>T(p.Pro611-Ser). The variants were con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Conclusions: Our results describe new, probably pathogenic
variants in SPATA5 gene, and we con ﬁrm that bi-allelic pathogenic
variants in SPATA5 cause a syndromic form of intellectual
disability. Our study expands the clinical spectrum of SPATA5
mutations.
D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. S. Atemin: None. T. Todorov:
None. H. Kathom: None. T. Delchev: None. A. Todorova: None.
P08.071.A STAG1 gene heterozygous de novo variant in a
patient with Angelman syndrome like phenotype
Kristi Rähn
1, Kai Muru1,2, Sander Pajusalu1,2, Eve Õiglane- Šlik3,
Katrin Õunap1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of Clinical Genetics,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
3Children ’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
STAG1 gene variants (OMIM: Mental retardation, autosomal
dominant 47, #617635) belong to a group of cohesinopathies
and are previously described only in few cases, as a cause of
unspeci ﬁc intellectual disability. STAG1 mutations are shown to be
milder than the phenotype associated with other cohesinopathies.In published cases, the constant features characterizing STAG1
gene variants are developmental delay, recognizable facial gestalt
and variable associated features.Case report: The proband wasborn at term by CS due to fetal hypoxia, her birth weight was3220g, length 52cm, OFC 33cm (-1.75 SD). In late infancy, she had
some feeding problems and excessive vomiting episodes. Speech
delay was noticed at the second year and from the third, herspeech and independent eating skills regressed. At the age of 4,she has developmental delay, important receptive and expressive
speech impairment. Her phenotype resembles Angelman syn-
drome and she has marked microcephaly - OFC 44.5cm (-4 SD).She has peculiar stereotypical “dancing ”movements with her
hands (less with her feet). Result: Trio-based exome sequencing
analysis revealed heterozygous high quality frameshift de novo
insertion in STAG1 gene NM_005862.2(STAG1):c.3288_3289insT p.
(Thr1097Tyrfs*7). It is absent from ClinVar and gnomAD databases.Conclusion: We report the patient with STAG1 gene variant, with
Angelman-like phenotype, ste reotypical hand movements and
regression of skills, which is not been described before. The number
of described patients with STAG1 variants is very small thus it ’s
phenotypic spectrum may be wider than currently described.Funding: Estonian Research Co uncil grant PRG471, MOBTP175
K. Rähn: None. K. Muru: None. S. Pajusalu: None. E. Õiglane-
Šlik:None. K. Õunap: None.
P08.072.B Tatton-Brown-Brahman syndrome: a novel muta-
tion in DNMT3A
Margarita Martínez-Atienza
1, Susana García-Linares2, Antonio
Miguel Poyatos-Andújar2, Irene Sofía Machado-Casas2, Susana
Pedrinaci-Rodríguez1, María Luz Bellido-Díaz1, Matías Pérez-Sánchez1
1Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain,
2Hospital Universitario Clínico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome (TBRS) is a con-
genital overgrowth disorder associated with intellectual disability
initially identi ﬁed in 2014 and is caused by constitutive variants of
the DNMT3A gene. The principal features are overgrowth andintellectual disability.
Material and Methods: We present a 13-years-old boy who
present development delay with a age of 2 years for independentwalking and of 2.5 years for ﬁrst spoken words and attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. We performed a serial molecular test
wich included normal karyotype and array-CGH analyses and
negative results for fragile-X, ﬁnally the clinical exome sequencing
(CES) analysis offered a de novo variant in DNMT3A.
Results: We found a not reported variant c.2114T>C, p.Ile705Thr
in DNMT3A gene, this variant was determined as de novo with the
segregation analysis and is classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic
according to the ACMG criteria (PM1, PM2, PP2, PP3).
Conclusions: The phenotype of TBRS included intellectual
disability and overgrowth, with freq uent clinical associations included
joint hypermobility, obesity, hypo tonia, behavioural/psychiatric
issues, kyphoscoliosis and afebrile seizures. TBRS overlaps clinically
with other overgrowth intellectual disability síndromes. The majority
of individuals with TBRS are healthy, however the bibliographyreports possible complications of be havioural/psychiatric issues,
kyphoscoliosis, febrile seizures, car diac anomalies, hypotonia and/or
joint hypermobility, a nd possibility of haemato logical malignancy. In
our case, we have developed a care protocol together with thedifferent medical specialties.
M. Martínez-Atienza: None. S. García-Linares: None. A.
Poyatos-Andújar: None. I. Machado-Casas: None. S. Pedrinaci-
Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz: None. M. Pérez-Sánchez:
None.
P08.073.C Heterozygous Loss of Function Variants in TBCK
Cause a Mild Neurologic Syndrome in Humans and Mice
Abdias Diaz-Rosado
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
TBCK-related encephalopathy syndrome is a rare pediatric
neurodegenerative disorder with no current treatment. Thedisease is characterized by loss-of-function biallelic mutations in
TBCK , which leads to a downregulation of mTORC1 signaling and
severe changes in brain morphology. Although formal studies onheterozygous carriers have never been done in the past, familiesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
253
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608have reported differences. Therefore, in this study we used our
heterozygous mice model (tbck +/-) to test this hypothesis. Both of
our behavioral and molecular data suggest that there is a
persistent neurologic phenotype, which could explain thedifferences observed in humans. Moreover, our group has alsoshown that heterozygosity in mice can affect autophagic ﬂux (LC3-
I/II), mTORC1 signaling (pS6 and downstream effectors) and even
pup vocalizations at PND-6. This suggests the possibility thathaploinsuf ﬁciency of TBCK can have phenotypic effect in human
hets. Also, preliminary data from a large dataset indicates the
presence of a statistically signi ﬁcant preponderance of neurologic
symptoms in heterozygous humans. Although more information isstill needed to understand these mechanisms, our results suggestthat in heterozygous animals TBCK functions are affected and this
can have further effects in metabolism and behavior. Hopefully in
the near future we will be able to understand the basis for thesepathologies and to establish the connection that exists between
heterozygosity in animals and the presence of a phenotype in
humans.
A. Diaz-Rosado: None.
P08.075.A Beyond founder and truncting variants in TECPR2 -
associated disorder
Sonja Neuser
1, Barbara Brechmann2,3, Gali Heimer4,5, Ines Brösse3,
Susanna Schubert1, Lauren O ’Grady6, Michael Zech7,8, Siddharth
Srivastava2, David A. Sweetser6, Yasemin Dincer9,10, Volker Mall9,11,
Juliane Winkelmann7,8,12,13, Christian Behrends13, Basil T. Darras14,
Robert J. Graham15, Parul Jayakar16, Barry Byrne17, Bat El Bar-
Aluma4,5, Yael Haberman4,5,18, Amir Szeinberg4,5, Hesham M.
Aldhalaan19, Mais Hashem20, Amal A. Tenaiji21, Shahnaz Ibrahim22,
Fatima Khan22, Henry Houlden23, Vijayalakshmi S. Ramakumaran24,
Alistair T. Pagnamenta25, Jennifer E. Posey26, James R.
Lupski26,27,28,29, Wen-Hann Tan30, Gehad ElGhazali21, Isabella Her-
man26,28,31, Tatiana Muñoz32, Gabriela M. Repetto32, Angelika Seitz33,
Mandy Krumbiegel34, M. Cecilia Poli27,32, Usha Kini24, Stephanie
Efthymiou23, Jens Meiler35,36, Reza Maroo ﬁan23, Fowzan S. Alkur-
aya20,37, Rami Abou Jamra1, Bruria Ben Zeev4,5, Darius Ebrahimi-
Fakhari2, Bernt Popp1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany,2Department of Neurology, The F.M. Kirby
Neurobiology Center, Boston Children ’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA,3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for
Children and Adolescents, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,Germany,4Edmond and Lily Safra Children ’s Hospital, Sheba Medical
Center, Ramat Gan, Israel,5Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel,6Division of Medical Genetics and
Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts GeneralHospital, Boston, MA, USA,7Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, München, Germany,8Institute of Human
Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich,München, Germany,9Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics,
Technische Universität München, München, Germany,10Zentrum für
Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik (MVZ), Martinsried,
Germany,11kbo-Kinderzentrum München, München, Germany,
12Lehrstuhl für Neurogenetik, Technische Universität München,
München, Germany,13Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology
(Synergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Ger-
many,14Department of Neurology, Boston Children ’s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA,15Department of
Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Boston Children ’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA,16Nicklaus
Children ’s Hospital, Miami, FL, USA,17Powell Gene Therapy Center,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA,18Cincinnati Children ’s
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College ofMedicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA,19Department of Neuroscience, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
20Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic
Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,21Sheikh Khalifa Medical City, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates,22Department of Paediatrics and Child Health,
Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan,23Department of
Neuromuscular Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology,University College London, London, United Kingdom,24Oxford Centre
for Genomic Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom,25NIHR Biomedical
Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,26Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,
27Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,
USA,28Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA,29Human
Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,TX, USA,30Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children ’s
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,31Section of Pediatric Neurology and
Developmental Neuroscience, Department of Pediatrics, BaylorCollege of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,32Facultad de Medicina,
Clinica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile,
33Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Heidel-
berg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany,34Institute of Human
Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität (FAU), Erlangen, Germany,
35Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA,
36Institute for Drug Discovery, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany,37Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Bi-allelic TECPR2 variants have been associated with a complex
syndrome with features of both a neurodevelopmental andneurodegenerative disorder. Core clinical symptoms entail intel-
lectual disability, muscular hypotonia, dysarthria, gait abnormal-
ities, peripheral neuropathy and autonomic dysfunction. To date,mostly truncating variants have been reported. Two are foundervariants in Bukharian and Ashkenazi Jewish populations.Through
an international collaboration, we identi ﬁed 17 individuals from 15
families with bi-allelic TECPR2 -variants. Eight of 17 distinct variants
in the cohort were missense variants. Analysis of the spatialdistribution revealed linear clustering of these variants in the N-
and C-terminal protein region, in line with higher restrain for
missense variation as indicated by higher computational scoresand depletion of homozygous missense variants. As TECPR2 has
no published crystal structure, we established a pipeline to predict
3D protein models based on three different algorithms (Galax-yTBM, swissmodel, trRosetta). We identi ﬁed one 7-bladed
β-propeller in the WD40 domain and two β-propeller motifs in
the TECPR-repeat containing region separated by an unstructured
linker region. All missense variants affected conserved residues inβ-propeller units without clear clustering, indicating structural
protein changes and faster degradation as possible pathomechan-
ism. These results can be used for classi ﬁcation of missense
variants according to ACMG guidelines as PM1_Supporting.Withthe results of our Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based
phenotype curation, we present an advanced framework for
TECPR2 missense reporting. Based on these analyses, we will
establish a TECPR2 -disease focused website allowing automated
variant classi ﬁcation, comparison of phenotypes and display of
current surveillance recommendations to aid clinicians involved.
S. Neuser: None. B. Brechmann: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Modest; German National Academic
Foundation, Carl Duisberg Program by the Bayer Foundation. G.
Heimer: None. I. Brösse: None. S. Schubert: None. L. O ’Grady:
None. M. Zech: None. S. Srivastava: None. D.A. Sweetser: None.
Y. Dincer: None. V. Mall: None. J. Winkelmann: None. C.
Behrends: None. B.T. Darras: None. R.J. Graham: None. P.
Jayakar: None. B. Byrne: None. B. Bar-Aluma: None. Y.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
254
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Haberman: None. A. Szeinberg: None. H.M. Aldhalaan: None. M.
Hashem: None. A.A. Tenaiji: None. S. Ibrahim: None. F. Khan:
None. H. Houlden: None. V.S. Ramakumaran: None. A.T.
Pagnamenta: None. J.E. Posey: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; NHGRI K08 HG008986. J.R.
Lupski: None. W. Tan: None. G. ElGhazali: None. I. Herman:
None. T. Muñoz: None. G.M. Repetto: None. A. Seitz: None. M.
Krumbiegel: None. M. Poli: None. U. Kini: None. S. Efthymiou:
None. J. Meiler: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:None. F.S. Alkuraya: None.
R. Abou Jamra: None. B. Ben Zeev: None. D. Ebrahimi-Fakhari:
Other; Modest; CureAP4 Foundation, CureSPG50 Foundation,Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Thrasher Research Fund, AstellasPharmaceutical Inc., MitoBridge Inc. B. Popp: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).
P08.076.B Characterizing a de novo TRIO gene variant as a
likely cause of autosomal dominant Intellectual developmen-
tal disorder type 63 with macrocephaly
Doga Ceren Tekguc
1, Gulten Tuncel2,S e ﬁk Karanlik3, Nevrez
Koreken3, Sehime Gulsun Temel4,Mahmut Cerkez Ergoren5
1Dr. Burhan Nalbantoglu State Hospital, Department of Pediatrics,
Nicosia, Cyprus,2Near East University, DESAM Institute, Nicosia,
Cyprus,3Near East University Hospital, Department of Medical
Genetic Diagnosis Laboratory, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Bursa Uludag
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics,Bursa, Turkey,5Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Medical Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
3-years-old female patient, born to non-consanguineous healthy
parents was admitted to the laboratory with a possible pre-
diagnosis of Kabuki Makeup Syndrome. In paediatric examination,
Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development - III wasperformed and global developmental delay was observed asthere was a signi ﬁcantly increased need for support in the areas of
language, cognitive and movement development. As she also had
dysmorphic ﬁndings including macrocephaly and ulnar deviation
of the wrist, genetic aetiology was considered. In cytogenetic andmolecular genetic analysis, no chromosomal abnormalities as well
as no variation in genes associated with Kabuki Makeup Syndrome
(CHD7, EYA1, IRF6, KDM6A, KMT2D) and no copy numbervariations (CNV) clinically related to the described phenotype
has been identi ﬁed. However, a heterozygous variant of uncertain
signi ﬁcance (VUS), in the TRIO gene c.3199_3203delinsGAGCC p.
(Lys1067_Glu1068delinsGluAla) was detected. Pathogenic variantsin the TRIO gene have mainly been associated with autosomal
dominant mental retardation type 44 with microcephaly and also
autosomal dominant Intellectual developmental disorder type 63with macrocephaly. In this context, the genetic diagnosis of anautosomal dominant TRIO-related disorder is possible but further
segregation analysis with samples from parents is required to
conﬁrm the variation as de novo . In conclusion, classi ﬁcation of
VUS variants by molecular analysis supported by clinical andexperimental data is of great importance for diagnosis and
development of treatment options in rare genetic disorders. Here
we present the c.3199_3203delinsGAGCC p.(Lys1067_Glu1068de-linsGluAla) VUS variant as a likely cause of the phenotypic clinical
traits observed in our patient.
D.C. Tekguc: None. G. Tuncel: None. S. Karanlik: None. N.
Koreken: None. S.G. Temel: None. M.C. Ergoren: None.P08.078.D Expanding the spectrum of WAC -related intellec-
tual disability: two novel variants and a patient with
congenital heart disease
Rita Quental
1, Daniel Gonçalves2, João Parente Freixo3, Miguel
Leão1
1Medical Genetics Service, São João University Hospital Centre, Porto,
Portugal,2Pediatrics Service, São João University Hospital Centre,
Porto, Portugal,3CGPP-IBMC, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in WAC gene
cause a rare syndrome characterized by intellectual disability,behavioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphism, gastrointestinal
dysfunction, and, in some individuals, visual problems, sleep
disturbance and seizures. Chromosomal deletions at 10p11p12encompassing WAC gene have been described in patients with a
similar phenotype, although some present with other clinical
manifestations namely cardiac defects. Cases: We report two
patients with a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder whoseclinical exome revealed novel variants in WAC gene. Patient 1 is a
7-year-old girl with dysmorphic features including synophrys, ﬂat
nasal bridge, protruding ears, hirsutism, and brachydactyly.
Additionally, she had developmental delay, microcephaly, hypo-tonia, and constipation. Most remarkable is the presence of
congenital heart disease (aortic coarctation associated with atrial
and ventricular septal defects), which required two cardiacsurgeries. Patient 2 is a 22-year-old male with microcephaly,intellectual disability and aggressive behaviour. He had synophrys,
pectus excavatum, history of patellar luxation and kyphoscoliosis.
Patient 1 has the variant c.1407del p.(Ser470Valfs*15) in hetero-zygosity in WAC , while in Patient 2 the c.811C>T p.(Gln271*)
variant was detected. Both were de novo and classi ﬁed as likely
pathogenic.
Discussion: We report two patients with novel de novo WAC
variants, one of which presenting a complex congenital cardio-
pathy. Although cardiac defects are a common feature in patients
with 10p11p12 deletions, here we show that single-nucleotideWAC pathogenic variants causing a syndromic form of intellectual
disability can also be associated with congenital heart defects.
Therefore, this report explores insights on the phenotypic and
genotypic spectrum of this rare syndrome.
R. Quental: None. D. Gonçalves: None. J. Parente Freixo:
None. M. Leão: None.
P08.079.A Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in WDR11 are
associated with microcephaly and intellectual disability
Natja Haag
1, Ene C. Tan2, Matthias Begemann1, Lars Buschmann1,
Petra Hoschbach3, Angeline H. M. Lai2, Maggie Brett2, Ganeshwaran
H. Mochida4,5, Stephanie DiTroia6, Lynn Pais6, Jennifer E. Nail4,5,7,
Muna Al-Saffar4,5,8, Laila Bastaki9, Christopher A. Walsh4,5,7, Ingo
Kurth1,Cordula Knopp1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany,2KK Research Centre/Genetics Service,
KK Women ’s & Children ’s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore,3Division of
Neuropediatrics and Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics,
Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
4Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children ’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA,5Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA,6Center for Mendelian Genomics,
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA,7Howard Hughes MedicalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
255
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Institute, Boston Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,8Department
of Paediatrics, College of Medical and Health Sciences, United Arab
Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates,9Kuwait Medical
Genetics Centre, Maternity Hospital, Shuwaikh, Kuwait.
Introduction: In humans, heterozygous missense variants in the
WDR11 gene have been associated with hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. In contrast, Wdr11 -null mice and knockdown-
zebra ﬁsh demonstrated complex developmental abnormalities in
multiple organs resembling features known to be associated with
hedgehog signaling and ciliogenesis. However, no human
phenotype associated with biallelic variants in WDR11 has been
described yet.
Material and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was per-
formed in six affected individuals from three unrelated families.
Independent discoveries were shared through GeneMatcher. Allpatients underwent comprehensive clinical examination. WDR11
protein expression was studied in patient-derived ﬁbroblasts using
western blot (WB) analysis and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining.
Results: Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in WDR11 were
identi ﬁed in six individuals from three independent families.
Affected patients show a distinct phenotype that includes
microcephaly, mild short stature and intellectual disability ofvariable degree. Complete loss of WDR11 protein in ﬁbroblasts
was demonstrated by WB and IHC analyses for one affected
patient. Heterozygous carriers of WDR11 loss-of-function variants
in our families were healthy and did in particular not show anyobvious clinical signs of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism as seen
in patients with heterozygous missense variants.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings suggest that biallelic WDR11 variants
in humans result in an overlapping but milder phenotypecompared to Wdr11 -deﬁcient animals. However, the observed
human phenotype differs signi ﬁcantly from dominantly inherited
mutations leading to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, suggest-ing that recessive WDR11 mutations de ﬁne a distinct clinically
entity.
N. Haag: None. E.C. Tan: None. M. Begemann: None. L.
Buschmann: None. P. Hoschbach: None. A.H.M. Lai: None. M.
Brett: None. G.H. Mochida: None. S. DiTroia: None. L. Pais: None.
J.E. Nail: None. M. Al-Saffar: None. L. Bastaki: None. C.A. Walsh:
None. I. Kurth: None. C. Knopp: None.
P08.080.B Skraban-Deardorff Syndrome: six new cases of
WDR26
-related disease and expansion of the clinical
phenotype
Auriane Cospain1, Elise Schaefer2, Marie Faoucher3,4, Christèle
Dubourg3,4, Wilfrid Carré3,4, Varoona Bizaoui5, Jessica Assoumani6,
Lionel Van Maldergem6, Amélie Piton7, Bénédicte Gérard7, Frédéric
Tran Mau-Them8,9, Ange-Line Bruel8,9, Laurence Faivre8,9, Florence
Demurger10, Laurent Pasquier11, Sylvie Odent1,4, Mélanie Fradin1,
Alinoë Lavillaureix1,4
1CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence
Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, ERN ITHACA, Hôpital Sud, Rennes,
France,2Service de Génétique Médicale, Institut de Génétique
Médicale d ’Alsace, Strasbourg, France,3Service de Génétique
Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU, Rennes, Rennes, France,4Univ
Rennes, CNRS, IGDR, UMR 6290, Rennes, France,5Service de
Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen Normandie,Caen, France,6Centre de Génétique Humaine, Université de Franche-
Comté, Besançon, France,7Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique,
Institut de Génétique Médicale d ’Alsace, Hôpitaux Universitaires
de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,8Centre de Référence Anomalies
du développement et syndromes malformatifs, Fédération
Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies duDéveloppement (TRANSLAD), CHU de Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon,
France,9Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du
Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,10Service
de Pédiatrie Génétique, CH de Vannes, Vannes, France,11Service de
Génétique Clinique, Centre Référence "Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de
causes rares" (CRDI), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes,
Rennes, France.
Introduction: Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (a disease related to
variations in the WDR26 gene; OMIM #617616) was ﬁrst described
in a cohort of 15 individuals in 2017, no other cases have been
described since. Here, we report on six novel cases withheterozygous de novo WDR26 pathogenic variants. We provide
additional clinical and molecular data and compare the probands ’
phenotypes with the literature data.
Materials and methods: Clinical and molecular data were
collected from six patients treated at four different university
hospitals in France. WDR26 variants were detected with next-
generation sequencing (whole exome sequencing or screeningagainst an intellectual de ﬁciency and epilepsy gene panel).
Results: We observed intellectual disability, developmental
delay (predominantly for the language), early-onset epilepsy,
skeletal manifestations, abnormal gait, characteristic dysmorph-ism, and a happy/friendly personality consistent with the originaldescription. One patient displayed marked hypotonia with Z ‐line
disorganisation and multiminicores on the muscle biopsy. Four
patients had intrauterine growth restriction. Five patients hadfeeding dif ﬁculties during infancy; one had a suspected Pierre ‐
Robin sequence, another had a velar cleft palate. Our patients with
WDR26 ‐related syndrome had a pronounced subpalpebral crease,
rounded palpebral ﬁssures and relatively large irises, not described
previously. Language appears to be limited to single words or
two‐word associations.
Conclusion: We con ﬁrm the rich gastrointestinal and muscu-
loskeletal morbidity and velar cleft as part of the clinical variabilityof this condition. Early speech therapy is crucial in order to
improve language and oral eating and drinking. We additionally
observed abnormal features in a muscle biopsy; this ﬁnding
warrants further investigation.
A. Cospain: None. E. Schaefer: None. M. Faoucher: None. C.
Dubourg: None. W. Carré: None. V. Bizaoui: None. J. Assoumani:
None. L. Van Maldergem: None. A. Piton: None. B. Gérard: None.
F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Bruel: None. L. Faivre: None. F.
Demurger: None. L. Pasquier: None. S. Odent: None. M. Fradin:
None. A. Lavillaureix: None.
P08.082.D Importance of a multidisciplinary team when
analyzing WES: higher diagnostic rate, increased con
ﬁdence
and better care
Sérgio B. Sousa1,2, Maria José Simões3,4, Belinda Campos-Xavier1,
Hugo Froufe3,4, Carolina Ribeiro2, João Mendes2, Joaquim Sá1,
Margarida Venâncio1,2, Conceição Egas4,5, Ana Catarina Gomes3,
Jorge M. Saraiva1,6
1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,2Medical Genetics
Institute - UC Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal,3CBR Genomics, Cantanhede, Portugal,4Genoin-
seq, Next-Generation Sequencing Unit, Biocant, Cantanhede, Portu-gal,5Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal,6University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
The diagnostic rate of whole exome sequencing (WES) is quite
variable, being the main challenge the accurate interpretation ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
256
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608variants for which the dialogue laboratory-clinicians is funda-
mental. Herein, we present the results of the In2Genome Project
whose main goal was to develop a multidisciplinary approach to
the WES-based genetic diagnosis by having both medical andlaboratorial geneticists working directly together in each case. Weanalyzed a group of 62 undiagnosed patients with intellectual
disability (ID) syndromes. A sequential approached was used in
most cases: ﬁrst, single WES was performed, being the analysis
based on an ID virtual gene panel; second, in the inconclusivecases (n =42) the parents were sequenced, and trio analysis
undertaken.
The diagnostic rate for the single analyses was 29.1% and
increased, after trio analyses, to 45.2% (28/62 of overall rate).Thirty causal variants, 22 of which novel, were identi ﬁed in 28
genes. The advantages of this multidisciplinary approach were
clear: not only the higher diagnostic rate (signi ﬁcantly above most
reported studies and comparing to our experience when WES was
analyzed in an independent laboratory), but also the more cost-
effectiveness and certainly the increased team satisfaction andconﬁdence in the results. Additionally, there is a much easier
translation to a research setting, data reanalysis and collaboration
with other centers in the remaining unsolved cases (additional 3
candidate genes so far). The In2Genome project CENTRO-01-0247-FEDER-017800 was supported by Centro Portugal RegionalOperational Programme (CENTRO 2020), under the Portugal
2020 Partnership Agreement, through the European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF).
S.B. Sousa: None. M. Simões: None. B. Campos-Xavier: None.
H. Froufe: None. C. Ribeiro: None. J. Mendes: None. J. Sá: None.
M. Venâncio: None. C. Egas: None. A. Gomes: None. J.M.
Saraiva: None.
P08.083.A A WES study in 200 intellectual disability/ autism
patients
Lucia Pia Bruno
1,2, Gabriella Doddato1,2, Floriana Valentino1,2,
Annarita Giliberti1,2, Caterina Lo Rizzo3, Maria Antonietta Mencarelli3,
Francesca Mari1,2,3, Anna Maria Pinto3, Francesca Fava1,2,3, Mar-
gherita Baldassarri1,2, Andrea Tommasi1,2,3, Alessandra Fabbiani1,2,3,
Vittoria Lamacchia1,2,3, Elisa Benetti2, Simone Furini2, Francesca
Ariani1,2,3, Alessandra Renieri1,2,3, Chiara Fallerini1,2
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,2Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,3Genetica Medica, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
Intellectual disability (ID) is a disorder characterized by an
incomplete or arrested mental development and by IQ less than70. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental
condition characterized by social impairment, restricted interests
and repetitive behaviors. ID and ASD symptoms are oftenoverlapping. In the present study, we investigated by Whole ExomeSequencing (WES) analysis a total of 200 ID/ASD patients. Our cohort
included 40 patients with syndromic ID, 64 with non-syndromic ID, 6
with autism and syndromic ID, 19 with autism and non-syndromicID, and71 with isolated autism. We identi ﬁed 39 patients with
pathogenic variants (PVs) with a detection rate of 20%. In particular,
2 9P V sw e r ef o u n di nI Dp a t i e n t sa n d3i nA S Dp a t i e n t s .7P V sw e r e
identi ﬁed in patients with ID and ASD features. Regarding variant
type, 13 variants were missense changes accounting for 33% of the
total, 7 were frameshift, 14 were nonsense, 4 were splicing changes
and 1 was inframe deletion. We report more de novo variants (37)than inherited ones (14). The majority of the mutated genes belongsto 4 biological pathways or regulate them: RAS/MAPK (e.g. FGFR3,PTPN11), Wnt/ß-catenin (e.g. DDX3X,GRIN2A, GRIN1), Sonic Hedge-
hog (e.g. B9D1,C2CD3) and GPCR signaling (e.g. DDX3X, MKS1). In
conclusion, our results demonstrated the ef ﬁciency of WES analysis
on the identi ﬁcation of PVs in ID/ASD patients. Moreover this study
allowed to subdivide the causing genes into four groups accordingto the biological pathways suggesting new molecular interactions.
L.P. Bruno: None. G. Doddato: None. F. Valentino: None. A.
Giliberti: None. C. Lo Rizzo: None. M. Mencarelli: None. F. Mari:
None. A. Pinto: None. F. Fava: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A.
Tommasi: None. A. Fabbiani: None. V. Lamacchia: None. E.
Benetti: None. S. Furini: None. F. Ariani: None. A. Renieri: None.
C. Fallerini: None.
P08.084.B WES result reanalysis and CAMK2B variant causing
developmental delay
Todor Arsov
1,2, Aspazija So ﬁjanova3, Marcin Adamski2, Carola
Vinuesa2
1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-
Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Australian National
University, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Centre forPersonalized Immunology, Canberra, Australia,3Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-Skopje, PHI
University Clinic for child diseases, Skopje, Macedonia, The FormerYugoslav Republic of.
CAMK2B has recently been found to cause Intellectual Disability
Autosomal Dominant 54 (MRD54, OMIM 617799), characterizedwith global developmental delay, hypotonia, dif ﬁculty holding the
head, delayed walking (or inability to walk) and speech (50% of
patients are averbal), behavioral problems, intellectual disability,
visual impairment, gastrointestinal problems and facial dys-morphic features. Some patients have seizures with EEG changes
and brain imaging is generally normal. We describe a 3-year old
patient with global developmental delay recognized at an earlyage, characterized with hypotonia and inability to hold the head,lack of speech, inability to walk, seizures (controlled on anti-
epileptic drugs) and behavioral problems. He is a second child
from a third pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents withhistory of anencephaly in the ﬁrst pregnancy and a healthy
daughter. The parents embarked on a long and expensive
diagnostic odyssey, including CMA and trio WES testing returning
no result. WES data re-analysis a year later identi ﬁed a “de novo ”
pathogenic variant in CAMK2B (NM_172079.2:c.709G>A), not
present in the databases of human variation, predicted damaging
by“in silico ”tools, affecting conserved amino acid residue and
described previously in one other patient with intellectualdisability of different ethnic origin. The result helped end the
diagnostic odyssey in this family, provided reassurance in terms of
the recurrence risk, and addressed some longstanding misconcep-tions about a “likely X-linked condition/inheritance pattern ”in the
family. This case illustrates the diagnostic utility of WES data re-
analysis and importance of periodically revisiting uninformative
results against growing evidence base for genetic causes ofdisease.
T. Arsov: None. A. So ﬁjanova: None. M. Adamski: None. C.
Vinuesa: None.
P08.085.C Whole-exome sequencing as an effective tool for
the detection of DNA sequence and structural variants in thepathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disordersAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
257
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Marketa Wayhelova1,2, Vladimira Vallova3,2, Jan Smetana1, Petr
Broz1, Aneta Mikulasova4, Dominika Loubalova1, Renata Gaillyova5,
Petr Kuglik1,2
1Department of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic,2Centre of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, University Hospita l Brno, Brno, Czech Republic,3Deaprtment of
Experimental Biology, Faculty of S cience, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic,4Biosciences Institute, Newca stle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom,5Department of Medical Genetics and
Genomics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
With more than 50% diagnostic yield the whole-exome sequencing
(WES) represents an effective and powerful tool to identify causes of
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) at the molecular level. We
present our experience with WES as an effective tool for thedetection of pathogenic sequence variants, copy-number variations(CNVs) and losses of heterozygosity (LOH) using the commercial kit
Human Core Exome (Twist Bioscien ces) and Illumina NovaSeq 600.
Our pilot study included 20 families ( trios or quatros) of children with
severe NDDs and associated congenital abnormalities. In theoptimization step for CNV detection using read-depth approach we
conﬁrmed and speci ﬁed all CNVs and LOH regions previously
detected by array-CGH +SNP in 8 families. Mainly, we identi ﬁed
recurrent de novo pathogenic sequence variants in clinically relevant
SHANK3, GRIN1 and NSD1 genes, novel de novo pathogenic variants
inKDM1A, KMT2E and GNAI1 genes, and a pathogenic sequence
variant in EDA gene of maternal origin. All clinically relevant ﬁndings
were manually veri ﬁed using Sanger sequencing and qPCR and
interpreted using a multistep approach based on information in
integrated databases of genomic variants, relevant scienti ﬁc
literature, and individual anamnesis. Our pilot results con ﬁrm WES
as aﬁrst-tier diagnostic test in the genetic evaluation of children with
NDDs. Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant
nr. NU20-07-00145. All rights reserved.
M. Wayhelova: None. V. Vallova: None. J. Smetana: None. P.
Broz: None. A. Mikulasova: None. D. Loubalova: None. R.
Gaillyova: None. P. Kuglik: None.
P08.086.D Xia-Gibbs syndrome - variable clinical manifesta-
tion of three cases from a single genetic department
Anna Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak , Pawe łWłasienko, Maria Boczar,
Olga Malinowska, Tomasz Gambin, Ma łgorzata Kruk, Agata Lipiec,
Jerzy Bal, Ewa Obersztyn, Monika Gos
Institute of the Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome (XGS) is a rare neurodevelop-
mental disorder characterized by developmental delay, behavioralproblems, speech delay, hypotonia and seizures. Most of the
patients with XGS have a heterozygous loss-of-function AHDC1
mutations.
Patients and methods: We present clinical evaluations of 3
patients with the clinical features of XGS, aged from 5 to 10 years.
The mutation analysis was performed using targeted nextgeneration sequencing.
Results: All patients had intellectual disability from mild to
severe, delayed or absent speech, hypotonia, motor development
delay, unstable gait, open mouth appearance, drooling, stereo-typic movements of hands, characteristic pattern of behavior withaggression, auto-aggression and tantrums. Two patients had
macrocephaly, one of them - delayed closure of fontanel and one
patient - abnormal skull shape. Hypoplastic corpus callosum andsimian crease were found in 2 individuals. One patient presentedshort stature treated successfully with growth hormone. Onepatient had accessory nipples and 2 whirls of hair. Molecular
analysis revealed the presence of pathogenic variants c.917del (p.
Pro306Leufs*146) and c.976_988del (p.Ser326Thrfs*122) in AHDC1
gene in 2 patients. In one individual, variant of unknownsigni ﬁcance c.1037G>A (p.Arg346His) was found.
Conclusions: The presence of macrocephaly, abnormal skull
shape and delayed fontanel closure as well as short stature in our
patients with XGS con ﬁrms the role of AHDC1 gene product in
skeleton development, especially in skull formation and progres-sive growth. The studies were supported from Institute of Mother
and Child intramural grant no. OPK-510-18-63.
A. Kutkowska-Ka źmierczak: None. P. W łasienko: None. M.
Boczar: None. O. Malinowska: None. T. Gambin: None. M. Kruk:
None. A. Lipiec: None. J. Bal: None. E. Obersztyn: None. M. Gos:
None.
P08.087.A A new neurodevelopmental disease with brain
abnormalities due to YWHAE loss-of-function variants: from
human to mice
Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon
1,2,3, Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Stephan C.
Collins2, Anna Mikhaleva4, Christel Wagner5, Valerie E. Vancollie6,
Mathys Weber2,7, Carlos Prada8, Alexis Overs1,2, María Palomares-
Bralo9,10,11, Fernando Santos-Simarro9,10,11, Marta Pacio-Míguez11,
Tiffany Busa12, Eric Legius13, Carlos A. Bacino14, Jill A. Rosenfeld15,
Maria Antonietta Mencarelli16, Ilaria Longo16, Alessandra
Renieri16,17,18, Salvatore Grosso19,20, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,2,
Antonio Vitobello1,2,3, Yannis Duffourd1,2, Christopher J. Lelliott6,
Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,2,21, Christophe Philippe1,2, Binnaz Yalcin2,
Laurence Faivre2,3,7
1Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des
maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon,
France,2UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche
Comté, Dijon, France,3European Reference Network, ERN ITHACA,
Dijon, France,4Center for Integrative Genomics, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,5IGBMC, UMR7104, Inserm, U964,
Illkirsch, France,6Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,7Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « Anomalies
du développement et syndromes malformatifs », Centre de
Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD et Institut GIMI, CHU Dijon Bourgogne,Dijon, France,8Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA,
9Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ,Madrid, Spain,10Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, U753), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain,11European Reference Network, ERN ITHACA, Madrid, Spain,
12Département de génétique médicale, CHU Timone enfants, AP-HM,
Marseille, France,13Laboratory for Neuro ﬁbromatosis Research,
Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven University Hospital,
Leuven, Belgium,14Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,15Baylor Genetics
Laboratories, Houston, TX, USA,16Genetica Medica, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,17Medical Genetics,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,18Med Biotech Hub and Competence
Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena,Siena, Italy,19Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e dello Sviluppo,
Universita ’degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy,20U.O.C. Pediatria,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,21Centre de
Référence Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, FHU-TRANSLAD,
CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
Introduction: Miller-Dieker syndrome is caused by a contiguous
gene deletion syndrome involving multiple genes on chromo-
some 17p13.3, especially PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE . Toyo-oka et al .Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
258
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608showed that deletions comprising YWHAE were responsible for
the most severe Miller-Dieker cases. Since then, several patients
with 17q13.3 deletions involving YWHAE have been reported and
presented with developmental delay and cerebral abnormalities.To date, no YWHAE loss-of-function single nucleotide variants
(SNV) has been described, and the gene has not been reported as
clearly morbid yet.
Materials and Methods: Three patients with YWHAE de novo
heterozygous loss-of-function SNVs and 5 patients (3 unpublished)with deletions (<1 Mb) encompassing YWHAE were gathered
through different data-sharing networks (GeneMatcher, Decipher,
AnDDI-Rares and ITHACA). To address the speci ﬁc impact of
YWHAE loss of function in the neurodevelopmental phenotype of
Miller-Dieker syndrome, we generated a full knockout of Ywhae in
the mouse and assessed neuroanatomical parameters in conjunc-
tion with 3D brain imaging techniques in mouse embryos andadults.
Results. The most frequent manifestations in patients were
developmental delay, delayed speech, seizures and brain mal-formations (corpus callosum hypoplasia, delayed myelination,ventricular dilatation). Patients with SNVs have no dysmorphic
features whereas those with large deletions presented with facial
features. Studies in mouse Ywhae
-/-revealed craniofacial char-
acteristics and numerous brain structural defects (thin cortices,corpus callosum dysgenesis and hydrocephalus) paralleling those
seen in the human condition.
Conclusion: These studies con ﬁrm YWHAE loss-of-function
variants as cause of a new rare neurodevelopmental disease
associated with brain abnormalities in human and mouse.
A. Denommé-Pichon: None. A. Bruel: None. S.C. Collins: None.
A. Mikhaleva: None. C. Wagner: None. V.E. Vancollie: None. M.
Weber: None. C. Prada: None. A. Overs: None. M. Palomares-
Bralo: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None.
T. Busa: None. E. Legius: None. C.A. Bacino: None. J.A.
Rosenfeld: None. M. Mencarelli: None. I. Longo: None. A.
Renieri: None. S. Grosso: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A.
Vitobello: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C.J. Lelliott: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. Philippe: None. B. Yalcin: None. L.
Faivre: None.
P09 Neurogenetic and Psychiatric Disorders
P09.001.B 17p13.3 microduplication syndrome: new cases
with class I and class II gains and clinical and molecular deli-
neation of the syndrome
Julián Nevado1,2,3, Jair A. Tenorio1,2,3, Ameni Touati1, Jesús Pozo-
Román4, Mabel Segovia5, Pedro Arias1, Natalia Gallego1, Gema
Gordo1, Irene Dapia1, SOGRI Consortium, Pablo D. Lapunzina1,2,3
1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain,2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,3ITHACA
European Research Network, Madrid, Spain,4Hospital Universitario
Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,5CENAGEM, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Chromosome 17p13.3 is a region of genomic instability due to
extensive LCRs which make it vulnerable to copy number
variations. Depending on whether a deletion or a duplication of17p13.3 occurs, different rare neurodevelopmental disorders arise.Phenotypic features of 17p13.3 microduplication-syndrome (MIM
#613275) include developmental and psychomotor delay, beha-
vioral problems, distinct physical features, postnatal-overgrowthand ASD, as well as limb malformations and cleft lip and palate.Genes thorough this region; CRK, PAFAH1B1 , and YWHAE have
crucial roles in neuronal migration and contribute to each of these
genetic disorders. BHLAH9 located within chromosome 17p13.3,
but immediately outside of the Miller-Dieker Syndrome criticalregion, seems to be necessary but not suf ﬁcient, for limb
malformation. Depending on the genes involved, patients with
duplications in this region may be categorized into either class I or
class II. Individuals in class I have microduplications of the YWHAE ,
but not PAFAH1B1 and generally, result in learning disabilities,
autism, and developmental delays. Individuals in class II always
have microduplications of the PAFAH1B1 gene, which may include
YWHAE and other genetic gains. Class II-microduplications
generally result in smaller body size, developmental delays,microcephaly, and other brain malformations. We review the
phenotypes associated with copy number gains of chromosome
17p13.3 in several cases of Class I and Class II-microduplicationsobserved in patients from The Spanish Overgrowth RegistryInitiative (SOGRI) by means SNP-arrays, in which the targeted
analysis was negative or in which the clinical features were not
compatible with any of the well-known Overgrowth disorders.
J. Nevado: None. J.A. Tenorio: None. A. Touati: None. J. Pozo-
Román: None. M. Segovia: None. P. Arias: None. N. Gallego:
None. G. Gordo: None. I. Dapia: None. P.D. Lapunzina: None.
P09.002.C Mouse neuronal cells outperform in a novel
galactonamide molecular gel rather than in neurosphere;comparison of neurogenesis and neuronal differentiationmRNA markers
Keziban Korkmaz Bayram
1, Juliette Fitremann2, Arslan Bayram3,
Zeynep Y ılmaz4, Ecmel Mehmetbeyo ğlu5, Yusuf Özkul5, Minoo
Rassoulzadegan6
1Medical Genetics Department, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University,
Ankara, Turkey,2Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France,3Medical
Genetics Department, Etlik Zubeyde Han ım Women ’s Diseases
Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,4Genome and
Stem Cell Center (GENKOK), Erciyes University, Kayser ı, Turkey,
5Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKOK), Erciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey,6University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
N-heptyl-D-galactonamide (GalC7) i s a synthetic carbohydrate deriva-
tive that self-assemble into supramolecular ﬁbers - biocompatible 3D
hydrogels. In this hydrogel, neural stem cells differentiate into both
glial cells and neurons. In this study, the gene expression of mousehippocampal stem cells has been inve stigated in several conditions.
The analysis was carried out either di rectly ex vivo on the cells of the
fresh hippocampus or after culture of the primary cells in vitro under
three conditions: (1) culture in neurospheres in non-adherent
conditions for 19 days, (2) direct c ulture in GalC7 for 7 days and (3)
culture in GalC7 for 7 days after 12 days in neurospheres; to complete
c u l t u r ed a y st o1 9a si n( 1 ) . Sox8 and Sox10 , oligodendrocyte markers,
and Sox9 , an astrocyte marker, were expressed at a much higher level
on GalC7. Dcx, a marker of neurogenesis and Neurod1 ,am a r k e ro f
neuronal differentiation, are expressed at a very low level compared
to the fresh hippocampi conditions both in neurospheres and inGalC7 hydrogels. However, these two markers were maintained atbetter levels in the GalC7 gel culture compared to the neurosphere
condition. These results show that the GalC7 hydrogel brings different
and interesting conditions for inducing the differentiation andmaturation of neural progenitor cells compared with polymer-basedscaffolds or cell-only conditions. Microstructure of the ﬁbrous network,
the chemical composition, and th e bioavailability of the gelling
molecule make cell culture in supramo lecular hydrogels very different.
The differences observed open new p erspectives in tissue engineer-
ing, induction, and gene expression analysis.
K. Korkmaz Bayram: None. J. Fitremann: None. A. Bayram:
None. Z. Y ılmaz: None. E. Mehmetbeyo ğlu:None. Y. Özkul:
None. M. Rassoulzadegan: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
259
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.003.D Transcriptomic characterization of 7q11.23
patient-speci ﬁc induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and
derivates
Mar Costa-Roger1, Bernd Kuebler2, Marina Alvarez-Estape1, Raquel
Flores1, Luis Alberto Pérez-Jurado1,3, Ivon Cuscó1,4, Roser
Corominas1,5
1Genetics Unit, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut,
Pompeu Fabra University, Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM),
Parc de Salut Mar and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain,2Regenerative
Medicine Programme, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge,
IDIBELL, L ’Hospital de Llobregat, and Spanish National Stem Cell
Bank-Barcelona Node, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid,
Spain,3Genetics Service, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain,
4Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Medicine
Genetics Group, VHIR, University Hospital Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain,5Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics,
Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS;OMIM#194050)
and 7q11.23 microduplication syndrome (DUP7;OMIM#609757)
are rare multisystem disorders with somehow opposed neurobe-havioral trajectories caused by 1.55-1.84Mb heterozygous micro-
deletion or microduplication of 26-28 contiguous genes at
7q11.23, respectively. Cellular reprogramming is a good approachto overcome the experimental limitations to study neurodevelop-mental disorders in humans. The purpose of this project is to
evaluate the transcriptomic consequences of 7q11.23 patient-
derived iPSC lines and derivatives.
Methods: We generated patient-speci ﬁc iPSCs from ﬁbroblasts
from four WBS patients, four DUP7 patients and two controls,
which were differentiated to neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and to
dopaminergic neurons. After RNA extraction from all cell-types(ﬁbroblasts, iPSCs, NPCs and neurons), we assessed genome-wide
differential expression using expression microarrays.
Results: We identi ﬁed a total of 722 differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) in a pairwise comparison of the three genotypes inall cell-types. Half of the genes in 7q11.23 showed mirroring
expression between DUP7 and WBS models. Enrichment analysis
of DEGs in ﬁbroblasts revealed speci ﬁc pathways and gene
ontology categories relevant for the hallmark phenotypes of bothdisorders. Neuronal processes, such as transmission across
chemical synapses, were signi ﬁcantly enriched in neurons. In
addition, WGCNA of iPSCs and NPCs lines uncovered interestingco-expression modules related to ion transport (q-value =0.0365)
or glutamate receptor signaling (q-value =0.0463), respectively.
Conclusions: Integrative transcriptomic analysis of in vitro
7q11.23-CNVs cellular models reveals genes and pathways alteredduring early neuronal development in these genomic disorders,
which could lead to novel potential therapeutic targets. Funded
by grants FPU16/06907 ,FIS16/00369 ,H2020-MSC-656359 ,
RYC-2017-21636 ,RTI2018-101960-A-I00 ,CIVP16A1828 ,RD12/
0019/0034 ,PRB2;PT13/0001/0041 .
M. Costa-Roger: None. B. Kuebler: None. M. Alvarez-Estape:
None. R. Flores: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; qGenomics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; qGe-
nomics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; qGenomics. I.
Cuscó: None. R. Corominas: None.
P09.004.A Relevance of double-hit mechanisms in patients
with Neurodevelopmental Disorders (NDDs): a re-evaluationof 526 patients with non-benign copy number variants (CNVs)Martina Servetti
1,2, Livia Pisciotta1,3, Elisa Tassano4, Lino Nobili1,5,
Silvia Boeri1,5, Maria Cerminara1, Margherita Lerone2, Maria Teresa
Divizia2, Patrizia Ronchetto4, Aldamaria Puliti1,2
1Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology,
Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI), University ofGenova, Genova, Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto
Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASST
Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milano, Italy,4Human Genetics Laboratory,
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,5Child Neuropsychiatry
Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
Introduction: Inconsistency of genotype-phenotype correlations
often complicates the clinical interpretation of CNVs. Increasing
ﬁndings suggest that such inconsistency may be also explained by
complex interactions among multiple CNVs. The aim of this studywas to re-evaluate patients with CNVs previously classi ﬁed as
variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VOUS) to unveil new candidate
genes and pathogenetic mechanisms that could explain the
patient ’s phenotype.
Methods: CNVs identi ﬁed by diagnostic array-CGH in 526 NDD
cases were re-analysed. A deep analysis, mainly consisting in a
revision of gene expression/function annotation, and chromatine
organization data, was performed. New candidate genes wereanalysed by GeneCodis4 to evidence enrichment for known NDD-
associated GeneOntology terms and pathways.
Results: In 42% of cases pathogenic CNVs were found, while in
58% identi ﬁed CNVs remained initially VOUS. Notably, 3.5% of
patients with variants classi ﬁed as VOUS had two CNVs, each
inherited from one of the two healthy parents and overlapping
known and/or new candidate NDD genes, that could act bydouble-hit mechanisms. Interestingly, two deletions involving twonew candidate genes, PTPRD and BUD13 , were found in a patient
with neuropsychiatric and neurological features that together
could fully explain the patient ’s phenotype. Double-hit mechan-
isms were also found among the 225 patients with pathogenic
CNVs, as those with syndromic CNVs (9%) and with inherited CNVs
encompassing known NDD genes (14%), that could account forvariable expressivity and incomplete penetrance.
Conclusions: In our cohort of patients CNV-mediated double-
hit mechanisms seem to play a relevant role in NDDs, helping to
elucidate complex phenotypes.
M. Servetti: None. L. Pisciotta: None. E. Tassano: None. L.
Nobili: None. S. Boeri: None. M. Cerminara: None. M. Lerone:
None. M. Divizia: None. P. Ronchetto: None. A. Puliti: None.
P09.005.B Sex speci ﬁc effect of ATXN2 rs7969300 polymorph-
ism on age of onset in Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 2
Luis E. Almaguer-Mederos
1, Suzana Gispert2, Dennis Almaguer-
Gotay1, Raúl Aguilera-Rodríguez1, Yanetza González-Zaldívar1,
Yaimé Vázquez-Mojena1, Dany Cuello-Almarales1, Daniel O. Palen-
zuela3, Georg Auburger2
1Center for the Investigation and Rehabilitation of Hereditary
Ataxias, Holguín, Cuba,2Goethe University Medical Faculty, Frank-
furt, Germany,3Center of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
Havana, Cuba.
Background: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) shows huge
clinical variability even in individuals sharing the same CAG repeatlength. A large study was conducted to assess the role of SNP
rs7969300 as a modi ﬁer of the age of onset in SCA2 patients.
Methods: A cross-sectional study involving 427 Cuban clinically
and molecularly con ﬁrmed SCA2 patients was conducted. TheAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
260
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608ATXN2 CAG-repeat length was determined by PCR followed by
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, while the SNP rs7969300 was
assessed by qPCR using a TaqMan assay.
Results: The mutant “T”allele for SNP rs7969300 was detected
in 17 out of 427 individuals, for a frequency of 0.0398. Regressionanalysis showed that SNP rs7969300 genotypes contributed in a
0.3% to explain age of onset variability (p =0.029), while the
interaction term between SNP rs7969300 genotypes and sexcontributed in a 0.5% (p =0.012). The occurrence of one “T”allele
produced an average age of onset of 6.41 years earlier than
expected in male SCA2 patients.
Conclusions: Evidence for a sex-speci ﬁc effect of SNP
rs7969300 on the age of onset of SCA2 patients is provided.Further replication studies in different SCA2 populations in the
world will be needed to clarify the role of this SNP on the SCA2
clinical phenotype. Also, further functional studies would bevaluable to establish the role of SNP rs7969300 in SCA2
physiopathology.
L.E. Almaguer-Mederos: None. S. Gispert: None. D. Alma-
guer-Gotay: None. R. Aguilera-Rodríguez: None. Y. González-
Zaldívar: None. Y. Vázquez-Mojena: None. D. Cuello-Almarales:
None. D.O. Palenzuela: None. G. Auburger: None.
P09.007.D An apparently de novo Alexander-associated GFAP
mutation transmitted from a healthy mother showing
gonosomal mosaicism
Alice Grossi , Tiziana Bachetti, Isabella Ceccherini
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
Alexander disease (AxD) is a leukodystrophy caused by hetero-
zygous mutation in the GFAP gene, presenting at different age of
onset: early childhood (type I) and later, up to adult (type II). Todate, pathogenic variants identi ﬁed throughout the gene explain
more than 90% of the patients. Rare recurrence of AxD in siblings,
without apparent parental transmission, allowed to hypothesizethe occurrence of germinal and eventually somatic mosaicism, acircumstance however never proven so far.Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) with deep coverage ( ≥500X) at the GFAP locus,
of DNA isolated from peripheral blood samples, was performed in11 probands, carrying apparently denovo GFAP mutations, and
their healthy parents. One mother revealed a mosaicism of the
GFAP mutation already detected in her son. The ratio between
coverages of mutant and wildtype alleles, compared to thoseobtained with known dilutions of the mutant allele, provided an
estimate of the mosaicism extension (12.18%) ( A). This result was
conﬁrmed through single nucleotide primer extension and ratio of
clones carrying mutant and wildtype inserts, obtaining 8.9% and10%, respectively.Though the search for parental gonosomal
mosaicisms should make use, whenever possible, of the relevant
tissues, deep NGS of even less appropriate DNA sources mayrepresent a fruitful approach to this type of investigation. Thegenetic counseling to AxD families should always take this rare
event into account.
A
180A_50% 180A_25% 180A_12,5% 180A_6,125% 110M_
unknown
TOT
(X)720 656 739 760 673
WT
(X)371 549 661 730 591
MUT
(X)349 107 78 30 82
% 48,47 16,31 10,55 3,95 12,18A. Grossi: None. T. Bachetti: None. I. Ceccherini: None.
P09.008.A Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome: novel compound
heterozygous KIAA1109 variants in two siblings with this
recently delineated disorder of brain development
Matina Prapa1, Suzanna Dunkerton2, Jeremy Brockelsby2, Nishi-
gandh Deole3, Pooja Harijan4, Marion Bohatschek5, Elspeth Whitby6,
Joan Paterson1, Soo-Mi Park1, Sarju G. Mehta1
1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, East Suffolk and North
Essex NHS Foundation Trust, Ipswich, United Kingdom,4Department
of Paediatric Neurology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHSFoundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,5Rosie Neonatal
Unit, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom,6University of Shef ﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, United
Kingdom.
Biallelic mutations in the KIAA1109 gene are reported to cause
Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome (OMIM #617822) characterised bycerebral parenchymal underdevelopment. To date, only a few
clinical reports have been published detailing the phenotype of
this rare autosomal recessive disorder. Severe loss of functionvariants were lethal; surviving patients with missense variants hadglobal developmental delay, early-onset epilepsy and arthrogry-
posis. We report a Kurdish consanguineous family with fetal brain
abnormalities in two pregnancies detected at 20 weeks ofgestation. The couple ’sﬁrst female child died at nine months
due to complications of respiratory tract infection; she had severe
global developmental impairment with hypotonia and infantile
epilepsy. Antenatally detected brain defects were con ﬁrmed via
MRI head imaging at 1 week of age including severe generalised
lissencephaly, parenchymal thinning, Dandy-Walker malformation,
colpocephaly, and absent corpus callosum. Trio exome sequen-cing reported compound heterozygosity for a protein-truncatingvariant (c.3673C>T;p.(Arg1225Ter)), and a variant of uncertain
signi ﬁcance (c.2794-21C>G) in the KIAA1109 gene predicted to
affect splicing. The second pregnancy was diagnosed with similarbrain defects including mild ventriculomegaly, absent corpuscallosum, lack of sulcation and sylvian ﬁssure formation, thick
neuronal eminence with lack of migration, small cerebellum, and
kinked brainstem. The pregnancy was terminated at 21 weeks ofgestation with subsequent testing con ﬁrming compound hetero-
zygosity for the familial KIAA1109 variants. This report expands the
mutational spectrum of Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome andemphasises its importance as a differential diagnosis of antena-tally detected neural migration defects, especially in the presence
of a severe cerebral pattern mimicking tubulinopathies (Cabet et.
al, 2019).
M. Prapa: None. S. Dunkerton: None. J. Brockelsby: None. N.
Deole: None. P. Harijan: None. M. Bohatschek: None. E. Whitby:
None. J. Paterson: None. S. Park: None. S.G. Mehta: None.
P09.009.B Whole-exome sequencing reveals differential
enhancement of ion channels activity genes between Alzhei-
mer patients and controls
Dimitar Serbezov
1, Maja Atanasoska2, Lubomir Balabanski1,2, Sena
Karachanak-Yankova1,3, Radoslava Vazharova4,2, Dragomira Niko-
lova1, Marta Mihaylova1, Rada Staneva1, Olga Antonova1, Vera
Damyanova1, Mihail Ganev1, Viktoria Spasova1, Dessislava Nesheva1,
Zora Hammoudeh1, Savina Hadjidekova1, Diyana Belezhanska1,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
261
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Shima Mehrabian1, Maria Petrova1, Latchezar Traykov1, Draga
Toncjeva1
1Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Gynecology and
assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria,3Depart-
ment of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, So ﬁa University "St. Kliment
Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Biology, Medical genetics
and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, So ﬁa University “St. Kliment
Ohridski ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause
of dementia, and identifying genetic factors causing changes inmolecular pathways associated with AD are crucial for developingdiagnostic methods and treatment therapies.
Materials & Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was per-
formed on two DNA pools, one set up with DNA isolated from 66AD patients and the other from 100 individuals showing nosymptoms of dementia. Gene enhancement was performed using
genes with variants with very low European population frequen-
cies (< 0.0025) but with higher estimated frequency in our pools(> 0.01), Associated with these genes molecular functions andpathways were determined using the online platforms Toppgene
and Reactome .
Results: The molecular function with the largest number of rare
variant genes in both pools was determined to be Ribonucleotide
binding . Neuronal system pathways were subsequently found to
be differentially enhanced in the pools. More speci ﬁcally, HCN
channels ,Long-term potentiation , and Assembly and cell surface
presentation of NMDA receptors are pathways notably enhanced in
the control group compared to the AD patients group.
Conclusions Our results reveal differential enhancement of ion
activity genes between Alzheimer patients and controls, lendingsupport to the ion channel hypothesis of AD. Acknowledgment
KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 - National Science Fund of Bulgaria"
D. Serbezov: None. M. Atanasoska: None. L. Balabanski:
None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Vazharova: None. D.
Nikolova: None. M. Mihaylova: None. R. Staneva: None. O.
Antonova: None. V. Damyanova: None. M. Ganev: None. V.
Spasova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. S.
Hadjidekova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. S. Mehrabian: None.
M. Petrova: None. L. Traykov: None. D. Toncjeva: None.
P09.010.C Identifying serum biomarkers of neurological
disorders using whole genome sequencing
Grace Png
1,2, Andrei Barysenka1, Linda Repetto3, Pau Navarro4, Xia
Shen5,6,7, Emmanouil Tsafantakis8, Maria Karaleftheri9, George
Dedoussis10, Anders Mälarstig11,12, James F. Wilson5,13, Arthur Gilly1,
Eleftheria Zeggini1,2
1Institute of Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich,
Neuherberg, Germany,2TUM School of Medicine, Technical University
of Munich and Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany,3Centre
for Global Health Research, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh,
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,4MRC Human
Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,5Centre for
Global Health Research, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom,6Biostatistics Group, State Key Labora-
tory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,Guangzhou, China,7Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,8Anogia
Medical Centre, Anogia, Greece,9Echinos Medical Centre, Echinos,
Greece,10Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of Health
Science and Education, Harokopio University of Athens, Athens,Greece,11Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Solna,Sweden,12Emerging Science & Innovation, P ﬁzer Worldwide
Research, Development and Medical, Cambrige, MA, USA,13MRC
Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UnitedKingdom.
Introduction: Despite the increasing global burden of neurologi-
cal disorders, there is a lack of effective diagnostic and therapeuticbiomarkers. Proteins are often dysregulated in disease and have astrong genetic component; here, we show that the human serum
proteome is an accessible reservoir of potential biomarkers.
Materials and Methods: Using deep whole genome sequen-
cing (WGS) data from two population-based cohorts (15X WGS; N=2,893), we carry out a protein quantitative trait locus (pQTL)
analysis of 184 neurologically-relevant proteins. We then apply
causal inference tools, such as colocalisation analysis, to mapthese loci to neurological diseases.
Results: We detect 139 pQTLs for 107 proteins, the majority of
which (65%) are cis-acting, including 76 independently-associated
sequence variants that have not been previously identi ﬁed. We
observe causal associations between serum levels of CD33 and
Alzheimer ’s disease, GPNMB and Parkinson ’s disease, and MSR1
and schizophrenia, describing their clinical potential and high-lighting drug repurposing opportunities.
Conclusions: We have generated a pQTL map of neurological
proteins, elucidating the genetic landscape that underlies the
circulating proteome and its connection to neurological disorders.In doing so, we con ﬁrm known protein-disease associations, and
describe new potential mechanisms that contribute to disease
aetiology.
G. Png: None. A. Barysenka: None. L. Repetto: None. P.
Navarro: None. X. Shen: None. E. Tsafantakis: None. M.
Karaleftheri: None. G. Dedoussis: None. A. Mälarstig: None. J.
F. Wilson: None. A. Gilly: None. E. Zeggini: None.
P09.011.D Alzheimer ’s disease polygenic risk score assess-
ment on longitudinal amyloid load in cognitively intact olderadults
Emma Susanne Luckett
1, Jolien Schaeverbeke1, Lars Bertram2, Koen
Van Laere1,3, Patrick Dupont1, Isabell Cleynen1, Rik Vandenberghe1,3
1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany,3UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Introduction: Published data have highlighted associations
between Alzheimer ’s Disease (AD) susceptibility loci and AD-
related brain changes. We investigated these associations withinthe Flemish Prevent AD Cohort KU Leuven (F-PACK) using ADpolygenic risk scores (PRSs) and longitudinal brain amyloid load.
Materials and methods: Sixty-one cognitively healthy partici-
pants (age: 68 (56-79), 29 females, 29 APOE ε4carriers) received an
[
18F]Flutemetamol-PET scan at two timepoints (interval 4.6 years
(3.4-8.6)). Amyloid rate of change: absolute change divided by
interval. Genotyping performed using Illumina GSA and imputa-
tion using the Michigan server and HRC reference panel. Dataunderwent standard quality control. PRSice was used for PRScalculations with Stage 1 summary statistics from Kunkle et al.
(2019) as base ﬁle and European individuals from 1000 Genomes
(N=503) as reference for clumping. We calculated PRSs at three
thresholds for SNP inclusion (pT): pT =0.5 (Escott-Price et al. 2015);
1x10
-5; 5x10-8. Linear regression models determined if PRSs were
associated with amyloid rate of change at each pT (age, sex andﬁrst three PCs as covariates).
Results: There was a signi ﬁcant effect of PRS on amyloid rate of
change when using the more stringent thresholds for SNPAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
262
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608inclusion: pT =5x10-8:β=0.0054 (CI: 0.000042-0.011), p=0.048;
pT=1x10-5:β=0.0056 (CI: 0.0000785-0.011), p=0.047. Amyloid
accumulation, however, was not signi ﬁcantly associated with PRS
when pT =0.5:β=0.0013 (-0.004-0.007), p=0.619.
Conclusions: A signi ﬁcant effect of PRS is detected with more
stringent pTs, suggesting AD-related brain changes have an
oligogenic architecture, in line with recent publications showing
AD is an oligogenic rather than polygenic disease.
E.S. Luckett: None. J. Schaeverbeke: None. L. Bertram: None.
K. Van Laere: None. P. Dupont: None. I. Cleynen: None. R.
Vandenberghe: None.
P09.012.A Pathway based enrichment analysis of genes
associated with Alzheimer ’s disease
David Vogrinc , Katja Gori čar, Vita Dol žan
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) is the most common
neurodegenerative brain disease affecting millions worldwide.
Late-onset AD cases comprise the vast majority of all AD patients.
Although family history is important in assessing AD risk, complexgenetic and environmental interactions contribute to AD even late
in life. Our aim was to perform pathway enrichment analysis on a
deﬁned AD risk gene set, obtained from comprehensive literature
review.
Materials and Methods: We performed a literature synthesis of
genome wide association studies and their meta-analyses that
investigated AD susceptibility. Next, we performed a functionalenrichment analysis, based on Gene Ontology: Biological Process.Pathway network was visualized using Cytoscape software.
Results: 105 loci were associated with AD risk, while 30
additional loci were associated with biomarker levels in bodyﬂuids or neurologic features. Identi ﬁed genes were grouped into
four parental categories for AD risk gene set and seven parental
categories for AD biomarker gene set. Common categories forboth gene sets were metabolic process, cellular process, localiza-tion and biological regulation, while transport, neurological
system process and regulation of cellular process were addition-
ally identi ﬁed in biomarker gene set.
Conclusion: Functional enrichment analysis enabled us to
identify key biological processes of AD pathogenesis. Our
comprehensive review can serve as a basis for studies of
pathophysiological mechanisms of risk genes, identi ﬁed on a
genome-wide scale. Better characterization of risk genes could
enable the strati ﬁcation of patients according to the main
molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis, supporting developmentof tailored and personalised treatment of AD. Research grants:ARRS P1-0170.
D. Vogrinc: None. K. Gori čar:None. V. Dol žan:
None.
P09.013.B ‘Genetically predicted telomere length is associated
with age- and Alzheimer ’s Disease-related brain structure
alterations. ’
Blanca Rodríguez-Fernández1, Natalia Vilor-Tejedor1,2,3, Marina
García1, Grégory Operto1,4,5, Eider M. Arenaza-Urquijo1,4,5, Carolina
Minguillon1,4,5, Karine Fauria1,5, Immaculata De Vivo6,7, Arcadi
Navarro1,8,9, José Luis Molinuevo1,10, Juan D. Gispert1,4,11, Aleix
Sala-Vila1,4, Marta Crous-Bou1,6,12, for the ALFA study
1Barcelona βeta Brain Research Center - Pasqual Maragall Founda-
tion, Barcelona, Spain,2Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG). The
Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,3Erasmus University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,4IMIM - Hospital del Mar Medical Research
Institute, Barcelona, Spain,5Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBER-FES), Madrid,Spain,6Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA,7Channing Division of Network
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA,8Institute of
Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Department of Experimental andHealth Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,
9Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona,
Spain,10Present address: H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark,11Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red Bioingeniería, Biomateriales yNanomedicina, Madrid, Spain,12Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO)-
Bellvitge Biomedical Research Center (IDIBELL), Hospitalet del
Llobregat, Spain.
Introduction: Telomere length (TL) is an objective biomarker of
biological aging. Shorter telomeres are associated with acceler-
ated aging, consequently increasing the risk of age-relateddiseases such as Alzheimer ’s Disease (AD). We aimed to test the
potential causal role of TL in age- and AD-related brain structure
alterations through a Mendelian Randomization (MR) analysis.
Methods: We included 1,134 participants from the ALFA
(ALzheimer and FAmilies) study. We calculated composite brainsignatures re ﬂecting cortical thickness of speci ﬁc age or AD
vulnerable brain regions. A total of 7 genome-wide hits associated
with TL were used as instrumental variables. Causal effects of TLwere estimated using the MR-inverse-variance weighted method
(IVW). Sensitivity analyses using the MR-Egger method were
conducted to test for directional pleiotropic effects. All analyseswere adjusted by age, sex and years of education. Strati ﬁed
analyses by APOE -ɛ4 status were performed.
Results: MR analysis revealed signi ﬁcant associations between
genetically predicted shorter TL and reduced cortical thickness inage and AD-related brain signatures; however, evidence fordirectional pleiotropy was observed. Our results suggested an
effect modi ﬁcation by APOE -ɛ4 status: signi ﬁcant effects were only
observed among APOE -ɛ4 carriers with no evidence for pleiotropy
(AD: β
IVW=-7.61, p-value =0.027; Aging: βIVW=-8.10, p-value <
0.001).
Conclusions: Our results suggest a causal role of telomeres in
vulnerability of brain regions associated with aging processes andAD, speci ﬁcally in individuals at increased genetic risk of AD.
This work was supported by an awarded Alzheimer ’s Associa-
tion Research Grant (AARG-19-618265).
B. Rodríguez-Fernández: None. N. Vilor-Tejedor: None. M.
García: None. G. Operto: None. E.M. Arenaza-Urquijo: None. C.
Minguillon: None. K. Fauria: None. I. De Vivo: None. A. Navarro:
None. J.L. Molinuevo: None. J.D. Gispert: None. A. Sala-Vila:
None. M. Crous-Bou: None.
P09.014.C Genomic data suggests the involvement of TLR5
variants in modifyingthe risk for Alzheimer ’s disease
Dragomira N. Nikolova1, Dimitar Serbezov1, Mihail Ganev1, Sena
Karachanak-Yankova1, Marta Mihaylova1, Shima Mehrabian2, Maria
Petrova2, Vera Damyanova1, Diyana Belezhanska2, Lachezar Tray-
kov2, Savina Hadjidekova1, Draga Toncheva1
1Department of Medical genetics, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Department of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexan-
drovska ”, Medical University - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) is an irreversible, progres-
sive brain disorder leading to dementia in adults. Immune
system ’s dysregulation is a key factor in the AD pathogenesis,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
263
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608particularly Toll-like receptors (TLRs) which participate in neuroin-
ﬂammatory reactions. The TLR-mediated response has bene ﬁcial
roles stimulating phagocytosis releasing neurotoxic products. he
aim of our study was to determine the presence and signi ﬁcance
of variants in TLR genes in the genomic data of patients with AD.
Materials and Methods: We selected 127 genes associated
with PRR (pattern recognition receptors) pathways, innate and
adaptive immunity, in ﬂammatory responses, defense responses to
viruses and bacteria. Whole exome sequencing was performed ontwo DNA pools, one constructed with DNA from AD patients and
the other with DNA from healthy age-synchronized individuals.
The obtained genomic data was then surveyed for the presence ofPRR variants and their frequency in the two pools was calculated.
Results: 1229 PRR variants were detected in both pools, but
only 24 of them were signi ﬁcantly different in frequency between
the two pools. Of these 5 variants belonged to different TLR familygene members - rs5744168 and rs2072493 ( TLR5) ; rs179008 ( TLR7) ;
rs3764880 ( TLR8) ; rs5743611 ( TLR1) . Two variants of highest
p-value belonged to TLR5 - rs5744168 (FDR =0.002) and
rs2072493 (FDR =0.005).
Conclusion . Our study demonstrates the role of TLRs in AD
pathogenesis. The role of two TLR5 variants can be highlighted -
rs5744168, a possibly protective factor and rs2072493, a riskfactor. Acknowledgement : The study is a part of a project KP-06-
N33/5 from 13.12.2019 - NSF of Bulgaria.
D.N. Nikolova: None. D. Serbezov: None. M. Ganev: None. S.
Karachanak-Yankova: None. M. Mihaylova: None. S. Mehra-
bian: None. M. Petrova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D.
Belezhanska: None. L. Traykov: None. S. Hadjidekova: None.
D. Toncheva: None.
P09.015.D Analysis of pathogenic variants in Alzheimer ’s
disease related genes in cases, healthy young controls andcentenarians
Sena Karachanak-Yankova
1,2, Dimitar Serbezov1, Lubomir Bala-
banski1,3, Marta Mihaylova1, Dragomira Nikolova1, Mihail Ganev1,
Desislava Nesheva1, Zora Hammoudeh1, Blaga Rukova1, T Dekova2,
Diyana Belezhanska4, Shima Mehrabian4, Mariya Petrova4, Latchezar
Traykov4, Savina Hadjidekova1, Draga Toncheva1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical Uni-
versity-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of Genetics, Faculty of
Biology, So ﬁa University "St. Kliment Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
3Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov ”,S oﬁa,
Bulgaria,4Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska ”, Medical
University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Along with vascular and oncological diseases,
dementia is one of the most signi ﬁcant health and social problems
of the 21st century. The most common type of dementia is
Alzheimer ’s disease (AD), which affects 65-70% of patients over 65.
In order to deepen the knowledge of the genetic basis of thedisease, in the present study we have analyzed pathogenic
variants in AD related genes by testing their presence among
patients, healthy young individuals and centenarians.
Materials and methods: We have performed whole exome
sequencing of three DNA pools of 66 patients, 61 young healthy
individuals (mean age 25 years) and 32 centenarians. The
sequencing was performed with high coverage (250 x) and theobtained variants were ﬁltered by stringent criteria.
Results: We have focused on the presence of pathogenic
variants in AD-related genes, namely APOE, PSEN1, PSEN2, MAPT,
APP and TREM2 . The exomes of AD patients contain 4 pathogenic
variants in these genes including the APOE- ε4allele. The rs429358
APOE allele, which is known to signi ﬁcantly increase AD risk, is alsofound as one of the two pathogenic variants in healthy young
individuals. On the other hand, centenarian exomes contain only
one AD pathogenic variant - rs193922916 in APOE , which shows
recessive inheritance.
Conclusions: The case/control analysis of the presence of
pathogenic variants in AD patients and healthy individuals at
different age can pave the way towards the implementation of
new diagnostic and prognostic blood biomarkers for Alzheimer ’s
disease. Acknowledgment: KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 -National Science Fund of Bulgaria
S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. D. Serbezov: None. L.
Balabanski: None. M. Mihaylova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M.
Ganev: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. B.
Rukova: None. T. Dekova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. S.
Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. L. Traykov: None. S.
Hadjidekova: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P09.017.B Investigation of proven genetic risk factors in the
Hungarian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis population
Zsóﬁ
a Flóra Nagy1, Margit Pál1, Gloria Kafui Esi Zodanu1, Dalma
Füstös1, Péter Klivényi2, Márta Széll1
1University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics, Szeged,
Hungary,2University of Szeged, Department of Neurology, Szeged,
Hungary.
Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal
neurodegenerative disease which affects both upper and lowermotor neurons. ALS has an oligogenic background: several genesand mutations are known to cause ALS, and additionally there are
well established genetic risk factors and disease modifying
variants for the disease. In this study we investigated 9independent genetic risk factors of ALS in the Hungarian
population.
Patients and methods: 157 patients of Hungarian origin
diagnosed with ALS were recruited for this study. For the analysisof the ATXN1 and ATXN2 genes repeat sizing was used. MLPA
technique was used to screen for the duplications of SMN1 gene.
We reanalyzed whole exome sequencing data from a previousstudy then used Sanger sequencing to con ﬁrm the presence of
the detected variants.
Results: We could not con ﬁrm the previously detected
association between the CYLD gene and ALS. We observed a
non-signi ﬁcant but tendentious relationship between ATXN2
intermediate-length repeat expansion and the duplication of the
SMN1 gene and ALS. In the ANXA11 ,PON1 ,PON3 and GLT8D1
genes we identi ﬁed 1-1 relevant variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS), and in the TIA1 gene 4 variants were detected; all have been
identi ﬁed as ALS-associated genetic variants. A potentially
pathogenic variant in the MFSD8 gene was revealed.
Discussion: With our results we contribute to the ﬁne mapping
of the genetic heterogeneity of ALS. For the development and
clinical application of novel therapeutic modalities in ALS it is
essential to stratify the patients based on their genetic back-ground. Funding:Hungarian Brain Research Program (Grant No.
2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002).
Z.F. Nagy: None. M. Pál: None. G. Kafui Esi Zodanu: None. D.
Füstös: None. P. Klivényi: None. M. Széll: None.
P09.018.C journALS: a comprehensive, uniform analysis of
three decades of genetics research in amyotrophic lateralsclerosis and frontotemporal dementia
Mark A. Doherty
1, Ciarán Kelly1, Louisse Mirabueno2, Orla Hardi-
man1, Russell L. McLaughlin1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
264
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland,2University of Reading,
Reading, United Kingdom.
Background: Here we present journALS, a web-application
designed to assess the clinical signi ﬁcance of all previously
reported amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)- and frontotemporal
dementia (FTD)-associated genetic variants. ALS is a highly
heritable neurodegenerative disorder which exhibits a phenotypicspectrum with FTD. Inferring variant signi ﬁcance is complicated in
ALS and FTD due to genetic heterogeneity, late age of onset, age-
related penetrance and a high proportion of sporadic cases.
Methods: Of 2,914 screened articles, 1,028 were found to be
relevant ALS or FTD genetic studies. 3,111 reported variants wereidenti ﬁed in 363 genes. Detailed phenotype and variant data and
were gathered. 479 pedigrees were documented. Variants in the
363 identi ﬁed genes were extracted from ALS-speci ﬁc and general
genomics datasets, creating a ﬁnal database of 1.5 million variants.
We uniformly assessed all variants for pathogenicity, penetrance,
prevalence, and phenotypic and geographic heterogeneity.
Results: 111 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were
conﬁrmed in 23 genes, with 10% classi ﬁed as benign or likely
benign; and greater than 89% classi ﬁed as variants of uncertain
signi ﬁcance. 10% of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants
exhibit geographic heterogeneity. We ﬁnd that due to the high
lifetime risk of ALS and low frequency of pathogenic alleles, even
the current largest genomics projects will struggle to con ﬁdently
identify intermediate penetrance rare variants in ALS.
Discussion: As precision treatments targeting speci ﬁc ALS-
causing mutations in speci ﬁc patients are becoming reality,
distinguishing pathogenic and benign ALS and FTD variantsbecomes essential. Our results support a reorientated view ofseveral ALS genes and variants.
M.A. Doherty: None. C. Kelly: None. L. Mirabueno: None. O.
Hardiman: None. R.L. McLaughlin: None.
P09.020.A Impact of emerging diagnostic technologies on
diagnostic rate of ataxia: experience of a Hungarian expertcentre for rare neurological diseases
Viktor Molnár , Magdolna Menyei-Kiss, Péter Balicza, Noémi Ágnes
Varga, Zoltán Grosz, Barbara Trombitás, Anikó Gál, Mária JuditMolnár
Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare
Disorders, Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: The diagnostic evaluation of a patient with chronic
ataxia is clinically challenging due to its association with aheterogeneous array of neurologic conditions spanning commonacquired etiologies to rare genetic disorders. Availability of
comprehensive NGS-based testing facilitates the genetic diag-
nosis, however it is far from perfect choice in covering every singlecase.
Materials and Methods: Consecutive cases referred with
chronic and progressive ataxia from the last 15 years. The dataset
with solved and unsolved cases had been enriched with dataabout clinical phenotype, severity and co-morbidities as well astime course and family history.
Results: In accordance with the literature approximately half of
the cases in our dataset with hereditary cerebellar ataxia arecaused by spinocerebellar ataxias. The second largest groups are
mitochondrial disorders including mtDNA mutations and nuclear
mitochondrial gene mutations in FRDA, POLG and SPG7 genes.Some of the familial AR ataxias are found to be related toATM, SETX, SACS alterations. Further rare causes (such as CTX,
APTX, CACNA1A etc.) were detected in single families. Due to itsrarity, nonspeci ﬁc or atypical clinical appearance, some of the
successfully revealed AR ataxias were solved by using exome
sequencing.
Conclusions: Optimal testing strategy of the ataxia cohort is
complicated by (i) highly heterogeneous composition of causes,(ii) population-speci ﬁ
c prevalence, and (iii) the need of clinical
genetics knowledge. These results provide relevant epidemiolo-
gical information, bringing a comprehensive knowledge of themost prevalent subtypes of genetic ataxias and their phenotypesin Hungary.
V. Molnár: None. M. Menyei-Kiss: None. P. Balicza: None. N.
Varga: None. Z. Grosz: None. B. Trombitás: None. A. Gál: None.
M. Molnár: None.
P09.021.B Genetics of Ataxia Telangiectasia in a Highly
Consanguineous Population
Hanouf Omar Aldeeb
KSU, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive multi-
systemic disorder. It usually presents in toddler years withprogressive ataxia and oculomotor apraxia, or less commonly, in
the late- ﬁrst or early-second decade of life with mixed movement
disorders. Biallelic mutations in Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutatedgene ( ATM ) cause AT phenotype, a disease not well documented
in Saudi Arabia, a highly consanguineous society. We studied
several Saudi AT patients, identi ﬁedATM variants, and investi-
gated associated clinical features. We included 17 patients from 12consanguineous families. All patients had a comprehensive clinicaland radiological assessment, and most were examined through
whole-exome sequencing (WES). Selected individuals were
analyzed using various genetic approaches. We identi ﬁed 4
different ATM variants in our patients: 3 previously reported
mutations, and one novel variant. Nearly all patients had classical
AT presentation except for two patients with a milder phenotype.Among the 3 known variants, a deletion causing truncation(c.381delA resulting in p.Val128Ter) was identi ﬁed in 13 patients.
Two patients harboured the other 2 variants, (c.9001_9002delAG
resulting in p.Ser3001Phefs*6) and (c.9066delA resulting in p.Glu3023Alafs*10). We speculate that c.381delA is a foundermutation in our population. This study provides a genotype-
phenotype relationship in a previously unstudied consanguineous
population. Our ﬁndings contribute to improve local clinical care,
therapy, and genetic counseling. We are grateful to the patients
and their families for their participation. This research received
intramural funds from KFSHRC, grants from NSTIP/KACST (NK, DC),and KSCDR (NK). We extend our special thanks to the fundingagencies.
H.O. Aldeeb: None.
P09.022.C Case report of classic ataxia-telangiectasia with
neurological phenotype and rare ATM gene variant
Rasa Traberg
1, Jurate Laurynaitiene2, Darius Cereskevicius1, Rasa
Ugenskiene1
1Department of Genetics and Molecular medicine, Medical Academy,
Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania,
2Department of Neurology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University
of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Background : Classic ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is characterized by
progressive cerebellar ataxia beginning between ages one andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
265
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608four years, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, telangiectasias of
the conjunctivae, immunode ﬁciency, and frequent infections. We
present a case were no telangiectasia were evident.
Methods : We report 11-years old boy who was referred to
geneticist due to suspected hereditary ataxia. He is the ﬁrst child
of healthy unrelated couple. Perinatal period and early psycho-
motor development were normal but gait instability was notice-
able from 16 month of age and gradually progressed. At 10 yearold neurologic examination showed horizontal nystagmus andsaccadic eye movements, face hyperkinesia, drooling, choreoathe-
tosis, Romberg instability, gait ataxia. Patient was unable to walk
without assistance. Brain MRI revealed cerebellar atrophy,laboratory testing increased alfa fetoprotein - 157 kU/l (normalvalue 0-7,89). There were no oculocutaneous telangiectasia and
immunode ﬁciency reported. Patient ’s grandfather was diagnosed
with prostate cancer at 50 years old. ATM gene sequencing was
performed by NGS.
Result : Two compound heterozygous variants in trans position
were found: pathogenic variant NM_000051.3(ATM):c.3214G>T;.Glu1072Ter (inherited from father) and variant of unknownsigni ﬁcance NM_000051.3(ATM):c.8710G>C ;Glu2904Gln; (inher-
ited from mother). The variant c.8710G>C (p.Glu2904Gln) was not
found in the population databases. Alternative variant c.8711A>G(Glu2904Gly), affecting the same amino acid is classi ﬁed as
pathogenic. The variant c.8710G>C was predicted to be deleter-
ious by in silico analysis. Based on clinical ﬁndings and variant
pathogenicity prediction the variant c.8710G>C (p.Glu2904Gln)was classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic.
Conclusions : The progressive symptoms allowed to suspect
and genetic testing con ﬁrmed the diagnosis of A-T.
R. Traberg: None. J. Laurynaitiene: None. D. Cereskevicius:
None. R. Ugenskiene: None.
P09.023.D Novel variants in critical domains of ATP8A2 and
expansion of clinical spectrum
Erfan Heidari
1, Alexander N. Harrison2, Ali Reza Tavasoli3, Navid
Almadani4, Robert S. Molday2, Masoud Garshasbi1
1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,3Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
4Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, Tehran, Iran, Islamic
Republic of.
Introduction: ATP8A2 is a member of the P4-ATPase subfamily of
P-type ATPases that actively ﬂips phosphatidylserine and phos-
phatidylethanolamine across membranes to generate and main-tain transmembrane phospholipid asymmetry. Loss-of-functionvariants in ATP8A2 cause severe neurodegenerative and develop-
mental disorders in rodents and humans.
Results: whole exome sequencing combined with homozyg-
osity mapping on DNA isolated from understudied patientsunravel one splicing variant (c.1868-2A>G) and two missense
variants (p.Asp825His and p.Met438Val) reside in highly conserved
domains of ATP8A2 gene in three unrelated Iranian families that
cause intellectual disability, dystonia, microcephaly/below-averagehead size, mild optic atrophy, dif ﬁcult feeding and developmental
delay. Furthermore, all the affected individuals displayed tooth
abnormalities associated with defects in teeth development.Protein expression and functional studies indicate that p.
Asp825His variant leads to a very low expression level of ATP8A2
and lack of phosphatidylserine-activated ATPase activity. More-over, we con ﬁrmed that p.Met438Val and p.Asp825His variants
lead to rapid degradation of the misfolded ATP8A2 by
proteasomes.Conclusion: We conclude that Asp825 which coordinates to the
Mg
2+ion within the ATP binding site and Met438 are essential for
the proper folding of ATP8A2 into a functionally active
phosphatidylserine ﬂippase. Also, our study for the ﬁrst time
provides evidence on the association of tooth abnormalities withdefects in ATP8A2 suggesting that disruption of ATP8A2 ﬂippase
activity interferes with teeth development and therefore expand-
ing the clinical spectrum of the associated disease.
E. Heidari: None. A. N. Harrison: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Modest; Canadian Institutes of Health
Research PJT 148649. A.R. Tavasoli: None. N. Almadani: None. R.
S. Molday: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Canadian Institutes of Health Research PJT
148649. M. Garshasbi: None.
P09.024.A Unravelling the implication of the major vault
protein in neuroanatomical phenotypes at the autism asso-ciated 16p11.2 locus
Binnaz YALCIN
1, Perrine Kretz2, Christel Wagner2, Charlotte
Montillot1, Sylvain Hugel3, Ilaria Morella4, Meghna Kannan2, Anna
Mikhaleva5, Marie-Christine Fischer2, Maxence Milhau1, Riccardo
Brambilla4, Yann Herault2, Alexandre Reymond5, Mohammed Sell-
oum6, Stephan Collins1
1Inserm, Dijon, France,2IGBMC, Illkirch, France,3INCI, Strasbourg,
France,4NMHRI, Cardiff, United Kingdom,5Center for Integrative
Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland,6MCI, Illkirch, France.
Introduction: Using mouse genetic studies, we set out to identify
which of the 30 genes causes brain size and other NeuroAnato-
mical Phenotypes (NAPs) at the autism-associated 16p11.2 locus,independently in male and female.
Materials and methods: To assess NAPs, we developed or
acquired through collaboration single-gene heterozygous knock-out mice, representing 20 unique genes of the 16p11.2 locus. Forthe remaining 10 genes, the germline transmission of the
mutation failed despite multiple attempts or no mouse model
was available during the course of the study. Result: Here we showthat multiple genes mapping to this region regulate brain size incontrast to previous studies, with female signi ﬁcantly less affected.
Major Vault Protein (MVP), the main component of the vault
organelle, is a highly conserved protein found in higher and lowereukaryotic cells, yet its function is not understood. While we ﬁnd
MVP expression highly speci ﬁc to the limbic system, Mvp stood
out as the top driver of NAPs, regulating the morphology ofneurons, postnatally and speci ﬁcally in male. Finally, we demon-
strate that the double hemideletion Mvp::Mapk3 rescues NAPs and
alters behavioral performances, suggesting that MVP and ERK
share the same pathway, in vivo.
Conclusion: Our results highlight that sex-speci ﬁc neuroanato-
mical mechanisms must be considered in neurological disorders
such as autism and provide the ﬁrst evidence for the involvement
of the vault organelle in the regulation of the mammalian brainsize.
B. Yalcin: None. P. Kretz: None. C. Wagner: None. C. Montillot:
None. S. Hugel: None. I. Morella: None. M. Kannan: None. A.
Mikhaleva: None. M. Fischer: None. M. Milhau: None. R.
Brambilla: None. Y. Herault: None. A. Reymond: None. M.
Selloum: None. S. Collins: None.
P09.025.B Contribution of compound heterozygous CACNA1H
mutations in autism spectrum disorder susceptibilityAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
266
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Marta Viggiano1, Cinzia Cameli1, Annio Posar2,3, Maria C. Scaduto2,
Magalì Rochat4, Paola Visconti2, Elena Bacchelli1, Elena Maestrini1
1Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy,2IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna,
UOSI Disturbi dello Spettro Autistico, Bologna, Italy,3Department of
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy,4IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna,
Diagnostica Funzionale Neuroradiologica, Bologna, Italy.
Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex
neuropsychiatric disorder with a strong genetic component. Sofar, more than one hundred high-con ﬁdence susceptibility genes
have been identi ﬁed and recent efforts have led to an ever-
growing list of ASD candidate genes. Among these, low-voltage
activated T-type calcium channels (Ca
v3) genes ( CACNA1G ,
CACNA1H ,CACNA1I ) have been consistently implicated, which
nicely correlates with the role calcium signaling in neuronal
function.
Materials and Methods: We performed whole genome
sequencing analysis in a cohort of 105 families, consisting of125 ASD individuals, 210 parents and 57 unaffected siblings, to
explore the presence of rare damaging variants in Ca
v3 genes.
Results: We have identi ﬁed inherited damaging variants in Ca v3
genes in 21 ASD families. Interestingly, compound heterozygous
rare damaging missense variants were detected in the CACNA1H
gene in 6 ASD subjects (2 sibs, 2 MZ twins and 2 independentcases), belonging to 4 different families. The identi ﬁed biallelic
damaging variants could affect the CACNA1H protein activity with
a recessive model and contribute to the disease development in
the context of a high-risk genetic background. Thus, we areperforming functional analysis to clarify the role of the CACNA1H
variants on the calcium channel activity.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁcation of biallelic mutations in 4
different ASD families provides further support for a role ofCACNA1H in ASD susceptibility, and for the ﬁrst time highlights it
as a candidate gene in ASD, acting in a recessive mode of
inheritance.Supported by the Italian Ministry of Health (Grant GR-2013-02357561).
M. Viggiano: None. C. Cameli: None. A. Posar: None. M.C.
Scaduto: None. M. Rochat: None. P. Visconti: None. E. Bacchelli:
None. E. Maestrini: None.
P09.027.D Mitochondrial DNA in ﬂuences the susceptibility to
Autism Spectrum Disorders and the severity of the clinicalphenotype
Leonardo Caporali
1, Claudio Fiorini1,2, Flavia Palombo1, Flavia
Baccari3, Martina Romagnoli1, Paola Visconti4, Annio Posar4, Maria
Cristina Scaduto4, Elena Maestrini5, Cinzia Cameli5, Marta Viggiano5,
Anna Olivieri6, Antonio Torroni6, Elena Bacchelli5, Magali Rochat7,
Valerio Carelli1,2,Alessandra Maresca1
1IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Programma di
Neurogenetica, Bologna, Italy,2Department of Biomedical and
Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,3IRCCS
Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, UOSI Epidemiologia eStatistica, Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy,4IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze
Neurologiche di Bologna, UOSI Disturbi dello Spettro Autistico,
Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy,5Department of Pharmacy and
Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy,6Depart-
ment of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Bologna, Italy,7IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze
Neurologiche di Bologna, Programma Diagnostica FunzionaleNeuroradiologica, Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy.Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex and
lifelong heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions. Different
genetic models could explain ASD, ranging from monogenic
disorder or copy number variation to polygenic disease. Mito-chondrial DNA (mtDNA) may have a role in the pathogenesis ofASD.
Materials and Methods: Our cohort consists of 98 families
including 117 subjects with ASD, 193 parents and 59 unaffectedsiblings. We performed deep sequencing of mtDNA, de ﬁning
haplogroups and evaluating private variants, including those at
low heteroplasmy. An independent cohort of 127 Italian families was
used as a replica. Both these cohorts were compared to a controlgroup of 5088 healthy individuals. MtDNA content was assessed inblood cells. Multivariable regression was used to evaluate risk factors
inﬂuencing ASD severity classi ﬁed by the calibrated severity score of
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule.
Results: Haplogroup H in probands resulted protective for ASD,
counterbalanced by increased risk conferred by haplogroups L
and I. Paternal haplogroups U5a and K increased the risk ofdeveloping ASD in offspring. Probands showed increased numberof missense mutations in MT-ATP6 and MT-ATP8 and reduced
mtDNA content. Paternal super-haplogroups H and JT are
associated with mild phenotypes, whereas variants with 15%-5%heteroplasmy are associated with severe phenotypes.
Conclusions: Our results indicate a contribution of mtDNA to
ASD susceptibility and phenotypic expression. Paternal mtDNA
inﬂuences the ASD pathogenesis, possibly due to accumulation of
nuclear de novo variants or epigenetic alterations in fathers ’
germinal cells that are transmitted to the offspring. Supported by
the Italian Ministry of Health (GR-2013-02357561).
L. Caporali: None. C. Fiorini: None. F. Palombo: None. F.
Baccari: None. M. Romagnoli: None. P. Visconti: None. A. Posar:
None. M. Scaduto: None. E. Maestrini: None. C. Cameli: None. M.
Viggiano: None. A. Olivieri: None. A. Torroni: None. E. Bacchelli:
None. M. Rochat: None. V. Carelli: None. A. Maresca: None.
P09.028.A Classi ﬁcation and exome sequencing of develop-
mental brain Disorders (DBD): novel genes, phenotypeexpansions and remarkable genetic heterogeneity
Ghaydda Mirzaa
1, Kimberly Aldinger2, Andrew Timms2
1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA,2Seattle Children ’s
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
Developmental brain disorders (DBD) are collectively common
pediatric disorders with a high rate of morbidity and mortality
among affected individuals. These disorders include brain growthabnormalities such as microcephaly (MIC), megalencephaly (MEG),and malformations of cortical development (MCD; such as
lissencephaly, polymicrogyria). The diagnosis of these disorders
is often challenging due to the complexity of the clinical andneuroimaging features of these malformations, the rarity of theindividual disorders or phenotypes, as well as the rapidly
expanding genetic landscape; the identi ﬁcation of which is
primarily due to the increasing use of Next Generation Sequencing(NGS) methods. We performed exome sequencing (ES) on >500families with developmental brain disorders (DBD) between the
years of 2013-2020. We analyzed ES data using a custom in-house
research pipeline searching for recessive (homozygous, com-pound heterozygous), dominant/ de novo , and X-linked variants.
We developed a hierarchical clinical classi ﬁcation scheme based
on the underlying biological mechanisms including cellularpathways, as well as known associations of features or malforma-tions. We identi ﬁed several novel genes for DBD broadly, inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
267
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608addition to numerous candidate genes for MEG, MIC, MCD and
other DBD. We also identi ﬁed many “atypical presentations ”or
“phenotype expansions ”of known syndromic forms of brain
malformations. Our series substantially expands on the molecularand phenotypic spectrum of DBD and highlights the combinatorialstrength of accurate evidence-based curation of genetic variation
and accurate phenotyping of brain malformations by neuroima-
ging. Our data will highlight important insights that will aid in thefuture clinical and molecular diagnosis of affected families.
G. Mirzaa: None. K. Aldinger: None. A. Timms: None.
P09.029.B RNA sequencing pro ﬁling in prefrontal brain cortex
ofC9ALS/FTD
Maria Isabel Alvarez
1, Francisco Garcia-Garcia2, Rubén Grillo-
Risco2, Marta Gracia1, Laia Rodriguez-Revenga1
1Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,2Centro de
investigación Principe Felipe, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: The GGGGCC (G4C2) repeat expansion in the non-
coding region of the C9orf72 gene is the most common genetic
cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporaldementia (FTD) (C9ALS/FTD). Although the mechanisms of disease
of C9ALS/FTD remain unknown, a gain of function of a toxic mRNA
and RAN-translation have been proposed as triggering patholo-gical mechanisms.
Material and Methods: To further elucidate the mechanisms
underlying C9ALS/FTD we performed an RNA sequencing study in
prefrontral brain cortex samples from 20 C9ALS/FTD and 12individuals without neurological manifestation and normalC9orf72 repeat alleles.
Results: Preliminary data analysis showed ﬁfty one genes
differentially expressed between both groups (FDR < 0.05).Among them, 46 were protein coding genes and 5 were non-
protein coding. Functional pro ﬁling showed deregulated GO
annotations in C9ALS/FTD patients including 11 genes involved inGeneration of neurons and Neurogenesis biological processes and 5
genes involved in Postsynapse cellular component GO
annotations.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings provide additional evidence of genes
deregulated in C9ALS/FTD patients that might shed light onneuropathological mechanisms underlying C9orf72 expansion.
Acknowledgements: We thank brain donors and relatives for
generous donation and the Neurological Tissue Bank of theBiobanc-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS. This work was supported by the
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067), co- ﬁnanced by Fondo
Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer
Europa ”and AGAUR (2017 SGR1134). The CIBERER is an initiative
of the Instituto de Salud Carlos III
M. Alvarez: None. F. Garcia-Garcia: None. R. Grillo-Risco:
None. M. Gracia: None. L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None.
P09.030.C The complexities of CACNA1A in clinical
neurogenetics
Marina P. Hommersom
1,2, T. H. van Prooije3,2, M. Pennings1,M .I .
Schouten1, H. van Bokhoven1,2, E-J. Kamsteeg1, B. P. C. van de
Warrenburg3,2
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Department of Neurology,
Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.Variants in CACNA1A are classically related to episodic ataxia type
2, familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 or spinocerebellar ataxia
type 6. Over the years, CACNA1A has been associated with a
broader spectrum of phenotypes including epilepsy, intellectualdisability, and neurological episodic syndromes during childhood.Targeted analysis and unbiased sequencing of CACNA1A result not
only in clear molecular diagnoses, but also in large numbers of
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance, or likely pathogenic variants
where the phenotype does not directly match the CACNA1A
spectrum. Over the last years, targeted and clinical exome
sequencing in our center has identi ﬁed 41 CACNA1A variants.
Variant interpretation was based on the ACMG guidelines. TypesofCACNA1A variants were exon deletions (n =3), frameshift (n =
6), missense (n =22), nonsense (n =6), and splice site (n =4)
variants. Ultimately, variants were considered pathogenic or likely
pathogenic in 23 cases, with most phenotypes ranging fromepisodic or progressive ataxia to more complex ataxia syndromes,
as well as with phenotypes dominated by non-cerebellar features
such as intellectual disability and epilepsy. In two cases, thecausality of the variant was discarded based on non-segregationor an alternative diagnosis. In the remaining 16 cases, the variant
was classi ﬁed as uncertain, due to lack of segregation analysis or
uncertain association with a non-classical phenotype. CACNA1A
thus represents a complex gene in clinical neurogenetics.Accessible functional read-outs are clearly needed, especially in
cases with a non-classical phenotype. This work was supported by
a grant from Radboud university medical center and DondersInstitute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour.
M.P. Hommersom: None. T.H. van Prooije: None. M.
Pennings: None. M.I. Schouten: None. H. van Bokhoven: None.
E. Kamsteeg: None. B.P.C. van de Warrenburg: None.
P09.031.D A case of CACNA1B associated neurodevelopmental
disorder with seizure and non-epileptic hyperkineticmovements
Mehmet Burak Mutlu
1, Murat Erdogan2, Aslihan Kiraz2, Mohame-
dahmed Salih Hassan1, Arslan Bayram3, Fatma Demiry ılmaz1
1Detagen Genetic Diseases Diagnosis Center, Kayseri, Turkey,
2Medical Genetic Department, Kayseri City Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey,
3Medical Genetic Department, Etlik Zübeyde Han ım Women ’s Health
Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: CACNA1B associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder
with Seizures and Non-Epileptic Hyperkinetic Movements (NEDS-
NEH, OMIM #618497) is a very rare type of developmental and
epileptic encephalopathy with autosomal recessive inheritance. It isa severe neurological disorder characterized by psychomotordevelopmental retardation, early-onset refractory seizures and
non-epileptic hyperkinetic movement disorders, including myoclo-
nus dystonia and dyskinesia, usually manifested by inability to walkand speak and caused by biallelic variants of the CACNA1B (Calcium
Channel, Voltage-dependent, N-Type, Alpha-1b Subunit) gene.
Materials and Methods: Two siblings with similar ﬁndings who
were being followed up in the pediatric neurology clinic due toloss of speech, cognitive and motor development retardationwere consulted for genetic evaluation. Result: Karyotype analysis,
FMR1 gene analysis and microarray analysis of the two siblings
were performed, no abnormality was found. Homozygouspathogenic c.5811dupT, p.Val1938fs (ENST371355) variant
detected in the CACNA1B gene in the whole exome sequencing
analysis.
Conclusions: The variant found in our patients was c.5811dupT;
p.Val1938fs is the novel variant previously not reported in theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
268
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608literature. Up to now, 5 pathogenic variants were reported to be
cause of CACNA1B associated NEDSNEH, and we present this novel
variant detected in our case as the 6th variant. Due to the scarce
number of reports describing CACNA1B associated NEDSNEH, this
variant and the clinical ﬁndings of the patients described in this
work will contribute to the expansion of the genetic and clinical
spectrum of the disease.
M.B. Mutlu: None. M. Erdogan: None. A. Kiraz: None. M.S.
Hassan: None. A. Bayram: None. F. Demiry ılmaz: None.
P09.032.A Genetic analysis of Portuguese patients with
Cerebellar Ataxia, Neuropathy, Vestibular Are ﬂexia Syndrome
(CANVAS)
Ana Lopes1, Maria João Malaquias2, Luís Braz3,4, Joana Damásio1,2,
Daniela Garcez5, Bravo Marques5,6, André Caetano7, Ana Paula
Sousa8, Ana Aires3,4, Ana Graça Velon9, Ana Luísa Sousa10, Cristina
Alves2, Cristina Costa11, Cristina Rosado Coelho12, Eva Brandão10,
Goreti Nadais3, Joana Guimarães3,4, Michel Mendes9, Nuno Vila-
Chã2, Pedro Abreu3,4, Pedro Castro3,4, Raquel Barbosa7, Ricardo
Taipa13, Rui Araújo3,4, Teresa Pimentel12, Jorge Pinto Basto14, Sara
Morais1, João Parente Freixo1, Marina Magalhães2,15, Jorge Oliveira1
1Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva (CGPP), Instituto de
Biologia Celular e Molecular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,Porto, Portugal,2Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universi-
tário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,3Serviço de
Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Porto,
Portugal, Porto, Portugal,4Departamento Neurociências Clínicas e
Saúde Mental da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto,Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,5Serviço de Neurologia, Instituto
Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal,6Unidade de Neuropsiquiatria, Fundação Champalimaud,
Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal,7Serviço de Neurologia, Centro
Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal,
8Serviço de Neuro ﬁsiologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,9Serviço de Neurologia, Centro
Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, Vila
Real, Portugal,10Serviço de Neurologia do Centro Hospitalar Entre
Douro e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, Santa Maria daFeira, Portugal,11Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital Prof. Doutor
Fernando da Fonseca, Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal,12Serviço
de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal,
Setúbal, Portugal,13Unidade de Neuropatologia, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,14CGC
Genetics, Porto, Portugal, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,15Serviço de
Neurologia, Hospital Padre Américo, Centro Hospitalar do Tâmega eSousa, Pena ﬁel, Porto, Portugal, Pena ﬁel, Portugal.
Diallelic expansion of an intronic (AAGGG)n in RFC1 (400_2,000
repeats) has been stablished as a genetic cause of the cerebellarataxia, neuropathy, vestibular-are ﬂexia syndrome (CANVAS). Four
main allelic variants were described: the (AAAAG)11 reference allele
(freq.=0.755); expanded AAAAG or AAAGG repeats (freq. =0.130 and
0.079); and the pathogenic (AAGGG)n expansion (freq. =0.007). This
relatively high frequency sugge sts that CANVAS may represent a
considerable fraction of late-onset ataxias. Genetic analysis was
based on the approach proposed by Cortese et al . (2019): (1) a
ﬂuorescently labelled PCR was used to amplify the repeat ’sr e g i o n ;( 2 )
three speci ﬁc repeat-primed PCRs (RP-PCRs) were performed, each
targeting one of the known pentanucleotides - presence of the
continuous stutter peak pro ﬁle in the AAGGG-speci ﬁc RP-PCR, and
absence of similar results in the other two PCRs, is compatible withthe diagnosis of CANVAS. From a cohort of 60 clinically suggestivecases of CANVAS (the vast majority previously tested for other
ataxias), 35 patients (28 families) were found with a diallelic (AAGGG)
n expansion. Five additional cases were carriers for only one
expanded pathogenic allele. Mean age-of-onset was 59 ± 10y(range:26-73y). The most common p resentation was gait imbalance
(n=33) or sensory symptoms (n =16). This report describes the ﬁrst
CANVAS patients genetically characterized in Portugal. Our expecta-
tion is that this cohort will signi ﬁcantly expand in the short term, as
awareness for this clinical entity increases. Testing for the (AAGGG)n
expansion in genetically undiagnose d patients with late-onset ataxia
(particularly those with the typ ical clinical triad) is highly
recommended.
A. Lopes: None. M. Malaquias: None. L. Braz: None. J.
Damásio: None. D. Garcez: None. B. Marques: None. A. Caetano:
None. A. Sousa: None. A. Aires: None. A. Velon: None. A. Sousa:
None. C. Alves: None. C. Costa: None. C. Coelho: None. E.
Brandão: None. G. Nadais: None. J. Guimarães: None.
M.
Mendes: None. N. Vila-Chã: None. P. Abreu: None. P. Castro:
None. R. Barbosa: None. R. Taipa: None. R. Araújo: None. T.
Pimentel: None. J. Pinto Basto: None. S. Morais: None. J.
Parente Freixo: None. M. Magalhães: None. J. Oliveira: None.
P09.033.B CANVAS: the biallelic RFC1 pentanucleotide repeat
expansion in Greek late-onset ataxia patients
Zoi Kontogeorgiou1, Chrisoula Kartanou1, Chrisanthi Tsirligkani1,
Evangelos Anagnostou2, Michail Rentzos3, Georgia Karadima1,
Georgios Koutsis1
1Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, Eginitio University
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,Greece,2Clinical Neurophysiology Unit, 1st Department of Neurology,
Eginitio University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece,31st Department of Neurology, Eginitio
University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Athens, Greece.
Cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy and vestibular are ﬂexia syndrome
(CANVAS) has been recently linked to a biallelic expansion of a
polymorphic pentanucleotide repeat in intron 2 of the replication
factor C subunit 1 ( RFC1 ) gene. To date, the only clearly
pathogenic CANVAS-associated allele includes an AAGGG expof
at least 400 repeats. We presently aimed to detect the
aforementioned pathogenic expansion in Greek patients with
late-onset ataxia. For this purpose, 77 selected index patients, withlate-onset ataxia (age of onset >35 years) and a compatible
pedigree, were screened for the expansion. These patients
originated from undiagnosed ataxia (67) and neuropathy (10)cohorts referred to the Neurogenetics Unit, 1
stDepartment of
Neurology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Greece. Genotyping was performed through fragment and RP-
PCR analysis. We report that 5 out of the 77 patients (6.5%) werefound homozygous for the pentanucleotide pathological expan-sion. Moreover we identi ﬁed two affected siblings raising the total
number of genetically con ﬁrmed CANVAS cases to 7. Our results
conﬁrmed that the AAGGG biallelic expansion is very common in
patients with complete CANVAS (80%), but less common in thegroup with incomplete CANVAS (26.7%), consistent with previous
studies. All positive cases exhibited sensory neuropathy as the
earliest clinical feature. These results highlight for the ﬁrst time the
presence of the RFC1 biallelic expansion in Greek patients with
late-onset ataxia.
Z. Kontogeorgiou: None. C. Kartanou: None. C. Tsirligkani:
None. E. Anagnostou: None. M. Rentzos: None. G. Karadima:
None. G. Koutsis: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
269
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.034.C Novel homozygous CEP41 mutation in a patient
with Joubert syndrome
Ezgi Gökp ınar İli1, Gonca Bekta ş2
1Genetic Diseases Center, Ba şakşehir Pine and Sakura City Hospital,
İstanbul, Turkey,2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Bak ırköy Dr.
Sadi Konuk Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: Joubert syndrome is a genetically heterogenous
disorder characterized by hypoplasia of cerebellar vermis with
distinctive ‘molar tooth sign ’, hypotonia, developmental delay and
neonatal breathing abnormalities.Clinical Report: Two-year-oldmale was referred to our clinic for global developmental delay.
After vaginal delivery at 37thgestational week, he was transferred
to newborn intensive care unit for respiratory distress. Heobtained head control at 7 months. At two years of age, he wasunable to walk, just started to sit without support for small periods
and couldn ’t speak. His parents were consanguineous. Brain MRI
revealed “molar tooth sign ”of the midbrain in the axial section.
Methods: After written informed consent from the parents,
whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed using peripheral
blood DNA from the proband.
Results: Because of parental consanguinity, we focused on rare
homozygous variants in known Joubert syndrome genes. Homo-
zygous c.911dupC (Glu305ArgfsTer21) mutation in the CEP41 gene
was found. The variant was not found in gnomAD. Since digenicinheritance was suggested for heterozygous mutations in CEP41
and other ciliopathy-related genes such as KIF7 and CC2D2A ,a
secondary analysis was performed. An additional heterozygous
c.74delA mutation was detected in KIAA0586 gene which is
required for ciliogenesis. Segregation analysis is ongoing.
Conclusions: We report a novel homozygous mutation in CEP41
and a heterozygous mutation in KIAA0586 in a patient with
Joubert syndrome. It may be bene ﬁcial to look for additional
mutations for recurrence risk assessment and family planning
especially when digenic inheritance is suggested.
E. Gökp ınar İli:None. G. Bekta ş:None.
P09.035.D Modelling SCA11 in cells using CRISPR/Cas9:
functional validation of a new TTBK2 missense variant
Daniela Felício
1, Jorge Sequeiros1,2, Mariana Santos1
1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S -
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade doPorto, Porto, Portugal,2CGPP, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell
Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is a rare autosomal
dominant form of cerebellar ataxia, characterized by an almost
pure, progressive cerebellar ataxia, abnormal eye movements andimpairment of speech. It has been linked to variants in the TTBK2
gene; all reported cases bear heterozygous truncating variants.
TTBK2 encodes the tau tubulin kinase 2 protein, a protein kinase
involved in different cellular processes, e.g., ciliogenesis, micro-tubule dynamics, and tau and TDP-43 phosphorylation. Currently,
the disease mechanism behind SCA11 and TTBK2 remains unclear.
Our group has previously identi ﬁed a novel missense variant in
TTBK2 (c.625C>T; p.L209F) in two Portuguese siblings with a
diagnosis of cerebellar ataxia. Therefore, we aim to characterize
the potential pathogenic effect of this variant in SCA11. For that,
we created cellular models expressing the endogenous TTBK2
missense variant, using CRISPR/Cas9. We also inserted a 3xFLAGtag at the N-terminus of TTBK2. Our preliminary results showedthat the new variant does not affect the mRNA expression, but
causes instead a decrease in TTBK2 protein levels, denoting
impairment of protein stability. Thereby, our cellular models may
present reduced TTBK2 kinase activity. Indeed, our previousoverexpression studies showed that this variant has reducedkinase activity against TDP-43. In conclusion, we created relevant
cellular models for study of the molecular and cellular mechan-
isms underlying SCA11 and, for the ﬁrst time, linked a missense
variant to SCA11. We also believe that abnormal proteinphosphorylation may play a key role in SCA11 pathogenesis.
This work was supported by Ataxia UK (small research grant
ZGRACA ).
D. Felício: None. J. Sequeiros: None. M. Santos: None.
P09.036.A A systematic review of cerebral phenotypes
associated with monogenic cerebral small vessel disease
Ed Whittaker , Sophie Thrippleton, Liza Y. W. Chong, Victoria Collins,
Emily Lancastle, David Henshall, Blair Wilson, Tim Wilkinson, KirstyWilson, Cathie Sudlow, Joanna Wardlaw, Kristiina Rannikmäe
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Cerebral small vessel disease, an important
contributor to stroke and dementia, results from environmental
and genetic factors. An emerging minority of cases have amonogenic cause. While NOTCH3 is the best-known gene, several
others have been reported, with less data about their associated
phenotypes.
Methods: We performed a systematic review, searching Medline/
Embase for any language publications describing HTRA1 ,TREX1 ,
ADA2 ,CTSA orCOL4A1/2 pathogenic variant carriers. We extracted
data about individuals ’characteristics, clin ical and radiological
vascular cerebral phenotypes. We summarised phenotype frequen-cies per gene, comparing patterns across genes.
Results: We screened 6485 publications and included: 61 HTRA1
(126 individuals), 35 TREX1 (123 individuals), 100 ADA2 (346
individuals), and 5 CTSA (14 individuals). Mean ages ranged from
15 (ADA2 ) to 59 years ( HTRA1 heterozygotes). Clinical phenotype
frequencies varied widely: stroke 9% ( TREX1 ) to 60% ( HTRA1
heterozygotes), cognitive decline 0% ( ADA2 :0/83 adults) to 64%
(CTSA :9/14 adults), psychiatric features 0% ( ADA2
:0/83 adults) to
100% ( HTRA1 homozygotes/compound heterozygotes:44/44
adults; CTSA :14/14 adults). Among individuals with neuroimaging,
vascular radiological phenotypes appeared common, rangingfrom 65% ( ADA2 ) to 100% ( HTRA1 homozygotes/compound
heterozygotes; CTSA ) (Table). White matter lesions were the most
common pathology. COL4A1/2 work is ongoing.
Conclusions: There appear to be differences in cerebral
manifestations across genes, but this may be due to age and other
biases inherent to case reports. The majority of individuals have
vascular changes on neuroimaging. Grants: KR:MR/S004130/1
HomZ=homozygous/compound heterozygous; HetZ =heterozy-
gous; N =number; WML =white matter lesions; ICH =intracerebral
haemorrhage; PVS =perivascular spaces. *Only those with
neuroimaging
E. Whittaker: None. S. Thrippleton: None. L.Y.W. Chong:
None. V. Collins: None. E. Lancastle: None. D. Henshall: None. B.
Wilson: None. T. Wilkinson: None. K. Wilson: None. C. Sudlow:
None. J. Wardlaw: None. K. Rannikmäe: None.
P09.037.B Deleterious variants in the autophagy regulator
CLEC16A are associated with microcephaly, brain atrophy,
growth retardation and a severe neurodevelopmental
disorderAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
270
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Daphne J. Smits1, Rachel Schot1, Martina Wilke1, Marjon van
Slegtenhorst1, Brahim Tabarki2, Amal Alhashem2, Antonio Romito3,
Aida M. Bertoli-Avella3, Grazia M. S. Mancini1
1Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Prince
Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3CENTOGENE
GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
Introduction: The CLEC16A (c-type lectin protein 16A) gene locus
has frequently been associated with susceptibility to various
autoimmune disorders including multiple sclerosis, type - 1
diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and primary biliary sclerosis.C-type lectin (CLEC) proteins are transmembrane proteins thatrecognize antigens via their carbohydrate recognition domain and
guide them to antigen presenting cells. Unlike other CLEC
proteins, CLEC16A lacks an active/full length carbohydraterecognition domain and is instead involved in autophagy andmitophagy. Even though the general link between autophagy and
autoimmune diseases is well studied, CLEC16A ’s physiological
function and its role in human disease is still poorly understood.
Methods: With the use of trio whole exome sequencing we
identi ﬁed the ﬁrst individuals from two unrelated families with bi-
allelic loss of function variants in CLEC16A .
Results: The affected individuals present with a severe
neurodevelopmental disorder including congenital microcephaly,
brain atrophy, corpus callosum hypoplasia, growth retardation,
hypotonia and a severe developmental delay. In addition, oneinfant showed severe respiratory infections and died afterrecurrent and unexplained sepsis.
Conclusion: Our observations suggest a causal implication for
the CLEC16A variants in these children and con ﬁrm the
importance of autophagy regulation during human brain devel-opment. Descriptions of additional patients with bi-allelic CLEC16A
variants will de ﬁnitively associate the gene to this novel
neurodevelopmental disorder. We therefore propose to add thisgene to exome/genome sequencing panels for microcephaly and
severe neurodevelopmental disorders.
D.J. Smits: None. R. Schot: None. M. Wilke: None. M. van
Slegtenhorst: None. B. Tabarki: None. A. Alhashem: None. A.
Romito: None. A.M. Bertoli-Avella: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None.
P09.039.D Functional analysis of mutations in a glycosylation
enzyme gene, GFPT1 , underlying limb-girdle congenital
myasthenic syndromes (CMS)
Paniz Farshadyeganeh
1, Bisei Ohkawara1, Masayoshi Kamon2,
Toshiyuki Araki2, Hirofumi Komaki2, Kinji Ohno1
1Department of Neurogenetics, School of Medicine, Nagoya Uni-
versity, Nagoya, Japan,2National Institute of Neuroscience (NCNP),
Tokyo, Japan.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are heterogeneous
inherited disorders caused by defective signal transduction at
the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Mutations in more than 30
genes expressed at NMJ have been identi ﬁed to be involved in
CMS. One of CMS, limb-girdle CMS, is caused by mutations inGFPT1 , a gene encoding glutamine fructose-6-phosphate transfer-
ase 1. GFPT1 is a rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine
biosynthesis pathway to synthesize UDP-N-acetylglucosamine,which is a crucial substrate for glycosylation of proteins andlipids. Post-translational modi ﬁcations are predicted to be critical
for several main components at the NMJ. However, the underlying
mechanisms leading to limb-girdle CMS due to GFPT1 de ﬁciency
remain elusive. Here, we are dissecting molecular mechanism of 6missense GFPT1 mutations identi ﬁed in CMS patients and furtherinvestigating one of the missense mutations using patient-derived
iPS cells and a knock-in mouse model.
P. Farshadyeganeh: None. B. Ohkawara: None. M. Kamon:
None. T. Araki: None. H. Komaki: None. K. Ohno: None.
P09.040.A Chromosomal aberrations in paediatric patients
with epilepsy, with or without additional neurodevelopmentaldisorders: a single-centre clinical investigation
Marlena M łynek
1, Katarzyna Urba ńska1, Katarzyna Pachota1,P e t r
Berko1, Danuta Sielska-Rotblum1, Dorota Wicher1, Agata Cie ślikowska1,
Agnieszka Madej-Pilarczyk1, Piotr Iwanowski1,M a r i aJ ędrzejowska1,2,
Justyna Pietrasik1, Katarzyna Iwanicka-Pronicka1,3, Anna Gutkowska1,
Małgorzata Krajewska-Walasek1,K r y s t y n aC h r z a n o w s k a1
1Children ’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Medical
Genetics, Warsaw, Poland,2Polish Academy of Sciences, Mossakowski
Medical Research Centre, Rare Diseases Research Platform, Warsaw,
Poland,3Children ’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of
Audiology and Phoniatrics, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction: Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological
disorders affecting up to 1% of the population. A number of geneshave been associated with rare autosomal dominant and severe
sporadic forms of epilepsy; however, the underlying cause of
epilepsy remains unknown in the majority of cases. Copy numbervariants (CNV) are increasingly recognised as an importantaetiology of many human neurodevelopmental disorders, includ-
ing epilepsy.
Materials and Methods: A whole-genome oligonucleotide
microarray (Agilent Technologies 60K and 180K) was applied to acohort of 239 unrelated patients phenotypically characterised with
various type of epilepsy with or without other neurodevelop-
mental disorders such as developmental delay, intellectualdisability, autism, or others.
Results: The chromosomal microarray analysis revealed CNVs
considered pathogenic in 43 (18.0%) of affected individuals,ranging from 3.7 kb to 16.9 Mb in size. Of these, 7/43 (16.3%)patients had CNVs in the epilepsy/neurodevelopmental disorder
“hotspots ”(15q13.3, 15q11 –q13, 16p11.2, and 16p13.11), and 4/43
(9.3%) patients have at least two potentially causative CNVs. Weidenti ﬁed novel CNVs in genes previously implicated in other
neurodevelopmental disorders ( L1CAM ) as well as epileptic
encephalopathy ( DENND5A ). In addition, we identi ﬁed CNVs of
uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance in 18/239 (7.5%) of cases.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings correspond with the data reported
worldwide and highlight the importance of the whole-genome
microarray testing in paediatric population with epilepsy with orwithout other neurodevelopmental features. Our study con ﬁrmed
the importance of CNV analysis for the detection of new candidate
disease-related genetic regions.
This study was partially supported by the CMHI project S151/17.M. M łynek: None. K. Urba ńska: None. K. Pachota: None. P.
Berko: None. D. Sielska-Rotblum: None. D. Wicher: None. A.
Cieślikowska: None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None. P. Iwanowski:
None. M. J ędrzejowska: None. J. Pietrasik: None. K. Iwanicka-
Pronicka: None. A. Gutkowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek:
None. K. Chrzanowska: None.
P09.041.B CSF1R-related adult-onset leukoencephalopathy as
an important differential diagnostic factor to consider in
early-onset dementias
Dóra Csabán
1, Péter Balicza1, Anett Illés2, Barbara Trombitás1,
Fruzsina Szabó1, Zoltán Grosz1, Mária Judit Molnár1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
271
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,2PentaCore Laboratory,
Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: The role of colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor
(CSF1R ) gene is well-known in the background of adult-onset
leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia(ALSP). ALSP is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder
characterized by dementia, psychi atric symptoms, parkinsonism and
behavioral changes. The pathology and symptoms of ALSP overlapwith other dementias e.g. frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Alzhei-mer’s disease which may lead to misdiagnosis.
Materials and Methods: 60 patients diagnosed with early-
onset dementia (EOD) were tested by next generation sequencingtargeted panel, which contained 127 genes associated toneurodegenerative disorders. All patients were examined by
experienced board certi ﬁed neurologists and had brain MRI
performed. Patients were clinically diagnosed with AD and FTD.
Results: We detected two rare, potentially pathogenic variants
in the CSF1R gene. In a male patient, we identi ﬁed a rare
damaging variant [(NM_005211.3):c.2646_2654 +6del]. The pro-
band ’s symptoms were progressive dysphagia, memory impair-
ment, apraxia and spasticity. The other rare variant
[(NM_005211.3):c.1771G>A (p.Gly591Arg)] was detected in a
female patient. She featured dif ﬁculty ﬁnding words, cognitive
decline and depression. Both detected variants were classi ﬁed as
pathogenic or likely pathogenic according to ACMG.
Conclusion: In our Hungarian EOD cohort two rare damaging
variants were identi ﬁed in the CSF1R gene. Our ﬁndings highlight
that CSF1R-related ALSP should be included in the differential
diagnosis of early-onset dementias. Using comprehensive genetic
testing, which simultaneously examine genes associated withdifferent types of dementia could be a feasible and cost effectiveway to include in the diagnostic workup. This study was supported
by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP and with the FIKP program.
D. Csabán: None. P. Balicza: None. A. Illés: None. B. Trombitás:
None. F. Szabó: None. Z. Grosz: None. M.J. Molnár: None.
P09.043.D Whole-exome sequencing indicates enrichment in
MAP kinase activation pathway genes in Bulgarian dementiapatients
Marta Mihaylova
1, Dimitar Serbezov1, Lubomir Balabanski2, Sena
Karachanak-Yankova3, Dragomira Nikolova1, Mihail Ganev1, Vera
Damyanova1, Desislava Nesheva1, Zora Hammoudeh1, Blaga
Rukova1, Diyana Belezhanska4, Shima Mehrabian4, Maria Petrova4,
Latchezar Traykov4, Savina Hadjidekova1, Draga Toncheva11Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University
of So ﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave ”s, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of
Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University of So ﬁa,
Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave ”s, Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital
“Malinov ”,S oﬁa, Bulgaria, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Department of Medical
Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University of So ﬁa, Bulgaria, 2
“Zdrave ”s, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, So ﬁa
University "St. Kliment Ohridski", So ﬁa, Bulgar-ia, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
4Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska ”, Medical University-
Soﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria., So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction : The aim of this study was to evaluate new genetic
and immunological biomarkers for unspeci ﬁed dementia, as well
as to identify over-represented molecular pathways related to
their pathogenesis.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed on two DNA pools, one composed with DNA from 90unspeci ﬁed dementia patients and the other - a control pool with
DNA from 100 age-synchronized healthy individuals. In total,
453748 variants were detected in the dementia patients ’pool and
442765 in the control pool.
Results: Variants were selected so that that their population
frequency is low, i.e. < 0.0025 in non-Finnish Europeans (gnomAD
database) and correspondingly enriched in our dementia patientspool and control pools (frequency > 0.01). The gene list enrich-
ment analysis platform ToppGene identi ﬁed 37 prioritized
molecular functions on our selected data, and the one involvingthe largest number of genes was ribonucleotide binding . Analysis
by the Reactome platform on the genes involved in this molecular
function showed that the immune system associated MAP kinase
(MAPKs) activation pathway to be signi ﬁcantly enriched in
dementia patients, but not in the control group.
Discussion : MAPKs are responsible for many cellular responses
to cytokines and to external stress signals, and play an important
role in regulating the production of in ﬂammation mediators.
Acknowledgment: KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 - National Science
Fund of Bulgaria
M. Mihaylova: None. D. Serbezov: None. L. Balabanski: None.
S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Ganev:
None. V. Damyanova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh:
None. B. Rukova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. S. Mehrabian:
None. M. Petrova: None. L. Traykov: None. S. Hadjidekova:
None. D. Toncheva: None.
P09.044.A When two is one -a case of homozygous mutation
inSTXBP1 gene as a result of single-parent disomyFrequency of clinical and vascular radiological cerebral phenotypes
Any clinical
cerebral features
(%)Any vascular
changes* (%)WML* (%) Ischaemia*
(%)ICH* (%) Enlarged
PVS* (%)Microbleeds*
(%)Atrophy*
(%)Calciﬁcation*
(%)
HTRA1
HomZ N =
4480 (35/44) 100 (44/44) 98 (43/44) 34 (15/44) 2 (1/44) 0 (0/44) 41 (18/44) 20 (9/44) 0 (0/44)
HTRA1 HetZ
N=8276 (62/82) 99 (69/70) 96 (67/70) 66 (46/70) 9 (6/70) 16 (11/70) 27 (19/70) 11 (8/70) 0 (0/70)
TREX1 N=
123≥54 (≥66/123) 78 (57/73) 89 (65/73) 8 (6/73) 0 (0/73) 0 (0/73) 1 (1/73) 1 (1/73) 32 (23/73)
ADA2 N=
34642 (144/346) 66 (78/119) 3 (3/119) 44 (52/119) 12 (14/119) 0 (0/119) 0 (0/119) 6 (7/119) 0 (0/119)
CTSA N=
14100 (14/14) 100 (14/14) 100 (14/14) 57 (8/14) 7 (1/14) 64 (9/14) 21 (3/14) 71 (10/14) 0 (0/14)Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
272
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska1, Anna Winczewska-Wiktor2, Marta
Smyk1, Paulina Gorka-Skoczylas1, Karolina Kanabus1, Barbara
Steinborn3
1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child,
Warsaw, Poland,2Department of Developmental Neurology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland,3Department of
Developmental Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-4
(DEE4) is a condition starting in infancy and characterized byabnormal brain function (encephalopathy), intellectual disabilityaccompanied often by recurrent seizures. This condition is caused
by mutations in the STXBP1 gene coding syntaxin-binding protein
1. The phenotypic spectrum of STXBP1 -related disorders is broad,
but the most cases result from heterozygous dominant, loss-of-function mutation of de novo character.
Materials and Methods: The family in which at the proband
homozygous missense mutation in STXBP1 gene was identi ﬁed.
Proband, 7 years old boy, was diagnosed with unclassi ﬁed
epileptic encephalopathy but with features of Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome. Mutation was identi ﬁed with the targeted NGS method
- 49 EIEEs related genes panel. Sanger sequencing performed forproband and his parent con ﬁrmed de novo character of mutation.
MLPA analysis showed no STXBP1 gene deletions in patient nor in
his parents. SNP microarray revealed in proband loss ofheterozygosity along the entire chromosome 9, further analysisconﬁrmed paternal origin of this chromosome.
Results: In this study, we identi ﬁed STXBP1 mutation p.
Arg192Trp that have not been reported previously and washomozygous, what is rather unusual in the case of this gene.Detailed analysis revealed that mutation arose de novo on paternal
chromosome, and its homozygosity is due to paternal uniparental
disomy of the chromosome 9.
Conclusions: So far only one case of homozygous missense
mutation has been described causing the Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome. Here we report the new one, which may follow thissame, unusual for STXBP1 , gain-of-function effect on synaptic
transmission.
D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. A. Winczewska-Wiktor: None.
M. Smyk: None. P. Gorka-Skoczylas: None. K. Kanabus: None. B.
Steinborn: None.
P09.045.B An attempt to identify gene variants responsible
for neurological symptoms in children with adverse effects
following immunization (AEFI)
Agnieszka Charzewska
1, Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska1, Iwona
Terczy ńska2, Tomasz Mazurczak2,E lżbieta Szczepanik2, Alicja Kar-
ney3, Tomasz Gambin1, Karolina Kanabus1, Renata Tataj1, Jerzy Bal1
1Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical Genetics,
Warsaw, Poland,2Institute of Mother and Child, Clinic of Neurology
of Child and Adolescents, Warsaw, Poland,3Institute of Mother and
Child, One Day Cllinic, Warsaw, Poland.
Introduction : Vaccinations are one of the most signi ﬁcant
achievements of medicine in modern times. Many catastrophic
diseases, such as black pox or polio, have been eliminated due tovaccination. These diseases are completely unknown to modernparents, and therefore they question the validity of preventive
vaccination, especially since none of the vaccines is completely
free of side effects. Studies conducted on large populations showa lack of connection between vaccination and serious neurologicalsymptoms, although there are isolated cases that indicate such arelationship. These reports on adverse effects following immuni-
zation (AEFI) reduce social con ﬁdence in vaccination, however
their background may be rare genetic defects.
Materials and Methods : The aim of the presented study was
veriﬁcation the following research hypothesis: Neurological
symptoms in children quali ﬁed as AEFI are related to the
occurrence of pathogenic mutations in genes related to the
development of the nervous system. To verify this hypothesis weperformed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 22 patients withneurological AEFI.
Results : Our preliminary results suggest signi ﬁcant relationship
between AEFI and the occurrence of mutations in genesassociated with neurodevelopmental diseases. We identi ﬁed
pathogenic/VUS variants in 18/22 patients, 9 of them were
acknowledged as de ﬁnitely pathogenic due to parent examina-
tion. The mutated genes belonged to the group of genesassociated with epilepsy syndromes/epileptic encephalopathy.
Conclusions : Preliminary results indicate that in many AEFI
patients the vaccine can only trigger neurological symptoms thatwould have manifested anyway as a result of a pathogenicmutation in a gene engaged in neurodevelopment.
A. Charzewska: None. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. I.
Terczy ńska: None. T. Mazurczak: None. E. Szczepanik: None.
A. Karney: None. T. Gambin: None. K. Kanabus: None. R. Tataj:
None. J. Bal: None.
P09.046.C Whole exome sequencing as instrument of mole-
cular diagnosis in children with developmental and epileptic
encephalopathies
Tatyana Kozhanova
1,2, Svetlana Zhilina1,2, Tatyana Mescherya-
kova1, Karina Osipova1, Sergey Ayvazyan1, Nikolay Zavadenko2,
Andrey Prityko1,3
1Scienti ﬁc and Practical Center of children medical care, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University, Moscow, Russian Federation,3Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, Moscow,Russian Federation.
Epilepsy is a complex disorder characterized by a predisposition to
recurrent seizures that are caused by abnormal neuronal ﬁring in
the brain. Around 70 —80% of all epileptic cases are caused by
genetic mutations.
Materials and Methods: We examined 128 patients with
developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. The clinical
phenotyping, video-electroencephalography, computed and mag-
netic resonance imaging of the brain were carried out. All patientsreceived informed consent for whole exome sequencing.
Results: The variants in genes were detected in 94/128 (73,4%)
patients. No mutations have been identi ﬁed in 34/128 (26,6%)
patients. The variants in genes associated with early infantileepileptic encephalopathy were identi ﬁed in 38/94 (40,4%) and
variants in genes associated with mental retardation - in 16/94
(17%). The remaining patients had variants in genes associated
with different types of epilepsy and neurodevelopmental dis-orders (25/94; 26,6%), tuberous sclerosis-2 (3/94; 3,2%), spasticparaplegia (3/94; 3,2%) and rare syndromes (3/94; 9,6%). The most
commonly identi ﬁed genes were SCN1A - 5, CACNA1A - 3, GABBR2 -
2, GRIN1 - 2, GRIN2B - 2, TSC2 - 3, SYNGAP1 - 2, SPTAN1 - 2, PCDH19 -2,TRIO - 2, CHD2 -2, FGF12 - 2, KCNQ2 - 2, MECP2 - 2 .
Conclusion: Genetic testing has become a ﬁrst line test in
epilepsy. Our study suggests that WES is an effective diagnostictool and encourage the interaction between an epileptologist andgeneticist. Genetic diagnosis can help to consolidate the clinical
diagnosis, to facilitate phenotypic expansion, and to in ﬂuenceAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
273
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608treatment and management options for seizure control in our
patients.
T. Kozhanova: None. S. Zhilina: None. T. Mescheryakova:
None. K. Osipova: None. S. Ayvazyan: None. N. Zavadenko:
None. A. Prityko: None.
P09.047.D PIGG variant pathogenicity assessment reveals
novel features within nineteen families
Camille Tremblay-Laganiere1, Reza Maroo ﬁan2, Thi T. M. Nguyen1,
Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani3, Salman Kirmani4, Fizza Akbar4, Shahnaz
Ibrahim4, Bushra Afroze4, Mohammad Doosti3, Farah Ashrafzadeh5,
Meisam Babaei6, Stephanie Efthymiou2, Tipu Sultan7, Roger L.
Ladda8, Heather M. McLaughlin9, Rebecca Truty9, Sonal Mahida10,
Julie S. Cohen10, Kristin Baranano10, Fatima Y. Ismail11, Millan S.
Patel12, Anna Lehman12, Andrew C. Edmondson13, Amanda Nagy14,
Melissa A. Walker14, Saadet Mercimek-Andrews15, Yuta Maki16, Rani
Sachdev17, Rebecca Macintosh17, Elizabeth E. Palmer17, Grazia M.S.
Mancini18, Tahsin S. Barakat18, Robert Steinfeld19, Christina T.
Rüsch19, Georg M. Stettner19, Matias Wagner20, Saskia B. Wort-
mann21, Usha Kini22, Angela F. Brady23, Karen L. Stals24, Naila
Ismayilova25, Sian Ellard24, Danilo Bernardo26, Kimberly Nugent27,
Scott D. McLean27, Stylianos E. Antonarakis28, Henry Houlden2, Taroh
Kinoshita16, Philippe M. Campeau1, Yoshiko Murakami16
1University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada,2UCL Queen Square
Institute of Neurology and The National Hospital for Neurology andNeurosurgery, London, United Kingdom,3Next Generation Genetic
Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of,4Aga Khan University,
Karachi, Pakistan,5Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mash-
had, Iran, Islamic Republic of,6North Khorasan University of Medical
Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran, Islamic Republic of,7The Children ’s Hospital
Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan,8Milton S Hershey Medical Centre, Hershey,
PA, USA,9Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA,10Kennedy Krieger Institute,
Baltimore, MD, USA,11Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA,12University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada,13Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
14Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,15University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,16Osaka University, Osaka, Japan,
17Sydney Children ’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia,18Erasmus MC
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,19University
Children ’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,20Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany,21Paracelsus Medical School, Salzburg,
Austria,22Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,23Northwick
Park Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom,24Royal Devon and Exeter
NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom,25Chelsea and
Westminster Hospital, London, United Kingdom,26University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,27The Children ’s
Hospital of San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA,28University of
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
Purpose : Phosphatidylinositol Glycan Anchor Biosynthesis, class G
(PIGG) is an ethanolamine phosphate transferase catalyzing themodi ﬁcation of the second mannose of glycosylphosphatidylino-
sitol (GPI). GPIs serve as anchors on the cell membrane by linking
over 150 surface proteins called GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs)on their third mannose. Pathogenic variants in genes involved inthe biosynthesis of GPI cause inherited GPI de ﬁciency (IGD) which
still needs to be further characterized.
Methods: We describe twenty-two individuals from nineteen new
unrelated families with bi-allelic variants in PIGG .W ea n a l y z e dG P I - A P
surface levels on granulocytes and ﬁbroblasts for three and two
individuals, respectively. We demonstrated enzymatic activity defectsforPIGG variants in vitro in a PIGG /PIGO double knockout system.
Results: Phenotypic analysis of reported individuals reveals
novel PIGG de ﬁciency associated features. All tested GPI-APs wereunchanged on granulocytes whereas FLAER and CD73 levels in
ﬁbroblasts were decreased. In addition to common symptoms
such as hypotonia, intellectual disability/developmental delay, and
seizures, individuals with PIGG variants of null or severelydecreased activity showed cerebellar abnormalities, neurologicalmanifestations, and mitochondrial dysfunction, a feature increas-
ingly recognized in IGDs. Individuals with mildly decreased activity
variants showed autism spectrum disorder.
Conclusion: This in vitro system is a useful method to validate
the pathogenicity of new variants in PIGG and to study PIGG
physiological functions. Recent work using this system has
identi ﬁed a new subset of PIGG-dependent GPI-APs with an
alternative bridging on the second mannose. Reduced levels ofspeci ﬁc PIGG-dependent GPI-APs might explain the phenotype
observed in individuals with PIGG-de ﬁciency.
C. Tremblay-Laganiere: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:None. T. T. M.
Nguyen: None. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. S. Kirmani: None. F.
Akbar: None. S. Ibrahim: None. B. Afroze: None. M. Doosti:
None. F. Ashrafzadeh: None. M. Babaei: None. S. Efthymiou:
None. T. Sultan: None. R. L. Ladda: None. H. M. McLaughlin:
None. R. Truty: None. S. Mahida: None. J. S. Cohen: None. K.
Baranano: None. F. Y. Ismail: None. M. S. Patel: None. A.
Lehman:
None. A. C. Edmondson: None. A. Nagy: None. M. A.
Walker: None. S. Mercimek-Andrews: None. Y. Maki: None. R.
Sachdev: None. R. Macintosh: None. E. E. Palmer: None. G. M.S.
Mancini: None. T. S. Barakat: None. R. Steinfeld: None. C. T.
Rüsch: None. G. M. Stettner: None. M. Wagner: None. S. B.
Wortmann: None. U. Kini: None. A. F. Brady: None. K. L. Stals:
None. N. Ismayilova: None. S. Ellard: None. D. Bernardo: None.
K. Nugent: None. S. D. McLean: None. S. E. Antonarakis: None.
H. Houlden: None. T. Kinoshita: None. P. M. Campeau: None. Y.
Murakami: None.
P09.048.A SCN9A gene variants do not cause monogenic
epilepsy in humans
James D. R. Fasham1, Joseph S. Leslie1, Jamie W. Harrison1, James
Deline2, Katie B. Williams3, Ashley Kuhl3, Jessica Scott Schwoerer3,
Harold E. Cross4, Andrew H. Crosby1, Emma L. Baple1
1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,2Center for Special
Children, La Farge Medical Clinic-VMH, La Farge, WI, USA,
3Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI,
USA,4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Arizona College
of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, USA.
Many studies demonstrate the clinical utility and importance of
epilepsy gene panel testing to con ﬁrm the speci ﬁc aetiology of
disease, enable appropriate therapeutic interventions, and informaccurate family counselling. Previously, SCN9A gene variants, in
particular the c.1921A>T p.(Asn641Tyr) substitution, have been
deﬁned as likely autosomal dominant causes of febrile seizures
plus and other monogenic seizure phenotypes indistinguishablefrom those associated with SCN1A . This led to the inclusion of
SCN9A on epilepsy gene panels globally.
In the Amish and other community settings both pathogenic and
benign gene variants may become enriched, enabling their clinicalinterpretation. Here we present serendipitous genetic ﬁndings that
identify SCN9A c.1921A>T p.(Asn641Tyr) at high frequency among
the Amish, in the absence of seizure phenotypes. This, alongsidereview of published cases and UK Biobank ﬁndings, clearly refutes an
association of SCN9A with epilepsy.
Given this, the presence of SCN9A on gene testing panels and
its currently widely accepted status as an epilepsy disease gene,clearly present a substantial misdiagnosis risk to patients. This is of
particular concern where a precise epilepsy molecular diagnosisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
274
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608informs drug choice and misdiagnosis may have devastating and
lethal consequences. Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of
ClinGen and other expert groups, and urge reappraisal of the
evidence regarding SCN9A in monogenic seizure phenotypes, to
mitigate potential harms. Further, our studies demonstrate theimportance of genomic community studies worldwide, where due
to ancestral genetic bottleneck events enrichment of otherwise
rare variants allows improved interpretation of pathogenicity.
Grants: Wellcome 220600/Z/20/Z (JF); MRC G1001931 (ELB),
G1002279 (AHC)
J.D.R. Fasham: None. J.S. Leslie: None. J.W. Harrison: None. J.
Deline: None. K.B. Williams: None. A. Kuhl: None. J. Scott
Schwoerer: None. H.E. Cross: None. A.H. Crosby: None. E.L.
Baple: None.
P09.049.B In silico association of the seizures phenotype to
iron-induced non-apoptotic cell death
Alejandro Cisterna García1, Irene Díez García-Prieto2, Paolo
Maietta2, Sara Álvarez de Andrés2, Álvaro Sánchez-Ferrer1, Juan A.
Botía1
1Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,2NIMGenetics, Madrid,
Spain.
Epileptic seizures represent a central phenotype within epilepsy.
We wanted to expand our knowledge about the phenotypesassociated with genes linked to seizures. We obtained the genes
associated with Seizure (Human Phenotype Ontology HP:0001250)
and performed a phenotype enrichment analysis with PhenoEx-amWeb. We observe that the genes associated with seizures arealso linked to Labile Iron (CRB:0000004 ; P =3.15x10-12) and
Peroxidized Lipids (CRB:0000007; P =2.15x10-19) using CRISPR-
Brain database within PhenoExamWeb. Terms that are not onlyrelevant in epilepsy and glutamatergic neurons, but are also
associated with ferroptosis, which is a novel form of non-apoptotic
regulated cell death attributed to severe lipid peroxidation causedby ROS production and iron overload. Although ferroptosis hasrecently been studied in epilepsy, the genetics underlying this
process remain unclear. The 49 genes shared by the three
annotation terms suggest a possible interesting novel ferroptosis-seizure relationship (Fisher´s Exact for the overlap P =5.95x10-12).
Those genes are linked to Epilepsy (C0014544; P =0.012), Leigh
Disease and Mitochondrial Complex I De ﬁciency (C1838979; P =
1.9x10-12). They are highly expressed in brain tissues according toGTExV8, preferentially expressed in Pyramidal neurons (P =
0.0104) among other mice brain cells according to EWCE. We
also observe that some of our genes and GPX4 are in the same co-expression network module within cortex and hippocampus tissuenetworks according to CoExp Web. These evidences may suggest
a role for ferroptosis in epilepsy and also point out this process to
certain genes.Fundación Séneca and NIMGenetics.
A. Cisterna García: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; NIMGenetics. I. Díez García-Prieto: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIMGenetics. P.
Maietta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIMGe-
netics. S. Álvarez de Andrés: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; NIMGenetics. Á. Sánchez-Ferrer: None. J.A. Botía:
None.
P09.050.C Genetic studies in epilepsy. Experience of a third
level pediatric hospital
Nelmar Valentina Ortiz Cabrera , Bárbara Fernández Garoz, Elena
González Alguacil, María Jiménez Legido, Ruth Camila Púa Torrejón,Víctor Soto Insuga, Teresa Moreno Cantero, Beatriz Bernardino
Cuesta, Anna Duat Rodriguez, Verónica Cantarín Extrémera, María
Luz Ruiz-Falcó Rojas, Juan José García Peñas
Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.
Epileptic encephalopathy (EE) causes severe cognitive and
behavioural issues, shows variable expressivity and could be
progressive. EE may present alone, accompanied by a corticalmalformation disorder or taking part of a syndromic entity.
Aim: We collected data from a third level children´s hospital
specialized in treating EE to evaluate the diagnostic yield ofgenetic studies based on next generation sequencing.
Patients: We collected data of patients whose primary
diagnosis was epilepsy or EE, referred to the Clinical Genetic
clinic by the Neurology department for study between June 2018and December 2020. We separated patients in different pheno-typic clusters. Cluster 1: syndromic epileptic encephalopathy
(HP:0200134), ASD (HP:0000729, HP:0000717), Rett-like phenotype,
spastic paraplegia (HP:0100021) or suspected mitochondrialdisease (HP:0003287). Cluster 2: cortical developmental disorderand/or focal epilepsy. Cluster 3: epilepsy without intellectual
disability including febrile seizures. Genes analysed were selected
depending on the phenotypic cluster.
Results: 137 patients were studied. Total diagnostic yield was
25% with 17% of non-conclusive results due to variants of
unknown signi ﬁcance. Analysing the data using clusters we found
that Cluster 1 and 2 had the maximum yield of 32 and 23%,respectively. Pathogenic variants in CDKL5 were present in 3 non-
related individuals of cluster 1, pathogenic variants in DEPDC5
were present in 3 non-related individuals of cluster 2.
Discussion and conclusion: The study of Epileptic encephalo-
pathy using next generation sequencing approach has a good
diagnostic yield. Whereas the study of epilepsy without intellec-
tual disability has a low diagnostic yield, except if there is a clearinheritance pattern.
N. Ortiz Cabrera: None. B. Fernández Garoz: None. E.
González Alguacil:
None. M. Jiménez Legido: None. R. Púa
Torrejón: None. V. Soto Insuga: None. T. Moreno Cantero:
None. B. Bernardino Cuesta: None. A. Duat Rodriguez: None. V.
Cantarín Extrémera: None. M. Ruiz-Falcó Rojas: None. J. García
Peñas: None.
P09.051.D A novel disorder causing fetal cerebral hemor-
rhages associated to a homozygous mutation of the ESAM
gene
Jessica Hernandez Rodriguez1,AR u i z2, Elena Miravet2, Victor Asensio
Landa3, Rosa Martorell-Riera2, Maria Carmen Vidal Lampurdanes2, Laura
Torres-Juan3, Iciar Martinez-Lopez3, Emilia Amengual-Cladera3, Cristofol
Vives Bauza3,DAMIAN HEINE SUÑER3
1Institut d ’Investigació Sanitaria de Palma (IDISBA), Palma, Spain,
2Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain,3Hospital Uni-
versitari Son Espases/Institut d ’Investigació Sanitaria de Palma
(IDISBA), Palma, Spain.
The stability and permeability of the blood vessel wall relies on
endothelial junctions, which are formed and regulated by cell
adhesion molecules. One of them is ESAM (endothelial adhesion
molecule), structurally related to JAM proteins, and all form part ofthe blood-brain barrier. Furthermore, a homozygous mutation inJAM3 has been reported to cause hemorrhagic destruction of the
brain. However, up to now ESAM has not been associated to any
disease. In our study, a brother and sister from non-consanguineous parents suffered severe prenatal cerebralAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
275
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608hemorrhages. As a result both siblings, now 2 and 4 years old,
show spastic tetraparesis, seizures, hydrocephalus, dysphagia,
respiratory problems and cortical blindness. Whole exome
sequencing (WES) analysis was oriented towards known genesassociated to hereditary bleeding or brain disorders but nosigni ﬁcant variant could be found. After this, we performed
analysis for runs of homozygosity shared between brother and
sister, and found a single 2,3 Mb homozygous block onchromosome 11q24.1 which contained 46 homozygous variantsin 19 genes, of which only 1 was likely pathogenic: a previously
not described frameshift mutation in exon 3 of the ESAM gene
(NM_138961.3; c.287delC/ p.Pro96fs). Mutation analysis of parentsand grandparents found both parents and the paternal andmaternal grandmothers to be carriers but no evidence of
consanguinity as they come from very distant parts of Spain.
RNA expression and ancestry studies will be presented.
J. Hernandez Rodriguez: None. A. Ruiz: None. E. Miravet:
None. V. Asensio Landa: None. R. Martorell-Riera: None. M.
Vidal Lampurdanes: None. L. Torres-Juan: None. I. Martinez-
Lopez: None. E. Amengual-Cladera: None. C. Vives Bauza: None.
D. Heine suñer: None.
P09.052.A Rare pathogenic variants in genes of glutamatergic
neurotransmission pathway segregate with schizophrenia in
Pakistani families
Ambrin Fatima
1,2,3,Uzma Abdullah4,3,5, Muhammad Farooq6,2,
Zafar Ali2, Yuan Mang2, Mana M. Mehrjouy2, Niels Tommerup2,
Shahid M Baig3,1
1Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences,The Aga Khan
University, Karachi, Pakistan,2Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
3National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering
(NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan,4University Institute of Biochemistry
and Biotechnology (UIBB).PMAS-Arid Agriculture University, Raw-
alpindi, Pakistan,5University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
6Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Biotechnol-
ogy and Bioinformatics (IBBB), The Islamia University of Bahawalpur,
Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
Introduction: Schizophrenia is a disabling neuropsychiatric
disorder of adulthood onset with high heritability. World-wide
collaborations have identi ﬁed association of ~270 common loci,
with small individual effect and hence weak clinical implications.Recent technological feasibility of exome sequencing is enabling
identi ﬁcation of rare variants of high penetrance, that re ﬁne
previous ﬁndings and improve risk assessment and prognosis.
Material and Methods: We recruited two multiplex Pakistani
families, having 11 patients and 19 normal individuals in three
generations. We performed genome-wide SNP genotyping, next
generation mate pair and whole exome sequencing to unveilgenetic component. Candidate variants were screened in unre-lated cohorts of 508 cases, 300 controls and ﬁfteen families (with
51 affected and 47 normal individuals) of Pakistani origin.
Structural impact of substituted residues was assessed throughin silico modelling using iTASSER.
Results: In one family, we identi ﬁed a rare novel microduplication
(5q14.1_q14.2) encompassing crit ical genes involved in glutamate
s i g n a l i n gs u c ha s CMYA5, HOMER , RasGRF2. Second family segregates
two rare, predicted pathogenic variants NM_001134407.3 ( GRIN2A) :
c.3505C>T, (p.R1169W) and NM_001010848.4 (NRG3):c.1951G>A,(p.
E651K). These genes encode for parts of AMPA and NMDA receptorsof glutamatergic neurotransmission respectively and the variants arepredicted to compromise protein function by destabilizing their
structures. The variants were absent in aforementioned cohorts.Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that rare, highly penetrant
variants of genes involved in glutamatergic neurotransmission are
contributing to etiology of schizophrenia in these families. It also
highlights that genetic investigations of multiplex, multigenera-tional families with could be a powerful approach to identify raregenetic variants involved in complex disorders.
A. Fatima: None. U. Abdullah: None. M. Farooq: None. Z. Ali:
None. Y. Mang: None. M. Mehrjouy: None. N. Tommerup: None.
S. Baig: None.
P09.054.C FKBP5 in First-Episode Psychosis: Insights from a
Greek population sample
Daniela Theodoridou
1, Alexandra Polyzou2, Angeliki Maria Vlai-
kou3,4, Michaela D. Filiou3,4, George Leondaritis2, Petros Petrikis5,
Marika Syrrou1
1Laboratory of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece,2Department of Pharmacol-
ogy, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University ofIoannina, Ioannina, Greece,3Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department
of Biological Applications and Technology, School of Health Sciences,
University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece,4Biomedical Research
Division, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Founda-
tion of Research and Technology Hellas (IMBB-FORTH), Ioannina,
Greece,5Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, School of
Health Sciences, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
Introduction: The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis mediates
the neuroendocrine response to stress. FKBP5 is a co-chaperone ofthe cortisol-bound glucocorticoid receptor. SNPs in the FKBP5
locus may affect its expression levels and have been associated
with psychopathology. Our objective is to investigate the
distribution of SNP rs1360780 and FKBP5 mRNA and proteinexpression in individuals with First-Episode Psychosis (FEP) at two
time points: at the onset of FEP and after treatment with second
generation antipsychotics (SGAs).
Materials and Methods: Upon admission, 21 individuals were
diagnosed with the Positive And Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS)
and whole blood was extracted. rs1360780 (C->T) was genotyped
using Taqman SNP genotyping assay. Total RNA and proteincontent were extracted from PBMCs, both upon admission andafter monotherapy with SGAs. FKBP5 expression levels were
assessed with RT-qPCR and Western Blot. mRNA levels were
normalized against the 18s rRNA and protein levels against theGAPDH reference genes, respectively. Statistical analysis was
performed by GraphPad Prism 8.
Results: In our sample (N =21), 80% of males and 50% of females
are homozygous for the C (protective) allele. The rest carry at leastone T (risk) allele for the rs1360780. FKBP5 mRNA levels decrease
after antipsychotic treatment ( **p=0.0095 ). The FKBP5 protein
levels in a subgroup of individuals (N =12) were assessed before
and after treatment and were not signi ﬁcantly different ( p=0.1763 ).
Conclusions: We observe altered mRNA but no protein FKBP5
expression level alterations. Further studies and larger population
data will shed light on the putative role of SGAs on FKBP5expression.
D. Theodoridou: None. A. Polyzou: None. A.M. Vlaikou: None.
M.D. Filiou: None. G. Leondaritis: None. P. Petrikis: None. M.
Syrrou: None.
P09.055.D Identifying lipid metabolism genes with a potential
role in the pathogenesis of Frontotemporal dementia throughpool exome sequencingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
276
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Mihail Ganev1, Dimitar Serbezov1, Lubomir Balabanski1,2, Radoslava
Vazharova2,3, Sena Karachanak-Yankova1,4, Olga Antonova1, Dra-
gomira Nikolova1, Marta Mihaylova1, Rada Staneva1, Viktoria
Spasova1, Vera Damyanova1, Desislava Nesheva1, Zora Hammou-
deh1, Blaga Rukova1, Savina Hadjidekova1, Shima Mehrabian5, Maria
Petrova5, Diana Belezhanska5, Lachezar Traykov5, Draga Toncheva1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov ”,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria,3Department of Biology, Medical genetics and
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, So ﬁa University “St. Kliment
Ohridski ”,S o ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Department of Genetics, Faculty of
Biology, So ﬁa University “St. Kliment Ohridski ”,S o ﬁa, Bulgaria,
5Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska ”, Medical University
of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Molecular pathogenesis of Frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) is associated with intracellular accumulation of proteins in
central nervous system. However, it is unknown whether genetically
determined lipid disturbances could also be a contributing factor(like the ApoE polymorphisms in Alzheimer ’s disease). This study
aims to identify dyslipidemia-associated genes with a potential for
further investigation of a pathogenic role in FTD.
Materials & Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was per-
formed on two DNA pools set up of frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) patients (n =66) and healthy individuals (n =100), respec-
tively. After quality ﬁltering, the 48,455 annotated rare genetic
variants detected in the FTD pool were used to compile a gene list.The list was subjected to functional enrichment analysis yielding
313 genes from the Gene Ontology “lipid binding ”molecular
function group. As a last step, a pathway prioritizing of the “lipid
binding ”genes was carried out. The same work ﬂow has been
applied to the data from the healthy individuals ’pool.
Results: Analysis of the FTD pool data led to the prioritization of 9
pathways with a total of 18 genes ass ociated with plasma lipoprotein
assembly, remodeling, and clearance. Healthy individuals ’pool data
did not yield overrepresented rare variant genes from the “lipid
binding ”molecular function group. Resul ts indicate a possible role of
some lipid metabolism genes in the pathogenesis of FTD.
Conclusion: The analysis of whole-exome pool sequencing data
of FTD patients and heathy individuals has identi ﬁed 18 lipid
metabolism-associated genes potentially associated with FTDpathogenesis. Acknowledgment: KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 -
National Science Fund of Bulgaria.
M. Ganev: None. D. Serbezov: None. L. Balabanski: None. R.
Vazharova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. O. Antonova:
None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Mihaylova: None. R. Staneva: None.
V. Spasova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z.
Hammoudeh: None.
B. Rukova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. S.
Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. L.
Traykov: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P09.056.A Topological mapping of variant-intolerant domains
in SCN1A using a novel functional modeling platform
Matteo Vatta , Dianalee McKnight, Karen Ouyang, Ana Morales,
Swaroop Aradhya
Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Introduction: The clinical classi ﬁcation of novel missense variants is
challenging due to insuf ﬁcient evidence, often leaving them
categorized as variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS). To generate
additional evidence to better interpret the effects of missense VUS,we developed a gene-speci ﬁc functional modeling platform (FMP)
evaluating DNA sequence conservation, biophysical, structural,cellular, and spatial relationships within an observed missense
change setting. Here, we evaluate t he accuracy of FMP for classifying
variants in the SCN1A-encoded NaV1.1 ion channel previously
associated with severe epilepsy syndromes.
Methods: FMP data on 619 missense SCN1A variants predicted
to be deleterious (P) or tolerated (B) were investigated for their
topological enrichment to identify variant-intolerant protein
domains.
Results: FMP predicted 468/619 (75.6%) variants as P and 151/
619 (24.4%) as B. Of the 468 P variants, 150 (32%) resided in the
cytoplasmic region, including a C-terminal cluster within the CaM-
binding domain (aa 1915-1944), 119 (25.4%) in the transmem-brane, 29 (6.2%) in the S4-voltage sensor, 45 (9.7%) in the “pore ”,
and 125 (26.7%) in the extracellular domains. FMP predicted 107
(70.9%) B variants in the cytoplasmic, 10 (6.6%) in transmembrane,
and 34 (22.5%) in extracellular domains. No B-predicted variantsresided in the S4-voltage sensor, “pore ”, or CaM-binding domains,
suggesting these regions are particularly variant-intolerant.
Conclusions: These data demonstrate the predictive accuracy of
FMP in NaV1.1 in identifying speci ﬁc functional domains apparently
intolerant to genetic variability, establishing its utility in supporting
clinical variant interpretation in germline genetic testing.
M. Vatta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁc a n t ;I n v i t a e .E .
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. D. McKnight: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. K.
Ouyang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. A. Morales: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁ
cant; Invitae. S.
Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae.
P09.057.B Screening for the FMR1 premutation in Greek
patients with late-onset cerebellar ataxia
Maria Seferiadi1, Chrisoula Kartanou1, Christalena Sofocleous2,3,
Joanne Traeger-Synodinos2, Georgia Karadima1, George Koutsis1
1Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, School of
Medicine, Eginition Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, Athens, Greece,2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia ”Children ’s Hospital,
Athens, Greece,3Research University Institute for the Study of Genetic
and Malignant Diseases of Childhood, “Aghia Sophia ”Children ’s
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late-
onset, X-linked, neurodegenerative disorder that occurs inpremutation carriers of the FMR1 gene. Although core motor
features include gait ataxia and action tremor, some patients
demonstrate parkinsonism, cognitive de ﬁcits and peripheral
neuropathy. Consequently, FXTAS is often misdiagnosed asspinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) or Parkinson ’s disease (PD). In Greek
patients with ataxia, although the most common SCAs have been
studied by our group, the occurrence of FXTAS has not been
previously investigated. Herein, we sought to investigate thefrequency, genotypic and phenotypic pro ﬁle of FXTAS in Greek
patients with late-onset cerebellar ataxia.From a cohort of 454
ataxia cases (SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7 negative), 92 index patients wereselected, clinically characterized by ataxia (100%), tremor (19%),polyneuropathy (14%), parkinsoni sm (9.8%), and cognitive decline
(8.7%). All cases had no male-to male transmission. Genotyping wasAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
277
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608performed using fragment analysis by capillary electrophoresis. We
detected two FMR1 premutation carriers (2.2%), well within the range
reported by multiple studies in ata xic cohorts (0-4.1%), and higher
than other, movement disorder, cohorts (<1%). Both patients hadcerebellar ataxia and neuropathy. One patient also had mildparkinsonism and cognitive impairment, and the other with
pyramidal signs. We conclude that FMR1 premutations are not rare
in Greek patients with late-onset cerebellar ataxia. In light of theabove, molecular screening for FXTAS should be considered in SCApanel negative hereditary ataxi a cases with supportive clinical
features. Our study highlights the importance of genetic testing in
the differential diagnosis and early management of FXTAS.
M. Seferiadi: None. C. Kartanou: None. C. Sofocleous: None. J.
Traeger-Synodinos: None. G. Karadima: None. G. Koutsis: None.
P09.058.C Characterization of SUMO2/3 protein levels in
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome patients
Laia Rodriguez-Revenga
1,2, Tamara Barcos1, Emma Peruga1, Laura
Molina-Porcel3,4, Maribel Alvarez-Mora1,2
1Hospital Cinic, Barcelona, Spain,2CIBER of Rare Diseases, Instiuto de
Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain,3Alzheimer ’s disease and other
cognitive disorders unit. Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d’Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,4Neurological Tissue Bank,Biobanc-
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome
(FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder with reducedpenetrance that appears in adult FMR1 premutation carriers (55-
200 CGGs). The neuropathological hallmark of FXTAS consists of
presence of ubiquitin-positive nuclear inclusions that are broadly
distributed throughout the brain. The small ubiquitin-relatedmodi ﬁer 2/3 (SUMO 2/3), which is an element of the cellular
response to environmental stress, has been recently described as
one of the most highly abundant proteins in FXTAS inclusions.Since bioenergetic collapse leading to cellular stress has been wellreported in FXTAS patients, we aimed to characterize SUMO2/3
protein levels in FXTAS patients.
Material and Methods: Fibroblasts cultures from FXTAS
patients were used to quantify SUMO2/3 protein levels by westernblot analysis. Immunohistochemistry experiments were also
performed in postmortem brain samples from FXTAS patients.
Results: SUMO2/3 quanti ﬁcation in whole ﬁbroblasts culture
lysates did not revealed signi ﬁcant differences between FXATS
and control samples. However, immunohistochemistry analysis
revealed positive SUMO2/3 staining in intranuclear inclusions ofFXTAS postmortem brain samples.
Conclusions: although the pathogenic mechanisms inducing
neurodengeneration and the development of inclusions in FMR1
premutation carriers are unknown, our results support a role ofSUMO2/3 in the process. Acknowledgements: Work supported bythe Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067), co- ﬁnanced by Fondo
Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer
Europa ”and AGAUR (2017 SGR1134). The CIBERER is an initiative
of the Instituto de Salud Carlos III. We thank brain donors andrelatives for generous donation and the Neurological Tissue Bank
of the Biobanc-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS.
L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. T. Barcos: None. E. Peruga:
None. L. Molina-Porcel: None. M. Alvarez-Mora: None.
P09.059.D Structural mapping of GABRB3 variants reveal
correlations between genotype and phenotypeKatrine M. Johannesen
1,2, Sumaiya Iqbal3,4, Milena Guazzi5,1,
Nazanin A. Mohammadi1,2, Eduardo Perez6, Dennis Lal7,8,9,10, Elise
Schaefer11, Anne De Saint Martin12, Marie Therese Abiwarde12, Amy
McTague13, Roser Pons14, Amelie Piton15, Manju Kurian16, Marie
Deprez17, Liesbeth de Waele18,19, Eva Brilstra20, Nienke E. Verbeek20,
Marjan van Kempen van Kempen20, Gerhard Visser21, Hilde M. H.
Braakman22, Martin Haeusler23, Miriam Elbracht24, David Stern-
man25, Ulvi Vaher26, Thomas Smol27, Joanna Kennedy28, Karl Martin
Klein29, Billie Au30, Kimberly Smyth31, Thomas Morgan32, Malin
Dewenter33, Argirios Dinopoulos34, Damien Lederer35, Vivian Liao36,
Philip K. Ahring36, Rikke S. Møller1,2, Elena Gardella37,2
1Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized Treatment, The
Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark,2Institute for Regional
Health Services, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark,
3Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA,4Center for the Development of
Therapeutics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
USA,5Department of Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy,6Center
for Genetics and Genomics Instit uto de Ciencias e Innovación en
Medicina (ICIM) Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile,7Genomic
Medicine Institute, Lerner Research In stitute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA,8Epilepsy Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA,9Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of Harvard and M.I.T, Cambridge, MA, USA,10Cologne Center for
Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,11Service de
Génétique Médicale, CMCO-SIHCUS, Hô pital de Hautepierre, Strassbourg,
France,12Department of Pediatric Neurology, Strasbourg University
Hospital, Strassbourg, France,13Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental
Neurosciences Programme, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, United Kingdom,14First Department of P ediatrics, "I Agia
Soﬁa" Children Hospital, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Athens, Greece,15Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Illkirch, France,16Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom,17Université Côte d ’Azur,
CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, France,18Department of Development
and Regeneration, Campus Kulak Kor trijk, Kortrijk, Netherlands,
19Department of Paediatric Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven,
Leuven, Netherlands,20Department of Genetics , University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht Univer sity, Utrecht, Netherlands,21Stichting
Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), Hoofddorp, Netherlands,
22Department ofAcademic Center for Epileptology Kempenhaeghe/
Maastricht University Medical Center Epilepsy Genetics and PersonalizedTreatment, The Danish Epileps y Centre, Heeze, Netherlands,23Institute of
Evolutionary Medicine, Universit y of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,
24Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany,25Division of Neurology Lincoln Medical and Mental
Health Center, Bronx, NY, USA,26Children ’s Clinic of Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,27Institut de Genetique Medicale, CHRU Lille,
Universite de Lille, Lille, France,28Clinical Genetics Department, University
Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, St Michael ’s Hospital, Bristol,
United Kingdom,29Epilepsy Centre Frankfur t Rhein-Main, University
Hospital Frankfurt, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany,30Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, Cumming Sc hool of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada,31Department of Pediatrics, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada,
32Precision Medicine/Genetic Testi ng Stewardship Program, Nemours A.
I. duPont Hospital for Children Precision Medicine/Genetic TestingStewardship Program, Wilmington, DE, USA,33Universitätsmedizin
Johannes Gutenberg-University Main z Institut für Humangenetik, Mainz,
Germany,34Attiko University Ho spital, University of Athens, 3rd Dept of
Pediatrics, Haidari, Greece,35Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de
Pathologie et de Génétique, Charleroi, Belgium,36Brain and Mind Centre,
School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University ofSydney, Sydney, Australia,37Department of Clinical neurophysiology, the
Danish Epilepsy Centre , Dianalund, Denmark.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
278
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Objective: It has previously been shown that pathogenic variants in
theGABRB3 gene increase seizure susceptibility and lead to a broad
phenotypic spectrum ranging from severe developmental and
epileptic encephalopathies to m ilder epilepsy syndromes such as
generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures +and childhood absence
epilepsy. With a cohort of 76 published an unpublished patients, we
aimed to highlight possible correlations between phenotype and
genotype in GABRB3 .
Material and Methods: Through an international collaboration
and literature review, we analyzed electro-clinical data of patients
with variants in GABRB3 . All variants was mapped to the 3D
structure of the GABRB3 subunit.
Results: 76 patients with pathogenic or likely pathogenic
GABRB3 variants, including 24 previously unpublished patients,
were included in the study. Clinical phenotype correlated with
structural location: Patients with variants in the extracellulardomain had febrile seizure, myoclonic seizures and epileptic
spams with onset at ten months, while patients with variants in
the transmembrane domain had focal seizures with or withoutsecondary generalization with onset at six months.
Conclusion: Our results suggest a genotype/phenotype corre-
lation, with variants in the extracellular domain causing milder
phenotypes with generalized epilepsy and variants in thetransmembrane domains causing more severe phenotypes withearly-onset focal epilepsy. Whether or not functional difference
also plays a part in the phenotypic differences will require further
research. These correlations are of importance as we stand on thebrink of precision medicine in the genetic epilepsies. KMJ was
funded by the Lundbeck Foundation (R324-2019-1083)
K.M. Johannesen: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Signi ﬁcant; Lundbeck Foundation. S. Iqbal:
None. M. Guazzi: None. N.A. Mohammadi: None. E. Perez: None.
D. Lal: None. E. Schaefer: None. A. De Saint Martin: None. M.
Abiwarde: None. A. McTague: None. R. Pons: None. A. Piton:
None. M. Kurian: None. M. Deprez: None. L. de Waele: None. E.
Brilstra: None. N.E. Verbeek: None. M. van Kempen: None. G.
Visser: None. H.M.H. Braakman: None. M. Haeusler: None. M.
Elbracht: None. D. Sternman: None. U. Vaher: None. T. Smol:
None. J. Kennedy: None. K. Klein: None.
B. Au: None. K. Smyth:
None. T. Morgan: None. M. Dewenter: None. A. Dinopoulos:
None. D. Lederer: None. V. Liao: None. P.K. Ahring: None. R.S.
Møller: None. E. Gardella: None.
P09.061.B Elevated expression of SLC6A4 encoding the
serotonin transporter (SERT) in Gilles de la Tourette syndrome
Amanda M. Levy1, Mathis Hildonen1, Christina Dahl2, Victoria A.
Bjerregaard1, Lisbeth Birk Møller1,3, Per Guldberg2,4, Nanette M.
Debes5, Zeynep Tümer1,6
1Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark,2Danish
Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark,3Institute
for Nature, Systems and Models, Roskilde University Center, Roskilde,
Denmark,4Department of Cancer and In ﬂammation Research,
Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark,Odense, Denmark,5Tourette Clinics, Department of Paediatrics,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark,6Department of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Universityof Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction: Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) is a complex
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by motor and vocaltics. Most of the GTS individuals have comorbid diagnoses,
of which obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and attentiondeﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are the most common.
Several neurotransmitter systems have been implicated in disease
pathogenesis, and amongst these, the dopaminergic and the
serotonergic pathways are the most widely studied. In this study,we aimed to investigate whether the serotonin transporter gene(SLC6A4 ) was differentially expressed among GTS individuals, and
whether DNA variants (5-HTTLPR, rs25531 and rs25532) or
promoter methylation was associated with GTS phenotype, orSLC6A4 expression.
Methods: DNA from peripheral blood samples was obtained
from 72 GTS individuals and 87 controls, and RNA from 56 GTS
individuals and 36 controls. All individuals were genotyped by PCRfollowed by sanger sequencing, and SLC6A4 expression was
quanti ﬁed using RT-qPCR. Promoter methylation of SLC6A4 was
quanti ﬁed using pyrosequencing.
Results: We observed that SLC6A4 expression is upregulated in
GTS individuals compared to controls. Although no speci ﬁc
genotype, allele or haplotype was overrepresented in GTS
individuals compared to controls, we observed that the L
AC/LAC
genotype of the 5-HTTLPR/rs25531/rs25532 three-locus haplotypewas associated with higher SLC6A4 mRNA expression levels in GTS
individuals, but not in the control group. We observed no
association between SLC6A4 promoter methylation and pheno-
type, genotype or expression levels.
Conclusions: Our results show that SLC6A4 expression is
increased in GTS individuals, and that this difference is more
pronounced in GTS individuals with the L
AC/LACgenotype.
A.M. Levy: None. M. Hildonen: None. C. Dahl: None. V.A.
Bjerregaard: None. L.B. Møller: None. P. Guldberg: None. N.M.
Debes: None. Z. Tümer: None.
P09.062.C Biallelic frameshift variants in CYHR1 cause severe
global developmental delay
Maria Asif1,2,3, Arwa Ishaq A. Khayyat1,2, Salem Alawbathani1,2,
Judith Haasters4, Birgit Budde1, Peter Nürnberg1, Matias Wagner4,5,6,
Muhammad Sajid Hussain1,2,7
1Cologne Center for Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany,2Institute of Biochemistry I,
Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,3Center
for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty ofMedicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental Medicine and
Social Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner ’s Children ’s Hospital, University of
Munich, Munich, Germany,55Institute of Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
6Institute for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuher-
berg, Germany,7Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC),
University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Introduction: The human brain is a highly sophisticated and
complex organ, yet to be completely understood. Investigation of
neurodevelopmental disorders may unravel protein networks,
crucial for brain development.
Material and Methods: We recruited index patients from two
families with global developmental delay from Yemen and
Germany. To identify the underlying causal variants, we subjected
DNA samples of affected members of each family to whole-exomesequencing. Using immuno ﬂuorescence, immunoblotting, and
pull-down assays coupled with proteomic mass spectrometry
(MS), we characterized the protein encoded by the candidategene and explored the functional consequences of the variants.
Results: In both families, we identi ﬁed homozygous frameshift
variants, c.959_960delTT, p.(Phe320Cysfs*18) and c.1036_1037delCT,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
279
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608p.(Leu346Glyfs*49) in CYHR1 (NM_138496.1), a previously unchar-
acterized gene. In HeLa, MCF7, and human primary ﬁbroblasts,
endogenous CYHR1 protein showed predominantly nuclear and only
weak cytosolic expression. Transiently expressed wild-type CYHR1was exclusively observed in the nucleus, however, mutant proteinwas reduced and found in cytoplasm. Reduction of mutant protein
could be recovered by treating the cells with cycloheximide and
MG132. In patient derived primary ﬁbroblasts from one case, we
observed complete absence o f CYHR1. MS analyses identi ﬁed 110
interacting partners of CYHR1 wh ich were enriched in spliceosome
and autophagy related pathway s. The autophagy markers LAMP1
and LC3 βshowed reduced expression in patient derived ﬁbroblasts
in line with MS results.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that loss of CYHR1 causes
autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental delay. Hence, CYHR1 is
likely to be a novel key factor in human brain development due toimpaired autophagy and spliceosome function.
M. Asif: None. A.I.A. Khayyat: None. S. Alawbathani: None. J.
Haasters: None. B. Budde: None. P. Nürnberg: None. M.
Wagner: None. M.S. Hussain: None.
P09.063.D Glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis defect
due to digenic heterozygous mutations in PIGT and PIGV
genes in a patient with psychomotor and cognitive delay
Gergely Büki
1,2, Anna Zsigmond1, Agnes Till1, Attila Gyenesei3, Bela
Melegh1,2, Kinga Hadzsiev1,2, Judit Bene1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary,2Szentagothai
Research Center, Pécs, Hungary,3Genomics and Bioinformatics
Research Group, Szentágothai Research Centre, Pécs, Hungary.
Introduction: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is an anchor for
many cell surface proteins. GPI-anchored proteins play crucialroles in many pathways and developmental event, particularly
embryogenesis, neurogenesis, immune response and signal
transduction. More than 30 genes are involved in the biosynthesisand remodeling of GPI anchor. Mutations in several genes in thispathway have been associated with inherited GPI de ﬁciencies
(IGDs) with a wide spectrum of clinical features.
Materials and methods: Whole-genome sequencing was
indicated in a male patient with psychomotor and cognitivedevelopmental delay, mild tetraspasticity, rigidity, tremor, re ﬂex
anomalies, dystonic hand movements and mild dysmorphic
features. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000instrument with the help of Illumina TruSeq
TMDNA PCR-Free HT
Library Prep Kit and 150bp paired-end chemistry. The detected
mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Analysis of WGS data revealed a de novo heterozygous
pathogenic mutation (c.439 C>T) in PIGV gene and an unknown,
potentially pathogenic heterozygous variant (c.256 C>T) in PIGT
gene. The patient phenotype shares features related to both genedefect.
Discussion: IGDs are inherited in autosomal recessive and
X-linked recessive manner. To our knowledge homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutati ons within the same gene were
responsible for the development of IGDs so far. Here we report amale patient carrying digenic heterozygous mutations in PIGT
and PIGV genes which are involved in the same biosynthesis
p a t h w a y .M o r ea n dm o r er a r ed i s o r d e r sa r eb e i n grecognized with digenic backgr ound. NGS technologies (WES
and WGS) are effective tools to facilitate the identi ﬁcation of
affected patients.
G. Büki: None. A. Zsigmond: None. A. Till: None. A. Gyenesei:
None. B. Melegh: None. K. Hadzsiev: None. J. Bene: None.P09.064.A A novel GRIN2B mutation sharing the position but
not the phenotypic expression of known pathogenic variant
Nevyana Ivanova , Kalina Mihova, Kunka Kamenarova, Tsvetina
Veleva, Daniela Adjieva-Tzavella, Ivo Kremensky, Vanio Mitev, IvankaDimova, Radka Kaneva
Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: De novo GRINB2 mutations are found in a wide
range of neurodevelopmental disorders resulting in epileptic
encephalopathy and mental retardation with/without epilepsy.Most of them are missense variants clustered in the transmem-brane and ligand-binding domains of the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors showing diverse functional consequences. Here
we report a newly identi ﬁed genetic variant that co-localizes with
a previously reported mutation but the related clinical casesexhibit extremely different phenotypic expression.
Materials and Methods: We performed clinical exome
sequencing to identify the disease-causing variant in the indexpatient and the Sanger sequencing method to con ﬁrm it and to
check its segregation in the family.
Results: Data ﬁltering identi ﬁed a novel genetic variant
c.2090G>A/p.Cys461Tyr in the GRINB2 gene changes evolutionary
conserved amino acid in the ligand-binding domain of the NMDA
receptor. Segregation analysis proved that it arises de novo.
Mutation was found in a child with only subtle dysmorphicfeatures and mild intellectual disabilities. It affects the same aminoacid as a previously reported pathogenic variant
(HGMD# СМ1314625) replacing cysteine 461 with phenylalanine
in a patient with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.
Conclusions: According to the ACMG criteria the variant
c.2090G>A/p.Cys461Tyr in the GRIN2B gene is de ﬁned as
pathogenic. Presence of a much milder clinical phenotype without
epilepsy compared to the already reported mutation in the sameamino acid causing a severe form of epileptic encephalopathy
could be attributed to the different physicochemical properties of
the mutant amino acids or imply the in ﬂuence of modifying
genetic factors. Acknowledgements: Funded by Ministry of
education and Science D01-285/2019/D01-395/2020.
N. Ivanova: None. K. Mihova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. T.
Veleva: None. D. Adjieva-Tzavella: None. I. Kremensky: None. V.
Mitev: None. I. Dimova: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P09.065.B Deep phenotyping of biallelic HACE1 variants
Merope Grif ﬁn1, Meena Balasubramanian2, Moira Blyth3, Abhijit
Dixit1, Peter D. Turnpenny4, Mohnish Suri1
1Clinical Genetics, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham, United Kingdom,2Shefﬁeld Genetics Service, Shef ﬁeld,
United Kingdom,3Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, United
Kingdom,4Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Trust, Exeter,
United Kingdom.
Introduction: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic HACE1 variants
are associated with spastic paraplegia and psychomotor retarda-
tion with/without seizures (SPPRS), a rare autosomal recessive,progressive neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by hypo-tonia, weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs, and seizures.
However, the clinical presentation of HACE1 variants has not been
fully characterised. Consequently, we undertook deep phenotyp-ing of 12 patients from 7 families with biallelic HACE1 variants.
Materials and Methods: Patients with biallelic pathogenic or
likely pathogenic HACE1 variants were identi ﬁed by trio exome
sequencing by the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD)Study or whole genome sequencing by the 100,000 GenomesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
280
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Project. A comprehensive phenotyping proforma was completed
for all patients by their responsible Clinical Geneticist.
Results: Twelve patients were recruited (7 male/5 female, age
range of 2-39 years). Six patients were homozygous for a recurrentnonsense variant (c.805C>T; p.(Arg269Ter)); all these patients wereof Pakistani origin. All patients displayed global developmental
delay and/or intellectual disability. Ten had seizures, with ﬁve
having a diagnosis of epilepsy. Notably, six patients had con ﬁrmed
neurogenic bladder, with one further patient having possibleneurogenic bladder that had not been investigated. Four had
vesicoureteric re ﬂux. Eye problems (most commonly divergent
squint and/or proptosis) were seen in ﬁve patients.
Conclusions: Patients with SPPRS variants can present with a
distinctive, clinically-recognisable phenotype of developmental
delay with early-onset neurogenic bladder, vesicoureteric re ﬂux
and ophthalmological problems, potentially aiding early diagnosisof this rare disorder. The pathogenic p.(Arg269Ter) variant appears
to be recurrent in the Pakistani population.
M. Grif ﬁn:None. M. Balasubramanian: None. M. Blyth: None.
A. Dixit: None. P.D. Turnpenny: None. M. Suri: None.
P09.066.C Ataxic neurodegenerative disorders in Sudan: when
whole exome sequencing is combined to high consanguinity& old genome
Liena E. O. Elsayed
1,2, Inaam N. Mohammed1, Ahlam A. A. Hamed1,
Maha A. Elseed1, Arwa M. A. Babai3, Elhami A. A. Ahmed3, Doua M. S.
AbdelGaleel3, Isra Z. M. Eltazi1, Rayan A. Siddig3, Esraa E. Eltaraife3,
Amal S. I. Abd Allah1, Atheer Eltigani4, Nabila M. H. Ali1, Sarah M. El-
sadig1,5, Afraa M. M. Musa1, Mahmoud E. Koko6, Ashraf Y. O.
Mohamed1,7,8, Mustafa I. Elbashir1, Alexis Brice8,9, Giovanni Steva-
nin8,9,10, Ammar E. Ahmed1, Muntaser E. Ibrahim3
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan,
2College of Medicine, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of
Endemic Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan,
4Department of Medical Biotechnology, Commission for Biotechnol-
ogy and Genetic Engineering, National Centre for Research,
Khartoum, Sudan,5Department of Neurology, Soba University
Hospital, Khartoum, Sudan,6Department of Neurology & Epileptol-
ogy, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University ofTübingen, Tübingen, Germany,7Department of Biochemistry, Faculty
of Medicine, National University, Khartoum, Sudan,8Institut du
Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR7225,Sorbonne Université, UMR_S1127, 75013 Paris, France,9APHP Pitié-
Salpêtrière Hospital, Department of genetics, 75013 Paris, France,
10Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, EPHE, PSL université, 75013 Paris,
France.
Introduction: The highly consanguineous Sudanese population
has one of the oldest African genomes with remarkable geneticheterogeneity augmenting the burden of neurogenetic disordersincluding Hereditary Ataxia (HA). As part of the broader Sudanese
neurogenetic project, we explored the genetics underlying the HA
in a cohort of 11 families.
Material and Method: Whole exome sequencing (WES)
coupled with optimized prioritization approaches was used in 10
families with autosomal recessive HA (ARHA). Phenotype-based
candidate genes were tested in the autosomal dominant HA(ADHA) family.
Results: A pathologic CAG repeat expansion in ATXN7 was
found to cause SCA7 with clear maternal anticipation in the ADHAfamily. In 50% of the ARHA families, novel mutations in known HAgenes [ SETX ,SIL1,KIF1C , and CLPP ] were found to cause the
disease. Potential novel genes pending further validation were
identi ﬁed in the remaining 50%.
Conclusion: The high level of novelty of the results indicates an
enormous potential for neurogenetic discoveries in Sudan. Theexceptional phenomena observed as the coexistence of multiple
genetic disorders in the same of the highly inbred families and
intra-familial variation in the phenotypic presentations imposechallenges on the analysis of the WES data and necessitate larger-scope studies to fully understand the mechanisms underlying
Sudanese neurogenetic disorders. Grants: French Embassy in
Sudan, Campus France, University of Khartoum, and the SudanMinistry of Higher Education for the scholarship (to LE), theWellcome Trust RDF grant (to LE), the European Union through the
H2020 program (SOLVE-RD to GS), and the French ASL-HSP
Association (to GS).
L.E.O. Elsayed: None. I.N. Mohammed: None. A.A.A. Hamed:
None. M.A. Elseed: None. A.M.A. Babai: None. E.A.A. Ahmed:
None. D.M.S. AbdelGaleel: None. I.Z.M. Eltazi: None. R.A. Siddig:
None. E.E. Eltaraife: None. A.S.I. Abd Allah: None. A. Eltigani:
None. N.M.H. Ali: None. S.M. El-sadig: None. A.M.M. Musa: None.
M.E. Koko: None. A.Y.O. Mohamed: None. M.I. Elbashir: None. A.
Brice: None. G. Stevanin: None. A.E. Ahmed: None. M.E.
Ibrahim: None.
P09.067.D Widening the genetic landscape of syndromic
hereditary optic neuropathies
Claudio Fiorini
1,2, Chiara La Morgia2, Andrea Degiorgi3, Flavia
Palombo1, Valerio Carelli1,2, Enrico Baruf ﬁni3, Leonardo Caporali1
1IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
2Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy,3Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and
Environmental Sustainability, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
Introduction: Hereditary Optic Neuropathies (HON) are a relevant
genetic cause of visual impairment, with a reported prevalence of1/10000 to 1/30000 in Europe. HON typically show a selective loss
of Retinal Ganglion Cells and subsequent optic nerve atrophy,
moreover, they are often associated with mitochondrial impair-ment. Most HON patients present mutations in the mitochondrialgenome and OPA1 . Several other genes, mostly related to
mitochondrial function, have been identi ﬁed as rarer causes of
non-syndromic or syndromic HON.
Materials and Methods: We performed WES on 75 patients,
through an Illumina sequencing platform. Rare variants were then
analyzed prioritizing genes related to mitochondrial or neuronalfunction.
Results: We identi ﬁed recessive, autosomal, or X-linked
pathogenic mutations in 8 cases of HON plus. Interestingly, 7 of
the identi ﬁed causative genes ( FDXR, MECR, NDUFAF2, NDUFB11,
PDSS1, SLC52A2, WDR45 ) were previously associated with severe
syndromic phenotypes, also involving optic atrophy, and one in
CACNA1F , previously associated with night blindness and retino-
pathy. Instead, our patients were admitted to the diagnosticpipeline as HON, with additional symptoms including neurosen-sorial hearing loss, neuropathy, developmental delay, ataxia,
retinal dystrophy, anemia, ptosis, hypotonia. Those genes are
mainly linked to mitochondrial disorders, for which variableexpressivity and incomplete penetrance of pathogenic mutations
are well established.
Conclusions: Our cases expand the known phenotypic range
for rare genes causative for HON plus. Mutations in these genesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
281
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608may occur in cases with optic atrophy “plus ”, and they must be
considered during the diagnostic process. Supported by the Italian
Ministry of Health (Grant GR-2016-02361449).
C. Fiorini: None. C. La Morgia: None. A. Degiorgi: None. F.
Palombo: None. V. Carelli: None. E. Baruf ﬁni:None. L. Caporali:
None.
P09.068.A Somatic mosaicism of the CAG repeat of the HTT
gene is CAG length- and age-dependent in intermediate (27-
35 CAGs) and reduced-penetrance (36-39 CAGs) alleles
Ainara Ruiz de Sabando1,2, Marc Ciosi3, Arkaitz Galbete2,4, Darren
G. Monckton3, Maria A. Ramos-Arroyo1,2
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain,2Navarrabiomed-Complejo Hospitalario de
Navarra-Universidad Pública de Navarra, IdiSNA, Pamplona, Spain,
3Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UnitedKingdom,4Red de Investigación en Servicios de Salud en Enferme-
dades Crónicas (REDISSEC), Pamplona, Spain.
Introduction: Huntington Disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant
neurodegenerative disorder caused by the expansion of a CAG
repeat (n ≥36) in the HTT gene. This CAG repeat is somatically
unstable in a process that is CAG length-, tissue- and age-speci ﬁc
in HD full-penetrance (n ≥40) alleles. We further investigated CAG
somatic expansions in normal (n ≤26), intermediate (n =27-35)
and reduced-penetrance (n =36-39) alleles.
Methodology: The HTT repeat genotype was determined and
the associated somatic mosaicism quanti ﬁed by Miseq sequencing
in blood DNA samples. Samples from 271 individuals carrying HTT
alleles with 10 to 66 CAGs were analysed. Linear regression was
used to study the association of the HTT repeat somatic mosaicism
with CAG-length and age at sampling.
Results: Somatic mosaicism is allele-length dependent, with a
much higher frequency of somatic expansions in larger alleles. Wecould also observe CAG length-dependent mosaicism in alleleswith <40 CAGs (n =184, b =0.045, 95% CI: 0.042-0.048). More-
over, we could show an age-dependent mosaicism in intermedi-
ate (n=101) and reduced-penetrance alleles (n =37), with b =
0.001 (95% CI: 0.001-0.002) and 0.006 (95% CI: 0.004-0.008),respectively.
Conclusion: We have demonstrated that the CAG repeat in
non-HD-causing (CAG < 36) and reduced-penetrance HTT alleles is
somatically unstable in blood DNA. Because some somatic
expansions beyond a particular CAG-length are likely to cause
cellular dysfunction, further studies in tissues that drive HDneurodegeneration are warranted, especially for alleles close tothe pathologic boundary.
A. Ruiz de Sabando: None. M. Ciosi: None. A. Galbete: None.
D.G. Monckton: None. M.A. Ramos-Arroyo: None.
P09.069.B Patient Survey Evaluating the Experiences of
Patients who Participated in at least one Telephone or VirtualAppointment for Pre-Symptomatic Testing for Huntington ’s
disease in the All Wales Medical Genomics Service
Donna Duf ﬁn, Angus Clarke, Karenze Evans, Oliver Murch,
Alexandra Murray, Ian Tully, Vani Jain
Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
In response to the on-going global SARS-CoV2 pandemic, the
All Wales Medical Genomics Service piloted consultations forpre-symptomatic genetic testing for Huntington ’s disease via
telephone and virtual appointments. Pre-symptomatic testing for
incurable neurological conditions has previously only been offered
as face-to-face appointments. The patients were contacted priorto their appointments to determine their preferences forappointment type before being taken through the pre-
symptomatic testing process. We then surveyed their experiences
post-results in order to evaluate our services.
Methods: We conducted structured telephone interviews to
gain an insight into their experiences and preferences of the
testing processes. This was to determine the impact of having
such dif ﬁcult and emotive discussions while being in their own
homes and not in the presence of the Genetic Counsellor orGeneticist. These patients were contacted at least a month after
receiving their results.
Results and Conclusions: Although patients had a variety of
preferences regarding face-to-face versus telephone or virtual
appointments, all appreciated a ﬂexible service where their
preferences were considered. It is important to bear in mindthere was no one method that suited all patients, and,consequently, we need to remain patient focused in our decision
making. Further evaluation needs to be conducted as we continue
to deliver our services in these unprecedented times.
D. Duf ﬁn:None. A. Clarke: None. K. Evans: None. O. Murch:
None. A. Murray: None. I. Tully: None. V. Jain: None.
P09.071.D Association between IQ and LSM1 (WHSC1L1) gene
polymorphism in Russian students
Andrey V. Marusin
1, Alexander N. Kornetov2, Maria G. Swarovs-
kaja1, Anna V. Bocharova1, Ksenia V. Vagaitseva1, Ekaterina S.
Pavlenyk2, Vadim A. Stepanov1
1The Research Institute for Medical Genetics, National Research
Medical Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian
Federation,2Federal State Budgetary Institution of Higher Education
"Siberian State Medical University" of the Ministry of Health of Russia,Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Intellectual capability is one of the most socially
signi ﬁcant characteristics. Twin studies of adult individuals have
found a heritability of IQ between 57% and 73%. Intelligence inthe normal range is a polygenic trait, and there are in ﬂuenced at
least 500 genes. However, major intelligence genes, as well as
their relationship with neuropsychiatric diseases, have not beenidenti ﬁed. Objective of the study is to identify common
polymorphic variants of susceptibility to severe behavioral
disorders (schizophrenia and Alzheimer ’s disease) with an
intelligence quotient (IQ) total score of young people.
Materials and Methods: The study was carried out on a sample of
135 young people. Using multiplex genotyping by MALDI-TOF
method, 29 polymorphic variants in 27 genes were studied. Theyhave previously been known to be associated with Alzheimer ’s
disease or schizophrenia using gen ome-wide association analysis.
The relationship between the studied polymorphic variants and the
IQ score was analyzed by using the nonparametric median test.
Results: There were no differences in IQ between men (34) and
women (101). Statistically signi ﬁcant associations were found for
IQ with r16887244 in the LSM1 gene (p =0,026) in case autosomal
dominant inheritance (AA vs. GA +GG genotypes). Average IQ
values were 113.2, 110.5 and 106.6 for AA, GA and GG genotypes,
respectively. Earlier, according to GWAS, this polymorphic variant
showed an association with schizophrenia.
Conclusion: The data obtained indicate a common genetic
basis for the heritability of mental and neurological disorders withAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
282
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608the intelligence variability. The reported study was funded by
RFBR, project number 20-015-00397.
A.V. Marusin: None. A.N. Kornetov: None. M.G. Swarovskaja:
None. A.V. Bocharova: None. K.V. Vagaitseva: None. E.S.
Pavlenyk: None. V.A. Stepanov: None.
P09.072.B PRKN exon inversion leads to juvenile generalized
levodopa-responsive dystonia
Emuna Paz1, Hagar Mor-Shaked1, Adily Basal1, Simona Ben-Haim2,
Hanna Grobe3, Sami Heymann4, Zvi Israel4, Vardiella Meiner1,
Montaser Namnah5, Anat Nitzan3, Ann Saada1, Tomer Tzur6, Ronen
Zaidel-Bar3, Tamar Harel1, David Arkadir5
1Department of Genetics, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,
2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hadassah Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel,3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel,4Department of Neurosurgery, Hadassah
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,5Department of Neurology,
Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,6Department of Plastic
Surgery, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic variants in PRKN , encoding the
E3 ubiquitin ligase parkin, lead to autosomal recessive juvenile
Parkinson disease [MIM 600116]. Up to 60% of the variants in PRKN
are structural variants, consistent with its location within FRA6E,one of the most unstable common fragile sites. We describe foursiblings af ﬂicted by young onset levodopa-responsive dystonia, in
whom genomic testing led to identi ﬁcation of an intragenic
inversion disrupting PRKN .
Materials and Methods: Following informed consent, exome
sequencing and linkage analysis were undertaken on four affected
and four unaffected siblings. Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
was subsequently pursued on two individuals. Breakpoint junctionanalysis and analysis of cDNA from patient ﬁbroblasts allowed for
characterization of the genomic rearrangement.
Results: All affected individuals shared a homozygous block
including PRKN . Exome sequencing was not diagnostic. WGS
revealed inversion of PRKN exon 5, followed by a common 49kb
deletion. Breakpoint junction analysis implicated non-homologous
end joining as the repair pathway involved. Analysis of cDNAindicated that exon 5 (84bp) was skipped, and was replaced by93bp of retained intronic sequence, preserving the reading frame
yet altering a signi ﬁcant number of residues.
Conclusions: Beyond the common deletions and duplications
inPRKN associated with juvenile dystonia and Parkinson disease,
which may be assessed by read depth analysis of exome data, one
must also consider inversions. This study further highlights thecomplexity of the FRA6E locus and its clinical implications. Theauthors declare no funding sources for this project.
E. Paz: None. H. Mor-Shaked: None. A. Basal: None. S. Ben-
Haim: None. H. Grobe: None. S. Heymann: None. Z. Israel: None.
V. Meiner: None. M. Namnah: None. A. Nitzan: None. A. Saada:
None. T. Tzur: None. R. Zaidel-Bar: None. T. Harel: None. D.
Arkadir: None.
P09.074.C A CLASP1 variant suggests a phenotypic relation
with lissencephaly in humans
Zafer Yüksel
1, Ratna Tripathy1, Norah S. Alsaleh2, Amal Al hashem3,
Mojgan Drasdo1
1Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH, Ingel-
heim, Germany,2Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolic
Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military MedicalCity, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan
Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction: Lissencephaly is a severe brain developmental
disorder, characterized by reduction in brain folding due tounderlying cortical layering defects. These aberrations arise during
embryonic development from defective neuronal migration, a
process in which neurons travel from their place of origin to theirﬁnal location within the cerebral cortex gray matter. Many of the
important roles of microtubule- and actin-associated proteins in
regulating the dynamics of the cytoskeleton during neuronal
migration have been uncovered through the study of geneticvariations that lead to lissencephaly in human and neuronalmigration defects in mouse.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES)
analysis was performed in a 10-month-old female and her 13-year-old brother diagnosed with lissencephaly. This analysis rule out all
known diagnostic genes described thus far for lissencephaly,
following which an approach focusing on disease candidate geneswas undertaken along with the informed consent of the family.
Results: WES revealed a homozygous missense variant in
CLASP1 (OMIM: 605852) [NM_015282.2:c.4442G>A p.(Arg1481His)]
in the affected siblings. Both parents are heterozygous carriers.
Conclusion: Cytoplasmic linker-associated protein 1 (CLASP1)
belongs to a group of proteins known as CLASPs which are non-
motor microtubule-associated proteins that interact with CLIPs
(Cap-Gly Domain-containing linker protein), a member of themicrotubule plus-end tracking protein family. In this work, we
propose the importance of CLASP1 as a diagnostic gene, wherein
variants in CLASP1 lead to brain structural disorders such aslissencephaly in humans.
Z. Yüksel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH. R. Tripathy: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH. N.
Alsaleh: None. A. Al hashem: None. M. Drasdo: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH.
P09.075.D A case of posterior lissencephaly due to a variation
inCEP85L gene: case report and re ﬁning of the phenotypic
spectrum
Gianluca Contrò
1, Alessia Micalizzi2, Sara Giangiobbe1,3, Simonetta
Rosato1, Marzia Pollazzon1, Stefano Giuseppe Caraf ﬁ1, Gabriele
Trimarchi1, Susanna Rizzi4, Francesca Clementina Radio5, Nives
Melli6, Carlo Fusco7, Giancarlo Gargano6, Marco Tartaglia5, Antonio
Novelli5, Livia Garavelli1
1Medical Genetics Unit, Azienda USL, IRCCS, Arcispedale Santa Maria
Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy,2Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy,3Clinical Genomics,
Medical Genetics Service, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy,4Child
Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Reggio Emilia, Italy,5Genetics and
Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy,6Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), Obstetric
and Pediatric Department, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia,
Reggio Emilia, Italy,7Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Azienda
USL- IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
Lissencephaly describes a group of clinical conditions characterized
by the absence of normal cerebral convolutions and abnormalities ofcortical development. To date, almost 20 genes have been identi ﬁed
as causative of this condition. Variants in CEP85L ,e n c o d i n gap r o t e i n
involved in the regulation of neuronal migration, have beendescribed as causative of this cond ition with a prevalent involvement
of the posterior cerebral cortex and an autosomal dominant patter of
inheritance. Here we describe a 5-month-old boy with delayedAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
283
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608psychomotor development and mild phenotypic features (such as
bitemporal narrowing, slightly protruding ears with up-lifted lobes,
posterior plagiocephaly). In his clini cal history, bordeline ventriculo-
megaly was observed during the antenatal ultrasound scan. EEGshowed a discontinuous pattern with interemispheric asymmetryand a cortical electrogenesis disorder in the absence of epileptiform
abnormalities. MRI identi ﬁed lissencephaly type 1, prevalently in the
temporo-occipito-parietal regions of both sides with "double-cortex ”
(Dobyns ’1-2 degree) periventricular band alterations. Furthermore, a
patent foramen ovale was detected. Among the genetic tests no
alterations was identi ﬁed by array-CGH and NGS-panel for cortical
malformations, but whole-exome sequencing revealed the presenceof a previously unreported de novo pathogenic variant in the CEP85L
gene (c.232 +1delG, NM_206921). To date, only 13 patients showing
lissencephaly with prevalent poste rior involvement, variable cogni-
tive de ﬁcits and epilepsy have been reported as carriers of
pathogenic CEP85L variants. The present ﬁndings document that
CEP85L mutations are not necessarily associated with severe
phenotypes and relevant MRI alterations, documenting the impor-tance of including CEP85L among the genes involved in the
pathogenesis of lissencephaly.
G. Contrò: None. A. Micalizzi: None. S. Giangiobbe: None. S.
Rosato: None. M. Pollazzon: None. S.G. Caraf ﬁ:None. G.
Trimarchi: None. S. Rizzi: None. F.C. Radio: None. N. Melli:
None. C. Fusco: None. G. Gargano: None. M. Tartaglia: None. A.
Novelli: None. L. Garavelli: None.
P09.076.A The clinical and neuroradiological spectrum of
variants in the GAR domain of MACF1
Jordy Dekker
1, Rachel Schot1, Kimberly A. Aldinger2, David B.
Everman3, Jennifer A. Sullivan4, Vandana Shashi4, Maha S. Zaki5,
Joseph G. Gleeson6, Antonio Vitobello7,8, Anne-Sophie Denommé-
Pichon7,8, Anne-Laure Mosca-Boidron7,8, Sophie Nambot7, Laurence
Perrin9, Stéphane Auvin9,10, Sarah E. McKeown11,12, Mark P.
Fitzgerald11,12, Ingo Helbig11,12, Felice D ’Arco13, Richard J. Leventer14,
Dan Doherty2,15, William B. Dobyns15,16, Grazia M. S. Mancini1, Kevin
C. Slep17
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Seattle Children ’s Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA,3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood,
SC, USA,4Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA,
5Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, Cairo, Egypt,
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, San Diego, CA, USA,7Université
de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,8Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Dijon, Dijon, France,9Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France,10Université
de Paris, Paris, France,11The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia and
the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,Philadelphia, PA, USA,12Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Phila-
delphia, PA, USA,13Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,14Royal Children ’s
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia,15University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA,16University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA,
17University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Microtubule-actin cross-linking factor 1 (MACF1) is a member of
the spectraplakin protein family, tha t cross-link different components
of the cytoskeleton. The growth arrest speci ﬁc 2 (Gas2)-related
(GAR) domain of MACF1 interacts w ith microtubules and dominant
variants affecting the GAR domai nr e s u l ti nab r a i nm a l f o r m a t i o n
involving a predominant posterior lissencephaly and reduced or
absent pontine crossing ﬁbers resulting in a W-shaped hypoplastic
brainstem. Here we describe six patients with a de novo variant in the
GAR domain of MACF1 ,o fw h i c h ﬁve have not been reported before.
We also identi ﬁed a variant in the most N-terminal of the four zinc-
binding residues (NM_012090.5:c.15524G>A p.(Cys5175Tyr)), wherepreviously no other variants have been reported. All patients with a
zinc-binding residue variant show on MRI a severe narrowing of the
pons, cerebellar vermis hypopla sia and a variable lissencephaly
severity. Patients present with global developmental delay, havingimpaired motor development and speech development rangingfrom no speech to using single words. Most patients develop
epilepsy during their ﬁrst year after birth. Furthermore, we identi ﬁed
one patient with a variant located between the two zinc-bindingresidue pairs (c.15575G>C p.(Ar g5192Pro)), likely to affect the β-sheet
structure of the GAR domain, whose MRI reveals only mild brainstem
and cerebellar hypoplasia with cortical dysgyria, but no lissencephaly.
These results show that variants in the zinc-binding residues of theMACF1 GAR domain result in a typic al cortical malformation, where
variants in the surrounding residues may be associated with a
different phenotype.
J. Dekker: None. R. Schot: None. K.A. Aldinger: None. D.B.
Everman: None. J.A. Sullivan: None. V. Shashi: None. M.S. Zaki:
None. J.G. Gleeson: None. A. Vitobello: None. A. Denommé-
Pichon: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: None. S. Nambot: None. L.
Perrin: None. S. Auvin: None. S.E. McKeown: None. M.P.
Fitzgerald: None. I. Helbig: None. F. D ’Arco: None. R.J. Leventer:
None. D. Doherty: None. W.B. Dobyns: None. G.M.S. Mancini:
None. K.C. Slep: None.
P09.077.B Genetic contributions to psychopathological symp-
tom dimensions in a transdiagnostic cohort of patients with
major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia,
and schizoaffective disorder
Friederike S. David1, Frederike Stein2,3, Till F. M. Andlauer4, Tilo
Kircher2,3, Udo Dannlowski5, Sergi Papiol6,7, Urs Heilbronner7, Peter
Falkai6, Thomas G. Schulze7, Marcella Rietschel8, Markus M. Nöthen1,
Axel Krug9,2, Andreas J. Forstner1,10,11
1Institute of Human Genetics, Unive rsity of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Department of Psychiatry
and Psychotherapy, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany,3Center
for Mind, Brain and Behavior, Unive rsity of Marburg, Marburg, Germany,
4Department of Neurology, Klinikum r echts der Isar, School of Medicine,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,5Department of
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Münster, Münster, Germany,
6Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, LMU
Munich, Munich, Germany,7Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and
Genomics (IPPG), University Hospit al, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany,
8Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of
Mental Health, Medical Faculty Man nheim, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany,9Department of Psychiatry und Psychotherapy,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,10I n s t i t u t eo fN e u r o s c i e n c ea n d
Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany,11Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
Introduction: Major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder
(BD), schizophrenia (SCZ), and schizoaffective disorder (SZA) are agroup of psychiatric disorders with a considerable amount of
phenotypic and genetic overlap. Recently, Stein et al. (2020) have
developed a 5-factor model that captures transdiagnostic symptomdimensions in these disorders. Here we investigate underlyinggenetic factors for the ﬁve symptom dimensions (depression,
negative syndrome, positive for mal thought disorder, paranoid-
hallucinatory syndrome, and increased appetite).
Methods: Our transdiagnostic sample (n =1042) of individuals
diagnosed with MDD, BD, SCZ, or SZA was recruited from the
German FOR2107 cohort. In this sample we performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for each of the ﬁve symptom
dimensions using the linear regression approach in PLINK. For the
most signi ﬁcant ﬁnding, we conducted a replication analysis in anAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
284
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608independent sample (n =875) of the German PsyCourse cohort
based on an approximate phenotype measure.
Results: The discovery GWAS revealed between 5 and 16
suggestively associated loci (P < 1x10-5) for each symptom
dimension. For the dimension of positive formal thought disorder,we identi ﬁed one genome-wide signi ﬁcant association (P < 5x10-8)
on chromosome 10 in the FOR2107 discovery sample. However,
this association could not be replicated in the PsyCourse sample.
Conclusions: While our ﬁndings suggest that genetic factors
contribute to transdiagnostic symptom dimensions in MDD, BD,
SCZ, and SZA and thus indicate shared etiological factors, no
replicable genome-wide associations could be identi ﬁed at the
given sample sizes. Additional studies with larger sample sizes arerequired to further elucidate the genetic contributions to
transdiagnostic symptom dimensions.
F.S. David: None. F. Stein: None. T.F.M. Andlauer: None. T.
Kircher: None. U. Dannlowski: None. S. Papiol: None. U.
Heilbronner: None. P. Falkai: None. T.G. Schulze: None. M.
Rietschel: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. A. Krug: None. A.J.
Forstner: None.
P09.079.D DNA methylation pattern of gene promoters of MB-
COMT, DRD2, and NR3C1 in Turkish patients diagnosed with
schizophrenia
Hasan Mervan Aytac1, Yasemin Oyaci2, Mustafa Pehlivan3, Sacide
Pehlivan2
1Psychiatry Unit, Malazgirt State Hospital, Mus, Turkey,2Department of
Medical Biology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University,Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey,3Department of Hematology, Gaziantep
University, Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep, Turkey, Gaziantep, Turkey.
Objective: We aim to evaluate the methylation status of MB-COMT
promotor, DRD2 ,a n d NR3C1 gene in patients with schizophrenia
(SCZ) by comparing healthy controls.
Methods: A sample of 110 patients with SCZ and 100 age- and
sex-matched healthy volunteers was included in the study. Theinterview was started by ﬁlling out data forms that included
sociodemographic and clinical information. SCID-I was used to
conﬁrming the diagnosis according to DSM-IV-TR criteria. Then the
patients were evaluated with the PANSS in terms of symptomseverity. Methylation-speci ﬁc polymerase chain reaction (MSP-
PCR) was used to determine the methylation status of MB-COMT
promotor, DRD2 , and NR3C1 gene from DNA material.
Results: When we compared the percentages of MB-COMT
promotor, DRD2 , and NR3C1 gene methylation status in SCZ
patients with the healthy control group, the percentages of MB-
COMT promotor (OR: 0.466; 95% Cl: 0.268-0.809; p =.006), DRD2
(OR: 0.439; 95% Cl: 0.375-0.514; p < .001), and NR3C1 (OR: 0.003;
95% Cl: 0.001-0.011; p < .001) gene methylation status of SCZ was
found to be signi ﬁcantly different from the control group.
Whereas unmethylation of MB-COMT promotor and NR3C1 genes
were associated with SCZ, the partial methylation of the NR3C1
gene was related to the SCZ.
Conclusion: The MB-COMT promotor, DRD2 , and NR3C1 gene
methylation status may be associated with the SCZ in the Turkishpopulation.
H.M. Aytac: None. Y. Oyaci: None. M. Pehlivan: None. S.
Pehlivan: None.
P09.080.A Chromosomal microarray analysis in 97 pediatric
cases of microcephaly
Ana-Maria Mea šić1, Adriana Bobinec1, Leona Moro žin Pohovski2,
Ivona Sansovi ć1, Mijana Kero1, Ljubica Boban1, Ingeborg Bari šić1
1Department of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children ’s
Hospital Zagreb, Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and
Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School of
Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,2Department of Medical Genetics and
Reproductive Health, Children ’s Hospital Zagreb, University of Zagreb
School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction: Microcephaly is de ﬁned as an occipitofrontal head
circumference (OFC) more than 2 standard deviations (SD) belowthe mean for sex and age. It is associated with a reduction in brain
volume and often developmental/intellectual disabilities. The
pathogenesis is heterogeneous, ranging from genetic to environ-mental factors. Anomalies may exclusively affect cerebral devel-
opment (non-syndromic) or may include extracranial
malformations and/or facial dysmorphism (syndromic).
Materials and Methods: A retrospective analysis was per-
formed on the results of whole-genome chromosomal microarray
analysis (CMA) of 97 children with microcephaly evaluated by
clinical geneticists in the period from 2015-2020.
Results: Twenty-six pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs)
were detected in 23 patients presenting syndromic microcephaly
with diagnostic yield of 23.71%. Slightly higher diagnostic yield
was observed associated with severe (OFC more than 3 SD belowthe mean), 26.42%, than mild microcephaly, 20.45%. Certainphenotypes predicted for the presence of pathogenic CNV,
especially combined with severe microcephaly, including brain
anomalies (odds ratio [OR] 2.03 [0.78-5.28]), cardiovascularanomalies (OR 4.96 [1.47-16.78]), skeletal anomalies (OR 2.75
[1.05-7.20]) and short stature (OR 2.29 [0.81-6.45]).
Conclusion: The results support the use of CMA as ﬁrst-tier test
for syndromic microcephaly, especially for severe microcephalypresented with skeletal and/or cardiovascular anomalies. Other
comorbidities, such as other brain anomalies, neurological
abnormalities and short stature, may also increase the diagnosticyield. Acknowledgement: This study was supported by CERRM,Republic of Croatia, and by the EU through ERDF, under grant
agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project,,Reproductive and
Regenerative Medicine - Exploring New Platforms and Potentials ”.
A. Mea šić:None. A. Bobinec: None. L. Moro žin Pohovski:
None. I. Sansovi ć:None. M. Kero: None. L. Boban: None. I.
Barišić:None.
P09.081.B A rare case of microlissencephaly associated with
KATNB1 gene variantsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
285
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ana Grangeia1,2, Carina Couto Reis3, Miguel Leão1
1Medical Genetics Service, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João
(CHUSJ), Porto, Portugal,2Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine
(FMUP), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Neurorradiology Service,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João (CHUSJ), Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: In 2014, pathogenic variants in KATNB1 gene, that
encodes the regulatory p80 subunit of Katanin, a microtubule-severing enzyme, have been shown to cause microcephaly with
brain malformation, particularly a simpli ﬁed gyral pattern. Since
then, only 9 families were described world-wide, 8 of themconsanguineous, harbouring KATNB1 variants in homozygosity. Case
Report: We present a 14-years-old Portuguese girl born of non-
consanguineous healthy parents, who was referred for genetic
evaluation due to congenital microcephaly. Physical exam at birthand throughout life revealed microcephaly, strabismus, nystagmusand moderate psychomotor development delay. Brain MRI demon-
strated frontal bilateral and symmetrical lissencephaly and pachy-
gyria, parieto-occipital polymicrogyria, subcortical heterotopia andhypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis. Chromosomal microarray and anew generation sequencing panel targeting key genes involved in
neuronal migration disorders revealed no causative variants. Clinical
exome sequencing revealed two heterozygote variants, c.1567-23_156722del and c.1703_1718 +25del in the KATNB1 gene. Both
variants occurred with very low frequencies in Genome Agrregation
Database and were not reported in the literature or disease ClinVardatabase. In silico tools predicted that c.1567-23_1567-22del andc.1703_1718 +25del variants alter splicing by disrupting the branch
point in the intron 13 and by deleting the acceptor splice-site of
intron 18 of the KATNB1 gene, respectively. Segregation analysis and
mRNA studies for functional evaluation are in course.
Conclusion: Here we report the second patient with congenital
microcephaly caused by two heterozygotes variants in KATB1
gene. This study supports the fundamental role of KATNB1 inhuman cerebral cortical development and pathology and extend
the genotype of KATNB1-associated microlissencephaly.
A. Grangeia: None. C.C. Reis: None. M. Leão: None.
P09.082.C Analysis of the most common nuclear genome
encoded mitochondrial gene in Hungarian patients withadult-onset mitochondrial disorders
Fruzsina Szabo
1, Zoltan Grosz1, Andras Gezsi2, Anna Suveges1, Idris
J Jimoh1, Helga Zeke1, Aniko Gal1, Mária Judit Molnár1
1SOTE, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Budapest,
Hungary,2BME, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics
(VIK) Department of Measurement and Information Systems,Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: Mitochondrial disease is one of the most common
metabolic diseases with a minimum prevalence of greater than 1in 5000 in adults. The disease may affect multiple organs and
could be inherited both dominant, recessive, X linked way or
maternally depending. Beside mtDNA nuclear genes are respon-sible for the mitochondrial function. In this study the geneticbackground of adult onset mitochondrial disorders were investi-
gated in Hungarian patients.
Materials and Methods: In our study, 75 patients (28 men and
47 women) (mean age: 49.9 ± 13.5) with multi-systemic phenotypewere tested. The inclusion criteria was a muscle biopsy and/or
lactate stress test indicating mitochondrial disease. Targeted panel
NGS sequencing was performed investigating 167 nuclear genesResults: Inmore than 50% of the cohort the main presenting
symptom was myopathy. Progressive ophthalamoplegia externa,ataxia, psychiatric symptoms, and diabetes mellitus was common
as well. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations were found in 6
cases in heterozygous form (3 SPG7 ,1 MSTO1 ,1 NDUFV1 ,1
POLG2).
Conclusion: In our cohort heterozygous pathogenic or likely
pathogenic alterations have been found in 8%. The pathomechan-
isms of adult-onset disease form is poorly studied, so we do not
have enough information on the exact intracellular effect of singleheterozygous mutations, therefore these cases further functionaltest might be needed.This study was supported by KTIA_NAP_
2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002; NKIH_132812 gratnts and FIKP pro-
gram. The Institute is the part of ERN RND and NMD.
F. Szabo: None. Z. Grosz: None. A. Gezsi: None. A. Suveges:
None. I. Jimoh: None. H. Zeke: None. A. Gal: None. M. Molnár:
None.
P09.084.A Mutations, genes and phenotypes related to
movement disorders: a never-ending list
Dolores Martínez-Rubio
1,2, Paula Sancho1,2, Isabel Hinarejos1,2,
Itxazo Martí3, S Jesús-Maestre4, Raquel Baviera2,5, I Sastre2,5, Irene
Martínez2,5, Marta Correa-Vela6, Cristina Tello1, Amparo Andrés-
Bordería1,2, Ana Sánchez-Monteagudo1,2, Alejandra Darling7,A
Duat8, P Janeiro9, E Moreno10, M J. Martínez-González11, A Ruiz12,
Vincenzo Lupo1,2, P Mir4, Belén Pérez-Dueñas13, Sergio Aguilera14,
Carmen Espinós1,2
1Unit of Rare Neurodegenerative Diseases, Centro de Investigación
Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain,2Rare Diseases Joint Unit, CIPF-IIS La
Fe, Valencia, Spain,3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital U. Donostia,
San Sebastián, Spain,4Unit of Movement Disorders, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/
Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain,5Department of Neurology,
Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain,6Department
of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain,
7Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona,
Spain,8Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño
Jesús, Madrid, Spain,9Department of Pediatrics, Hospital de Santa
Maria, Lisbon, Portugal,10Department of Pediatrics, Hospital
Regional, Málaga, Spain,11Department of Pediatrics, Hospital
Universitario de Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain,12Department of Pediatrics,
Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain,13Department of
Pediatrics, Hospital Universitari Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,
14Department of Pediatrics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain.
Introduction: Movement Disorders (MDs) comprise heteroge-
neous neurological syndromes that present dysfunction in thebasal ganglia and/or connected structures. Patients may presentwith ataxia, parkinsonism, dystonia, chorea, spasticity, myoclonus,
tremor, and others. Hundreds of genes are associated with MDs
and genetic diagnosis in clinical practice may end up being acumbersome odyssey.
Material and Methods: We investigated a clinical series with 54
patients suffering from MDs using a custom panel based on
SureSelectQXT technology (Agilent Technologies), which com-prises 498 genes. To compare both approaches, 10 additionalpatients were studied by whole exome sequencing (WES), using
the whole exome family plus test (Blueprint Genetics) or Human
Clinical Exome Capture & Mitochondrial DNA (Nimblegen).
Results: Using the panel MovDisord-498, 20 patients achieved a
genetic diagnosis. Nine patients were further investigated by WES,
and 3 of them were solved. On the other hand, in 6 out of the 10patients only studied by WES, the causative changes wereidenti ﬁed. All in all, we detected 34 mutations, 19 of them being
novel, in 21 different genes in 26 out of 64 probands.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
286
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: The genetic bases of MDs show an incredible
heterogeneity. The obtained diagnosis rate success (45.3%) is a
pretty nice rate, although insuf ﬁcient. We need to unravel the
molecular bases underlying these Mendelian disorders whosemolecular causes escape to the prevailing techniques becausethere are a notable proportion of patients who remain without
diagnosis. Grants: ISCIII co-funded with ERDF funds [PI18/00147],
the Fundació La Marató TV3 [20143130-31], Generalitat Valenciana[PROMETEO/2018/135].
D. Martínez-Rubio: None. P. Sancho: None. I. Hinarejos: None.
I. Martí: None. S. Jesús-Maestre: None. R. Baviera: None. I.
Sastre: None. I. Martínez: None. M. Correa-Vela: None. C. Tello:
None. A. Andrés-Bordería: None. A. Sánchez-Monteagudo:
None. A. Darling: None. A. Duat: None. P. Janeiro: None. E.
Moreno: None. M.J. Martínez-González: None. A. Ruiz: None. V.
Lupo: None. P. Mir: None. B. Pérez-Dueñas: None. S. Aguilera:
None. C. Espinós: None.
P09.085.B Quantitative dissection of multilocus pathogenic
variation
Isabella Herman
1,Angad Jolly1, Haowei Du1, Moez Dawood1,
Ghada M. H. Abdel-Salam2, Dana Mara ﬁ1, Tadahiro Mitani1, Daniel
G. Calame1, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir3, Jawid M. Fatih1, Ibrahim
Hegazy2, Shalini N. Jhangiani1, Richard A. Gibbs1, Davut Pehlivan1,
Jennifer E. Posey1, James R. Lupski1
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,2National Research
Centre, Cairo, Egypt,3The University of Texas Health Science Center,
Houston, TX, USA.
Objective: Genomic sequencing and clinical genomics have
demonstrated substantial subsets of atypical and/or severe
disease presentations result from multilocus pathogenic variation(MPV) causing blended phenotypes. Using the Human Phenotype
Ontology (HPO), we quantitatively dissected the blended pheno-
type of an infant with severe neurodevelopmental disorder, brainmalformation, dysmorphism, and hypotonia.
Methods: Family-based exome sequencing (ES) with rare
variant analysis was completed. HPO analysis with semantic
similarity was implemented to determine phenotypic contributionof each implicated gene.
Results: ES revealed deleterious variants in CAPN3 (c.259C>G:p.
L87V), MUSK (c.1781C>T:p.A594V), NAV2 (c.1996G>A:p.G666R), and
ZC4H2 (c.595A>C:p.N199H). CAPN3, MUSK , and ZC4H2 are estab-
lished disease genes linked to limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
(OMIM# 253600), congenital myasthenia (OMIM# 616325), and
Wieacker-Wolff syndrome (OMIM# 314580), respectively. NAV2 is a
retinoic-acid responsive novel gene candidate with biologicalroles in neurite outgrowth and cerebellar dysgenesis in mouse
models. Using semantic similarity, we show quantitatively that no
gene individually explains the proband phenotype but rather thetotality of the clinically observed disease is most parsimoniouslyexplained by disease-contributing effects of all four genes. These
data reveal that the combination of variants results in a blended
phenotype with each gene affecting a different part of thenervous system and nervous system-muscle connection.
Interpre-
tation: In patients with MPV and complex blended phenotypes
resulting from multiple molecular diagnoses, HPO analysis allows
for dissection of phenotypic contribution of both establisheddisease genes and novel gene candidates not yet proven to cause
human disease with marked implications for prognosis, treatment,
and family counseling for the most complex genetic patients.
I. Herman: None. A. Jolly: None. H. Du: None. M. Dawood:
None. G.M.H. Abdel-Salam: None. D. Mara ﬁ:None. T. Mitani:None. D.G. Calame: None. Z. Coban-Akdemir: None. J.M. Fatih:
None. I. Hegazy: None. S.N. Jhangiani: None. R.A. Gibbs: None.
D. Pehlivan: None. J.E. Posey: None. J.R. Lupski: F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; Regeneron Genetics Center. Other;Modest; Multiple Molecular Diagnostic Patents.
P09.086.C Multiple sclerosis associated HLA variants affect the
immunological T lymphocytes repertoire
Melissa Sorosina
1, Silvia Santoro1, Laura Ferrè1,2, Elisabetta
Mascia1, Ferdinando Clarelli1, Antonino Giordano1,2, Miryam Can-
nizzaro1,2, Massimo Filippi2,3,4, Federica Esposito1,2
1Laboratory of Neurological complex disorders, Division of Neuros-
ciences, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,2Neurol-
ogy, Neurorehabilitation and Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS SanRaffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,3Neuroimaging Research
Unit, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan, Italy,4Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
Introduction: genetic predisposition to multiple sclerosis (MS)
includes >200 genetic loci, with the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) region accounting for 32 independent associa-tions. We aim to investigate the impact of MHC MS-risk alleles on
T-lymphocytes repertoire in MS.
Methods: 183 untreated relapsing-remitting MS subjects have
been studied. Class I and II HLA alleles were inferred from whole-genome genotyping data using SNP2HLA and Beagle_v3.3 tools.
T-cell receptor (TCR) CDR3 sequences were obtained from whole
blood DNA according to the ImmunoSEQ hsTCRB kit (AdaptiveBiotechnologies ®). The weighted HLA-risk score (wHRS) was
calculated for each individual. The inverse of the Simpson ’s Index
(INV.S) was calculated as representative of immune repertoire
diversity. Statistical analyses were performed within R environ-ment and plink v.1.9.
Results: after quality controls, the ﬁnal set was composed by
144 individuals and 30 MS-risk MHC loci. Four loci showedassociation with INV.S: HLA DRB1*15:01 (P =0.014), rs11751659 (P
=0.02), rs9271366 (P =0.003), SNP_DRB1_32660116_A (P =
0.036). A mild association was found between INV.S and wHRS
(P=0.049), with individuals with a higher wHRS showing a lower
diversity. Additionally, individuals carrying the risk alleles showeda different percentage of clonotypes occupying the 10% of the
repertoire.
Conclusions: MS-risk MHC loci appear to in ﬂuence TCR repertoire
in MS patients, with the risk alleles reducing the diversity and
inducing an expansion of speci ﬁc clonotypes. Analyses are ongoing
to better de ﬁne the ampli ﬁed clonotypes and their role.
Funding: This research was supported by the Italian Ministry of
Health (GR-2016-02363997)
M. Sorosina: None. S. Santoro: None. L. Ferrè: None. E.
Mascia: None. F. Clarelli: None. A. Giordano: None. M.
Cannizzaro: None. M. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec,
Merck-Serono, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Speak-ers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expertwitness); Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis,
Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharma-
ceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis,Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
287
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.087.D Differentially expressed genes and their miRNA
regulators in Multiple Sclerosis
Nagehan Ersoy Tunali , Birgül Çolak
Istanbul Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated disorder, resulting
in demyelination of the neurons. Gene expression changes in Tand B cells are considered to be the main initiator of disease
pathology. In this work, we aimed to investigate the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in T cells in MS using bionformatic toolsand to identify the miRNAs regulating these genes. For thispurpose, we used GSE43591 dataset, which contains microarray
proﬁling data obtained from 10 RRMS and 10 healthy individuals.
Weﬁrst determined differentially expressed genes (DEGs), then we
applied functional enrichment analysis using DAVID. Pathwayenrichment is accomplished by KEGG pathway analysis. Protein-
protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using STRING
database, then transferred to Cytoscape to screen for the hubproteins. Finally, we screened for the targeting miRNAs for eachhub-protein-expressing genes. 582 nodes and 2102 edges were
mapped in the PPI network of identi ﬁed DEGs, including 388 up-
regulated and 1318 down-regulated genes. The 10 hub proteinsinclude RBX1, UBA52, SKP1, FBXW11, UBE2B, CDC34, UBE2R2,
UBE3A, HERC5 and FBXL14. The KEGG pathway analysis showed
that the up-regulated genes were signi ﬁcantly enriched in
ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, RNA degradation and NF-kappaB signalling, while down-regulated genes were signi ﬁcantly
enriched in B and T cell receptor signalling, neurotrophin
signalling, NK cell mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis. ThemiRNAs targeting the genes encoding 10 hub proteins weremiR514b-3p, miR495-3p, miR3913-5p, miR4420, miR4789-5p,
miR4500, miR4725-3p, miRNA-374b-5p, miR-196a-1-3p, miR5011-
5p. We conclude that DEGs in Tcells are mostly involved inubiquitination and signalling in the immune system.
N. Ersoy Tunali: None. B. Çolak: None.
P09.088.A A replication study of genetic variants associated
with multiple sclerosis risk in the Kuwaiti population
Rabeah A. Altemaimi
1, Khadijah Ateyah1, Mohammad Dashti2,
Raed Alroughani3
1Kuwait University, Jabriya, Kuwait,2Dasman DIabetes Institute,
Sharq, Kuwait,3Amiri Hospital, Kuwait City, Kuwait.
Introduction: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic neurodegenera-
tive disorder resulting from an autoimmune reaction againstmyelin. Many genetic variants have been reported to associatewith MS risk however their association is inconsistent across
populations. Here we investigated the association of consistently
reported genetic MS risk variants in Kuwaiti MS patients.
Materials and Methods: Fifty-six healthy Kuwaitis and 113
Kuwaiti MS patients were exome sequenced on Illumina ’s
HiSeq2000, and 404 healthy Arab control exomes from publicdatabases were used. Bioinformatic analysis was used to mine for94 MS related risk variants with ≥2 reports con ﬁrming MS risk
association. Replication analysis was done on 170 MS patients and
311 healthy Kuwaitis using Taqman genotyping assays.
Results: Of the 94 reported MS risk variants four showed MS risk
association in the exome analysis ( EVI5 rs11808092 p =0.0002;
TNFRSF1A rs1800693 p =0.00003; MTHFR rs1801131 p =0.038;
and CD58 rs1414273 p =0.00007). Replication analysis in only
Kuwaiti cohorts con ﬁrmed EVI5 rs11808092A, TNFRSF1A
rs1800693C, and MTHFR rs1801131G as MS risk factors in theKuwaiti population (OR: 1.6, 95%CI: 1.19 - 2.16, p =0.002; OR: 1.36,
95%CI: 1.04 - 1.78, p =0.025; and OR: 1.79, 95%CI: 1.3 - 2.36, p =
0.001; respectively). CD58 rs1414273 did not sustain risk associa-
tion (p =0.37).
Conclusions: Variants in EVI5,TNFRSF1A and MTHFR are MS risk
factors in the Kuwaiti population. Further investigations into their
roles in MS pathogenesis and progression are merited.This work
was funded by KFAS grant 2012-1302-02.
R.A. Altemaimi: None. K. Ateyah: None. M. Dashti: None. R.
Alroughani: None.
P09.090.C Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses 6 type in Yakutia
Polina Golikova
1, Aitalina Sukhomyasova1,2, Elizaveta Gurinova2,
Irina Nikolaeva2, Diana Petukhova1, Svetlana Stepanova2, Roza
Ivanova1,2, Tatyana Grigorieva1,2, Tatyana Nikolaeva3, Nadezda
Maksimova1
1Research Laboratory “Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics ”,
Medical Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University,Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2Medical Genetic Center, Republican
Hospital №1- “National Medical Center ”, Yakutsk, Russian Federa-
tion,3Medical Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal
University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a
group of lysosomal storage disorders. NCL is the most commonchildhood neurodegenerative disease with a prevalence of
1:1000000 to 1:14000 worldwide.
Methods: in the Medical Genetic Center of National Medical
Center (Yakutsk) a few families with a clinical diagnosis ofleukodystrophy were observed. All observed cases were Yakut
nationality. In order to search for a molecular genetic cause of
disease in patients we carried out the exome sequencing usingthe TruSight Inherited Disease panel (Illumina, USA). The results
were validated by Sanger direct sequencing. Experiments were
performed using equipment of Center for collective use of theNorth-Eastern Federal University.
Results: we identi ﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant
c.396dupT (p.Val133CysfsTer18) in 4th exon of CLN6 gene in all
patients. Their parents were heterozygous carriers of the mutation.Totally we revealed 22 patients from 18 unrelated Yakut familieswith a diagnosis of type 6 neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. The main
clinical symptoms of disease were early onset of the disease at the
age of 3-4 years, impaired coordination, frequent falls, regressionof psychomotor development, seizures, subatrophy of the optic
nerves. The total prevalence of NCL6 in Yakutia is 2.3 per 100000
populations.
Conclusion: All examined patients with NCL6 had one major
mutation in the CLN6 gene. The results obtained can be useful for
molecular genetic diagnostics and consultations. Grant: The study
was supported by the Ministry Education and Science of RussianFederation (Project No. FSRG-2020-0014 “Genomics of Arctic:
epidemiology, hereditary and pathology ”)
P. Golikova: None. A. Sukhomyasova: None. E. Gurinova:
None. I. Nikolaeva: None. D. Petukhova: None. S. Stepanova:
None. R. Ivanova: None. T. Grigorieva: None. T. Nikolaeva:
None. N. Maksimova: None.
P09.091.D The portray of the Italian cohort of patients with
variants in POGZ: new care opportunities from a deep
genotyping and phenotyping
Agnese Feresin
1, Beatrice Spedicati1, Giulia Pelliccione2, Corrado
Romano3, Livia Garavelli4, Maria Lisa Dentici5, Nicola Specchio5,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
288
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Paolo Al ﬁeri5, Paola Grammatico6, Gabriele Trimarchi4, Margherita
Baldassarri7, Alessandra Renieri7, Roberta Milone8, Flavio Faletra2,
Giuseppe Cossu9, Giorgia Girotto1,2, Marco Tartaglia5, Paolo
Gasparini1,2, Maria Teresa Bonati2
1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste,
Italy,3I.R.C.C.S. Oasi Maria SS., Troina, Italy,4AUSL Reggio Emilia,
Reggio Emilia, Italy,5Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy,
6Università La Sapienza, Roma, Italy,7University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
8IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy,9Centro Medico di
Foniatria, Padova, Italy.
Introduction : Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are charac-
terized by genetics and phenotypic heterogeneity. Thus, Whole
Exome Sequencing (WES) studies combined with a clinical
evaluation can be a powerful approach maximizing moleculardiagnostic yield. Heterozygous pathogenetic variants in POGZ
gene have been associated to a syndromic NDD, including autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), developmental delay (DD), intellectual
disability (ID) and some dysmorphic facial features.
Material and methods : A multicentric, Italian WES data sharing
has been carried out with the aim of providing a complete clinical
and neurocognitive picture of patients with a similar phenotypic
characteristic (a diagnosis of POGZ-related disorder), and negativeto SNPs/CGH molecular karyotyping.
Result, new perspectives : All collected cases resembling a
POGZ-related disorder (n =13; 8 male) presented with ID (from
mild to severe), a global DD, usually exhibited behaviouralimpairments and, in ﬁve cases, a diagnosis of ASD. The identi ﬁed,
novel pathogenetic or likely pathogenetic variant in POGZ include
frameshift (5), stop (3), splicing (2) and missense (1) variants,mostly occurring de novo , except for a familiar case (3 subjects).
Considering the unmet medical needs for most life-longing NDDs
and recent evidences on the improvement of behavioural
impairments in POGZ knock-in mice, we propose new careperspectives through the inhibition of glutamatergic signal and
the mitigation of excitatory neurons. A recruitment of patients
with POGZ-related disorder is dare for ongoing.
Conclusion : Combining depth clinical data with genomic
ﬁnding, we highlighted, for the ﬁrst time, the important role of
POGZ gene in the pathogenesis of NDDs, opening new
perspectives with therapeutic opportunities.
A. Feresin: None. B. Spedicati: None. G. Pelliccione: None. C.
Romano: None. L. Garavelli: None. M. Dentici: None. N.
Specchio: None. P. Al ﬁeri: None. P. Grammatico: None. G.
Trimarchi: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A. Renieri: None. R.
Milone: None. F. Faletra: None. G. Cossu: None. G. Girotto:
None. M. Tartaglia: None. P. Gasparini: None. M. Bonati: None.
P09.093.B AGO1 amino acid changes in neurodevelopmental
disorders
Clarisse Delvallee , Sarah Baer, Léa Sanna, Valérie Skory, Jérémie
Courraud, Nathalie Drouot, Damien Plassard, Jean-Louis Mandel,
Amélie Piton
IGBMC, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
Introduction: AGO1 is a RNA-binding protein (RBP) from the
Argonaute family involved in gene-silencing mediated by smallnon-coding RNA and additional processes regulating geneexpression. We recently reported 28 patients with a neurodeve-
lopmental disorder (NDD) harboring de novo amino acid changes
in AGO1 (Schalk, Cousin et al, BioRxiv 2010). The role of AGO1 inneuronal cells, as well as the impact of these amino acid changeson its functions, remain to be elucidated.Methods:
We used human neural stem cells (hNSCs) to study
the role of AGO1 and the consequences of its inactivation at
molecular and cellular levels. In parallel, we overexpressed AGO1
mutant proteins in neuronal (Neuro2A) and non-neuronal (HeLa,HEK293) cells.
Results: We showed that AGO1 inactivation using siRNA did not
alter the proliferation of hNSCs but impacts differentiation process
in Neuro2A cells. Transcriptomic studies performed in hNSCs didnot reveal any signi ﬁcant change at the mRNA level (except AGO1
itself) but identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant changes in splicing events in
several hundreds of genes, enriched in proteins related to DNA
binding/transcription regulation. In parallel, AGO1 mutant proteinsare stably expressed and localized in HeLa and HEK293 cells, butthey show a different pattern of protein interactions compared to
the wild-type AGO1 as revealed by IP-MS experiments.
Conclusion: The splicing and neurite outgrowth alterations
identi ﬁed in neural cells after AGO1 inactivation provide insight
into how AGO1 dysfunction could impact brain development and
can serve as read-out to test the effect of amino acid changesidenti ﬁed in patients with NDD.
C. Delvallee: None. S. Baer: None. L. Sanna: None. V. Skory:
None. J. Courraud: None. N. Drouot: None. D. Plassard: None. J.
Mandel: None. A. Piton: None.
P09.094.C Genetic characterization of 274 patients with
neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1: rare and diagnostically challenging
co-occurrence of two variants in the same patient
Rita Bastos Ferreira
1,2, Susana Sousa1,2, Ana Lopes1,2, Ana Filipa
Brandão1,2, Sara Morais1,2, Paulo Silva1,2, Fátima Lopes1,2, Alexandra
Lopes1,2, Cláudia Patraquim3, Miguel Rocha4, João Parente Freixo1,2,
Jorge Sequeiros1,2, Jorge Oliveira1,2
1CGPP-IBMC –Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2i3S–Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Serviço de Pediatria, Hospital de Braga,
Braga, Portugal,4Serviço de Genética, Hospital de Braga, Braga,
Portugal.
Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) shows a wide phenotypic
spectrum. Milder forms exhibit cutaneous and ophthalmologicalfeatures: café-au-lait macules, axillary and inguinal freckles,
cutaneous neuro ﬁbromas, and Lisch nodules. More severe
phenotypes present a range of tumours (plexiform neuro ﬁbromas
and optic nerve gliomas), variable neurological and cognitive
features. NF1 is caused by variants in the neuro ﬁbromin ( NF1)
gene, arising de novo in ~50% of cases. A total of 536 patients with
a clinical suspicion of NF1 were genetically tested. Variantscreening in NF1 was performed in all exonic regions, either by
Sanger or next-generation sequencing (Ion Torrent). To detect
large gene rearrangements in NF1, MLPA was used. A molecular
diagnosis of NF1 was stablished for 274 patients (~51% of cases).Disease-causing variants encompass loss-of-function (n =168),
variants predicted to affect splicing (n =49), missense variants (n
=29), inframe indels (n =6), and large intragenic deletions or
duplications (n =6) or entire gene deletions (n =16). One further
patient with café-au-lait spots, epilepsy, developmental and
psychomotor delay, harbored two NF1 variants: a heterozygous
variant c.731-2A>C co-segregating with NF1 in affected relatives,and a deletion of exon 19. Usually in such context, only the familial
variant would be tested. However, as family history was not
initially available, the entire NF1 coding sequencing and MLPA was
performed. This case shows the importance of a thorough NF1
variants screening. As biallelic disfunction of NF1 gene through a
second-hit is critical for the development of additional clinicalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
289
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608features, precise genotyping is invaluable to establish an early
diagnosis and for accurate genetic counselling.
R. Bastos Ferreira: None. S. Sousa: None. A. Lopes: None. A.
Brandão: None. S. Morais: None. P. Silva: None. F. Lopes: None.
A. Lopes: None. C. Patraquim: None. M. Rocha: None. J. Parente
Freixo: None. J. Sequeiros: None. J. Oliveira: None.
P09.095.D Estimated prevalence of Niemann-Pick type C
disease in Quebec
Marjorie Labrecque1,2, Lahoud Touma1,3, Claude Bhérer4, Antoine
Duquette1,3,5, Martine Tétreault1,3
1CHUM Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Bioinformatics
Program, Department of Biochemestry and Molecular Medecine,Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,3Department of
Neurosciences, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,
4Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada,5André-Barbeau Movement Disorders Unit, CHUM, Montreal,
QC, Canada.
Introduction: Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC) is an autosomal
recessive disease caused by mutations in the NPC1 orNPC2 genes.
It has a large range of symptoms depending on age of onset, thus
making it dif ﬁcult to diagnose. In adults, symptoms appear mainly
in the form of psychiatric problems. The prevalence varies from0,35 to 2,2 per 100000 births depending on the country. The aimof this study is to calculate the estimated prevalence of NPC in
Quebec to determine if it is underdiagnosed in the population.
Method: The CARTaGENE database regroups individuals
between 40-69 years old with no known neurodegenerativedisease. The blood RNA was available for 911 individuals and the
blood DNA for 198 individuals. We used a bioinformatic pipeline
on those individuals to extract the variants in the NPC1/2 genes.
The estimated prevalence was calculated using the Hardy-
Weinberg Equilibrium.
Results: From the 452 variants identi ﬁed, two were classi ﬁed as
pathogenic. The variant p.Pro543Leu was found in three hetero-zygous individuals (AF =0,00148) that share a common haplo-
type. The variant p.Ile1061Thr was found in two heterozygous
individuals (AF =0,000984). Both variants are usually associated
with an infantile or juvenile onset. The estimated prevalencecalculated using those two variants is 1,21:100000 births.
Conclusions: Less than one case of NPC is diagnosed per year
in Quebec which is equivalent to a minimal prevalence of1,19:100000 births. The estimated prevalence found was
1,21:100000. The estimated result of is relatively close, meaning
that NPC is probably not underdiagnosed in Quebec.
M. Labrecque: None. L. Touma: None. C. Bhérer: None. A.
Duquette: None. M. Tétreault: None.
P09.096.A Leukodystrophy in consanguineous Bedouin kin-
dred caused by homozygous novel NOTCH3 nonsense
mutation
Amit Safran
1, Regina Proskorovski ‐Ohayon1, Ohad S. Birk1,2
1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for
Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel,
2Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Introduction: Leukodystrophies are a group of rare metabolic and
genetic diseases affecting the white matter of the brain, spinalcord and often the peripheral nervous system. In the Bedouincommunity in Israel, consanguineous marriages are common,contributing to high rates of congenital malformations and
genetic diseases. Leukodystrophy, presenting with severe mental
retardation and epileptic seizures, was identi ﬁed in a consangui-
neous Bedouin family.
Materials and Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis com-
bined with whole exome sequencing were performed to identify
disease-causing variants. Exome data were narrowed down to a
few variants using the Ingenuity Variant Analysis ™software and in-
house WES data of 500 ethnicity-matched controls. Sangersequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism
analysis was conducted to study recently found and novel variant
segregation within the affected family.
Results: Based on analysis of gene expression databases and
previous human and mouse studies, a homozygous nonsense
mutation in NOTCH3 (c.2221C>T; NM_ 000435.3; p.Q741*) was
identi ﬁed as the most probable disease-causing variant in the family.
Conclusions: NOTCH3 (Notch Receptor 3) encodes a transmem-
brane protein involved in signaling pathways expressed during
embryonic development. Mutations in NOTCH3 have been
previously identi ﬁed as the underlying cause of a cerebral
autosomal dominant disease named CADASIL. Moreover a single
case of Leukodystrophy was identi ﬁed with null NOTCH3 mutation
unexpectedly acting in recessive heredity. These ﬁndings highlight
NOTCH3 null mutations as a cause of autosomal recessive
Leukodystrophy and will allow for carrier testing and early pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis within the studied family and the
larger Bedouin kindred.
A. Safran: None. R. Proskorovski ‐Ohayon: None. O.S. Birk:
None.
P09.097.B Don ’t take your (virtual) panels for granted!
Fulvio D ’Abrusco
1, Valentina Serpieri1,2, Romina Romaniello3,
Filippo Arrigoni4, Roberto Ciccone1, Renato Borgatti5,6, Enza Maria
Valente1,2
1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,
2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy,
3Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scienti ﬁc Institute
IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy,4Neuroimaging
Lab, Scienti ﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco,
Italy,5Dept. of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia,
Pavia, Italy,6Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino
Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
Recently, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized the
genetic diagnosis of rare diseases. The adoption of gene panels,
clinical exome and whole exome sequencing (WES) increased thediagnostic yield even for complex syndromic patients, often leadingto an expansion of the phenotypic spectrum of a given gene.
Nonetheless, in the diagnostic setting, it becomes necessary to
bioinformatically ﬁlter the data, restricting the analysis only to those
genes compatible with the phenotype (so called “virtual panels ”).
For complex phenotypes, choosing the right panel may be tricky,
leading to diagnostic mistakes. We report on two male siblings with
corpus callosum agenesis, cerebellar hypoplasia, microcephaly,severe intellectual disability (ID), seizures, behavioral disorder,myopia, ataxia and peculiar face dysmorphisms. After WES, the
analysis of a virtual panel of 381 genes implicated in corpus
callosum abnormalities disclosed in both siblings a hemizygousvariant in PAK3 , a gene known to cause ID, epilepsy, corpus callosum
agenesis and microcephaly. Yet, the extreme severity of ID and the
peculiar dysmorphisms prompted a further analysis of a larger panelof ID-related genes. This showed a second hemizygous variantshared by both siblings in FRMPD4 , a gene associated to ID, seizures,
behavioral disorders and dysmorphic features. This exampleAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
290
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608conﬁrms the advantage of a wider WES-based strategy over custom
panels and illustrates the importance of a careful phenotyping
before the analysis. Realistically, many complex cases labelled as
“expansion of the phenotypic spectrum ”of a given gene, may
actually harbor mutations in two distinct genes, both concurring tothe phenotype.
F. D ’Abrusco: None. V. Serpieri: None. R. Romaniello: None. F.
Arrigoni: None. R. Ciccone: None. R. Borgatti: None. E. Valente:
None.
P09.098.C Genetic analysis in a large cohort of patients with
hereditary spastic paraplegia: diagnostic challenges
Sara Morais1,2, Ana Filipa Brandão1,2, Ana Lopes1,2, Rita Bastos-
Ferreira1,2, Susana Sousa1,2, Paulo Silva1,2, Fátima Lopes1,2, Alexan-
dra Lopes1,2, Joana Damásio1,2,3, José Leal Loureiro4, Marina
Magalhães3,5, Miguel Leão6, Cristina Costa7, Ricardo Maré8, Jorge
Sequeiros1,2, João Parente Freixo1,2, Jorge Oliveira1,2
1CGPP-IBMC –Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2I3S–Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Santo
António, CHUP, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal,4Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Entre o Douro
e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal,5Serviço de Neurologia,
Hospital Padre Américo, Centro Hospitalar do Tâmega e Sousa,Pena ﬁel, Porto, Portugal,6Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar de
São João /Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal,7Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital Professor Doutor Fernando
Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal,8Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de
Braga, Braga, Portugal.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a large group of
neurodegenerative disorders, characterized by lower limb spasti-
city and weakness, but may include a range of other neurological
and non-neurological symptoms. HSPs are genetically hetero-geneous; at least 70 loci have been identi ﬁed. Other genes,
primarily associated to other phenotypes such as ataxia, have also
been consistently associated with HSP.
At our centre, 139 HSP-related genes are routinely analysed, by
single-gene tests or whole exome-based multigene panels,according to the clinical request. A total of 208 HSP patients
(and 79 affected relatives) were successfully characterized: 118 by
single-gene testing, 78 using multigene panels and 12 throughlarger NGS panels (e.g., clinical exome). Variants were identi ﬁed at
33 different loci; SPAS T( n=89 cases) and SPG11 (n=25) were the
most frequently involved. Also, interesting cases with variants inSYNE1 orALS2 highlight the wide phenotypic spectrum associated
with HSP. Multigene panels contributed to the identi ﬁcation of 66
cases harbouring variants of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance. A large
number of patients (n =90) carried a single (heterozygous) variant
in genes associated to diseases with autosomal recessiveinheritance. Besides new attempts to identify a missing patho-
genic allele, functional studies may also clarify their causative role
and, ultimately, provide a de ﬁnitive diagnosis.
Our results demonstrate the importance of considering over-
lapping phenotypes and differential diagnosis for genes ’selection
for NGS panels design. Given the number of patients without any
variant (n =135), we presume that a signi ﬁcant number of genes
related to HSPs are yet to be uncovered.
S. Morais: None. A. Brandão: None. A. Lopes: None. R. Bastos-
Ferreira: None. S. Sousa: None. P. Silva: None. F. Lopes: None. A.
Lopes: None. J. Damásio: None. J. Leal Loureiro: None. M.
Magalhães: None. M. Leão: None. C. Costa: None. R. Maré: None.
J. Sequeiros: None. J. Parente Freixo: None. J. Oliveira: None.P09.099.D PRKN analysis in Parkinson disease: two decades
experience
Ana Filipa Brandão
1,2, Sara Morais1,2, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1,2,
Susana Sousa1,2, Marina Magalhães3, António Bastos Lima3, José
Alves Grilo Gonçalves4, Leonor Correia Guedes5, Alexandre Mendes3,
Ana Graça Velon6, Carlos Sanchez Bueno7, João Proença8, Maria
Manuela Manuela Costa9, Ana Oliveira10, Joaquim Ferreira5, Mário
Romero Blanco7, Rui Araújo10, Tânia Lampreia11, João Parente
Freixo1,2, Jorge Sequeiros1,2, Jorge Oliveira1,2
1CGPP-IBMC –Centro de Genética Preditiv aeP r e v e n t i v a ,I n s t i t u t od e
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,2i3S
–Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal,3Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário
do Porto, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal,4Serviço de
Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar e Univer s i t á r i od eC o i m b r a ,E P E ,C o i m b r a ,
Portugal,5Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro
Hospitalar de Lisboa Norte, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal,6Serviço de
Neurologia, Hospital de São Pedro, Cen tro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes
e Alto Douro, EPE, Vila Real, Portugal,7Serviço de Neurologia, Centro
Hospitalar do Barlavento Algarvio, SA, Algarve, Portugal,8Serviço de
Neurologia, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Lisboa, Portugal,9Serviço de
Neurologia, Hospital das Forças Armadas - Pólo Porto, Porto, Portugal,
10Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hosp italar Universitário de São João/
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
11Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Egas Moniz, Centro Hospitalar de
Lisboa Ocidental, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, characterized
by rest tremor, muscle rigidity, bradykinesia, postural instability anddementia. Although predominantly sporadic, there are PD patientswith autosomal recessive (AR) or do minant inheritance. Biallelic
variants in the gene for parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase ( PRKN )
is an important cause of AR PD. We describe the PKRN variants pro ﬁle
in a cohort of 524 patients with PD, tested between 2000-2020. PRKN
analysis was performed by Sanger sequencing and/or MLPA, or a
NGS multigene panel. A molecular diagnosis of PRKN-related PD wasestablished in 63 patients, with 3 a dditional cases with variants of
unknown clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS). A pathogenic variant in
heterozygosity was also identi ﬁed in 16 patients. Altogether, 29
PRKN variants have been identi ﬁed: 7 missense, 3 affecting splice-
sites, 2 small frameshift deletions and 1 insertion-deletion, plus 16copy number variants (14 deletio ns, 2 duplications). Overall, 25
variants were classi ﬁed as pathogenic or likely-pathogenic, whereas 4
are VUS. The obtained diagnostic yield (12%) is quite relevantconsidering the high clinical and genetic heterogeneity of PD. The
c.155del change was the most frequently found variant (65% of
cases). Surprisingly, however, large PRKN rearrangements were also
identi ﬁed in a signi ﬁcant proportion (54%) of patients. A de ﬁnitive
d i a g n o s i so fP Da l l o w sp r o p e rp atient management and more
precise genetic counselling of patients and families. As several gene-
targeted therapies for PD have now reached the clinical trial stage(not yet the case for PRKN- related entity), the clinical utility of genetic
testing for PD has expanded considerably.
A. Brandão: None. S. Morais: None. R. Bastos-Ferreira: None.
S. Sousa: None. M. Magalhães: None. A. Bastos Lima: None. J.
Alves Grilo Gonçalves: None. L. Correia Guedes: None. A.
Mendes: None. A. Graça Velon: None. C. Sanchez Bueno: None.
J. Proença: None. M. Manuela Costa: None. A. Oliveira: None. J.
Ferreira: None. M. Romero Blanco: None. R. Araújo: None. T.
Lampreia: None. J. Parente Freixo: None. J. Sequeiros: None. J.
Oliveira: None.
P09.100.A Over-mutated mitochondrial, lysosomal and TFEB-
regulated genes in Parkinson diseaseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
291
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Eulàlia Segur - Bailach1, Olatz Ugarteburu1,Frederic Tort1, Laura
Texidó1, Celia Painous2, Yaroslau Compta2, Maria J Martí2, Antonia
Ribes1, Laura Gort1
1Secció d ’Errors Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquímica
i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBERER., Barcelona,Spain,2Parkinson ’s Disease & Movement Disorders Unit, Hospital
Clínic/IDIBAPS/CIBERNED/European Reference Network for Rare
Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND)/Institut de Neurociències, Universi-tat de Barcelona., Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Association of Parkinson ’s disease (PD) with
mutations in genes involved in lysosomal and mitochondrialfunction has been reported. However, the involvement of other
cellular mechanisms is unknown. We aim to identify novel genetic
associations to better understand the pathogenesis of PD.
Material and Methods: We performed WES in a cohort of 33
PD patients and 30 age-matched controls. We searched for rare
variants in 1665 genes: PD-causative (53), related to lysosomal
function (128), TFEB-regulated (428) and Mitocarta 2.0 (1158). Thevariants were classi ﬁed according to the ACMG criteria.
Results: We identi ﬁed a burden of rare variants in genes
associated to lysosomal or mitocondrial function in PD patients
compared to controls, 45% vs 17% and 76% vs 39% respectively.In particular, we found an enrichment of mutations in genes
encoding for proteins affecting the OXPHOS function and mtDNA
maintenance. Interestingly, an important accumulation of rarevariants in TFEB-regulated genes was observed in PD patients(85% vs 45%). The Z-score calculation using the European
population database (GnomAD) showed an over-representation
of particular variants in 36 of the analyzed genes. Remarkably, 11of these genes have a mitochondrial function and 18 were TFEB-regulated genes.
Conclusions: We suggest the involvement of TFEB-regulated
genes in the genetic susceptibility to PD. This is remarkable asTFEB factor has been reported to be sequestered inside Lewy
Bodies, pointing to a role of TFEB in the pathogenesis of PD. Our
data also reinforce the involvement of lysosomal and mitochon-drial mechanisms in PD. Funding: ISCIII (PIE14/00061), CIBERER.
E. Segur - Bailach: None. O. Ugarteburu: None. F. Tort: None.
L. Texidó: None. C. Painous: None. Y. Compta: None. M. Martí:
None. A. Ribes: None. L. Gort: None.
P09.101.B Diagnostic yield of whole exome sequencing in
early-onset and familial Parkinson ’s disease in the Balkans
AlešMaver
1,Anja Kovanda1, Gaber Bergant1, Natasa Teran1, Irena
Vrečar1, Marija Brankovic2, Milena Jankovic3, Marina Svetel2,
Vladimir S. Kostic2, Ivana Novakovic4, Valentino Ra čki5, Vladimira
Vuletic5, Borut Peterlin1
1Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Neurol-
ogy Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade,Serbia,3Neurology Clinic, CCS, Belgrade, Serbia,4Institute of Human
Genetics and Neurology Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,5Department of Neurology, University of
Rijeka, Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia.
Parkinson ’s disease (PD) is a common neurological disorder,
hallmarked by progressive motor and autonomic dysfunctions andcognitive decline, with a typical onset after the age of 60. PD ismultifactorial, with genetic variation in over 30 genes involved in
PD risk, development, onset and progression. To assess the
genetic component in development of PD in the Balkanpopulation and to determine the diagnostic yield of whole exomesequencing (WES) in our clinical setting, we performed WES on acohort of consecutive patients with early-onset (before age 50)
and/or familial PD. We performed WES analysis of 100 patients
with either early-onset and/or familial PD, consecutively referred
from 2014 to 2021 to our center from Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia.The analysis was based on the Illumina Nextera Coding Exometargeting 37 Mb of exonic coding sequences and sequencing was
performed on Illumina HiSeq 2500 in 2x100 reads paired-end
sequencing mode. Variant interpretation was limited to a panel ofPD associated genes. We determined pathogenic or likelypathogenic variants in PD associated genes of 15% of patients,
while 26% of patients carried variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS) in PD-associated genes. The most commonly affected genein our population was Glucosylceramidase Beta (GBA) (12/15pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants, and 5/26 VUS). The
results show diagnostic yield of WES in PD to be 15%, which is
comparable to similar studies on other populations. GBA variantsrepresent an important genetic contributor to early onset and/or
familiar PD in the Balkan population.
A. Maver: None. A. Kovanda: None. G. Bergant: None. N.
Teran: None. I. Vre čar:None. M. Brankovic: None. M. Jankovic:
None. M. Svetel: None. V.S. Kostic: None. I. Novakovic: None. V.
Rački:None. V. Vuletic: None. B. Peterlin: None.
P09.102.C The study of the role of genetic risk factors in
neurosychological disorders in Russian patients with Parkin-
son ’s disease
Gulnara Akhmadeeva
1, Irina Khidiyatova2, Irina Gilyazova2, Gulnaz
Tayupova3, Salavat Umutbaev4, Azamat Baitimerov3, Rim Magzha-
nov1, Elza Khusnutdinova2
1Bashkir State Medical University Ministry of Healthcare of the
Russian Federation, Ufa, Russian Federation,2Institute of Biochem-
istry and Genetics Ufa Research Study Center, Ufa, RussianFederation,3Clinical Institute of Neurology and Rehabilitation
National medical holding Limited Liability Company «Medstandart»,
Ufa, Russian Federation,4State budgetary healthcare institution
Kuvatov Republican clinical hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Introduction: More than 90% of patients with Parkinson ’s disease
(PD) have various neuropsychological disorders: depression,anxiety and cognitive impairments. We assumed that there aregenetic markers for neuropsychological disorders development in
PD patients among polymorphic variants of genes of the
dopaminergic and serotoninergic systems.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 357 PD patients from
Republic of Bashkortostan. We used MMSE, the Beck depression
inventory (BDI) and the state-trait anxiety inventory (STAI). Theanalysis of 18 SNPs of dopamine and serotonin receptors,serotonin transporter, monoamine oxidase B, catechol-O-methyl-
transferase, tryptophan hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase
genes was performed. The SPSS software was used for statisticalanalysis. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically signi ﬁcant.
Results: Data on the in ﬂuence of the rs6275*A/A genotype of
the DRD2 gene on the development of anxiety in PD patients was
obtained (p =0.041). It has be shown that rs6280*T/T genotype of
DRD3 gene can be a genetic marker of depression development inPD (p=0.023), and shorter alleles (TH*6 and TH*7) of the (TCAT)n
in the TH gene can be a genetic marker of depression with suicidal
behavior (p =0.041). A signi ﬁcant effect of the rs4680 polymorph-
ism of the COMT gene on the MMSE indicators of the cognitive
functions (p =0,019) was established.
Conclusion: Our results show the possible in ﬂuence of some
polymorphic variants of the genes of the dopaminergic system onthe development of certain neuropsychological disorders in
Parkinson ’s disease. It is necessary to conduct more extensiveAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
292
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608studies the larger sampling. The work was supported by RFBR
grant #19-015-00331
G. Akhmadeeva: None. I. Khidiyatova: None. I. Gilyazova:
None. G. Tayupova: None. S. Umutbaev: None. A. Baitimerov:
None. R. Magzhanov: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None.
P09.105.B Analysis of DNM2, EPN2 & EXOC4 relative gene
expression levels in peripheral blood from Parkinson ’s disease
patients
Ekaterina Igorevna Semenova1, Margarita Maksimovna Rudenok1,
Anelya Khanlarovna Alieva1, Alexey Vyacheslavovich Karabanov2,
Sergey Nikolaevich Illarioshkin2, Petr Andreevich Slominsky1, Maria
Igorevna Shadrina1
1The Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre
«Kurchatov Institute», Moscow, Russian Federation,2Research Center
of Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Parkinson ’s disease (PD) is a widespread disorder of
the nervous system. Because of the long prodromal period of the
PD it is necessary to search for prognostic biomarkers. To date,
there is evidence that impaired membrane transport can play animportant role in the pathogenesis of PD; therefore, in our work
we have analyzed changes in the relative mRNA levels of the
DNM2, EPN2 and EXOC4 genes in the peripheral blood fromtreated and untreated patients with PD.
Materials and Methods: In the present work we have studied 2
groups of patients with PD and 2 comparison groups. Analysis of
mRNA levels was performed using reverse transcription and real-time PCR with TaqMan probes.
Results: No signi ﬁcant changes in the expression of the studied
genes were found in the group of untreated patients with PD.
However, signi ﬁcant changes in the expression at the mRNA level
for the DNM2 gene were obtained in the group of treated patients
with PD.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that genes DNM2, EPN2
and EXOC4 are most likely not involved in the pathogenesis of thedisease at the mRNA level in patients with early stage of PD.
Therefore they probably cannot be used as prognostic biomarkers of
PD. Changes in the expression of the DNM2 gene in treated patientswith PD suggest that this gene is may be involved in processesassociated with dopamine agonist therapy. This work was supported
by the Russian Science Foundation (grants no. 20-15-00262).
E.I. Semenova: None. M.M. Rudenok: None. A.K. Alieva: None.
A.V. Karabanov: None. S.N. Illarioshkin: None. P.A. Slominsky:
None. M.I. Shadrina: None.
P09.106.C Dissecting the HLA locus in Parkinson ’s disease in
Europeans
Eric Yu
1,2, Aditya Ambati3, Maren S. Andersen4,5, Lynne Krohn1,2,
Mehrdad A. Estiar1,2, Prabhjyot Saini1,2, Konstantin Senkevich1,2, Yuri
L. Sosero1,2, Ashwin A. K. Sreelatha6, Jennifer A. Ruskey1,2, Farnaz
Asayesh1,2, Dan Spiegelman1, Mathias Toft4,5, Marte K. Viken4,5,
Manu Sharma6, Cornelis Blauwendraat7, Lasse Pihlstrøm4, Emmanuel
Mignot3, Ziv Gan-Or1,2
1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,2The Neuro (Montreal
Neurological Institute-Hospital), Montreal, QC, Canada,3Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA,4Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,
5University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,6University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany,7National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Introduction : Recent evidence from human and animal studies
suggest that the immune system has an important role inParkinson ’s disease (PD). Genetic evidence also nominated immune
related genes such as LRRK2 ,BST1 , and the human leukocyte
antigen ( HLA) locus. In this study, we performed the largest genetic
analysis of the HLA region in PD.
Materials and Methods :W e ﬁne-mapped the HLA locus using
13,770 PD patients, 20,214 proxy-cases and 490,861 controls of
European origin. We used genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) data to impute HLA types and to performed multiple
statistical analyzes, to examine the association of speci ﬁcHLA
types, haplotypes and amino acid changes with PD. We further
performed conditional analyzes to identify speci ﬁc alleles or
genetic variants that drive the association with PD.
Results : Four HLA types were associated with PD after
correction for multiple comparisons: HLA-DQA1 *03:01, HLA-
DQB1 *03:02, HLA-DRB1 *04:01 and HLA-DRB1 *04:04. Haplotype
analyzes followed by amino-acid analysis and conditional analyzessuggested that the association is protective and primarily driven
by three speci ﬁc amino acid polymorphisms present in most HLA-
DRB1 *04 subtypes - 11V, 13H and 33H (OR =0.87 95%CI =0.83-
0.90, p< 8.23x10-9for all three variants). No other effects were
present after adjustment for these amino acids.
Conclusions : Our results suggest that speci ﬁc variants in the
HLA-DRB1 gene are associated with reduced risk of PD, providing
additional evidence for the role of the immune system in PD.Although effect size is small and has no diagnostic signi ﬁcance,
understanding the mechanism underlying this association may
lead to identi ﬁcation of new targets for therapeutics development.
E. Yu: None. A. Ambati: None. M.S. Andersen: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;South-Eastern Regional Health Authority. L. Krohn: None. M.A.
Estiar: None. P. Saini: None. K. Senkevich: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Canada FirstResearch Excellence Fund, Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives. Y.L.
Sosero: None. A.A.K. Sreelatha: None. J.A. Ruskey: None. F.
Asayesh: None. D. Spiegelman: None. M. Toft: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Modest; NorwegianParkinson Research Fund, Reberg ’s legacy. M.K. Viken: None. M.
Sharma: None. C. Blauwendraat: None. L. Pihlstrøm: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
National Health Association, South-Eastern Regional Health
Authority. E. Mignot: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Jazz Pharmaceutical, Alairion, ALPCO,INEXIA, Merck, Orexia, Rhythm, Sunovion. Z. Gan-Or: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Fondsde recherche du Québec - Santé (FRQS) Chercheurs-boursiersaward. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Idorsia, Neuron23,
Handl Therapeutics, Lysosomal Therapeutics Inc, Deer ﬁeld, Light-
house, Prevail Therapeutics, Ono Therapeutics, Denali, InceptionScience.
P09.107.D A Patient with Parkinsonian-Pyramidal Syndrome
due to a TBK1 Mutation
Jelena Pozojevic
1, Diego Santos-García2, Teresa de Deus Fonti-
coba3, Mónica Kurtis4, Josep Gamez5, Christine Klein1, Mariana H. G.
Monje6, Ana Westenberger1
1Institute of Neurogenetics, Lübeck, Germany,2Department of
Neurology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña(CHUAC), A Coruña, Spain,3Section of Neurology, Hospital Arquitecto
Marcide y Hospital Naval, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario deAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
293
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ferrol (CHUF), A Coruña, Spain,4Department of Neurology, Hospital
Ruber Internacional, Madrid, Spain,5Neurology Department, GMA
Clinic, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6HM-
CINAC, Hospital Universitario HM Puerta del Sur, Universidad CEU-San Pablo, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Pathogenic variants in TBK1 cause amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia spectrum neurodegen-erative disorders. Occasionally, patients manifest cerebellar ataxiaand a form of progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal
syndrome/progressive non ﬂuent aphasia. We have identi ﬁed the
ﬁrst patient with a pallidopyramidal syndrome due to a TBK1
mutation.
Methods: Our patient underwent a series of clinical and
neuroimaging examinations at two time points (2011 and 2017).
Genetic investigations included gene-panel sequencing, long-range and quantitative PCR analyses.
Results: At the age of 40 years, our patient manifested with
resting tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity on his left side. Brain MRIwas normal and a DaTSCAN revealed an asymmetric bilateralreduction of striatal tracer uptake. Thus, he was diagnosed with
early-onset Parkinson´s disease. Within six years, the patient
progressively developed a bilateral pyramidal syndrome, mildwearing-off, and dyskinesias. Another DaTSCAN and 18F-DOPApositron emission tomography showed striatal dopaminergic
denervation with right-side predominance and cranio-caudal
progression. He displayed no signs of lower motor neuroninvolvement or cognitive impairment. Gene-panel sequencing
revealed a splicing variant c.701 +1G>A in TBK1 . No alternatively
spliced TBK1 mRNA forms were detected by long-range PCR.
However, quantitative PCR revealed markedly decreased TBK1
levels in the patient sample, as compared to three healthy
controls.
Conclusions: Since the mutant TBK1 mRNA is likely degraded
by nonsense-mediated decay in our patient, haploinsuf ﬁciency is a
conceivable disease mechanism. Our ﬁndings extend the pheno-
typic spectrum of pathogenic variants in TBK1 , indicate a novel
genetic cause of pallidopyramidal syndrome, and suggest screen-ing for TBK1 mutations in patients with atypical parkinsonism.
J. Pozojevic: None. D. Santos-García: None. T. de Deus
Fonticoba: None. M. Kurtis: None. J. Gamez: None. C. Klein:
None. M.H.G. Monje: None. A. Westenberger: None.
P09.108.A De novo variants in the lysinedemethylase PHF2 are
associated with developmental delay, autistic behavior, andfacial dysmorphism
Alexej Knaus
1, Miriam Wojcik2, Miriam Viktor3, Katheryn Grand4,
Pedro A. Sanchez-Lara4, Tzung-Chien Hsieh1, Gaber Bergant5, Wendy
K. Chung6, Alexa Geltzeiler6, Erin Torti7, Peter M. Krawitz1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital, Bonn, Germany,2Division of Newborn Medicine Division
of Genetics and Genomics Boston Children ’s Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA,3Center for Pediatrics, Devision for Neuropediatrics, University
Hospital, Bonn, Germany,4Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA,5Centre for Mendelian
Genomics, Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, UMC Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,6Department of Pediatrics and Medicine,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA,
7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
We report de novo missense variants in PHF2 in three individuals
causing a novel neurodevelopmental disorder characterized bydevelopmental delay, expressive language delay, autistic behavior,
stereotypy and facial dysmorphism. PHF2 is a lysine-speci ﬁcdemethylase that has already been shown to promote memory
consolidation in mice via CREB signaling, however, PHF2 has yet
not been implicated in congenital disorder.The ﬁrst de novo
variant affects the Jumonji-C domain (JmjC), c. 727G>C; p.(Asp243His), probably impairing demethylase activity. The othertwo de novo variants affect highly conserved amino acids in the
plant homeodomain PHD, c.23G>C; p.(Cys8Ser) and c.125C>T; p.
(Ala42Val). The cysteine residues of the PHD domain are crucial informing a complex with Zn2 +, p.(Cys8Ser) is predicted to
compromise DNA binding; while p.(Ala42Val) lies in the highly
conserved α-helix of the PHD domain.Further studies including
gestalt matching and transcriptional pro ﬁling will explore the
speci ﬁc mechanisms implicated in the pathophysiology of de novo
variants in PHF2 .
A. Knaus: None. M. Wojcik: None. M. Viktor: None. K. Grand:
None. P.A. Sanchez-Lara: None. T. Hsieh: None. G. Bergant:
None. W.K. Chung: None. A. Geltzeiler: None. E. Torti: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. P.M. Krawitz:
None.
P09.109.B A variant in PIGK clears up the diagnosis of a
patient with neurological disorder after 4 years beenundiagnosed
Bárbara Fernández Garoz , Verónica Cantarín Extremera, Anna
Duat Rodríguez, Victor Soto Insuga, Elena González Alguacil, JuanJosé García Peñas, Luis González Gutiérrez-Solana, María Jiménez
Legido, Beatriz Bernardino Cuesta, María Luz Ruiz-Falco Rojas,
Nelmar Valentina Ortiz Cabrera
Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored pro-
teins are glycolipids found on many blood cells and served toanchor other proteins to the cell surface. They are critical for
embryogenesis, neurogenesis and cell signalling. Case presenta-
tion: We present a 5-year-old boy, who debuted with epilepsy at 7months of age, with severe neurological manifestations: epilepticencephalopathy, progressive cerebellar atrophy, global develop-
mental delay with axial hypotonia and spastic-dystonic disorder. A
whole exome sequence was performed.
Results: This study reveals the presence of a variant in PIGK
(c.748A>C; p.Thr250Pro) in homozygosity. Following the ACMG
criteria and the relation between phenotype and genotype, we
concluded that this variant is probably pathogenic and respon-sible for the neurodevelopmental disorder present in our patient.
Conclusions: PIGK gene encodes for an enzyme that is involved
in GPI-anchor biosynthesis. Pathogenic variants in PIGK gene are
related to neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia andcerebellar atrophy with or without epilepsy (MIM#618879). This
syndrome has been recently described by Nguyen et al. (Nguyen
et al, Am J Hum Genet, 2020). This disease is an autosomalrecessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by globaldevelopmental delay, which is usually severe, accompanied by
hypotonia with variable intellectual disability. Most patients
develop early-onset seizures and movement disorder, such asataxia or dysmetria associated with progressive cerebellar atrophyon brain imaging. These manifestations are consistent with the
ones presented in our patient. On the other hand, being a recently
described entity, the information available may not be completelyconsistent, and functional studies are needed.
B. Fernández Garoz: None. V. Cantarín Extremera: None.
A.
Duat Rodríguez: None. V. Soto Insuga: None. E. González
Alguacil: None. J. García Peñas: None. L. González Gutiérrez-
Solana: None. M. Jiménez Legido: None. B. Bernardino Cuesta:
None. M. Ruiz-Falco Rojas: None. N. Ortiz Cabrera: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
294
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.110.C Functional analysis of PLXNA1 variants in a novel
neurodevelopmental syndrome with oculo-cerebral anomalies
Paulina Z. M. Kempe1,2,3, Öznur Yilmaz2, Tobias T. Lindenberg2,
Jaya Punetha4,5, Jeshurun C. Kalanithy2, Haktan B. Erdem6, Zeynep C.
Akdemir4, Ender Karaca7, Tadahiro Mitani4, Dana Mara ﬁ4, Jawid M.
Fatih4, Shalini N. Jhangiani8, Boris Keren9, Julien Buratti Buratti9,
Perrine Charles9, Caroline Nava9,10, Davut Pehlivan4, Jennifer E.
Posey4, James R. Lupski4,11,12,8, Ben Odermatt2, Heiko Reutter3,
Gabriel C. Dworschak1,2,3
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2Institute of Anatomy, Medical Faculty, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital
Bonn, Bonn, Germany,4Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,5Department
of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine atMount Sinai, New York City, NY, USA,6Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit
Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,7Department of
Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,USA,8Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,9AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Département de Génétique, Paris, France,10Institut du Cerveau et
de la Moelle épinière, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France,11Texas
Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA,12Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
PLXNA1 encodes for the transmembrane semaphorin receptor
Plexin-A1 which plays a key role in axonal outgrowth and neuronal
migration in the developing central nervous system (CNS).Previously, we reported 3 patients from 3 unrelated families withmonoallelic missense variants and 8 patients from 5 unrelated
families with biallelic variants in PLXNA1 (unpublished).
Knockdown of the zebra ﬁsh homologs plxna1a and plxna1b in
zebra ﬁsh larvae (z ﬂ) by antisense morpholinos (MO) was
performed in wild-type and transgenic z ﬂTg(-3.1ngn1:GFP). We
performed rescue experiments by co-injection of MO togetherwith human PLXNA1 mRNA. The eye development and axonaloutgrowth of the z ﬂwere analyzed in vivo using time-lapse
microscopy. To assess the impact of the discovered alleles in
PLXNA1, we will co-inject MO together with mRNA carrying therespective variants.
MO knockdown of plxna1a and plxna1b in zebra ﬁsh larvae
resembled the human CNS and eye phenotype. The number of
dorsal root ganglia and outgrowing axons as well as the eyediameter of the z ﬂwas signi ﬁcantly reduced. While co-injection of
MO together with human PLXNA1 mRNA resulted in a rescue of
phenotype, the impact of human alleles in PLXNA1 is being testedin this model.
The zebra ﬁsh is a suitable model to study the role of PLXNA1 in
CNS development and axonal outgrowth in vivo. Furthermore, this
model allows the testing of (potentially) pathogenic variants inPLXNA1 in the context of a novel neurodevelopmental syndromewith oculo-cerebral anomalies.BonnNI:Q-614.2954(PZMK); DFG-RE
1723/5-1(HR); NHGRI and NHLBI grant to the Baylor-Hopkins-
Center for Mendelian Genomics[UM1 HG006542](JRL); BONFOR:O-120.0001, Herbert-Reeck-foundation (GCD)
P.Z.M. Kempe: None. Ö. Yilmaz: None. T.T. Lindenberg: None.
J. Punetha: None. J.C. Kalanithy: None. H.B. Erdem: None. Z.C.
Akdemir: None. E. Karaca: None. T. Mitani: None. D. Mara ﬁ:
None. J.M. Fatih: None. S.N. Jhangiani: None. B. Keren: None. J.
Buratti: None. P. Charles: None. C. Nava: None. D. Pehlivan:
None. J.E. Posey: None. J.R. Lupski: None. B. Odermatt: None. H.
Reutter: None. G.C. Dworschak: None.P09.111.D Re-weighting hundreds of polygenic risk scores
improves prediction accuracies of psychiatric and neurological
disorders
Clara Albiñana, Florian Privé, Esben Agerbo, ISPYCH-Broad Con-
sortium, Preben B. Mortensen, John McGrath, Bjarni Vilhjalmsson
Aarhus University, Aarhus V, Denmark.
The genetic architecture underlying psychiatric and neurological
disorders is remarkably complex and highly polygenic. Polygenic
risk scores (PRS) trained on summary statistics from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for these are thereforegenerally underpowered and capture only a fraction of the
estimated heritable variation. However, many psychiatric and
neurological disorders are geneti cally correlated with behavioral
and cognitive traits that have been the focus of large GWAS.PRSs for correlated traits can therefore be used to improve
prediction accuracy of relate d outcomes (Krapohl et al., Mol
Psych 2018).
Here, we make use of 940 GWAS summary statistics for a variety
of diseases and traits to train PRS for 50 psychiatric and
neurological disorders and related subtypes in IPSYCH (Bybjerg-
Grauholm et al., medRxiv 2020). We generated the 940 PRS usingLDpred2-auto (Privé et al., Bioinformatics 2020), which does not
require any validation data to ﬁt hyper-parameters. We then use
these as covariates for two multiPRSs prediction models, penalizedregression and gradient boosted trees
We observe that multiPRS can drastically boost the predic-
tion accuracy compared to marginal (single-outcome) PRS. For
instance, the prediction R2 (adjusted for sex, age, and20 genetic PCs) for the three most prevalent psychiatricdisorders in the IPSYCH cohort ADHD, autism, and depression
was 1.1%, 0.4%, and 2.6% when using the single-outcome PRS
(excluding IPSYCH samples), and 9.1%, 4.0%, and 4.3%respectively using multiPRS. F or some psychiatric diagnoses
we obtain predictive PRS even though GWAS of these are not
yet available.
C. Albiñana: None. F. Privé: None. E. Agerbo: None. P.B.
Mortensen: None. J. McGrath: None. B. Vilhjalmsson: None.
P09.112.A Correlation of GAA genotypes and enzymatic
activity of acid- α-glucosidase among Hungarian Pompe
disease patients
Aniko Gal
1, Zoltan Grosz1, Beata Borsos1, Ildiko Szatmari2, Agnes
Sebok3, Laszlo Javor4, Veronika Harmat5, Katalin Szakszon6, Livia
Dezsi7, Eniko Balku8, Zita Jobbagy9, Agnes Herczegfalvi10, Zsuzsanna
Almassy11, Levente Kerenyi12, Maria Judit Molnar1
1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary,2First Department of Pediatrics,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,3Department of Neurol-
ogy, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary,4Petz Aladár County Hospital,
Győr, Hungary,5Department of Pediatrics, St. Rafael Hospital of Zala
County, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary,6Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary,7Department
of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary,8Department of
Pediatrics, Andras Josa Teaching Hospital, Nyíregyháza, Hungary,
9Department of Neurology, Bács-Kiskun County Hospital, Kecskemet,
Hungary,10II. Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary,11Heim Pal Children ’s Hospital Budapest,
Budapest, Hungary,12Department of Neurology, Szent György
County Hospital, Szekesfehervar, Hungary.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
295
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Pompe disease is caused by the accumulation of
glycogen in the lysosome due to de ﬁciency of the lysosomal acid
alpha-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme. The disease can be divided into
two major groups based on age of onset 1.) late of onset Pompedisease (LOPD) (>12 months); 2.) infant onset Pompe disease(IOPD) (<12 months). In this study, we correlate the enzyme
activity and the genetic alterations in the Hungarian patients with
Pompe disease. Patients and methods: 24 patients with Pompe
disease were enrolled. Enzymatic activity of acid- α-glucosidase
was measured by mass spectrometry. The mutation analysis of
GAA gene was performed with Sanger sequencing and MLPA
methodology.
Results: 21 (87.5%) patients were classi ﬁed as LOPD and 3
(12.5%) as IOPD. In this cohort 15 different pathogenic or likely
pathogenic GAA mutations were detected in homozygous or
compound heterozygous form. The most common alteration wasthe c.-32-13 T>G splice site mutation. By comparing the α-
glucosidase enzyme activity of c.-32-13 T>G homozygous and
compound heterozygous cases, the mean GAA activity inhomozygous form is signi ﬁcantly higher than in the compound
heterozygous cases. The lowest enzyme activity was found in
cases where the c.-32-13 T>G mutation was not present.
Discussion: Based on our study the localization of mutation and
protein domain involvement correlated with the GAA activity. Ourstudy provides valuable information on the Pompe disease
genotype-phenotype correlation, which is expected to facilitate
and improve genetic counseling of affected individuals and theirfamily members.
This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP_
2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002; NKFIH_132812 grants.
A. Gal: None. Z. Grosz: None. B. Borsos: None. I. Szatmari:
None. A. Sebok: None. L. Javor: None. V. Harmat: None. K.
Szakszon: None. L. Dezsi: None. E. Balku: None. Z. Jobbagy:
None. A. Herczegfalvi: None. Z. Almassy: None. L. Kerenyi:
None. M.J. Molnar: None.
P09.113.B MINPP1 prevents intracellular accumulation of
inositol hexakisphosphate and is mutated in PontocerebellarHypoplasia
Ekin Ucuncu
1, Karthyayani Rajamani1, Miranda S. C. Wilson2,
Francesca Picco1, Daniel Medina-Cano1, Nami Altin1, Nadia Bahi-
Buisson1, Catherine Fossoud3, Fabienne Giuliano4, Laurence Col-
leaux1, Lydie Burglen1, Joseph G. Gleeson5, Nathalie Boddaert1,
Vincent Cantagrel1
1Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France,2University College London, London,
United Kingdom,3CHU-Lenval, Nice, France,4Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Nice, Nice, France,5University of California San
Diego, san diego, CA, USA.
Inositol polyphosphates are vital metabolic and secondary
messengers, involved in diverse cellular functions. Therefore, tightregulation of inositol polyphosphate metabolism is essential for
proper cell physiology. Here, we describe a very early-onset
neurodegenerative syndrome caused by loss-of-function muta-tions in the multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 1 gene(MINPP1). Patients from 6 families were found to have a distinct
type of Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia with typical basal ganglia or
thalami involvement on neuroimaging. We found that patient-derived and genome edited MINPP1
-/-induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) are not able to differentiate ef ﬁciently into neurons.
MINPP1 de ﬁciency results in an intracellular imbalance of the
inositol polyphosphate metabolism. This metabolic defect ischaracterized by an accumulation of highly phosphorylatedinositols, mostly inositol hexakisphosphate (IP
6), detected in
HEK293, ﬁbroblasts, iPSCs and differentiating neurons lacking
MINPP1. IP 6has strong chelating properties and is also known to
be a cofactor for multiple enzymes involved in diverse functionsincluding RNA editing and nuclear RNA export. In mutant cells,higher IP
6level is expected to be associated with an increased
chelation of intracellular cations, such as iron or calcium, resulting
in decreased levels of available ions. These data highlight thecritical role of MINPP1 and IP
6regulation in human brain
development and homeostasis.
E. Ucuncu: None. K. Rajamani: None. M.S.C. Wilson: None. F.
Picco: None. D. Medina-Cano: None. N. Altin: None. N. Bahi-
Buisson: None. C. Fossoud: None. F. Giuliano: None. L. Colleaux:
None. L. Burglen: None. J.G. Gleeson: None. N. Boddaert: None.
V. Cantagrel: None.
P09.114.C A biallelic frameshift indel in PPP1R35 as a cause of
primary microcephaly
Moez Dawood1, Gulsen Akay1, Tadahiro Mitani1, Jawid M. Fatih1,
Jaya Punetha1, Jaya Punetha1, Dana Mara ﬁ1,2, Christopher M.
Grochowski1, Haowei Du1, Angad Jolly1, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir1,3,
Shalini N. Jhangiani1, Jill V. Hunter1,4, Davut Pehlivan1,4, Jennifer E.
Posey1, Claudia M. B. Carvalho1,5, Richard A. Gibbs1, James R.
Lupski1,4
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,2Kuwait University,
Safat, Kuwait,3The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX, USA,4Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX,
USA,5Paciﬁc Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 35 ( PPP1R35 ) encodes a
centrosomal protein required for recruiting microtubule-binding
elongation machinery. PPP1R35 interacts with several established
primary microcephaly (MCPH) genes, and multiple PPP1R35 model
organism studies hypothesize PPP1R35 as a candidate MCPH gene.
Here, using exome sequencing and family-based rare variantanalyses, we report a homozygous, frameshifting indel deletingthe canonical stop codon in the last exon of PPP1R35 [Chr7:
c.753_*3delGGAAGCGTAGACCinsCG (p.Trp251Cysfs*22)] in a 3.7
Mb AOH block in a proband with severe MCPH (-4.3 SD at birth,-6.1 SD by 42 months), pachygyria, and global developmentaldelay from a consanguineous Turkish family. Droplet digital PCR
conﬁrmed mutant mRNA expression in ﬁbroblasts. In silico
prediction of the translation of mutant PPP1R35 protein is
expected to be elongated by 22 amino acids before encountering
another stop codon. Aside from the proband family, this complex
indel allele was absent in public databases (ClinVar, gnomAD,ARIC, 1000 genomes) and our in-house database of 14,000 +
exomes including 1,800 +Turkish exomes. A comprehensive
literature search for PPP1R35 mutations yielded two probands
affected with severe microcephaly (-15 SD and -12 SD) with thesame homozygous indel from a single, consanguineous, Iranianfamily from a cohort of 404 predominantly Iranian families. The
lack of heterozygous cases in two large cohorts representing the
genetic background of these two families decreases suspicion fora founder allele. Finally, we propose two origin models for thesame mutation in two different populations mediated by hairpin
formation between complimentary CG rich segments ﬂanking the
stop codon.
M. Dawood: None. G. Akay: None. T. Mitani: None. J.M. Fatih:
None. J. Punetha: None. J. Punetha: None. D. Mara ﬁ:None. C.M.
Grochowski: None. H. Du: None. A. Jolly: None. Z. Coban-
Akdemir: None. S.N. Jhangiani: None. J.V. Hunter: None. D.
Pehlivan: None. J.E. Posey: None. C.M.B. Carvalho: None. R.A.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
296
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Gibbs: None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; stock
ownership in 23andMe; coinventor on multiple US and European
patents related to molecular diagnostics for inherited neuropa-thies, eye diseases, and bacterial genomic ﬁngerprinting. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; paid consultant for Regen-
eron Pharmaceuticals.
P09.115.D Novel variants identi ﬁed in the rare undiagnosed
families
Farzane Zare Ashra ﬁ1, Fatemeh Peymani1, Marzieh Mohseni1,
Sanaz Arzhangi1, Mohammad R. Akbari2,3,4, Hossein Najmabadi1,5,
Kimia Kahrizi1
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,2Women ’s
College Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada,3Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada,4Institute of Medical Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,5Kariminejad - Najmabadi Pathology
& Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of.
Introduction: Rare disorders refer to a group of diseases that
affect less than 200,000 people in the United States or less than
2,000 people in Europe. These diseases, although individually rare,are generally prevalent. It has been estimated that there are about7000 rare genetic diseases that the genetic cause is recognized for
about half. Many of them affect the nervous system; causing some
common phenotypes including intellectual disability, autism,epilepsy, ataxia, muscular dystrophy and neuropathy. Recentadvances in molecular approaches like next-generation sequen-
cing (NGS) make it possible to reach an accurate molecular and
subsequently clinical diagnosis for patients with presumed raregenetic disorders who remained previously undiagnosed.
Materials and methods: 20 families with an undiagnosed rare
genetic disorder were studied by whole-exome sequencing (WES).
Results: 18 causative variants in genes ( LARP7(2), TWNK,
L2HGDH, UNC80, ANO10, TRRAP, STAMBP, MAP3K20, ZNF142,
TAF2, WDR81, CHRNE, EFTUD2, SPTBN2 ,MAN1B1 ,BCL11B and
DIAPH3 ) have been detected by WES in 15 families but no
candidate variants were identi ﬁed in 4 families and one family is
under study by using whole-genome sequencing (WGS). In total,
we identi ﬁed 12 single variants in 12 patients which one of them
is a known copy number variation (CNV) reported for hearingimpairment.
Conclusions: NGS approaches can signi ﬁcantly improve diag-
nostics of rare genetic disorders. We are reporting BCL11B variant
as a de novo mutation as it has been reported previously in otherstudies. This study was supported by INSF (Iran National Science
Foundation) with grant number 960111200 to Kimia Kahrizi.
F. Zare Ashra ﬁ:None. F. Peymani: None. M. Mohseni: None. S.
Arzhangi: None. M. Akbari: None. H. Najmabadi: None. K.
Kahrizi: None.
P09.116.A Mapping the GBA1 gene rare variants and their
effects in a Hungarian Parkinson ’s Disease Cohort
Tamás Szlepák
1, Annabel Plamen Kossev1, Dóra Csabán1, Anett
Illés2, Beáta Borsos1, Péter Balicza1, Zoltán Grosz1, Annamária
Takáts1, Péter Klivényi3, Mária Judit Molnár1
1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,2Pentacore Laboratories
and Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,3University of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.Introduction : Parkinson ’s Disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative
disorder associated with genetic alterations in cc. 7-15% of the
cases. GBA1 is considered one of the major genetic risk factor for
PD. The frequency of its rare variants in distinct ethnic populationsand the penetrance of these variants in individuals can be
different. Therefore, the genetic burden of GBA1 variants and the
exact genotype-phenotype correlation is still a hot topic today.
Methods : Patients from the institute ’s biobank (NEPSYBANK)
were selected for the study (N =116). The enrollment criteria
included the diagnosis of PD, early onset and/or positive family
history for PD, and negative ﬁndings for other PD related genes.
The occurrence of GBA1 variants were identi ﬁed by either Sanger
or NGS. Pathogenicity of the variants was determined according to
the ACMG guidelines.
Results :GBA1 rare variants were detected in 21 PD patients. The
most frequent mutations are the T408M(n =12) and E365K(n =4).
We identi ﬁed 5 further rare variants (n =1-2), two patients had 2
heterozygous variants. Most of the patients with T408 hadcognitive decline and tremor dominant PD, with E365K depressionbeside the typical PD signs. Two patients had atypical PD with
spasticity and/or pyramidal signs. Cognitive de ﬁcit was present in
35% of the GBA1 positive cases.
Conclusion :GBA1 rare variants were present in 18,1% of our PD
cohort. The early identi ﬁcation of these patients is important, since
they may have targeted causative treatment by using the
substrate reduction treatment or lysosomal exocytosis stimulator.This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP and
with the FIKP program
T. Szlepák: None. A.P. Kossev: None. D. Csabán: None. A. Illés:
None. B. Borsos: None. P. Balicza: None. Z. Grosz: None. A.
Takáts: None. P. Klivényi: None. M.J. Molnár: None.
P09.117.B Genome-Wide Association and Whole Exome
Sequencing Studies reveal a Novel Candidate Locus for
Restless Legs Syndrome
Ufuk Ergun
1, Bahar Say1, Sezen Guntekin Ergun2, Ferda Percin3,
Levent Inan4, Sukran Kaygisiz5,Pınar Gelener Asal6, Buket Yurteri2,
Maksim Struchalin7, Dmitry Shtokalo8,Mehmet A. Ergun3
1Kırıkkale University, K ırıkkale, Turkey,2Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey,3Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey,4Ankara Training and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,5Ordu University Education and
Research Hospital, Ordu, Turkey,6Near East University, Lefkosa,
Cyprus,7AcademGene Ltd, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,8A.P.
Ershov Institute of informatics systems, Moscow, Russian Federa-
tion.
The restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common heritable neurologic
disorder which is characterized by an irresistible desire to move
and unpleasant sensations in the legs. We aim to identify newvariants associated with RLS by performing genome-wide linkageand subsequent association analysis of forty member ’s family with
history of RLS. We found evidence of linkage for three loci 7q21.11
(HLOD =3.02), 7q21.13-7q21.3 (HLOD =3.02) and 7q22.3 (HLOD
=3.09). Fine-mapping of those regions in association study using
exome sequencing identi ﬁed SEMA3A (p-value =8.5·10-4),
PPP1R9A (p-value =7.2·10-4), PUS7 (p-value =8.7·10-4), CDHR3
(p-value =7.2·10-4), HBP1 (p-value =1.5·10-4) and COG5 (p-value
=1.5·10-4) genes with p-values below signi ﬁcance threshold.
Linkage analysis with subsequent association study of exome
variants identi ﬁed six new genes associated with RLS mapped on
7q21 and q22.
U. Ergun: None. B. Say: None. S. Guntekin Ergun: None. F.
Percin: None. L. Inan: None. S. Kaygisiz: None. P. Gelener Asal:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
297
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608None. B. Yurteri: None. M. Struchalin: None. D. Shtokalo: None.
M.A. Ergun: None.
P09.119.D Prevalence of Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 in
Yakutia (Russia)
Afanasy I. Fedorov1, Aitalina L. Sukhomyasova1, Irina A. Nikolaeva2,
Anastasia A. Maksimova1, Aiaan V. Ivanov1, Polina I. Golikova1,
Nadezhda R. Maksimova1
1North-Eastern Federal University named after M.K. Ammosov,
Yakutsk, Russian Federation,2Medical Genetic Center, Republican
Hospital №1–“National Medical Center ”, Yakutsk, Russian Federa-
tion.
Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) refers to
polyglutamine diseases. It is a progressive and late-manifestation
neurodegenerative disorder.
Material and Methods: We analyzed SCA1 Register data of the
Medical Genetic Center of the Republican Hospital No. 1 (NationalCenter of Medicine). Monitoring of carriers of the SCA1 mutation
covers a 20-year period.
Results: During the monitoring period, the prevalence of SCA1
in Yakutia increased from 35 to 77.6 cases per 100,000 Yakuts.
Currently, 532 carriers of mutation have been registered, of which
376 with clinical manifestations. The SCA1 mutation in Yakutia aredistributed over the following geographic foci - Northern(Indigirka River), Central (Lena-Aldan inter ﬂuve) and Southwestern
(Vilyui and Lena rivers). Currently, the expansion of the boundaries
of the Northern and Southwestern focuses of mutation has beenestablished. New isolated cases of mutation carriage are alsorecorded in the southern regions. The accumulation of the
mutation continues in the Central focus. The median number of
CAG repeats for the mutant allele is 46 repeats. The median age ofcarriers is 43 years old.
Conclusion: The increase in the prevalence of the studied
mutation can be explained by the improvement of moleculargenetic diagnostic methods. Currently, among the population ofYakutia, the accumulation and spread of the SCA1 mutation
continues. This requires further improvement of methods for the
prevention of this hereditary disease. Research is part of theproject FSRG-2020-0014 “Arctic Genomics: epidemiology, heredity
and pathology ”.
A.I. Fedorov: None. A.L. Sukhomyasova: None. I.A. Nikolaeva:
None. A.A. Maksimova: None. A.V. Ivanov: None. P.I. Golikova:
None. N.R. Maksimova: None.
P09.120.A Oxytocin receptor gene and CD38 gene polymorph-
isms association with social functioning in schizophrenia
Vera Mikhailova
1,2, Victoria Plakunova1, Tatiana Lezheiko1
1The Mental Health Research Center (MHRC), Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Social adaptation is the main ability for any
schizophrenia patient and its family to judge whether the therapy
is working or not, improving of social functioning is the mail goalto reach for healthcare professionals. Oxytocin plays an importantrole in social behavior, multiple OXTR polymorphisms has been
observed to be associated with autism, OCD, bipolar disorder.
Materials and Methods: Social functioning was assessed with
the Personal and Social Performance (PSP) scale in 933 patients(women 412), aged 36,5 ± 12,3 years, with ICD-10 diagnosis of
schizophrenia or schizoaffective psychosis. Patients were strati ﬁed
into moderate and good or poor (n =233) social functioning
groups. Genotyping was performed with HRM (High ResolutionMelt) method. Allele frequencies were aligned with Hardy-Weinberg equation ( р>0,05).
Results: Logistic regression models were estimated to examine
the association between social functioning, SNPs and environ-mental factors such as birth complications, parental alcoholism,history of abuse in childhood or puberty etc. Adjusted models
included as signi ﬁcant interaction between CD38(rs3796863) and
father ’s alcoholism (p < 0,05); OXTR(rs53576) interaction with
childhood dif ﬁculties (p < 0,001). Patients with CD38(rs3796863)
ССgenotype who have reported father ’s alcoholism were less
likely to be in moderate and good social performance group (OR
=0,26, 95%CI 0,20-0,34). OXTR rs53576 G allele carriers with a
history of abuse were also less likely to be in moderate and good
social performance group (OR =0,06, 95%CI 0,01-0,30).
Conclusion: Oxytocin pathway polymorphisms were found to
be associated with social functioning and environmental factors inschizophrenia patients, CD38 rs3796863 Сand OXTR rs53576 G
being risk alleles.
V. Mikhailova: None. V. Plakunova: None. T. Lezheiko: None.
P09.121.B Developing expression system for evaluation of
SCN1A splicing alterations
Peter Sparber , Kseniya Davidenko, Margarita Sharova, Alexandra
Filatova, Mikhail Skoblov
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the SCN1A
gene is considered to be one of the most common causes ofchildhood-onset epilepsies. To date almost 200 pathogenic
variants are annotated as splice-affecting, many of which locate
outside of the canonical splice sites dinucleotides. However, onlyfew were con ﬁrmed to disrupt splicing by a valid splicing assay.
Here, we develop a robust splicing assay for functional
characterization of intronic and exonic variants covering all
protein coding exons of the SCN1A gene.
Material and methods: Splicing effects were predicted using
HSF3.1, MaxEntScan and SpliceAI. Mini-, midi- and maxi-genes
plasmids with coding SCN1A exons were constructed based on
pSpl3-Flu2 splicing vector. The intronic/exonic variants of interestwere introduced by site-directed mutagenesis. The plasmids were
transfected into HEK293 cells using calcium phosphate transfec-
tion method. Splicing pattern was evaluated using RT-PCR withfollowing Sanger sequencing.
Results: Splicing vectors with different genomic context, several
promoters of varying strength, containing different exons were
created in order to reproduce the wild-type splicing pattern of theSCN1A gene. 24 previously published intronic variants and one
novel missense variant were then testes for splicing alteration. The
most common splicing change was exon skipping (37.5%)
followed by complex splicing changes (29.2%) and crypticacceptor site activation (16.6%). 4 tested variants showed nosplicing change, although being reported as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic in the literature.
Conclusion: A splicing assay for the SCN1A gene was created.
Testing of more than 20 variants con ﬁrmed the importance of
functional analysis for proper variant annotation.
P. Sparber: None. K. Davidenko: None. M. Sharova: None. A.
Filatova: None. M. Skoblov: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
298
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.122.C Proteomics of the dentate gyrus reveals semantic
dementia speci ﬁc biology
Merel O. Mol1, Shamiram Melhem1, Suzanne S. M. Miedema2, Harro
Seelaar1, Netherlands Brain Bank3, August B. Smit2, John C. van
Swieten1, Jeroen G. J. van Rooij1
1Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,2Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Netherlands Institute for
Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Semantic dementia (SD) is a subtype of frontotem-
poral dementia (FTD) characterized by impaired word compre-
hension and semantic memory. The consistent neuropathological
diagnosis is FTD-TDP subtype C, with TDP-43 protein aggregatesin the temporal cortex and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus.Despite this striking clinicopathological concordance, the patho-
physiological mechanisms remain largely unknown.
Materials and Methods: We assessed the relative protein
abundance changes in laser capture micro-dissected dentategyrus of 15 SD patients and 14 age- and sex-matched non-
demented controls using a label-free quantitative proteomics
approach. We identi ﬁed proteins and biological pathways that
might be uniquely altered in SD, by comparing to 9 other large
FTD and Alzheimer ’s Disease (AD) proteomics datasets. Validation
experiments on selected candidate proteins are ongoing, includ-ing immunoblotting.
Results: 145 of all 2414 detected proteins showed differential
abundance (FDR < 5%) in SD patients. 73 proteins were observed
in at least 2 other proteomics studies in FTD/AD. The remaining 72proteins were regarded as potentially SD speci ﬁc and selected for
further analyses. Functional enrichment revealed an overrepre-
sentation of the cell-cell adherens junction and the cadherin-
catenin complex, represented by multiple upregulated proteinswithin this complex, including CDH2/N-cadherin, CTNNB1/ß-
catenin, and JUP/plakoglobin.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings indicate an SD speci ﬁc upregulation
of cell adhesion proteins constituting the cadherin-catenincomplex at the synaptic membrane. Validation of several proteins
by immunoblotting is currently being performed. This study
contributes to an improved understanding of the diseaseprocesses in SD, and demonstrates the value of quantitativeproteomics to differentiate the pathophysiological mechanisms of
speci ﬁc subtypes of dementia.
M.O. Mol: None. S. Melhem: None. S.S.M. Miedema: None. H.
Seelaar: None. .. Netherlands Brain Bank: None. A.B. Smit:
None. J.C. van Swieten: None. J.G.J. van Rooij: None.
P09.123.D Clinical and genetic characteristics of two patients
from Russia with SESAME syndrome due to mutations of the
KCNJ10 gene
Natalia Semenova , Olga Schagina, Andrey Marakhonov
Reseach Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: SESAME syndrome (seizures, sensorineural deaf-
ness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalance) is
caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation intheKCNJ10 gene. Generally, patients have severe symptoms of the
disease.
Materials and methods: We present two children of the same
age (10 years old) with SESAME syndrome and different clinicalpictures. Both of them were from non-consanguineous parentswith no signi ﬁcant family history. Patient 1 is male and hasseizures, mental retardation, and severe electrolyte imbalance. He
could not sit and walk by himself. He could understand spoken
language but could not speak. The serum K-level was 2.3-2.5
mmol/l (normal 4.1-5.3 mmol/l). Patient 2 is a female with ataxia,intention tremor, and dyskinesia. She studies in an ordinary schoolwith high grades. Her speech has elements of chanting. At the age
of 4y11m, she had febrile seizures and started taking antiepileptic
therapy. Without therapy, ataxia and tremor increase and she hasa headache. The details of their symptoms are presented in theTable.
Results: The diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by WES in Patient 1 and
WGS in Patient 2. We identi ﬁed novel variants in the KCNJ10 gene
in the compound heterozygous state: c.322T>C/ с.643G>A and
c.148C>T/c.925T>A. The variants were veri ﬁed by Sanger sequen-
cing. Parents and siblings are healthy and heterozygous for either
mutant allele.
Conclusions: We describe patients with the different pheno-
types of SESAME syndrome.
N. Semenova: None. O. Schagina: None. A. Marakhonov:
None.
P09.124.A Discrepancy in phenotypes between SHANK2
deletion and nonsense mutations in hiPSC-derived neural
stem cells
Flavia-Bianca B. Cristian1, Carsten Sticht2, Ralph Röth1,3, Gudrun A.
Rappold1, Simone Berkel1
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human
Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany,2Core
Facility Next Generation Sequencing, Medical Faculty Mannheim,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
299
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany,3nCounter Core Facility,
Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidel-
berg, Germany.
SHANK2 mutations have been consistently associated with autism
spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the speci ﬁc consequences of
these mutations at the molecular/cellular level, including the cell
types/developmental stages that are crucially relevant for thephenotype, remain unclear. A fundamental question is whetherthe affected processes are limited to synapse formation/function,
or if the pathobiology of the disorder starts earlier, either in
differentiating neurons or already in neuronal progenitors. Wehave reprogrammed ﬁbroblasts from a trio –two neurotypical
parents and their daughter diagnosed with ASD, harboring a de
novo 120 kb deletion in SHANK2 –into induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), and subsequently differentiated them into neuralstem cells (NSCs). For comparison, we used four additional iPSC
lines: one derived from a patient with a heterozygous nonsense
mutation in SHANK2 (R841X), a CRISPR/Cas9-engineered homo-
zygous SHANK2 knockout line, and their respective isogenic
controls. Interestingly, only the NSCs derived from the deletion
patient presented a strikingly different morphology, whereas the
other SHANK2 -deﬁcient lines were indistinguishable from wildtype
cells. Moreover, the SHANK2 deletion NSCs showed a tendency
towards premature differentiation into neurons. The discrepancy
between the phenotypes, coupled with comparable SHANK2
levels in the deletion patient and controls, suggests that thealtered phenotype might be caused by genetic factors indepen-
dent of SHANK2 expression. In fact, this SHANK2 deletion removes
not only exon 16, but also a large portion of the adjacent intron.This region harbors numerous enhancers hypothesized to berelevant for general neural differentiation, and their deletion could
contribute to the observed phenotype.
F.B. Cristian: None. C. Sticht: None. R. Röth: None. G.A.
Rappold: None. S. Berkel: None.
P09.125.B Three novel heterozygous variants in the MACF1,
POLA1 and TOP3B genes: a new phenotype associated with
theTOP3B gene?
Betül Gerik-Celebi
1, Hilal Aydin2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Balikesir Ataturk City Hospital,
Balikesir, Turkey,2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Balikesir
University Faculty of Medicine, Balikesir, Turkey.
Introduction: Epilepsy is a multifactorial and heterogeneous
disorder that occurs mainly due to structural, metabolic,immunological and genetic reasons. Epilepsy can be seen as partof the clinical spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities, single
gene disorders, microdeletion and duplication syndromes, with
different inheritance patterns, pathophysiology, and accompany-ing dysmorphic and / or non-dysmorphic ﬁndings. It is extremely
important to diagnose patients with epilepsy, to know additional
preventable ﬁndings, to recover completely with treatment in
some of them, and to prevent the emergence of individuals withsimilar ﬁndings with prenatal preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed using Illumina HiSeq 4000 instrument on four different
patients who presented with epilepsy and dysmorphic symptoms.We used sanger sequencing for mother and father carrier
screenings.Results: As a result of whole exome sequencing analysis
NM_012090.5: c.3133G>T: p.Val1045Leu, NM_016937.4:
c.1436C>T: p.Thr479Ile, NM_003935.5: c.2018T>A: p.Leu673Gln
novel heterozygous variants were detected in the MACF1, POLA1
and TOP3B genes, respectively, and the homozygous SLC13A5
gene: c.425C>T: p.Thr142Met mutation. In the analysis of POLA1
gene segregation, it was observed that the variant was inherited
from the mother. Parent studies of other variants continue.
Conclusions: In this study, we found two novel heterozygous
variants associated with the extremely rare diseases Lissencephaly
9 with complex brainstem malformation (LIS9 [MIM no: 618325)
and Van Esch-O ’Driscoll syndrome (VEODS [MIM no: 301030]).
Although the TOP3B gene is not de ﬁned as the genotype of a
particular disease in OMIM, its pathogenic variants have been
associated with epilepsy, cognitive and behavioral disorders.
B. Gerik-Celebi: None. H. Aydin: None.
P09.127.D Familywise whole-genome linkage analysis of
speci ﬁc language impairment (SLI) identi ﬁes novel loci and
replicates previous ﬁndings
Erin M. Andres
1, Kathleen Kelsey Earnest1, Shelley D. Smith2, Mabel
L. Rice1, Muhammad Hashim Raza1
1University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA,2University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
Introduction: Individuals with speci ﬁc language impairment (SLI)
are often slow to talk and their performance on multiple measures
of language remains below their age-matched peers throughoutdevelopment, despite no known cause and typical non-verbalintelligence. Twin and family studies indicate genetic factors are
involved in SLI. Although there are numerous reports of genomic
regions and genes, the underlying causal pathways of SLI have notbeen explained.
Materials and Methods: We used SNP genotyping data from
six families (N =60) followed longitudinally, all with multiple
members who have SLI, to perform genome-wide parametriclinkage analysis. SLI phenotype status was categorically de ﬁned
based on the lowest score across time points on an age-
appropriate standardized omnibus language measure. Behavioralinformation was available for both parents of each proband.
Results: Suggestive linkage at 14q11.2-q13.3 in family 489
(LOD=2.4) replicated a previous region of interest. Additionally, a
three-branch extended family (315) showed linkage to a novel SLIlocus at 15q24.3-25.3 (LOD =3.06), while another family (300)
showed suggestive linkage at 4q31.23-q35.2 (LOD =2.4). All the
highest LOD scores were identi ﬁed under a recessive mode of
inheritance. The other three families did not reveal suggestivelinkage.
Conclusions: This initial study of families from the KU SLI cohort
indicates the continued importance of family-based investigationof complex disorders, like SLI. The results will serve as thefoundation for targeted follow-up inquiry to identify shared gene
effects among families segregating SLI. Funding: NIDCD
(T32DC000052 and R01DC001803)
E.M. Andres: None. K.K. Earnest: None. S.D. Smith: None. M.L.
Rice: None. M.H. Raza: None.
P09.128.A Identi ﬁcation of enhancer regions to expose novel
genetic causes of spinocerebellar ataxiaAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
300
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Fatemeh Ghorbani , Eddy N. de Boer, Kim A. de Lange, Dineke S.
Verbeek, Helga Westers, Cleo C. van Diemen
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of
genetically heterogeneous, dominantly inherited ataxias.
Although 38 SCA genes are known, approximately 25% of patients
remain genetically undiagnosed upon testing of the codingregions of SCA genes for variations. We hypothesize that variants
in the regulatory regions of SCA genes might contribute to the
disease in some genetically undiagnosed patients. Here, we aim toidentify the yet unknown cerebellar enhancers of SCA genes withthe ultimate goal to screen these regions for variations in patients.
Materials and methods: We selected four genes, TBP, ATXN3,
ATXN1 and ITPR1 , for enhancer identi ﬁcation in neuroblastoma SH-
SY5Y cells and healthy human cerebellum using 4C-seq. Putativeenhancers were prioritized for follow-up studies by overlapping
cerebellar/SH-SY5Y 4C-seq data with publicly available SH-SY5Y/
cerebellar ATAC-seq, ChiP-seq and Dnase-seq data. Next, theseregions will be validated with in vitro luciferase assays andscreened for genetic variations in 500 genetically undiagnosed
SCA patients.
Results: The 4C-seq data showed 2, 3 and 1 shared putative
enhancer regions between cerebellum and SH-SY5Y for TBP,
ATXN3, ATXN1 , respectively, after prioritization with ATAC-seq,
ChiP-seq and Dnase-seq data. Additionally, 2, 1 and 7 putativeenhancer regions were unique for the cerebellum for ATXN3,
ATXN1 and ITPR1 , respectively.
Conclusions: Putative cerebellar and SH-SY5Y enhancer regions
are quite similar for three of the four SCA genes now tested. Theidenti ﬁcation of enhancers will help to understand how the
expression of SCA genes is regulated in the human cerebellum
and whether variation in these regions may lead to disease.
F. Ghorbani: None. E.N. de Boer: None. K.A. de Lange: None.
D.S. Verbeek: None. H. Westers: None. C.C. van Diemen: None.
P09.130.C Brain region speci ﬁc effects on the expression of
glucocorticoid receptor-regulated genes
Nathalie Gerstner
1,2,3, Anthodesmi Krontira1,3, Janine Knauer-
Arloth1,2, Elisabeth B. Binder1,4
1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany,2Institute of
Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich,Germany,3International Max Planck Research School for Transla-
tional Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany,4Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Functional variants increasing the risk for psychiatric disorders
alter the transcriptional response of glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
target genes. The GR-regulated transcripts form brain-regionspeci ﬁc co-expression networks whose structure is affected by
different behavioral stressors throughout development in mouse
models. To further study the regional speci ﬁcity of brain response
to GR activation, we stimulated with glucocorticoids or vehicle 30mice for four hours, isolated eight distinct brain regions (prefrontal
cortex-PFC, amygdala, cerebellum-CER, paraventricular nucleus
of the hypothalamus, dorsal and ventral cornu ammonis 1 anddorsal and ventral dentate gyrus) and performed RNA sequencing.Proﬁling patterns of differential gene expression (DE) in each
of the brain regions, we observed a strong response of the PFC
(245 unique differentially expressed (DE) genes, FDR 10%) and theCER (176 unique DE genes), while 172 genes were differentiallyexpressed across all regions. Furthermore, we employed aprior-guided gene expression network inference strategy to
analyze GR-regulated co-expression patterns within and across
brain regions. We map the identi ﬁed transcriptional pro ﬁles to a
circuit-level in order to get a better understanding of themolecular mechanisms involved in the brain response to stress.
N. Gerstner: None. A. Krontira: None. J. Knauer-Arloth: None.
E.B. Binder: None.
P09.131.D STXBP1 splicing variant caused developmental
delay, hypotony and dysmorphic features without epilepsy
Ahmet Yesilyurt
1, Eyyup Uctepe2, Sait Tumer1, Nisa Esen1
1Acibadem Labgen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey,
2Acıbadem Labmed/Ankara Tissue Typing Laboratory, Ankara,
Turkey.
STXBP1 gene mutations are among the most common mutations
in early onset epileptic encephalopathies. Pathogenic variants inthe STXBP1 gene are associated with neonatal or infantile onsetrefractory epilepsy, EEG abnormality, and global developmental
retardation. However, some pathogenic STXBP1 variants has been
reported with developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypo-tonia and ataxia without epilepsy. Here, we report a 2 year-old girl
patient who was admitted to our clinic with developmental delay,
hypotony and dysmorphic features (macrocephaly, ﬂat occiput,
wide forehead, cup shaped ears, depressed nasal bridge,hypoplastic nasal wings, short neck and strabismus) without
epilepsy. Brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed mild
hyperintense gliotic signals compatible with mild hypoxicischemic sequelae. We performed whole exome sequence analysis(WES) and identi ﬁed a heterozygous splicing mutation (c.1029
+1G>A) in STXBP1 gene (NM_003165.6). This study reinforces the
idea that epilepsy is not a mandatory feature of patients with aSTXBP1 mutation.
A. Yesilyurt: None. E. Uctepe: None. S. Tumer: None. N. Esen:
None.
P09.132.A Burden of rare variants in ANK2, AKAP9 and TSC2
genes supports membrane traf ﬁcking and cytoskeletal pro-
tein binding as biological processes in patients with severetinnitus
Sana Amanat
1, Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1, Joseph Sollini2, Patricia
Perez-Carpena1, Juan M. Espinosa-Sanchez1,3, Ismael Aran4, Andres
Soto-Varela5, Angel Batuecas ‐Caletrio6, Barbara Canlon7, Patrick
May8, Christopher R. Cederroth9,2,7, Jose Antonio Lopez-Escamez1,3,10
1GENYO-Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research –Pﬁzer/Uni-
versity of Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada, Spain,2Hearing
Sciences, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, School of Medicine,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom,3Department
of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria, ibs.Granada,
Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain,4Depart-
ment of Otolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra,Pontevedra, Spain,5Division of Otoneurology, Department of Otorhi-
nolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago, Spain,6Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital
Universitario de Salamanca, IBSAL Salamanca Spain, Salamanca,Spain,7Laboratory of Experimental Audiology, Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Swe-
den,8Bioinformatics Core, Luxembourg Centre for System Biomedicine,
University of Luxemburg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg,9National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Nottingham Biomedical ResearchCentre, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Ropewalk House,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
301
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Nottingham, United Kingdom,10Department of Surgery, Division of
Otolaryngology, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Severe tinnitus is a heterogeneous condition reported
in 1% of the population, showing a signi ﬁcant heritability. It is often
associated with hearing loss, hyperacusis or Meniere disease (MD).
We aim to identify genes involved in severe tinnitus by using an
extreme phenotype (EP) approach.
Materials and Methods: Three independent cohorts with
European ancestry (Spanish with MD, Swedish tinnitus and
European with generalised epilepsy) were selected to sequence
patients with severe tinnitus. We performed a single rare variantanalysis (MAF < 0.05) and a gene burden analysis in theSynaptomeDB synaptic genes (N =1886, MAF < 0.1). Gene ontol-
ogy (GO) analyses and gene enrichment analyses were performed
using GSEA and MsigDB.
Results: We found an enrichment of rare missense variants in
24 synaptic genes including AKAP9, ANK2 and TSC2 (p<2 E
-04).This
burden was replicated in the Swedish tinnitus cohort (N =97) for
ANK2 and in a subset of (N =34) with severe tinnitus for ANK2 ,
AKAP9 and TSC2 genes. However, these associations were not
signi ﬁcant in the epilepsy cohort without tinnitus (N =701). ANK2
coordinates the assembly of several proteins in the axon initialsegment (AIS) and drives axonal branching. GO analyses foundmembrane traf ﬁcking and cytoskeletal protein binding in neurons
associated with severe tinnitus.
Conclusion: ANK2, AKAP9 and TSC2 reveal the main biological
processes suggesting that the cytoskeleton organization in AIS
could be involved in severe tinnitus.
Funding source: This project is funded by H2020 MSC-ITN-
2016-722046, H2020-SC1-2019-848261 and GENDER-Net Co-PlusFund (GNP-182) by “la Caixa ”Foundation (ID 100010434), under
agreement LCF/PR/DE18/52010002.
S. Amanat: None. A. Gallego-Martinez: None. J. Sollini: None.
P. Perez-Carpena: None. J.M. Espinosa-Sanchez: None. I. Aran:
None. A. Soto-Varela: None. A. Batuecas ‐Caletrio: None. B.
Canlon: None. P. May: None. C.R. Cederroth: None. J.A. Lopez-
Escamez: None.
P09.133.B Ultrarare structural variation across the genome
contributes to severe tinnitus phenotype
Alvaro Gallego-Martinez
1,2, Sana Amanat1,2, Natalia Trpchevska3,
Christopher R Cederroth3,4, Jose Antonio Lopez-Escamez1,2,5
1Otology & Neurotology Group CTS 495, Genomic Medicine Area,
Centro de Genomica e Investigación Oncológica (GENyO), P ﬁzer-
Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía, Granada, Spain,
2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosani-
taria, ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves,
Granada, Spain,3Laboratory of Experimental Audiology, Department
of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,Sweden,4Division of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom,5Department of Surgery, Division of
Otolaryngology, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Tinnitus is the most frequent phantom sensation,
affecting 70 million individuals in Europe. While prevalence is
higher in men, women shows greater psychological burden,
suggesting that different coping mechanisms operate betweenboth genders. In this study, we sequenced a Swedish cohort of 97
tinnitus patients aiming to analyse large genomic feature
differences between both genders.
Methods: We selected 97 tinnitus Swedish patients according
to their reported tinnitus functional index scores through
questionaries and performed whole genome sequencing. Variantcalling was addressed for different genomic features, separating
small indels (SI), Structural Variants (SV) and Copy Number Variants
(CNV). We analysed the burden of high constraint variants of each
type in both genders comparing their allelic frequencies withSwedish controls from SWEGEN database.
Results: We have found a signi ﬁcant burden of ultrarare SV
variants in severe tinnitus patients when compared with Swedish
controls ((SV) =pvalues: (DUP)=1,2e-08; (DEL) =9,4e-04; (INS) =4,1e-
12). However, both genders reported similar burden of damagingvariants on the entire genome when considering only structural
variants found in high constraint regions.
Conclusion: We report a signi ﬁcant burden of ultrarare
structural variation across high constraint regions of the genomefor our tinnitus cohort for both genders. This burden increases as
we segregate patients with other clinical symptomatology.
Funding: This study is funded by GNP-182 GENDER-Net Co-Plus
Fund from “La Caixa ”Foundation (ID 100010434), under agree-
ment LCF/PR/DE18/52010002(JALE and CRC) and H2020-SC1-
2019-84826.
A. Gallego-Martinez: None. S. Amanat: None. N. Trpchevska:
None. C. Cederroth: None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None.
P09.134.C 90% TSC1/TSC2 mutation detection rate in Tuber-
ous Sclerosis Complex patients without mutation identi ﬁed in
commercial laboratories
Katarzyna Klonowska
1, Joannes Grevelink2, Krinio Giannikou1,
Magdalena Tyburczy1, David Kwiatkowski1
1Brigham and Women ’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA,2Boston Dermatology and Laser Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Introduction: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic
disorder due to TSC1 /TSC2 mutations, characterized by hamarto-
mas involving multiple organs. Our past studies have shown that
mosaicism is common in TSC patients who had ‘no mutation
identi ﬁed’(NMI) by conventional testing.
Materials and Methods: We used Massively Parallel Sequen-
cing (MPS) for analysis of 144 samples [normal tissues/ ﬂuids and
TSC tumors (skin: angio ﬁbromas, ungual ﬁbromas, shagreen patch;
kidney: angiomyolipomas)] from 30 NMI TSC patients (median age:33). Mosaic mutations were validated by our new MPS strategy
utilizing Unique Molecular Identi ﬁer (UMI) based error suppression
[sensitivity:0.02% variant allele frequency (VAF)]. Combining theseresults with previous analysis of 44 mosaic TSC patients, we
performed genotype-phenotype correlations.
Results: TSC1 /TSC2 mutations were identi ﬁed in 27 of 30
patients (90%) [21(78%) in TSC2 ; 6(22%) in TSC1 ]; 25 patients had
mosaicism [blood VAF:0-19%, median:2.8%]. We identi ﬁed 7 novel
TSC1 /TSC2 mutations, including 6 large mutations/rearrangements
and a de novo deep intronic deletion. We also identi ﬁed two
unique sporadic TSC2 mutations in each of an angiomyolipoma
and a facial angio ﬁbroma, in a patient with minimal TSC clinical
features. The mosaic VAF was signi ﬁcantly higher in TSC1 vs.TSC2
(median VAF in facial angio ﬁbroma: TSC1 -6.4%, TSC2 -4.2%, p =
0.02), although the number of clinical features was similar.
Conclusions: We provide new strategy for very sensitive TSC1 /
TSC2 mosaic mutation detection and de ﬁne the spectrum of
mosaic mutations and associated clinical features in greater detailthan reported previously.
The study was funded by Engels Family Fund and FY2020
Tuberous Sclerosis Alliance Postdoctoral Fellowship Award (KK)
K. Klonowska: None. J. Grevelink: None. K. Giannikou: None.
M. Tyburczy: None. D. Kwiatkowski: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
302
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P09.135.D Tyrosine hydroxylase de ﬁciency associated with
dopa-responsive dystonia in a Bulgarian family
Maya Atanasoska1,2, Radoslava Vazharova1,3, Lubomir Balabanski1,
Slavyana Yaneva-Staykova1, Draga Toncheva1,4
1Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov MD ”,S oﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Soﬁa University St Kliment Ohridski, Faculty of Biology,
Department of Genetics, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,3Soﬁa University St Kliment
Ohridski, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical
genetics and Microbiology, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Medical University of
Soﬁa, Department of Medical Genetics, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: The de ﬁciency of tyrosine hydroxylase leads to
autosomal recessive L-DOPA-responsive infantile Parkinsonism
and susceptibility to adult-onset L-DOPA-responsive dystonia dueto striatal dopamine shortage. Here, we present a family with anaffected 1.5-year-old infant, second-born of nonconsanguineous
parents, with symptoms of progressive hypokinesia, hypotonia,
reduced facial mimicry, diurnal periods of lethargy and irritability,sporadic dystonic movements, developmental delay, and seizures.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from the proband and
his family members (mother, father, and a 6-year-old sister) was
extracted. Whole exome sequencing was performed for thepatient followed by targeted sequencing of the THgene for his
family, using an Illumina MiSeq platform.
Results: We identi ﬁed two heterozygous pathogenic variants in
theTHgene: c.605G>A(p.Arg202His) and c.614T>C(p.Leu205Pro),
associated with an autosomal recessive form of L-DOPA-
responsive infantile Parkinsonism. The targeted sequencing
conﬁrmed the inheritance of the variants, from the mother ( TH:
c.605G>A) and the father ( TH:c.614T>C). The sister is a hetero-
zygous carrier of the TH:c.614T>C.
Conclusion: DOPA-responsive dystonias are a group of
hereditary neurometabolic disorders. The symptoms of theproband correspond to the severe autosomal recessive Segawa
syndrome with dystonia onset in the early neonatal period.
Beginning treatment, he developed L-dopa hypersensitivity andadverse side-effects. The rest of the family members were non-symptomatic at the time of examination. Studies in a hetero-
zygous knock-in mice-model have shown 60-80% striatal dopa-
mine reduction as a result of the dominant-negative effect ofmutant alleles. The outcome is gene dosage depended andindividuals with heterozygous TH pathogenic variants are
expected to be susceptible to adult-onset DRD.
M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Balabanski:
None. S. Yaneva-Staykova: None. D. Toncheva: None.
P09.136.A Diagnostic exome and genome sequencing in
complex patients of the Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Diseases
Program (SpainUDP)
Beatriz Martinez-Delgado
1,2, Estrella Lopez1, Sara Monzón3, Isabel
Cuesta3, Beatriz Baladrón1, Jose Ignacio Alvarado1, Gema Gomez-
Mariano1, Marina Gutierrez1, Julián Lara4, Rosario Cazorla4, Gema
Iglesias4, Enriqueta Román4, Puri ﬁcación Ros4, Pablo Tutor4, Susana
Mellor4, Maria Jose Cabrejas4, Angel Zaballos5, Francisco Javier
Alonso1,2, Eva Bermejo1, Manuel Posada1
1Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, IIER. Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,2CIBER de Enferme-
dades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain,3Bioinformatics Unit. Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,4Hospital Puerta de
Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,5Genomics Unit. Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.Introduction: The Undiagnosed Rare Diseases Program, Spai-
nUDP, ( http://spainudp.isciii.es/ ) is an institutional Program which
has the aim of ﬁnding a diagnosis for people with unsolved rare
diseases. For this purpose, genomic analysis is applied togetherwith deep phenotyping in a multidisciplinary approach involvingclinicians, geneticists, bioinformaticians and researchers.
Materials and Methods: Phenotips was used for an accurate
and standardized description of phenotypes (through HPO,Human Phenotype Ontology). Whole Exome Sequencing (WES),and more recently Whole Genome (WGS), were analyzed in Trios.
In addition, Transcriptome analysis (RNASeq) was also initiated in
22 cases.
Results: At this moment, genomic analysis through WES was
performed in 140 patients. Signi ﬁcantly, we have resolved
favorably, establishing the diagnosis of the disease in 43% of
the cases, the vast majority of them with pediatric neurologicalrare syndromes. In 78% of diagnosed cases, the casual variant
corresponded to a de novo mutation. Additionally, in 11 cases,
variants in interesting candidate genes were found which shouldbe further explored for functional validation. This data is beingshared through Matchmaker exchange in order to ﬁnd similar
patients, and collaborations were established in 9 cases. Moreover,
13 cases with negative exome results are being analyzed by WGSand/or RNASeq.
Conclusions: WES analysis has allowed us to get a diagnosis in
a signi ﬁcant proportion of cases and revealed some recurrent
causal genes in our series. WGS and RNASeq analysis is expectedto increase the diagnostic rate. Collaborative efforts are important
to establish new candidate genes as causal genes de ﬁning new
disease entities.
B. Martinez-Delgado: None. E. Lopez: None. S. Monzón: None.
I. Cuesta: None. B. Baladrón: None. J. Alvarado: None. G.
Gomez-Mariano: None. M. Gutierrez: None. J. Lara: None. R.
Cazorla: None. G. Iglesias: None. E. Román: None. P. Ros: None.
P. Tutor: None. S. Mellor: None. M. Cabrejas: None. A. Zaballos:
None. F. Alonso: None. E. Bermejo: None. M. Posada: None.
P09.137.B Van Maldergem syndrome 2; An extremely rare
case
Deniz Esin , Fahrettin Duymus, Busra Goksel Tulgar, Ebru Marzioglu
Ozdemir, Tulin Cora
Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
Van Maldergem syndrome 2 is an autosomal recessive disease
characterized by intellectual disability, dysmorphic craniofacial
features, auditory malformations resulting in hearing loss, andlimb malformations. This syndrome is caused by mutations in theFAT4 gene. The FAT4 gene encodes a protein that is a member of
protocadherins. In this case, we aimed to share the diagnosis
process of a 4-year-old boy with Van Maldergem syndrome 2,which is extremely rare.A four-year-old male patient was referredto our clinic with complaints of dysmorphic facial features, poor
growth and feeding, and neuromotor retardation. Dysmorphic
ﬁndings of the patient included microcephaly, bitemporal
narrowing, high palate, dental malocclusion, maxillary hypoplasia,and a prominent auricle. The patient also had bilateral hearing loss
since birth and spasticity and cryptorchidism. Cranial MR ﬁndings
of the patient were diffuse polymicrogyria, periventricular
calciﬁcation, subcortical subependymal heterotopia, pontine
hypoplasia, and large cisterna magna. The patient had a history
of gastrostomy due to feeding dif ﬁculty. Her parents were healthy
and have no consanguinity. Whole exome sequence analysis wasperformed on the patient. FAT4:c.6788 C>T and FAT4:c.3055 C>A
heterozygous mutation was detected. As we know to date theseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
303
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608two mutations and the coexistence of these two heterozygous
mutations were not found in the literatüre review. In this case
report, we emphasize that a novel compound heterozygous FAT4
mutation may cause Van Maldergem syndrome 2 and we aim tocontribute to the literature.
D. Esin: None. F. Duymus: None. B. Goksel Tulgar: None. E.
Marzioglu Ozdemir: None. T. Cora: None.
P09.138.C Bi-allelic variants in HOPS subunit VPS41 cause
cerebellar ataxia and point to differential lysosomal dysregu-
lation in brain cell types
Leslie E. Sanderson1, Kristina Lanko1, Maysoon Alsagob2, Rawan
Almass3, Nada Al-Ahmady3, Maryam Naja ﬁ4,5, Mohammad Al-
Muhaizea6, Hamad Alzaidan7, Hesham Aldhalaan6, Elena Perentha-
ler1, Herma C. van der Linde1, Anita Nikoncuk1, Nikolas Kühn1, Dinu
Antony5, Tarek Owaidah8, Salmo Raskin9, Luana Vieira10, Romulo
Mombach11, Najmeh Ahangari12, Taina Silveira13, Najim Ameziane13,
Arndt Rolfs14,13, Aljohara Alharbi8, Raghda Sabbagh8, Khalid
AlAhmadi6, Bashayer Alawam7, Hazem Ghebeh15, Aljouhra Alhar-
gan3, Anoud Albader3, Faisal Binhumaid3, Faten Almutairi3, Ali Al-
Odaib3, Durdane Aksoy16, Nazli A. Basak17, Robin Palvadeau17, Jill
Rosenfeld18, Daniah Trabzuni19, Ehsan Karimiani20, Brian Meyer3,
Bedri Karakac15, Futwan Al-Mohanna21, Stefan Arold22, Dilek Colak23,
Reza Maroo ﬁan20, Henry Houlden24, Aida Bertoli-Avella13, Miriam
Schmidts4,5, Tahsin S. Barakat1, Tjakko van Ham1, Namik Kaya3
1Erasmus University Medical Center, Dept of Clinical Genetics,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,2King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research
Center (KFSHRC), Dept. of Genetics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3KFSHRC,
Dept. of Genetics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Genome Research Division,
Human Genetics Dept., Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands,5University Hospital Freiburg, Center for Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg, Germany,6KFSHRC, Dept. of
Neurosciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,7KFSHRC, Dept. of Medical
Genetics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,8KFSHRC, Dept. of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,9Genetika-Centro de
Aconselhamento e Laboratório de Genética, Curitiba, Curitiba, Brazil,
10Universidade da Região de Joinville, Programa de Pós- Graduação
em Saúde e Meio Ambiente, Santa Catarina, Brazil,11Prefeitura de
Joinville, Núcleo de Assistência Integral ao Paciente Especial, SantaCatarina, Brazil,12Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Dept. of
Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Mashad, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,13CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, Germany,14Albrecht-Kossel-
Institut for Neurodegeneration, University of Rostock, Rostock,Germany,15KFSHRC, Dept. of Molecular Oncology, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,16Gaziosmanpasa University, Dept. of Neurology, Tokat,
Turkey,17Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey,18Baylor College of
Medicine, Dept. of Molecular and Human Genetics, Houston, TX,USA,19UCL Institute of Neurology, Dept. of Molecular Neuroscience,
London, United Kingdom,20Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and
Clinical Sciences Institute, St George ’s University of London, London,
United Kingdom,21KFSHRC, Dept. of Cell Biology, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,22King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
Computational Bioscience Research Center, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia,
23KFSHRC, Dept. of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scienti ﬁc
Computing, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,24UCL Institute of Neurology,
Dept. of Neuromuscular Diseases, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Membrane traf ﬁcking is an essential process in
eukaryotic cells responsible for protein transport and processing.
Deﬁciencies in vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) proteins, key
regulators of this process, are linked to human disease. VPSproteins function as part of tethering complexes, including thehomotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting (HOPS) complex.
While the HOPS-speci ﬁc subunit VPS41 has been reported topromote viability of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson ’s disease,
it has not yet been linked to human disease.
Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was
performed on nine affected individuals, comprising ﬁve unrelated
families. In silico modeling was performed on suspected causative
variants. The consequences of VPS41 disruption were assessed in
vitro using human embryonic stem cells and in vivo using
zebra ﬁsh.
Results: Affected individuals presented with progressive
neurodevelopmental disorder consisting of cognitive impairment,
cerebellar atrophy/hypoplasia, nystagmus, and motor dysfunction
with ataxia and dystonia. Whole exome sequencing revealed thateach individual carried one of four homozygous missense variantsin VPS41. In vivo imaging in a genetic zebra ﬁsh model indicated
lysosomal dysregulation throughout the brain, including signi ﬁ-
cant abnormalities in progenitor cells, microglia, and cerebellarfunction. In vitro analyses in VPS41 knock-out stem cells con ﬁrmed
effects of the identi ﬁed variants on VPS41 expression and
function, supporting in silico predictions.
Conclusions: Bi-allelic variants in VPS41 result in lysosomal
dysregulation that impacts multiple brain cell types, affects
cerebellar function, and contributes to neurodevelopmental
disease in humans. Thus, screening for variants in VPS41 and
other HOPS subunits should be considered in cases of unsolvedneurodevelopmental disorder.
L.E. Sanderson: None. K. Lanko: None. M. Alsagob: None. R.
Almass: None. N. Al-Ahmady: None. M. Naja ﬁ:None. M. Al-
Muhaizea: None. H. Alzaidan: None. H. Aldhalaan: None. E.
Perenthaler: None. H.C. van der Linde: None. A. Nikoncuk:
None. N. Kühn: None. D. Antony: None. T. Owaidah: None. S.
Raskin: None. L. Vieira:
None. R. Mombach: None. N. Ahangari:
None. T. Silveira: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
CENTOGENE AG. N. Ameziane: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; CENTOGENE AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; CENTOGENE AG. A. Alharbi: None. R. Sabbagh:
None. K. AlAhmadi: None. B. Alawam: None. H. Ghebeh: None.
A. Alhargan: None. A. Albader: None. F. Binhumaid: None. F.
Almutairi: None. A. Al-Odaib: None. D. Aksoy: None. N.A. Basak:
None. R. Palvadeau: None. J. Rosenfeld: None. D. Trabzuni:
None. E. Karimiani: None. B. Meyer: None. B. Karakac: None. F.
Al-Mohanna: None. S. Arold: None. D. Colak: None. R.
Maroo ﬁan: None. H. Houlden: None. A. Bertoli-Avella: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; CENTOGENE AG. M.
Schmidts: None. T.S. Barakat: None. T. van Ham: None. N. Kaya:
None.
P09.139.D Novel WDR45 frameshift variant detected by whole
exome sequencing in beta-propeller protein-associated neu-rodegeneration disease
Seda Susgun1,2,3, Mert Demirel4, Gul Yalcin Cakmakli4, Bulent Elibol5,
Sibel Ugur Iseri1, Zuhal Yapici6
1Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Graduate School of
Health Sciences, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,3Department of
Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Bezmialem Vakif University,Istanbul, Turkey,4Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey,5Department of Neurology,
Institute of Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry, Hacettepe UniversitySchool of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey,6Department of Neurology, Faculty
of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) is an
X-linked dominant subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron
accumulation (NBIA). It is associated with pathogenic variations inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
304
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608WDR45 almost exclusively in females due to probable male lethality.
Somatic mosaicism has been reported for males diagnosed with
BPAN. WDR45 encodes WD repeat domain 45 and has a main role in
autophagy, which is a highly conserved and essential cellularhomeostatic process. Clinical features of BPAN include early-onsetseizures, developmental delay, intellectual disability, delayed speech,
and motor dysfunction. In this study, we have performed whole-
exome sequencing (WES) in a male with a potential clinical diagnosisof BPAN at the age of 37. This effort followed by Sanger-basedvalidation and segregation analysis has led us identify a frameshift
variant in low level mosaic state in the DNA obtained from the
peripheral blood of the affected male. Our next step will beinvestigating somatic mosaicism using different tissue samples fromproband. This work has been supported by the grants of TUBA
GEBIP 2019 program.
S. Susgun: None. M. Demirel: None. G. Yalcin Cakmakli: None.
B. Elibol: None. S. Ugur Iseri: None. Z. Yapici: None.
P09.140.A Complex cases with Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD), developmental delay, hyperactivity and sleep distur-
bance explained by oligogenic mechanisms
Maria Cerminara
1, Martina Servetti1,2, Margherita Squillario2, Livia
Pisciotta1,3, Giovanni Spirito4,5, Maria Teresa Divizia2, Margherita
Lerone2, Elisa De Grandis1,6, Silvia Boeri6, Lino Nobili1,6, Diego Vozzi5,
Remo Sanges4,5, Federico Zara1,2, Stefano Gustincich5, Aldamaria
Puliti1,2
1Department of Neurosciences, Rehabil itation, Ophthalmology, Genetics,
Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI ), University of Genova, Genova,
Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova,
Italy,3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milano,
Italy,4Area of Neuroscience, Scuola Int ernazionale Superiore di Studi
Avanzati (SISSA), Trieste, Italy,5Department of Neuroscience and Brain
Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova, Italy,6Child
Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
Introduction : Genetic diagnosis of complex ASD cases is often
difﬁcult. Emerging evidence suggest s that various genetic compo-
nents can account for these cases according to an oligogenic model.
After the observation of a patient with deleterious variants inmultiple genes (FrontGenet, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fgene.2021.625564 ), we extended the search for possible oligogenic
mechanisms to a cohort of 30 ASD trio families.
Methods : Whole exome sequencing was performed and
potentially deleterious variants prioritized by custom ﬁltering
strategies including the use of ORVAL (Oligogenic Resource for
Variant Analysis Platform) and enrichment analysis of candidategenes with GeneCodis4.
Results : Two cases showed possible deleterious rare variants,
each in 3 different genes. A male patient was carrying 2 maternally
inherited variants, one hemizygous in BCOR and one heterozygous
inMYO9B , genes associated to cognitive and behaviour impair-
ment. A third heterozygous paternally inherited variant affected
HTR1E , a serotonin receptor hypothesized to play a role in autism-
like behaviour and sleep disturbance. The second case, anothermale patient, had 2 maternally inherited variants, one hemizygousinZC4H2 , associated to developmental delay, and one hetero-
zygous in ALDH5A1 , associated to behaviour and sleep impair-
ment. A further paternally inherited variant affected CPLX3 ,
involved in neurotransmitter release, hypothesized to be impli-
cated in neurodevelopmental delay. Implicated genes revealed
enrichment in ASD-associated biological processes and pathways.As our previously described patient, these two patients presentedcomplex ASD phenotype.Conclusions : About 10% of patients from our ASD cohort
showed rare deleterious variants in multiple genes that seem to
fully explain their complex phenotype.
M. Cerminara: None. M. Servetti: None. M. Squillario: None. L.
Pisciotta: None. G. Spirito: None. M.T. Divizia: None. M. Lerone:
None. E. De Grandis: None. S. Boeri: None. L. Nobili: None. D.
Vozzi: None. R. Sanges: None. F. Zara: None. S. Gustincich:
None. A. Puliti: None.
P09.141.B Whole genome sequencing in neurodegenerative
diseases: novel variants using different bioinformatics tools
Roberta Croce
1,Lucia Corrado1, Nadia Barizzone1, Alice Di Pierro1,
Loredana Marialuisa Genovese2, Filippo Geraci2, Eleonora Mangano3,
Romina D ’Aurizio2, Roberta Bordoni3, Davide Corà1, Francesco
Favero1, Miriam Zuccalà1, Cristoforo Comi1, Fabiola De Marchi4,
Luca Magistrelli4, Giovanni Manzini2,5, Project MinE ALS sequencing
consortium, Gianluca De Bellis3, Alfredo Brusco6, Marco Severgnini3,
Marco Pellegrini2, Letizia Mazzini4, Sandra D ’Alfonso1
1University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, Novara, Italy,2Institute of
Informatics and Telematics of CNR, Pisa, Italy,3National Research
Council of Italy, Institute for Biomedical Technologies, Segrate(Milano), Italy,4ALS Center AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara,
Italy,5University of eastern Piedmont, UPO, Alessandria, Italy,
6University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
We explored missing heritability in 140 patients affected by three
different Neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs). We performed
Whole Genome Sequencing after excluding pathogenic variants inthe main causative genes and investigated three classes ofpotentially pathogenic variants: a) Coding/non-coding SNV/Indels
in a panel of 696 genes involved in NDDs. Using standard
annotation, we identi ﬁed pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in
genes causative of rare forms of each disease (N =15) and in gene
causing a NDD different from patient clinical presentation (N =
16). SpliceAI, a deep learning tool predicting an effect on splicingmechanism identi ﬁed 48 variants with a possible splicing impact.
We performed in vitro studies for 9 variants and con ﬁrmed a role
in splicing alteration for 6 of them. b) Genome-wide structural
variants. Using CNVkit, we identi ﬁed a 15q25 deletion in a PD
patient. Similar deletions have been associated with mildintellectual disability and dysmorphisms but never reported in
PD cases. c) Genome wide Tandem Repeat (TR). Using literature
and novel tools, we identi ﬁed four novel loci in ALS cohort with a
possible TR expansion and performed a replication of the results in
larger independent cohorts from Italy and International MinE
project. For 3 of them ( FRA10AC1 ,RFC1 ,HK1) the result was not
replicated. For ITFG2 , preliminary data are promising since the TR
was observed only in patients and in none controls. In conclusion,
using WGS data we were able to ﬁnd missed pathogenetic
variants in genes associated with different NDDs, reinforcing theidea of a shared genetic cause among these diseases.
R. Croce: None. L. Corrado: None. N. Barizzone: None. A. Di
Pierro: None. L. Genovese: None. F. Geraci: None. E. Mangano:
None. R. D ’Aurizio: None. R. Bordoni: None. D. Corà: None. F.
Favero: None. M. Zuccalà: None. C. Comi: None. F. De Marchi:
None. L. Magistrelli: None. G. Manzini: None. G. De Bellis: None.
A. Brusco: None. M. Severgnini: None. M. Pellegrini: None. L.
Mazzini: None. S. D ’Alfonso: None.
P09.142.C Genetic variation spectrum of ATP7B in a cohort of
113 patients with Wilson diseaseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
305
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608João Parente Freixo1, Ana Lopes1, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1, Henedina
Antunes2,3,4, Ermelinda Santos Silva5, Jorge Sequeiros1, Marina
Magalhães6, Jorge Oliveira1
1CGPP - Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, IBMC - Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular, i3S - Instituto de Investigação eInovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition Unit, Hospital
de Braga, Braga, Portugal,32CA –Clinical Academic Center, Braga,
Portugal,4ICVS - Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School
of Medicine, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal,5Unidade de
Gastroenterologia Pediátrica, Serviço de Pediatria, Centro Materno-Infantil do Norte, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto,Portugal,
6Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of the
copper metabolism, caused by diallelic pathogenic variants in the
copper-transporting gene, ATP7B . WD usually presents with
hepatic, neurologic, and/or psychiatric disturbances. Moleculargenetic testing is critical for a timely-adequate diagnosis andtreatment, to prevent lifelong disabilities. This work aimed at
expanding the mutational spectrum of disease-related variants in
ATP7B , in a large cohort of WD patients. Since 2004, a total of 301
patients were genotyped at CGPP, for con ﬁrmation or exclusion of
WD. In the vast majority of patients, ATP7B gene was analysed by
Sanger sequencing and, in patients heterozygous for one disease-causing variant (n =20), MLPA was also performed. Variants were
classi ﬁed according to the ACMG guidelines. WD was genetically
conﬁrmed in 113 patients (99 families): 32 are homozygotes and
81 compound heterozygotes for pathogenic or likely-pathogenicvariants. A total of 34 distinct variants (including 4novel) and 64
different genotypes were determined. The three most common
disease-causing variants were found in 75.2% of the cases, among
whom 18 were homozygotes; NM_000053.3:c.3402del was themost frequent, being present in homozygosity in 6 and in
heterozygosity in 19 patients. This data expands the mutational
spectrum of WD causing variants and contributes to thecontinuously demanding effort of interpreting variants causingWD. Interestingly, the c.3402del variant has also been reported as
the most frequent in WD cohorts from Venezuela and Brazil. This
contrasts with other European or Asian cohorts, where p.His1069Gln or p.Arg778Leu, respectively, seem to be the mostprevalent WD-causing alleles.
J. Parente Freixo: None. A. Lopes: None. R. Bastos-Ferreira:
None. H. Antunes: None. E. Santos Silva: None. J. Sequeiros:
None. M. Magalhães: None. J. Oliveira: None.
P10 Neuromuscular Disorders
P10.001.A Objective evaluation of clinical actionnability for
genes involved in myopathies: 51 promising genes
Maude Vecten
1,2,Emmanuelle Pion3, Raul Juntas Morales4, Damien
Sternberg5, John Rendu6, Tania Stojkovic7, Cécile Acquaviva-
Bourdain8, Corrine Métay9, Isabelle Richard10, Laurent Villard2,
Mathieu Cérino11,2, Mathieu Milh12,2, Sevtlana Gorokhova13,2, Nicolas
Levy13,2, Xenia Martin6, Gisele Bonne7, Valérie Biancalana14, François
Petit15, Aurélien Perrin16, Pascal Laforet7, Marc Bartoli2, Mireille
Cossée17, Martin Krahn13,2
1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Bichat –Claude-Bernard, APHP,
Paris, France,2Aix-Marseille Université, INSERM, Marseille Medical
Genetics, U1251, Marseille, France,3Filnemus, Laboratoire de
Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
4Département de Neurologie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, CHU de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,5Service de Biochimie Métabolique,Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Salpétière, APHP, Paris, France,6Labor-
atoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Grenoble et des Alpes,
Grenoble, France,7Institut de Myologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière,
APHP, Paris, France,8Service Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire Grand
Est - UM Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, HCL, Lyon, France,
9UF Cardiogénétique et Myogénétique et Cellulaire, Centre de
Génétique moléculaire et chromosomique, Hôpitaux Universitaire
Pitié-salpétière, APHP, Paris, France,10Centre de Recherche Généthon
Institut des Biothérapies Généthon, Paris, France,11Laboratoire de
Biochimie, Hôpital de la Conception, APHM, Marseille, France,
12Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Timone Enfants, APHM,
Marseille, France,13Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital
Timone Enfants, APHM, Marseille, France,14Laboratoire de diagnostic
génétique CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,15Laboratoire de
génétique moléculaire Service de biochimie et hormonologie Hôpital
Antoine Béclère, APHP, Clamart, France,16PhyMedExp, Université de
Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire,
CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,17Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Introduction: The implementation of high-throughput diagnostic
sequencing has led to the generation of large amounts of
mutational data, making their interpretation more complex andresponsible for long turnaround times. It has been important toprioritize certain analyses, particularly those of "actionable" genes
in diagnostic situations, involving speci ﬁc treatment and/or
management. In our project, we carried out an objectiveassessment of the clinical actionability of genes involved in
myopathies, for which only few data obtained methodologically
exist to date.
Materials and methods: Using the ClinGen Actionability
criteria, we scored the clinical actionability of all 200 associated
genes for myopathies published by FILNEMUS for the “National
French consensus on gene Lists for the diagnosis of myopathiesusing next generation sequencing ”.
Results: We objecti ﬁed that 51 associated geènes for myopa-
thies were actionable with currently available data. Among In
theise 52 genes only 14 had beenve scored to date by ClinGen.
Conclusion: The data obtained through these methodological
tools are an important resource for strategic choices in diagnostic
approaches and the management of genetic myopathies. The
clinical actionability of genes has to be considered as an evolvingconcept, in relation to progresses in therapeutic approaches.
M. Vecten: None. E. Pion: None. R. Juntas Morales: None. D.
Sternberg: None. J. Rendu: None. T. Stojkovic: None. C.
Acquaviva-Bourdain: None. C. Métay: None. I. Richard: None.
L. Villard: None. M. Cérino: None. M. Milh: None. S. Gorokhova:
None. N. Levy: None. X. Martin: None. G. Bonne: None. V.
Biancalana: None. F. Petit: None. A. Perrin: None. P. Laforet:
None. M. Bartoli: None. M. Cossée: None. M. Krahn: None.
P10.002.B ACTN3 rs1815739 polymorphism is not associated
with sports injuries in Slovenian female football players
Inge Sotlar
1, Tisa Podkraj šek1, Tina Levstek1, Katja Gori čar1, Vita
Dolžan1, Katarina Trebu šak Podkraj šek1,2
1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Clinical
Institute for Special Laboratory Diagnostics, University Children ’s
Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Alpha-actinin-3 is a protein expressed in fast-twitch
(type II) muscle ﬁbres. Genetic variant NM_001104.4:c.1729C>T (p.
R577X) (rs1815739) in ACTN3 introduces premature termination
codon. In homozygous form, it reduces strength, muscle mass andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
306
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608fast-twitch ﬁbre diameter. In athletes (including professional
football players), it was associated with a higher risk of sports
injuries and longer exercise recovery. We aimed to evaluate the
association of the p.R577X with sports injuries in Slovenian femalefootball players.
Materials and Methods: The study group included 43 female
football players older than 13 years and actively training football
more than 4 years. Data collected included player ’s position and
frequency of sports injuries. ACTN3 p.R577X genotyping was
performed on saliva DNA with PCR and DdeI restriction analysis
with subsequent Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmation, if necessary.
Results: The median (range) age of the group was 16 (13 ‒28)
years; they were actively training football for a median of 7 (4 ‒18)
years. p.R577X in homozygous or heterozygous form was present
in 58.1% of the players, while 41.9% had normal genotype. 53.7%
had a history of at least one sports injury, namely sprains, bonefractures, muscle, or other injuries. However, no statistically
signi ﬁcant association was found between genotype and the
presence of injuries (p =0.309), nor between the player position
and the presence of injuries or genotype and player position (p =
0.598 and p =0.830, respectively).
Conclusion: No association was found between ACTN3 p.R577X
genotypes and sports injuries or player position in our study,although further studies with larger cohort are needed to verifythe results.
I. Sotlar: None. T. Podkraj šek: None. T. Levstek: None. K.
Gori čar:None. V. Dol žan:None. K. Trebu šak Podkraj šek:None.
P10.003.C Utilising gold-standard PCR genotypes to accu-
rately infer repeat expansions from whole-genome sequencedata
Mark A. Doherty, Laura O ’Briain , Jennifer Hengeveld, Éanna
MacDomhnaill, Orla Hardiman, Russell L. McLaughlin
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Background: We present a pilot study to ultimately develop a
pipeline utilising in silico tools to identify and accurately infer the
lengths of known and novel pathogenic repeat expansions (REs) in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) from whole-genome sequen-cing (WGS) data. This pipeline will bene ﬁt from having both WGS
data and gold-standard PCR genotypes of multiple REs. Despite
being highly heritable, pathogenic variants are only identi ﬁed in
approximately 15% of ALS cases. The most common known causeof ALS is a hexanucleotide RE in C9orf72 . Other intermediate REs in
NIPA1 ,ATXN1 and ATXN2 are known ALS risk factors. In this
preliminary study we evaluate the ability of in silico tools to assessthe lengths of ATXN2
CAG REs.
Methods: 221 cases and 117 controls are included in this initial
study. Both WGS and gold-standard ATXN2 CAG PCR genotypes
are available for all individuals. The WGS data were interrogatedusing a suite of bioinformatic tools.
RESULTS: Several tools including hipSTR, lobSTR, tredparse and
ExpansionHunter accurately measure ATXN2 CAG REs (route-
mean-square deviations (RMSDs): 1.2). The worst performingsoftware was gangSTR (RMSD: 12.8), which falsely identi ﬁed CAG
repeats elsewhere in the genome.
Discussion: This project utilises high-quality WGS data and
gold-standard PCR data. We accurately infer the lengths of ATXN2
CAG repeats using in silico tools; however, certain gene and repeat
speci ﬁc properties can negatively impact results. We now aim to
expand this study to a larger gene panel for which accurate PCRgenotypes are available and to a larger international sample size.M.A. Doherty: None. L. O ’Briain: None. J. Hengeveld: None. É.
MacDomhnaill: None. O. Hardiman: None. R.L. McLaughlin:
None.
P10.004.D The pleiotropy of neurodegenerative repeat expan-
sions in ALS
Jennifer C. Hengeveld
1, Alice Vajda2, Mark Heverin2, Orla Hardi-
man2, Russell L. McLaughlin1
1Smur ﬁt Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland,
2Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute,
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
Introduction: Repeat expansions (REs) underlie more than 40
diseases, most of them affecting the nervous system. The mostcommon neurodegenerative repeat expansions (NDREs) diseases
are Huntington ’s Disease (HD), Spinocerebellar Ataxias (SCA),
Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis(ALS). ALS is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder which causes thedeath of neurons controlling voluntary muscles. ALS has no cure,
and its underlying cause is mostly unknown, although a strong
genetic component is known to play a role. Several REs arepleiotropic; for example, GGGCC RE in C9orf72 is associated with
FTD/ALS and CAG RE in ATXN2 causes SCA2/ALS. Previous studies
onATXN2 showed that harbouring intermediate-length repeat
expansions are signi ﬁcantly associated with the risk of ALS.
Therefore, pleiotropy might be common in ALS. This study aims to
genotype 34 neurodegenerative genes that harbour REs, in a
cohort of 1000 controls and 1000 patients from the Irish ALS bankto assess the association between expanded genotypes and ALS.
Materials and Methods: The length measurement of each
NDRE gene and its possible repeat expansions was done by PCR,
Repeat Primed-PCR (RP-PCR), agarose gel electrophoresis andfragment length capillary electrophoresis.
Results: In an Irish population, ALS might be driven by multiple
intermediate-length repeat expansion in likely 8 NDREs genes:ATXN2 ,DIP2B ,FRA11AC1 ,FRA11A ,NUTM2B-AS1 ,PABN1 ,TK2-BEAN
and ZNF713 .
Conclusions: ALS is a very complex disease that might be
caused by pleiotropy of multiple REs and multiple factors.Funding:Science Foundation Ireland (17/CDA/4737)
J.C. Hengeveld: None. A. Vajda: None. M. Heverin: None. O.
Hardiman: None. R.L. McLaughlin: None.
P10.006.B Dissecting the sex-dependent genetic architecture
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Ross P. Byrne
1, Wouter van Rheenen2, Jan H. Veldink2, Russell L.
McLaughlin1
1Smur ﬁt institute of genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland,
2Department of Neurology, Brain Centre Rudolf Magnus, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a late-onset
neurodegenerative disease char acterised by progressive loss of
upper and lower motor neurons. Sex modi ﬁes both disease risk and
heritability, with higher incidence in males and higher rates ofmother to daughter transmission. However, the extent that sexaffects the genetic architecture of ALS is currently understudied. We
reanalysed genetic data from a published ALS GWAS (N =36,052) to
assess sex differences in genetic architecture of the disease.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
307
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Methods: Weﬁt sex as an interaction term in a GCTA-GREML
model to evaluate its impact on ALS heritability. Next, we ran
GWAS on male-speci ﬁc( N=18,732) and female-speci ﬁc( N=
17,322) subsets of the data using linear mixed models. Sex speci ﬁc
loci were identi ﬁed in males and females by scanning for variants
signi ﬁcant at a 5% FDR in one sex, but not even nominally
signi ﬁcant in the other (p>0.05). Both global and regional sex-
speci ﬁc heritabilities were estimated using LD-score regression
and Heritability Estimation from Summary Statistics (HESS).
Results: We observed signi ﬁcant evidence of gene by sex
interactions that account for ~1/3rd of ALS SNP heritability
(likelihood-ratio test: p =0.0087). Female-speci ﬁc heritability
(h2=0.043;SE =0.01) was substantially higher than male-speci ﬁc
heritability (h2 =0.001;SE =0.01) and regional heritability analysis
revealed greater polygenicity in females. Finally, our sex speci ﬁc
scan identi ﬁed several known (MOBP, C9orf72, SARM1, UNC13A)
and novel (PIP5K1B, ATP8A2, PCDH9, RNASE9, OTUD7A, ITPRIPL2,
UNK, FBF1) loci harbouring SNPs associated with ALS in only one
sex. These loci were enriched for expression in brain tissueconsistent with the known aetiology of ALS. Grants: SFI 17/CDA/
4737
R.P. Byrne: None. W. van Rheenen: None. J.H. Veldink: None.
R.L. McLaughlin: None.
P10.007.C Bi-allelic loss of ERGIC1 in relatively mild
arthrogryposis
Caterina Marconi1, Laure Lemmens1, Frédéric Masclaux1, Francesca
Mattioli1, Joel Fluss2, Philippe Extermann3, Puri ﬁcacion Mendez4,
Russia Ha-Vinh Leuchter2, Elisavet Stathaki1, Sacha Laurent1, Anne
Vanier1, Konstantinos Varvagiannis1, Michel Guipponi1,5, Frédérique
Sloan-Bena1,6, Jean-Louis Blouin1,6, Abramowicz Marc1, Siv
Fokstuen1,6
1Genetic Medicine division, Diagnostic Department, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland,2Pediatric Specialties
division, Department of Women, Children and Adolescents, HôpitauxUniversitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland,3Dianecho, Geneva,
Switzerland,4Centre Médical Eaux-Vives, Geneva, Switzerland,
5Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, School of
Medicine, Uniersity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,6Department of
Genetic Medicine and Development, School of Medicine, University ofGeneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
Arthrogryposis is a descriptive term that de ﬁnes the presence of
multiple joint-contractures. Clinical severity of this phenotype is
variable and ranges between mild joint-only to severe multi-organ
involvements. So far, more than 400 genes have been reported ascausative. Among these, ERGIC1 is a recently proposed candidate
gene that encodes a putative transmembrane protein of the
Endoplasmic Reticulum-Golgi interface. Two homozygous mis-
sense variants have been reported in patients with relatively mildnon-syndromic arthrogryposis. We report on a consanguineousfamily with two affected siblings presenting relatively mild
congenital arthrogryposis of upper and lower limbs, and some
facial dysmorphism. Whole genome sequencing revealed ahomozygous 22.6Kb deletion encompassing the promoter andﬁrst exon of ERGIC1 . We mapped the breakpoints at nucleotide-
level resolution, showing the involvement of two 86% similar Alu
elements in the rearrangement. RNA studies demonstrated thecomplete absence of ERGIC1 expression in the two affected
siblings and a nearly 50% decrease in the heterozygous parents.
Our data allowed to establish the pathogenic role of ERGIC1 in
congenital arthrogryposis by demonstrating the loss-of-functionpathogenic mechanism associated to a relatively mild arthrogry-
posis phenotype even with the complete absence of ERGIC1expression. This contributes to a better comprehension of ERGIC1
function and to improve genetic counseling of ERGIC1 mutations,
especially in a prenatal setting.
C. Marconi: None. L. Lemmens: None. F. Masclaux: None. F.
Mattioli: None. J. Fluss: None. P. Extermann: None. P. Mendez:
None. R. Ha-Vinh Leuchter: None. E. Stathaki: None. S. Laurent:
None. A. Vanier: None. K. Varvagiannis: None. M. Guipponi:
None. F. Sloan-Bena: None. J. Blouin: None. A. Marc: None. S.
Fokstuen: None.
P10.008.D At birth hypertony and arthrogryposis: expanding
the phenotypic spectrum of variants in the Filamin C (FLNC)
gene
Nikola Čajbiková
1, Pavel Tesner1, Martin Schwarz1, Veronika
Moslerová1, Miroslava Bala ščaková1, Luká šRyba1, Anna K řepelová1,
Lucie Du šková2, Jana Zídková2, Lenka Fajkusová2, Markéta Havlovi-
cová1, Milan Macek, jr1
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech
Republic,2Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University
Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: The Filamin C gene ( FLNC; MIM: 102565) is known
for its association with various cardiomyopathies and myopathies.
Here we report two cases of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita(MIM: 208100), which presented at birth through hypertony, as anew phenotypic presentation of pathogenic variants in FLNC .
Materials: Both probands come from no n-consanguineous Czech
families with a negative family history. The ﬁrst case is a two-year-old
boy, diagnosed at birth with symmetric hypertonic syndrome andarthrogryposis of his shoulders. Car diological investigation revealed a
mild form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The second case is a
seven-year-old boy diagnosed after birth also with neck hypertonyand limited mobility of his shoulder girdle. His ﬁrst cardiological
examination was performed at the age of 4 years resulting in the
diagnosis of atypical cardiomyopathy.
Methods: Massively parallel sequencing (Illumina, USA) was
performed in both cases, followed by Sanger DNA sequencing in
order to verify detected variant segregation in available ﬁrst-
degree relatives.
Results: Ade novo heterozygous likely pathogenic (Class 4)
variant c.3557C>T p.(Ala1186Val) in FLNC was found in both
patients, while additional pathogenic variants were not detected.
Conclusions: The phenotype of congenital arthrogryposis
associated with FLNC was described only recently, in three cases.
Our patients have the same pathogenic variant as two of them,
suggesting that this might be a recurrent variant. Our observationunderscores the importance of the analysis of FLNC in patients
with at birth hypertony and/or arthrogrypotic clinical features.
Supported by MH CZ - DRO, Motol University Hospital, Prague,
Czech Republic 00064203
N.Čajbiková: None. P. Tesner: None. M. Schwarz: None. V.
Moslerová: None. M. Bala ščaková: None. L. Ryba: None. A.
Křepelová: None. L. Du šková: None. J. Zídková: None. L.
Fajkusová: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M. Macek, jr: None.
P10.009.A Mutations of ATP1A3 in residue 756 cause a new
phenotype, case report and literature review
Mateusz Biela
1,M a łgorzata Rydzanicz2, Krystyna Szyma ńska3,
Karolina Pieniawska- Śmiech1, Aleksandra Lewandowicz-Uszy ńska1,
Joanna Chruszcz1, Leszek Szenborn1, Aleksandra Jakubiak1, Rafa ł
Płoski2, Robert Śmigiel1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
308
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland,2Warsaw Medical
University, Warsaw, Poland,3Mossakowski Medical Research Centre,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
Heterozygous mutations in the ATP1A3 gene cause different
phenotypes like: alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC), rapid-
onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP), catastrophic infantile epilepsy
with microcephaly, and cerebellar ataxia, are ﬂexia, pes cavus, optic
atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) and severe earlyinfantile epileptic encephalopathy. In 2017 a new phenotype was
proposed by Yano et al. for patients with mutations in residue 756
- Fever-Induced Paroxysmal Weakness and Encephalopathy(FIPWE), next Sabouraud et al. suggested Relapsing Encephalo-pathy with Cerebellar Ataxia (RECA) in children with ATP1A3
mutation. Here we present a case of a boy with 2 episodes of
severe hypotonia with depressed deep tendon re ﬂexes and
speech disorder, strabismus and ataxia triggered by a febrile
infection. In WES analysis performed in rapid mode a de novo
ATP1A3 mutation (R756H) was found. Additionally, we have
analyzed 34 (including our) cases with mutation in residue 756of aminoacid sequence described in literature. In the analyzed
group of ATP1A3 mutation patients, all paroxysmal episodes (59 in
total) were triggered by fever. During the paroxysmal episodes themost common symptoms were: hypotonia (82.4%), symptomsincluding the orofacial area (85.3% i.a. dysarthria, dysphagia,
mutism), ataxia (76.5%) and cognitive decline (61.8%). Recovery
was usually slow and not always full. Taking into account theoverall symptoms and the repeatability of the phenotype, we
suggest delineating a separate disease entity and support the
acronym FIPWE. Financed from the funds granted by the Ministryof Science and Higher Education in the Regional Initiative ofExcellence program for the years 2019-2022, project number 016/
RID/2018/19.
M. Biela: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. K. Szyma ńska: None. K.
Pieniawska- Śmiech: None. A. Lewandowicz-Uszy ńska: None. J.
Chruszcz: None. L. Szenborn: None. A. Jakubiak: None. R.
Płoski: None. R.Śmigiel: None.
P10.010.B Genetic investigation of a Brown Vialetto Van Laere
family from Southern Italy
Benedetta Perrone
1, Paola Ruffo1, Sebastiano Andò1, Francesca
Luisa Conforti1, Vincenzo La Bella2
1University of Calabria, Cosenza, Italy,2University of Palermo, Sicilia,
Italy.
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome is a debilitating neurodegen-
erative disease with an incidence of about 1 in 1,000,000 people inthe general population. It is considered a juvenile form of
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) characterized by progressive
pontobulbar palsy associated with sensorineural deafness. In thisreport, we present a study of a family in which a young female wasaffected by BVVL. We performed genetic analysis by Sanger
sequencing for ribo ﬂavin transporters genes and targeted Next-
generation sequencing (NGS) panel, containing all genes currentlyassociated with ALS. Our results showed 5 known variants inC20orf54 gene both in the proband and in healthy family
members (I74M in exon 2 and P267L, T278M, I303V, R266W in
exon 3). Among these variants, we focused our attention on theheterozygote mutation R266W, that could have a deleterious
consequence for the protein structure perturbing its function. In
addition, NGS revealed a new frameshift deletion in exon 19 of theTBK1 gene (I669Sfs*). This gene plays a key role in the
phosphorylation of several protein, promoting autophagy. Thisability depends on the CCD2 domain integrity and I669Sfs*, falling
within that protein portion, could cause the accumulation of
protein aggregates. Our ﬁndings indicate that the C20orf54
mutation R266W alone is not suf ﬁcient to trigger BVVL but,
together with other speci ﬁc variants, it could orchestrate a
particular genetic spectrum able to induce BVVL. Furthermore,
we suggest for the ﬁrst time that a new variant in TBK1 gene could
exert a crucial action in suppressing autophagy mechanisms,contributing to promote BVVL.
B. Perrone: None. P. Ruffo: None. S. Andò: None. F. Conforti:
None. V. La Bella: None.
P10.012.D In-depth characterization of mutations causing
axonal recessive peripheral neuropathy with neuromyotonia
(NMAN): the structure gives a HINT
Silvia Amor-Barris
1,2, Tamás Lázár3,4, Kristien Peeters1,2, Shoshana
Wodak3,4, Albena Jordanova1,2,5
1VIB - Center for Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, Belgium,2University
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,3VIB - Center for Structural Biology,
Brussels, Belgium,4Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium,
5Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Loss-of-function mutations in HINT1 were identi ﬁed
to cause axonal recessive peripheral neuropathy with neuromyo-tonia (NMAN). Patients suffered from motor-greater-than-sensorypolyneuropathy with an age of onset mostly within the ﬁrst
decade of life. Moreover, 70% of patients present with the
hallmark of neuromyotonia. Currently, 25 NMAN variants havebeen described, predominantly in sporadic cases and smallfamilies, most of them with limited functional evidence of
pathogenicity. We systematically characterized all reported
variants aiming to dissect the loss-of-function mechanism.
Methods: Each variant was mapped in the crystal structure of
HINT1 and in silico folding stability predictions were performed.
Stability and functionality of the resulting proteins were tested invivo using HINT1 KO cells and a yeast model de ﬁcient for HNT1
(yeast HINT1 orthologue).
Results: Mapping of all NMAN-causing variants allowed their
classi ﬁcation into three structural clusters: a) catalytic pocket; b)
dimer interface; c) β-sheet behind the catalytic pocket. Folding
stability predictions pointed towards monomer instability for
variants in the β-sheet and dimer instability for variants at the
dimer interface. These predictions were con ﬁrmed in vivo, and we
correlated each structural cluster to different loss-of-function
mechanisms: mutations in the catalytic pocket rendered a non-
functional protein; mutations at the dimer interface led tounstable proteins; mutations in the β-sheet were highly unstable
but retained some enzymatic activity.
Conclusions: We clustered all HINT1 mutations in three
different structural groups allowing for a potential patientstrati ﬁcation strategy for future treatments. Our study enables us
to predict and validate the pathogenicity of newly identi ﬁed
variants.
S. Amor-Barris: None. T. Lázár: None. K. Peeters: None. S.
Wodak: None. A. Jordanova: None.
P10.013.A Screening of SORD mutations in a CMT cohort
expands the clinical spectrum of SORD -related neuropathy
Camila Armirola-Ricaurte
1, Els de Vriendt1, Ayse Candayan2,
Ognyan Asenov3, Yesim Parman4, Teodora Chamova3, Ivailo
Tournev3, Esra Battaloglu2, Albena Jordanova1,5Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
309
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081VIB-UAntwerp Center of Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, Belgium,
2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici University,
Istanbul, Turkey,3Department of Neurology, University Hospital
Alexandrovska, Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,4Depart-
ment of Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University,Istanbul, Turkey,5Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bul-
garia.
Introduction: Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT) are incur-
able diseases, and collectively, they are the most common genetic
disorder affecting peripheral neurons. Mutations in SORD have
been recently identi ﬁed as a frequent and potentially treatable
cause of autosomal recessive CMT, presenting as axonal or
predominantly distal motor neuropathy. In light of this discovery,
we aimed to evaluate the impact of SORD mutations in a cohort of
unsolved individuals with CMT.
Methods: We analyzed 720 unrelated patients, predominantly
of South-Eastern European and Turkish ancestry, with sporadic orrecessive CMT who remained unsolved after targeted re-sequencing of the most common CMT genes. Sanger sequencing
was used to screen all probands for mutations in exon 7 of SORD ,
which harbors SORD ’s most common pathogenic variant
c.757delG (p.Ala253GlnfsTer27). Targeted sequencing of theremaining exons was performed in cases where only one
heterozygous pathogenic variant was found in exon 7.
Results: We identi ﬁed 12 individuals homozygous for the
c.757delG mutation. Five of them were diagnosed with axonal
CMT, three with demyelinating CMT and one patient with
intermediate CMT. Three adult siblings with the c.757delGhomozygous variant exhibited phenotypic variability, as onlyone of them reported symptoms whereas the others were
asymptomatic. Interestingly, one Bulgarian patient with axonal
CMT also experienced pyramidal and cerebellar symptoms. Weidenti ﬁed 10 individuals heterozygous for the c.757delG mutation.
One of them carried additionally a variant of unknown signi ﬁcance
(c.951T>G, p.Asn317Lys).
Conclusions: This work con ﬁrms the relevance of SORD as a
causal gene for CMT disorders and expands the phenotypicspectrum of SORD neuropathy.
C. Armirola-Ricaurte: None. E. de Vriendt: None. A. Canda-
yan: None. O. Asenov: None. Y. Parman: None. T. Chamova:
None. I. Tournev: None. E. Battaloglu: None. A. Jordanova:
None.
P10.014.B Uniform Drosophila models for four CMT-related
aminoacyl-tRNA syntheses reveal common signs of toxicity
Laura Morant
1,2, Maria Luise Petrovic-Erfurth1,2, Albena
Jordanova1,2
1VIB - Center for Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, Belgium,2University
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
Introduction : Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is characterized
by demyelination and/or axonal degeneration of peripheral motorand sensory neurons. Six aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) havebeen associated to CMT etiology. Interestingly, loss of
aminoacylation-activity does not cause CMT, suggesting a toxic
gain of function mechanism. We aim to investigate whether thereis a common pathomechanism underlying aaRS-associated CMT.
Methods : We generated ﬂy models for four CMT-related aaRS
by expressing two pathogenic mutations (one altering and onenot affecting the enzymatic activity) using a modi ﬁed GeneS-
witch
TMtechnology. Transgenes were injected into the samelanding sites of the ﬂy genome and veri ﬁed by Sanger
sequencing. AaRS protein expression levels were quanti ﬁed by
immunoblotting. General toxicity and locomotor function were
evaluated via developmental lethality and negative geotaxisclimbing assays.
Results : Strong ubiquitous expression of mutant aaRS induced
developmental lethality in all four aaRS Drosophila models.
Reducing mutant transgene levels restored ﬂy viability, suggesting
that toxicity of aaRS-mutants is dosage dependent. Males ﬂies
were more affected than females, suggesting gender speci ﬁc
vulnerability. Ageing ﬂies pan-neuronally expressing mutant aaRS
displayed reduced locomotion, mimicking the progressive walkingimpairment features of CMT patients. Overall, our ﬁndings are
similar to previously described phenotypes in YARS and GARS ﬂy
models, con ﬁrming that phenotype expressivity does not correlate
with aminoacylation-activity of aaRS.
Conclusion : Expression of CMT-causing mutations caused
similar signs of toxicity in four CMT-related aaRS, rendering our
models a valid platform for investigating putative sharedmolecular pathway(s). The knowledge gained might contributeto common treatment strategies for all aaRS-related neuropathies.
L. Morant: None. M.L. Petrovic-Erfurth: None. A. Jordanova:
None.
P10.015.C Additive effect of frequent and rare synonymous
variants as the cause of altered NPC1 splicing in twin patients
with Niemann-Pick disease type C
Igor Bychkov , Aleksandra Filatova, Tatiana Proshlyakova, Vyache-
slav Tabakov, Galina Baydakova, Alexandra Ilyushkina, MikhailSkoblov, Ekaterina Zakharova
Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background: Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by mutations in either the NPC1 orNPC2
genes. Two 55 y.o. twins were suspected for adult form of NPC,based on clinical and biochemical symptoms and were referred fora genetic testing.
Results: NGS analysis of patient`s DNA revealed two rare
compound heterozygous variants in NPC1 : typical loss-of-function
c.2196dup (p.Ala732fs*30) mutation and c.2727C>T (p.Cys909 =)
variant of unknown signi ﬁcance. Analysis of the patients` cDNA
showed that c.2727C>T variant causes cryptic donor splice site
(DS) activation and 74 b.p. deletion in NPC1 exon 18. As patients
also had frequent c.2793C>T (p.Asn931 =) variant in homozygous
state, located in wild type DS of the same exon, we hypothesized,
whether it could affect the competitive activity of two DSs.Minigene assay demonstrated that the signi ﬁcant decrease of WT
transcript isoform and the signi ﬁcant amount of shortened
isoform are observed only when both variants are present in cis.
Conclusion: The novel complex allele c.[2727C>T;2793C>T] in
NPC1 is functionally characterized. Minigene assay demonstrated
that it is a “leaky ”spliceogenic mutation, which leads to
approximately 50% reduction of WT transcript isoform. In
compound heterozygous state with typical loss-of-function muta-tion it causes adult onset form of NPC. The results of this studyhighlight the necessity of analyzing the impact of genomic milieu
in cases when identi ﬁ
ed mutation is spliceogenic, as any
additional variant in close proximity could signi ﬁcantly affect the
ratio of transcript isoforms and lead to a misconception in
genotype-phenotype correlations or even wrong diagnosis.
I. Bychkov: None. A. Filatova: None. T. Proshlyakova: None. V.
Tabakov: None. G. Baydakova: None. A. Ilyushkina: None. M.
Skoblov: None. E. Zakharova: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
310
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P10.016.D Isoform speci ﬁc variant as a potential cause of
distal myopathy
Jean Mezreani1,2, Florence Martin1, Sébastien Audet1,2, Jade
Charbonneau1, Erik Bareke1, Annie Laplante1, Bernard Brais3,4, Erin
O’Ferrall3,4, Jason Karamchandani3,4, Martine Tétreault1,2
1CRCHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Neurosciences Department,
UdeM, Montreal, QC, Canada,3MUHC, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Rare
Neurological Diseases Research Group, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Introduction: Despite recent advance in next-generation DNA-
sequencing technologies, at least 25% of myopathy patientsremain without a genetic diagnosis. In order to increase diagnostic
yield, we combined omic technologies to identify novel gene
mutations in a cohort of 17 patients with rare undiagnosedmyopathies. Among those, we have identi ﬁed a nonsense variant
in the gene Muscular LMNA-Interacting Protein ( MLIP ) in a patient
affected with adult-onset distal myopathy. MLIP is highly
expressed in muscle, but its role hasn ’t been completely
elucidated yet. However, it is known to be the direct interactantofLMNA (Lamin Type A/C), which has been linked with
laminopathies, cardiomyopathies and muscular dystrophies.
Material and methods: The combination of DNA- and RNA-
sequencing led to the identi ﬁcation of the defective MLIP gene.
Isoform speci ﬁc analysis are being performed using targeted long-
read sequencing.
Results: A homozygous nonsense variant in exon 5 of MLIP ,a n
alternatively spliced exon, has been identi ﬁed. Differential
expression showed downregulation of speci ﬁcMLIP transcripts,
those containing the LMNA interacting site and the NLS sequence;
suggestive of a mislocalization and a loss of function. As acompensatory mechanism, we observed an upregulation of its
interactant LMNA .
Conclusion: Our results highlight the importance of consider-
ing alternatively spliced isoforms when calling variants and
interpreting their potential functional impact. The interpretation
of pathogenicity when considering alternatively spliced isoformwill have a direct impact on the affected individuals and theirfamilies, it will also help inform on the normal function of MLIP in
skeletal muscles.
Acknowlegdments: Fondation Courtois, FRQSJ. Mezreani: None. F. Martin: None. S. Audet: None. J.
Charbonneau: None. E. Bareke: None. A. Laplante: None. B.
Brais: None. E. O ’Ferrall: None. J. Karamchandani: None. M.
Tétreault: None.
P10.017.A systematic analysis of genetic variation of duch-
enne muscular dystrophy and implication for cancer
Hubert Chen
Ivymind Academy, West Windsor, NJ, USA.
Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rare,
severe, progressive genetic disorder causing disability andpremature death. In this study, we performed a systematicanalysis of the DMD genetic variants via dbSNP database and
explored protein-protein interactions (PPI) for genetic modi ﬁers
identi ﬁed in DMD patients. In addition, DMD genetic alternations
in different tumors have also been investigated.
Methods: The genetic variants of DMD genes were extracted from
the dbSNP database. PPI map for genetic modi ﬁ
ers identi ﬁed in DMDpatients was constructed using STR ING v11. Genetic alternations in
the DMD gene with cancer was examined by using cBioPortal.
Results: We examined a total of 3,627 exonic SNPs in the DMD
gene. SNPs distributed across all exons. The largest category wasnonsynonymous account for nearly 64% of all mutations. Exon 19appeared to have most density of pathogenic SNP distribution.
Nonsense mutation (i.e. stopgain) or frameshift mutation likely
lead to more pathogenic. Among the genetic modi ﬁers identi ﬁed
in DMD patients, THBS1 has higher network topological para-meters. In addition, we also observed signi ﬁcant poorer overall
survival for cancer patients with DMD mutations.
Conclusions: We conducted a systematic genetic analysis of all
variants, especially SNPs, in one of the largest known human gene .
Network analysis highlighted non- random interconnectivity between
the genetic modi ﬁers identi ﬁed in DMD patients, and potentially
shed light on new genetic modi ﬁers by their functional coupling to
these known genes. Our results also suggest DMD gene may serve as
a diagnostic and therapeutic target for certain types of cancer.
H. Chen: None.
P10.018.B Newborn screening of Duchenne Muscular Dystro-
phy speci ﬁcally targeting deletions amenable to exon-
skipping therapy
Pablo Beckers
1, Jean-Hubert Caberg1, Vinciane Dideberg1, Johan T.
den Dunnen2, Tamara Dangouloff3, Vincent Bours1, Laurent Servais4,
François Boemer1
1CHU Liege, Liege, Belgium,2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands,3University of Liege, Liege, Belgium,4University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal progressive
muscle-wasting disease. New treatment strategies relying on DMD
gene exon-skipping therapy have recently been approved and
about 30% of patients could be amenable to exon 51, 53 or 45
skipping. We evaluated the spectrum of deletions reported inDMD registries, and designed a method to screen newborns andidentify DMD deletions amenable to exon 51, 53 and 45 skipping.
We developed a multiplex qPCR assay identifying hemi(homo)-
zygotic deletions of the ﬂanking exons of these therapeutic
targets in DMD exons (ie. exons 44, 46, 50, 52 and 54). We
conducted an evaluation of our new method in 51 male patients
with a DMD phenotype, 50 female carriers of a DMD deletion and
19 controls. Studies were performed on dried blood spots withpatient ’s consent. We analyzed qPCR ampli ﬁcation curves of
controls, carriers, and DMD patients to discern the presence or the
absence of the target exons. Analysis of the exons ﬂanking the
exon-skipping targets permitted the identi ﬁcation of patients that
could bene ﬁt from exon-skipping. All samples were correctly
genotyped, with either presence or absence of ampli ﬁcation of
the target exon. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates thatthis new assay is a highly sensitive method to identify DMDpatients carrying deletions that are rescuable by exon-skipping
treatment. The method is easily scalable to population-based
screening. This targeted screening approach could address thenew management paradigm in DMD, and could help to optimizethe bene ﬁcial therapeutic effect of DMD therapies by permitting
pre-symptomatic care.
P. Beckers: None. J. Caberg: None. V. Dideberg: None. J.T.
den Dunnen: None. T. Dangouloff: None. V. Bours: None. L.
Servais: None. F. Boemer: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
311
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P10.019.C Whole genome sequencing and RNA analysis allow
genetic diagnosis of DMD atypical mutations
Rita Selvatici1, Rachele Rossi1, Fang Mingyan2, Jerry Lu2, Valeria
Sansone3, Maria So ﬁa Falzarano1, Francesca Gualandi1, Luca Bello4,
Elena Pegoraro4, Alessandra Ferlini1
1Dept. of Medical Sciences, Unit of Medical Genetics, University-
Hospital of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2BGI, Shenzen, China,3Center for
the Study of Neuromuscular Diseases, Milan, Italy,4Dept. of
Neurosciences, Unit of Neurology, Padua, Italy.
Introduction: Dystrophin (DMD) gene mutations cause Duchenne
and Becker muscular dystrophies and are routinely identi ﬁed by
MLPA and sequencing. Nevertheless, about 1% of patients
remained undiagnosed. Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) is ahigh throughput method able to detect theoretically all varianttypes, including copy number variations or complex genomic
rearrangements. FluiDMD is a custom TaqMan based assay we
designed to pro ﬁle the full DMD transcript.
Materials and Methods: W ep e r f o r m e dF l u i D M Da n dW G Si n
two DMD cases in which no dystrophin mutations were
found. RNA was obtained from ur inary stem cells from the two
patients.
Results: In the ﬁrst patient, FluiDMD RNA analysis suggested
the occurrence of a genomic event affecting the splicing of exons
54 and 55. WGS identi ﬁed a large inversion of 15Mb encompass-
ing the region Xp:g.[16147177_31662545inv] with breakpoints inDMD intron 54 and in GRPR (a DMD downstream gene,
OMIM*305670) intron 1. In the second patient, FluiDMD analysis
showed lack of DMD transcript spanning exon 1-53, with the soleDp71 isoform expressed. WGS analysis revealed a large inversionof 10Mb encompassing the region Xp:g.[23607043_32981797inv]
with breakpoints in DMD intron 2 and in an upstream intergenic,
non-coding, region localized in Xp22.12. Both inversions gener-ated fusion genes and DMD-GRPR inversion also generated two
fusion transcripts.
Conclusions: FluiDMD RNA pro ﬁle accurately addresses the
gene region where atypical mutations may have occurred andWGS accurately identi ﬁed the two inversions. We suggest that this
diagnostic pipeline might facilitate the identi ﬁcation of unde-
tected genetic variations.
Grant references EU project Solve-RD Grant Agreement
number 779257
R. Selvatici: None. R. Rossi: None. F. Mingyan: None. J. Lu:
None. V. Sansone: None. M.S. Falzarano: None. F. Gualandi:
None. L. Bello: None. E. Pegoraro: None. A. Ferlini: None.
P10.021.A Lack of correlation between DMDexon 2 duplica-
tion splicing choices and phenotype severity
Martina Mietto
1, Marina Fabris1, Rosa Bonaccorso2, Stefano Carlo
Previtali2, Alberto Zambon2, Francesca Gualandi1, Rachele Rossi1,3,
Maria So ﬁa Falzarano1, Alessandra Ferlini1,3
1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Sciences, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2Neuromuscular Repair Unit, Head InSpe
and Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano,
Italy,3The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Great Ormond
Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked
disorder caused by mutations in the DMD gene. About 75% of
DMD mutations are deletions or duplications while the remaining
are small mutations. Exon 2 duplication is the most frequentduplication and is associated with variable phenotypes, ranging
from mild to severe.
Materials and Methods: We pro ﬁled the muscle biopsy
splicing pattern of DMD exon 2 duplication in six DMD patients
(identi ﬁed by MLPA) using the Agilent High Sensitivity assay. Two
patients showed classical DMD phenotype, with loss of ambula-
tion within 13-year-old while in the other four patients ambulation
was lost >age 15.
Results: We found four different transcripts due to different
splicing choices: the exon2-exon2 duplicated transcript (79%), the
intron1-exon2-exon2 transcript, which incorporates an upstream
region of intron 1, generating a premature stop codon (14%), atranscript with both exon 2 skipped (3%) and a transcript skippingone exon 2, which generates a normal messenger (6%), this last
represented in all six DMD muscles.
Conclusions: We did not identify a phenotype-speci ﬁcD M D
splicing pattern in the six exon 2 duplicated DMD patients. All
DMD patients show a similar percentage of wild type transcript
(6%), and the very low amount of the transcript skipping bothexon 2 suggests that dystrophin rescue due to the alternativeATG translation start site in exon 5 may not play a major role in
disease severity. Our results therefore indicate lack of correla-
tion between DMD exon 2 duplication splicing choices andDMD phenotype.
M. Mietto: None. M. Fabris: None. R. Bonaccorso: None. S.C.
Previtali: None. A. Zambon: None. F. Gualandi: None. R. Rossi:
None. M.S. Falzarano: None. A. Ferlini: None.
P10.022.B Somatic mosaicism for Duchenne muscular dystro-
phy in an asymptomatic 4 year-old boy
Ana-Maria Mea šić
1, Ivona Sansovi ć1, Adriana Bobinec1, Leona
Moro žin Pohovski2, Mijana Kero1,Ljubica Odak1, Ingeborg Bari šić1
1Department of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children ’s
Hospital Zagreb, Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and
Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School ofMedicine, ZAGREB, Croatia,2Department of Medical Genetics and
Reproductive Health, Children ’s Hospital Zagreb, University of Zagreb
School of Medicine, ZAGREB, Croatia.
Introduction: Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/
BMD) are X-linked recessive disorders caused by mutations in
DMD gene, characterized by progressive symmetric skeletal
muscles weakness, elevated creatine kinase (CK) concentrationsand late-onset dilated cardiomyopathy. Here we report a case of a
boy with elevated CK and mosaic DMD mutation.
Methods: An asymptomatic 4-year-old boy without family
history of neuromuscular disorders was referred to us due toincidental ﬁndings of elevated CK (2160-3335 U/L). MLPA for DMD
was performed using peripheral blood DNA, followed by NGS of
the clinical exome.
Results: MLPA revealed a change in exon 10 of DMD . NGS
identi ﬁed mosaic nonsense mutation c.[986 =/C>A] in exon 10 of
DMD with 70% of reads containing alternative allele A.
Conclusions: The DMD shows a high germ-line mutation rate,
which predicts high somatic mutation rate and somatic mosai-cism. Only eight cases of somatic DMD mosaicism are published to
date. Somatic mutation rates may be lower than expected, or the
patients aren ’t diagnosed due to mild/uncharacteristic symptoms.
Published cases show lower mutation ratio in muscles than in
blood, consistent with a genetic normalization, a selective
pressure against mutant muscle cells. This could explain the lackof symptoms in our case. Patient ’s young age should also be
considered as he could develop symptoms later in life. This studyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
312
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608was supported by CERRM, Republic of Croatia, and by the EU
through ERDF, under grant agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008,
project,,Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine - Exploring New
Platforms and Potentials ”.
A. Mea šić:None. I. Sansovi ć:None. A. Bobinec: None. L.
Moro žin Pohovski: None. M. Kero: None. L. Odak: None. I.
Barišić:None.
P10.023.C Dystrophin isoforms transcription heatmap in
human adult control brain areas
Maria So ﬁa Falzarano1, Rachele Rossi1,2, Martina Mietto1, Fernanda
Fortunato1, Rita Selvatici1, Pietro Spitali3, Federica Montanaro2,
Francesco Muntoni2, Alessandra Ferlini1,2
1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Sciences, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom,3Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked
disease due to pathogenic variants in the DMD gene. In addition
to the neuromuscular involvement, DMD often presents with
cognitive and neuro-behavioural co-morbidities, for which the
pathogenesis and genotype-phenotype relationship are partiallyunderstood. Multiple DMD isoforms, differentially affected based
on the site of the mutation, are thought to play a relevant role in
these co-morbidities, based on their prominent (Dp71) or
exclusive (Dp140) brain expression.
Material and methods: All known dystrophin isoforms were
analysed in 24 normal adult human brain areas using TaqMan
assays on TissueScan cDNA array (OriGene). Ct were used to build
a heatmap of dystrophin isoforms expression with values rangingfrom 40 (lowest) to 27 (highest) Ct.
Results: Three main dystrophin isoform clusters were identi ﬁed.
Cluster 1 includes Dp116, Dp427p1 and Dp260.1 that show lowexpression in all brain areas. Cluster 2 includes Dp260.2, Dp427m,Dp140 with intermediate expression levels. Cluster 3 consists of
Dp427b, Dp427p2, Dp71 that have the overall high expression in
most brain areas. Hierarchical clustering also highlighted brainareas with overall low dystrophin expression, such as telencepha-lon (frontal, temporal and occipital lobe, amygdala, caudate, and
choroid plexus), diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), and
myelencephalon (medulla). By contrast, the cerebellum showedthe highest expression of Dp140.
Conclusion: The approach showed that adult human brain
areas show differential enrichment for expression of speci ﬁc
dystrophin isoforms. This information may help understand therole of dystrophin in brain co-morbidities observed in affected
DMD patients. Grant: BIND EU Grant N. 847826
M.S. Falzarano: None. R. Rossi: None. M. Mietto: None. F.
Fortunato: None. R. Selvatici: None. P. Spitali: None. F.
Montanaro: None. F. Muntoni: None. A. Ferlini: None.
P10.024.D Whole genome sequencing - A solved case of
dystrophinopathy in a young girl
Natalie Pluta
1, Ann-Kathrin Zaum1, Arpad von Moers2, Indrajit
Nanda1, Frederic Zimmer1, Cosima Drewes1, David Atlan3, Beat
Wolf4, Simone Rost1
1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Wuerzburg, Germany,2DRK Kliniken,
Berlin, Germany,3Phenosystems SA, Wallonia, Belgium,4iCoSys,
Fribourg, Switzerland.Introduction: Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) will be the
method of choice in near future genetic diagnostics. Major
challenges in WGS are interpreting and handling the large amountof data and ﬁnding the causative variant(s). Here we present a
case that was solved with WGS in which all other methods used
did not yield de ﬁnite results.
Material/Methods: The patient is a 6 year old girl with muscle
weakness and very high levels of serum creatine kinase (CK)>20,000U/l. Due to her symptoms and an almost completely
skewed X-inactivation a dystrophinopathy was strongly sug-
gested. WGS was performed and analyzed with our software forroutine NGS diagnostics (GensearchNGS, Phenosystems).
Results: We found a position in intron 54 of the DMD gene
where a small intergenic sequence of chromosome (chr) 5 was
detected. By performing Sanger sequencing we con ﬁrmed a
reciprocal translocation involving chr 5p and Xp with de ﬁnite
breakpoints. Previously performed cytogenetic analysis could not
depict the evidence of a translocation between 5p and Xp. Anextended FISH analysis could validate the translocation and will beuseful to demonstrate the participation of the active chr X in the
translocation.
Discussion: This case shows how important WGS will be or
already is for genetic routine diagnostics. By performing WGS as aﬁrst step this case could have been solved faster and with higher
accuracy than the stepwise application of conventional methods.
Supported by DFG RO 5397/3-1 | ZA 1137/2-1N. Pluta: None. A. Zaum: None. A. von Moers: None. I. Nanda:
None. F. Zimmer: None. C. Drewes: None. D. Atlan: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Phenosystems SA. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Phenosystems SA. B. Wolf: None. S. Rost: None.
P10.025.A Bionano optical genome mapping and southern
blot analysis for FSHD detection
Jeroen Depreeuw, Barbara Dewaele, Sascha Vermeer, Gert Matthijs,
Valérie Race
Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
Introduction: Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD;
OMIM*158900) is an autosomal dominant muscular disorder
characterized by slowly progressive dysfunction of facial, upperand lower extremity muscles. FSHD1 is associated with the
contraction of the D4Z4 microsatellite in the 4q35 subtelomeric
region. The most common technique for genetic diagnosis ofFSHD1 is Southern Blotting. We explored the potential of a newtechnique, called Optical Genome Mapping (OGM) from Bionano
Genomics for FSHD1 detection.
Materials and Methods: Blood samples from 10 patients with
FSHD related symptoms were collected and stored at -80°C. OGMwas performed according to the manufacturer ’s instructions and
samples were loaded on a Saphyr instrument. Bionano “EnFocus
FSHD ”pipeline was used to calculate the haplotype and the
number D4Z4 repeats (diagnostic when shorter than 10 repeats).OGM results were then compared with the results from the
Southern Blot analyses.
Results: Patient samples included 2 affected individuals (7 and
8 repeats) and 8 unaffected individuals (repeat range 13-59). OGM
results were concordant with Southern Blot results. There were no
false positives nor false negatives in our series and no differenceswere found in terms of repeatability and reproducibility. Inaddition, OGM could differentiate between 4qA (pathogenic) and
4qB (not pathogenic) haplotypes.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
313
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: We conclude that OGM is a powerful and robust
technique for FSHD1 testing in genetic diagnostic laboratories,
providing results that are completely concordant with the current
gold standard Southern Blot analysis. Additionally, OGM providesextra relevant information, such as the 4qA or 4qB haplotype andSMCHD1 structural variations.
J. Depreeuw: None. B. Dewaele: None. S. Vermeer: None. G.
Matthijs: None. V. Race: None.
P10.026.B A family with mutation in DMD that inherited from
gonadal mosaic mother
Basak Gogus , Muhsin Elmas
Afyonkarahisar Health Science University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.
Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker
muscular dystrophy (BMD) are X-linked recessive disorders these
affect 1 in 7,250 males aged 5 - 24 years. Mutations in theDystrophin (DMD ) cause DMD, BMD. Mostly, female relatives of
patient ’s are carrier. Clinical symptoms are delayed motor mile-
stones like walking independently. In addition, increasing at
creatinine kinase occur at these patients. In genetics, one of mostchallenging handicap is gonadal (germline) mosaicism mutations.
Diseases caused by germline mosaicism can be dif ﬁcult to
diagnose as genetically-inherited because the mutant alleles arenot likely to be present in the somatic cells. We aim to present onefamily with germline mosaicism in DMD gene.
Materials and Methods: 18 months old girl was referred our
clinic because of increasing creatinine kinase that foundincidentally. She had one sister. We decide to perform DMDMLPA test for her. At the same time, if we will ﬁnd any
pathological changes, same test will be performed for her sister
and mother.
Results: At the result of DMD MLPA analysis of patient, we
determined heterozygous deletion at 14th and 15th exons. The
result of her sister was same with proband. But their mother didn ’t
had any changes in DMD gene. This situation gave us the idea of apossible presence of gonadal mosaicism in the mother.
Conclusions: If there is repating for same mutation but parents
haven ’t changes, gonadal mosaicm consider. While giving genetic
counseling, parents should be informed about the rate at whichtheir next child becomes patient.
B. Gogus: None. M. Elmas: None.
P10.027.C A novel de novo missense NIPA1 mutation causing
hereditary spastic paraplegia
Dora Fabbro
1, Catia Mio2, Federico Fogolari2, Giuseppe Damante2
1Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale, Udine, Italy,2Uni-
versity of Udine, Udine, Italy.
Introduction: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) includes a
heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders character-ized by spasticity, hyperre ﬂexia and weakness in the lower limbs,
due to the degeneration of corticospinal axons. To date, more
than 80 types of HSP have been identi ﬁed. SPG6 accounts for 1%
of autosomal dominant HSP and is caused by pathogenic variantsinNIPA1 (OMIM# 608145). It encodes a magnesium transporter
located in plasma membrane and early endosomes, implicated in
neuronal development and maintenance. Here we report a 39-
years-old woman affected by progressive gait disturbanceassociated to absence seizures episodes within childhood.Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing was
performed identifying a de novo heterozygous variant in NIPA1
(NM_144599.5 c.249C>G; p.Asn83Lys). Molecular modelling was
performed to evaluate putative functional consequence of theNIPA1 protein.
Results: The NIPA1 c.249C>G mutation is classi ﬁed as likely
pathogenic following the ACMG (American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics)/AMP (Association for Molecular Pathol-ogy) guidelines. The Asn83 is located between the secondtransmembrane domain (TMD) and a loop exposed to the
extracellular space. By molecular modelling, the Asn83Lys
modi ﬁcation induces a signi ﬁcant perturbation of the protein
structure, altering signal transduction or small-molecule transportby modulating the length of TMDs.
Conclusion: We described a novel Asn83Lys mutation in NIPA1
in a patient displaying the chief phenotypical characteristics ofSPG6. Our data are in agreement with the idea that NIPA1
missense variants in SPG6 act through a gain of function
mechanism able to activate the apoptotic program, as suggestedby studies performed in C. Elegans.
D. Fabbro: None. C. Mio: None. F. Fogolari: None. G.
Damante: None.
P10.030.B Clinical and genetic characterization of seven
Portuguese patients with KMT2B variants
Alexandra M. Lopes
1, Susana Sousa1, Ana Lopes1, Paulo Silva1, Sara
Morais1, Ana F. Brandão1, Fátima Lopes1, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1, André
Jorge2, Cristina Januário2, Henrique M. Costa3, Ana C. Brás2, Rita
Quental4, Miguel Leão4, Joana Damásio1,5, Marina Magalhães5, João
P. Freixo1, Jorge Sequeiros1, Jorge Oliveira1
1CGPP-IBMC/I3S, Porto, Portugal,2Serviço de Neurologia, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal,3Serviço
de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, EPE,
Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal,4Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário de São João/Faculdade de Medicina daUniversidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,5Centro Hospitalar Universitário
do Porto, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
KMT2B pathogenic variants were recently identi ﬁed as an important
cause of early-onset dystonia. The phenotype spectrum of KMT2B -
related diseases is expanding as more complex neurological and
syndromic manifestations emerge. Clinical and genetic data from
seven Portuguese patients with causal variants in KMT2B were
reviewed to further characterize its mutational spectrum and
reassess phenotype. Two patients presented isolated dystonia, while
ﬁve had more complex or atypical phenotypes. NGS multigene
panels, based on whole-exome sequencing, were applied in sixpatients, whereas one was directly tested for variants in KMT2B by
Sanger sequencing, according to the clinical request. The two
patients with isolated dystonia carried one missense variant ofunknown clinical signi ﬁcance (p.Arg1762His) or one splice-site
variant (c.5198-4_5206del). The latter occurred de novo ; neither
had been previously reported. In the group of patients with complex
dystonia, one frameshift (p.Glu1267Alafs*35) and two missensevariants (p.Arg145Gln and p.Arg1777Pro) were identi ﬁed. Two were
pathogenic or likely-pathogenic, whereas one missense substitution
was of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance. Only one had been reported.
One patient with an atypical phenotype, comprising ataxia, subtledystonia and polyneuropathy, harboured a novel splice-site variant
(c.3334+1G>A). One additional patient with a syndromic presenta-
tion, including dysmorphic features and intellectual disability, but nodystonia, carried a novel frameshift variant (p.Ala1856Profs*115); itsclinical signi ﬁcance and origin are under investigation as anotherAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
314
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608candidate variant in TRIO was found in this patient. We expand the
spectrum of pathogenic variants in KMT2B and hope contributing to
explore further their association with atypical and syndromic
phenotypes.
A.M. Lopes: None. S. Sousa: None. A. Lopes: None. P. Silva:
None. S. Morais: None. A.F. Brandão: None. F. Lopes: None. R.
Bastos-Ferreira: None. A. Jorge: None. C. Januário: None. H.M.
Costa: None. A.C. Brás: None. R. Quental: None. M. Leão: None.
J. Damásio: None. M. Magalhães: None. J.P. Freixo: None. J.
Sequeiros: None. J. Oliveira: None.
P10.031.C Partial uniparental disomy of chromosome 4 causes
by homozygous TRAPPC11 truncating variant
Nawale HADOUIRI1,2, Véronique Darmency3, Véronique Dulieu2,
Marie-Gabrielle Mourot De Rougemont4, Benoit Collomb5, Stéphanie
Perez Martin6, Olivier Blanchard7, Antonio Vitobello8, Christophe
Philippe9, Laurence Faivre1,10, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,11,12
1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté,
Dijon, France,2Pôle rééducation-réadaptation, CHU de Dijon, 23, rue
Gaffarel, Dijon, France,33- Service de Neurophysiologie Clinique,
Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,44- Hôpital
Francois Mitterrand, département de radiologie diagnostique et
thérapeutique, CHU, 14, rue Paul Gaffarel, Dijon, France,55- Unité de
Réanimation polyvalente, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne,
Dijon, France,6Pôle pédiatrie, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France,7Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier
de Roanne, Roanne, France,8Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon,France,98- Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique
des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,109- Centre de
Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement et
syndromes malformatifs », centre de génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD,CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,1110- Centre de Référence
maladies rares « Dé ﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares », CHU
Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,12Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHUDijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
Introduction: Transport protein particle (TRAPP) is a multisubunit
tethering complex implicated in tricellular vesicle traf ﬁcking.
Biallelic pathogenic variants of the TRAPC11 gene have rarely
been associated with various phenotypes from limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy (LGMD) to congenital disorder of glycosyla-tion (CDG), associated to various extramuscular symptoms. To
date, only 20 patients have been reported in the literature with 13
pathogenic variants.
Patients and Results: In a 15-month-old male referred for severe
developmental delay, weakness of the 4 limbs and pelvic girdle
muscles, mild dysmetria of the u pper limbs, severe microcephaly,
seizures, and mildly elevated crea tine kinase (670 UI/L), trio exome
sequencing (ES) identi ﬁed a homozygous pathogenic splice-site
variant (NM_021942.5:c.1287 +5 G > A )i nt h ei n t r o n1 2o ft h e
TRAPPC11 gene, only inherited from his father. Targeted ES reanalysis
identi ﬁed a paternal partial 24 Mb uniparental disomy (UPD) of the
chromosome 4 including this variant, previously reported in 5affected members. Affected indivi duals had microcephaly, early-
onset psychomotor delay, hyperkinetic movement disorder, truncal
ataxia, and elevated creatine kinase (300 −1200 UI/L). At last follow-
up (4 years of age), he presented a persistent muscular weakness,
severe microcephaly, seizures, delayed developmental milestones
and thin corpus callosum. His mus cular phenotype appeared more
pronounced that previous reported in cases with the same TRAPPC11
variant.Conclusion: This report highlights the bene ﬁt of trio ES for the
precocious diagnosis of children affected with severe developmental
delay and unusual causative mole cular mechanisms such as partial
UPD. It also appears highly useful for genetic counseling for parentsto precise the recurrence risk.
N. Hadouiri: None. V. Darmency: None. V. Dulieu: None. M.
Mourot De Rougemont: None. B. Collomb: None. S. Perez
Martin: None. O. Blanchard: None. A. Vitobello: None. C.
Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None.
P10.033.A Homozygous splice-site variant in MADD, encoding
a Rab guanine nucleotide exchange factor, results inpleiotropic effects and a multisystemic infantile-lethal
disorder
Hagar Mor-Shaked
1, Bassam Abu-Libdeh2, Amir A. Atawna3, Gillis
David4, Orli Halstuk1, Nava Shaul-Lotan1, Mordechai Slae4, Mutaz
Sultan5, Vardiella Meiner1, Orly Elpeleg1, Tamar Harel1
1Department of Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical
Center, jerusalem, Israel,2Department of Pediatrics, Makassed
Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Al-Quds University, East Jerusalem,
Israel,3Department of Neonatology, Makassed Hospital, East
jerusalem, Israel,4Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah-Hebrew
University Medical Center, jerusalem, Israel,5Department of Pedia-
trics, Makassed Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Al-Quds University,East jerusalem, Israel.
Introduction: Rab proteins coordinate inter-organellar vesicle-
mediated transport, facilitating intracellular communication,protein recycling, and signaling processes. Dysfunction of Rabproteins or their direct interactors lead to a wide range of diseases
with diverse manifestations. MADD encodes a Rab guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) which activates RAB3 andRAB27A/27B and is thus a crucial regulator of neuromuscular
junctions and endocrine secretory granule release. Pathogenic
variants in MADD have recently been associated with syndromic
neurodevelopmental disorder [MIM 619005] and with DEEAHsyndrome [MIM 619004].
Materials and Methods: Following informed consent, exome
sequencing analysis was undertaken on seven individuals fromfour consanguineous Arab Muslim families with an infantile-lethalsyndrome including failure to thrive, chronic diarrhea, neonatal
respiratory distress, variable pituitary dysfunction and distal
arthrogryposis. Sanger sequencing was used to segregate thecandidate variant in available family members, and analysis of
cDNA allowed characterization of the mutant transcript. Result:
Internal gene-matching using a local exome database allowed theidenti ﬁcation of a homozygous splice-site variant in MADD (c.2816
+1G>A) on a common haplotype in all four families, indicating a
founder variant. The variant segregated with the disease in all
available family members. Determination of cDNA sequenceveriﬁed single exon skipping, resulting in an out-of-frame deletion.
Conclusions: The combined roles of MADD and its downstream
effectors correlate with the phenotypic spectrum of disease, and
call for additional studies to con ﬁrm the pathogenic mechanism
and to investigate possible therapeutic avenues through modula-tion of TNF- αsignaling. The authors declare no funding sources for
this project.
H. Mor-Shaked: None. B. Abu-Libdeh: None. A. A. Atawna:
None. G. David: None. O. Halstuk: None. N. Shaul-Lotan: None.
M. Slae: None. M. Sultan: None. V. Meiner: None. O. Elpeleg:
None. T. Harel: None.
P10.034.B Variants in the imprinted gene MAGEL2Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
315
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Evelyn Douglas1, Louisa Sanchez1, Jessica Burdett2, Shannon Le
Blanc3, Nicholas J. C. Smith4, Andrew Dubowsky2, David Lawrence5,
Karin Kassahn6, Sui Yu1, Kathie Friend1
1SA Pathology (Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital), North Adelaide,
Australia,2SA Pathology (Flinders Medical Centre), Bedford Park,
Australia,3Paediatric and Reproductive Genetics Unit (Women ’s and
Children ’s Hospital), North Adelaide, Australia,4Neurology (Women ’s
and Children ’s Hospital), North Adelaide, Australia,5CCB ACRF
Cancer Genomics Facility, Adelaide, Australia,6SA Pathology
(Technology Advancement Unit), Adelaide, Australia.
Pathogenic variants in MAGEL2 are associated with Chitayat-Hall
(CHS), Schaaf-Yang (SYS) and Prader-Willi (PWS) syndromes.
Schaaf-Yang Syndrome is characterised by neonatal hypotonia,
developmental delay, intellectual disability, feeding problems ininfancy, joint contractures and autism spectrum disorder, sharingclinical overlap with Prader-Willi Syndrome and Chitayat-Hall
syndrome. Truncating variants in the maternally imprinted
MAGEL2 gene have been identi ﬁed in patients with SYS.
A neuromuscular gene panel analysis was requested on a two
week old male infant, requiring respiratory support, with
hypotonia, bilateral talipes and central apnoeas. No variants
explaining the patient ’s phenotype were initially found, but
subsequent reanalysis of the exome identi ﬁed a truncating variant
in the MAGEL2 gene. Familial studies showed this variant to be
paternally inherited and also con ﬁrmed this variant in the paternal
grandmother, consistent with the inheritance pattern of Schaaf-Yang Syndrome due to imprinted inheritance.
Following this ﬁnding, the MAGEL2 gene was added to our
standard neuromuscular panel. To date, only one additionalvariant has been identi ﬁed in MAGEL2 , an in-frame deletion of 30
nucleotides. Parental studies indicated this variant to be
maternally inherited, so it is considered unlikely to be disease
causing.
E. Douglas: None. L. Sanchez: None. J. Burdett: None. S. Le
Blanc: None. N.J.C. Smith: None. A. Dubowsky: None. D.
Lawrence: None. K. Kassahn: None. S. Yu: None. K. Friend: None.
P10.035.C Phenotypic variability of MEGF10 variants causing
congenital myopathy Report of two unrelated patients from ahighly consanguineous population
Hanan Suliman AlQudairy , Mohammad AlMuhaizea, Omar Dab-
bagh, Wafa Alotaibi, Aljouhra AlHargan, Mariam Ali, Hindi AlHindi,Dilek Colak, Namik Kaya
King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
Congenital mypoathies are rare neuromuscular hereditary dis-
orders that manifest at birth or during infancy and usually appear
with muscle weakness and hypotonia. Early onset myopathy,areﬂexia, respiratory distress, and dysphagia (EMARDD, OMIM:
614399, MIM: 612453) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
caused by biallelic mutations (at homozygous or compoundheterozygous status) in MEGF10 (multiple epidermal growth
factor-like domains protein family). Here, we report two unrelated
patients, born to consanguineous parents, having two novel
MEGF10 mutations. There are only ﬁve cases reported in the
literature to date. Interestingly, presence of MEGF10 associated
EMARDD has not been reported in the Saudi Arabia, a highly
consanguineous population. Our work expands phenotypic
features of the disease and provides opportunity for geneticcounseling to the in ﬂicted families. Awareness of the implications
of consanguineous union is extremely important for parental
counseling and recognition in a greatly inbred society.
H.S. AlQudairy: None.
M. AlMuhaizea: None. O. Dabbagh:
None. W. Alotaibi: None. A. AlHargan: None. M. Ali: None. H.
AlHindi: None. D. Colak: None. N. Kaya: None.
P10.036.D Mitochondria-lysosome membrane contacts are
defective in GDAP1 -related Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Lara Cantarero1,2, Elena Juárez-Escoto1, Azahara Civera-Tregón1,2,
María Rodríguez-Sanz1, Yaiza Díaz-Osorio1, Mónica Roldán1,3, Raúl
Benítez1,4, Janet Hoenicka1,2, Francesc Palau1,2,3
1Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Molecular Medicine –IPER, Institut
de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,2CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain,3Dept. of Genetic
Medicine –IPER, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, and Hospital Clínic,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,4Automatic Control
Department and Biomedical Engineering Research Center, UniversitatPolitècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Mitochondrial membrane contact sites (MCSs) allow
bidirectional communication between mitochondria and other
organelles for speci ﬁc functions. GDAP1 is an atypical glutathione
S-transferase located both in the outer mitochondrial membraneand in the mitochondrial contacts with endoplasmic reticulum(MAMs). Since mutations in GDAP1 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy, its function is essential for peripheral nerve physiol-
ogy. Our previous studies showed structural defects in mitochon-dria and ER cisternae, associated with abnormal autophagicvesicles. Nevertheless, the underlying pathophysiological mechan-
isms of loss of function mutations remain elusive.
Materials and methods: Cellular and functional experiments
on autophagy, interorganelles MCSs and mitochondrial network in
embryonic motor neurons from Gdap1
-/-mice, GDAP1 -silenced SH-
SY5Y cells and GDAP1 patients ’ﬁbroblasts.
Results: We demonstrate that GDAP1 participates in basal
autophagy and its depletion affects autophagosome biogenesis
and membrane traf ﬁcking from MAMs. GDAP1 also participates in
lysosome maturation by interacting with PYK fyve, a pH-dependent
kinase. Notably, we present GDAP1-LAMP-1 as a new tetheringpair of mitochondria-lysosome MCSs. GDAP1 de ﬁciency reduces
MCSs between these organelles, impairs lysosomal and mitochon-
drial network morphology and decreases cellular glutathionelevels. Supplying this antioxidant rescues lysosomes membrane
and mitochondrial dynamics defects but not early autophagic
events or mitochondrial MCSs.
Conclusions: GDAP1 enables the proper function of mitochondrial
MCSs in both degradative and non- degradative pathways, which
could explain primary insults in GDAP1 -related CMT pathophysiology
and highlights new redox-sensitive targets in axonopathies wheremitochondria and lysosomes are involved. Grants: Spanish Ministry
of Science, Innovation and Universities (SAF2015-66625-R), General-
itat de Catalunya 2015 FEDER/S-21, and CIBERER.
L. Cantarero: None. E. Juárez-Escoto: None. A. Civera-Tregón:
None. M. Rodríguez-Sanz: None. Y. Díaz-Osorio: None. M.
Roldán: None. R. Benítez: None. J. Hoenicka: None. F. Palau:
None.
P10.037.A Cis MFN2 missense variants causing familial
CMT2A2AAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
316
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Enrica Marchionni1, Fabiana Fattori2, Gioia Mastromoro1, Daniele
Guadagnolo1, Francesca Di Palma1, Luca Bosco2, Enrico Bertini2,
Antonio Pizzuti1
1Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
Rome, Italy,2Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative
Disorders, Department of Neurosciences, Bambino Gesù Children ’s
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Introduction: MFN2 (MIM *608507) is a nuclear gene encoding for
a mitochondrial outer membrane protein. Heterozygous muta-
tions in MFN2 are associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT)disease type 2A2A (CMT2A2A MIM*609260) and CMT6A(MIM*601152) while biallelic variants cause CMT2A2B
(MIM*617087).
Materials and Methods: A 39 y.o. woman was referred for a
peripheric neurop athy, sensory de ﬁcits and distal-predominant
weakness. ENMG showed a marked neurogenic involvement. At
birth she presented clubfeet an d during childhood she under-
went nine surgical intervention s for foot and ankle deformities.
She also presented scoliosis and a severe symptoms progres-sion. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) was performed using an Illumina
M i S e qa n a l y z i n gac u s t o m i z e dg e n ep a n e li n c l u d i n g1 1 1g e n e srelated to peripheral neuropathies and/or distal SMA. Target
enrichment was carried out using Nextera Rapid Capture
Custom Enrichment Kit.
Results: NGS analysis detected two heterozygous MFN2
(NM_014874.3) variants: c.2170C>G; p.(Leu724Val) and
c.2200C>G; p.(Leu734Val). The ﬁrst one is absent in GnomAD
v2.1.1, clinical databases and is not reported in literature. Thesecond one is described in literature in a patient presentingCMT2A. Segregation analysis disclosed the same variants in her 69
y.o. father, revealing the cis phase. Neurological examination
evidenced milder symptoms and the presence of pes cavus,scoliosis and distal weakness.
Conclusions: MFN2 genotype-phenotype studies show signi ﬁ-
cant phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity and variant interpreta-tion is challenging. Interrogation of the in house databasepermitted to ﬁnd another family with similar indication analysis
and the same in cis variants, currently under clinical reassessment
to better re ﬁne the associated phenotype.
E. Marchionni: None. F. Fattori: None. G. Mastromoro: None.
D. Guadagnolo: None. F. Di Palma: None. L. Bosco: None. E.
Bertini: None. A. Pizzuti: None.
P10.038.B Exploring the role of genetic modi ﬁers in a mild
LAMA2-RD case associated with a LAMA2 loss-of-function
mutation
Veronica Pini
1, Ben Weisburd2, Vijay Ganesh2, Stephanie Di Troia2,
Francesco Catapano1, Sara Aguti1, Francesco Muntoni1
1UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health - Dubowitz
Neuromuscular Centre, London, United Kingdom,2Centre for
Mendelian Genomics - Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,Cambridge, MA, USA.
Introduction: Merosin-de ﬁcient congenital muscular dystrophy
(LAMA2-RD) is a neuromuscular disorder caused by mutations inthe LAMA2 gene, coding for the alpha-2 subunit of laminin-211
(merosin). LAMA2-RD patients carrying LAMA2 loss-of-function
mutations lack merosin and their invariably severe clinical
phenotype is characterised by the inability to acquire ambulation.A wider (often milder) spectrum of disease severity results frommissense mutations, if a partially functional protein is produced.To date, only one LAMA2-RD patient was reported with a very mild
phenotype despite the total merosin absence in muscle. This
patient is still ambulant at the age of 30 with no respiratory
insuf ﬁciency nor cardiomyopathy. Interestingly, this patient carries
the same LAMA2 loss-of-function mutation as a severely affected
sibling. We hypothesized that genetic modi ﬁer(s) in the atypical
patient mitigate the consequences of complete merosin de ﬁ-
ciency via a novel mechanism.
Methods: We performed RNA-sequencing on RNA obtained
from muscle samples of the atypical patient, the affected sibling
and unrelated LAMA2-RD patients with both total and partial
merosin de ﬁciency.
Results: Transcriptome analysis showed a similar LAMA2 gene
expression in the atypical patient, the affected sibling and patients
with absent merosin. A limited number of genes differentially
expressed in the atypical patient affect pathways potentiallyrelevant for the observed phenotypic divergence.
Conclusion: We plan to study the role of candidate modi ﬁer(s)/
pathways in dystrophic zebra ﬁsh and identify novel mechanisms
to attenuate LAMA2-RD severity. New knowledge about themolecular aspects of the disease could lead to the development of
new therapeutic approaches for LAMA2-RD. Project supported by
CureCMD.
V. Pini: None. B. Weisburd: None. V. Ganesh: None. S. Di
Troia: None. F. Catapano: None. S. Aguti: None. F. Muntoni: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;UCL.
P10.039.C Interactome-based multi-omics study of molecular
networks implicated in disease activity in Multiple Sclerosis
Valentina Nale
1, Ferdinando Clarelli2, Noemi Di Nanni1, Laura
Ferrè2,3, Elisabetta Mascia2, Silvia Santoro2, Matteo Gnocchi1, Marco
Moscatelli1, Martina Tosi2, Kaalindi Misra2, Melissa Sorosina2,
Luciano Milanesi1, Massimo Filippi3,4,5, Federica Esposito2,3, Ettore
Mosca1
1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council,
Segrate (Milan), Italy,2Laboratory of Neurological complex disorders,
Division of Neurosciences, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan, Italy,3Neurology, Neurorehabilitation and Neurophysiology
Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,4Vita-Salute
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy,5Neuroimaging Research Unit,
Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan, Italy.
Introduction: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of
the Central Nervous System, characterized by high clinicalheterogeneity. Interactome-based approaches to complex dis-
eases have proven successful to ﬁll the gap of knowledge
between gene-level ﬁndings and pathological phenotypes. In this
study, we used tissue-speci ﬁc as well as general models of the
human interactome to ﬁnd gene networks affected by the most
signi ﬁcant molecular alterations associated with disease activity in
MS patients.
Materials and Methods: The genome-wide association study
involved 1174 patients; gene-wise statistics were estimated with
VEGAS; differential expression analysis was performed on whole
blood samples from 182 patients. Tissue-speci ﬁc interactomes
source: HumanBase. General interactomes: STRING, DIAMOND,
HINT, iRefIndex. Network analysis: “dmﬁnd”(genomics); “mND ”
(genomics and transcriptomics). Statistical signi ﬁcance was
assessed by permutation-based approaches. Pathway sources:Biosystems, MsigDB. Pathway cross-talk was quanti ﬁed consider-
ing inter-pathway gene-gene interactions.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
317
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: The analysis of genomics in brain-speci ﬁc and
lymphocyte-speci ﬁc interactomes revealed a series of genes that
carry variants and form signi ﬁcant gene networks; these networks
share a common component, but let us also hypothesize tissue-speci ﬁc effects on different pathways. The integrative analysis
revealed intra-pathway functional links between the genetic and
expression alterations, and pathway cross-talks, with a core of
conserved relations (recurrent across interactomes) as well asinteractome-speci ﬁcﬁndings.
Conclusions: Collectively, the gene networks emerging in our
study provide an in-depth knowledge of molecular pathways
implicated in disease activity. Our study underlines also theimportance of integrating complementary approaches to addressthe complexity of molecular networks. Funding: MoH GR-2016-
02363997; FRRB ERAPERMED2018-233 FindingMS GA 779282.
V. Nale: None. F. Clarelli: None. N. Di Nanni: None. L. Ferrè:
None. E. Mascia: None. S. Santoro: None. M. Gnocchi: None. M.
Moscatelli: None. M. Tosi: None. K. Misra: None. M. Sorosina:
None. L. Milanesi: None. M. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec, Merck-
Serono, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-ness); Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche,Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-
Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharma-
ceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis,
Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono.
E. Mosca: None.
P10.040.D Expanding disease spectrum of muscular dystrophy
Marwan Nashabat ,Şahin Avc ı, Esra Börklü-Yücel, Hilal P ırıl
Saraço ğlu, Piraye O ﬂazer, Nathalie Escande-Beillard, Hülya Kayserili
Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Congenital muscular dystrophy is a genetically and phenotypically
heterogeneous spectrum of disorders characterized by progres-sive muscle weakness starting at infancy or early childhood.
Although currently the majority of patients are diagnosed by high
throughput genetic investigations, a large number of musculardystrophies remain unraveled.
Case presentation: 8-year-old female patient born from a
nonconsanguineous marriage de veloped normally until early
childhood. At 5 years old, she started to experience frequentfalls and developed an abnormal gait. Her symptoms progres-
sively worsen over time. The pa tient has normal growth and
mental abilities. Her upper and lower limbs muscle power
decreased ranging from 2 to 4/5. The patient has waddling gait
with mildly anterior pelvic tilt and thoracic scoliosis. Biochem-
ical investigations showed elevated creatinine kinase level.
Electromyography showed a myopathic pattern. The musclebiopsy analysis was consistent with muscular dystrophy. Allusual genetic investigations including clinical exome sequen-
cing, myositis gene panel, and DMD MLPA analysis were
unremarkable. Interestingly, whole exome sequencing revealeda promising candidate involved in the nucleo-cytoplasmic
trafﬁcking. Segregation analysis results suggest autosomal
recessive inheritance. Encourag ingly, additional cases with
more severe phenotype have been identi ﬁed by using
GeneMatcher. Functional valid ation is under investigation.Conclusion: The recent advances in genetic investigations
improved substantially the understanding of the pathophysiology
of many congenital muscular dystrophies. Further research is
needed to unravel new causative candidates and possibletreatments for the undiagnosed patients.
M. Nashabat: None. &. Avc ı:None. E. Börklü-Yücel: None. H.P.
Saraço ğlu:None. P. Oﬂazer: None. N. Escande-Beillard: None. H.
Kayserili: None.
P10.041.A Functional analysis of an RYR1 variant underlying a
myopathy with variable expressivity
Jennifer Hauteclocque
1,2, Adrien Rihoux3,2, Jean-Denis Brisson4,5,6,
Alex Parker1,2, Cam-Tu E. Nguyen1,7, Martine Tétreault1,2
1Département de Neurosciences, Un iversité de Montréal, Montreal,
QC, Canada,2Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Montreal, QC,
Canada,3Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immuno-
logie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Faculté de
médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke,Sherbrooke, QC, Canada,5Groupe de recherche interdisciplinaire
sur les maladies neuromusculaires , Centre intégré universitaire de
santé et de services sociaux du S aguenay-Lac-St-Jean, Saguenay,
QC, Canada,6Clinique des maladies neuromusculaires, Centre
intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux du Saguenay-
Lac-St-Jean, Saguenay, Saguenay, QC, Canada,7Pediatric Neurol-
ogy, CHU Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC,Canada.
Neuromuscular diseases are kn own to be highly heterogeneous
diseases where a single mutation is often associated with a widerange of phenotypes. Although t he nature and location of the
variant can explain the variability between different mutations,
differences in clinical presenta tion amongst carriers of the same
variant remain elusive. We present a study cohort composed of
individuals carrying the same uncharacterized RYR1 hetero-
zygous missense variant but who demonstrate extremelydiverse phenotypes ranging from exertional rhabdomyolysis,ﬁxed weakness with ptosis, and a symptomatic individuals. Our
goal is to validate the pathogenicity of this variant before
proceeding to investigate the m olecular basis of this clinical
heterogeneity.
We used a CRISPR/Cas9 mediated homozygous knock-in of the
RYR1 variant in C. elegans to study the functional effects of the
mutation. Locomotion, lifespan, and synaptic transmission weremeasured and compared to wild type (wt) controls using video
microscopy, a lifespan assay, and an aldicarb-induced paralysis
assay respectively. As such, we identi ﬁed a decrease in mobility,
longevity, and synaptic ef ﬁcacy in mutant worms compared to
the wt.
We conclude that this RYR1 variant is in fact pathogenic as it
causes a variety of neuromuscular phenotypes in our C. elegans
model. This provides further evidence for the pathogenicity of thisvariant in humans and corroborates the idea that this cohort is
ideal to study the mechanisms of clinical heterogeneity. Finally,
these ﬁndings will not only have a direct impact on the affected
individuals and their families, but will also help inform diseaseprogression, risk management and prognosis.
J. Hauteclocque: None. A. Rihoux: None. J. Brisson: None. A.
Parker: None. C.E. Nguyen: None. M. Tétreault: None.
P10.042.B The c.794C>T p.(Ala265Val) SCN4A variant may be
associated with congenital myopathy with FSHD-likephenotypeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
318
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Barbora Plevová1, Jana Zídková2, Petra La ššuthová3, Roope
Männikkö4, Jana Haberlová1
1Department of Paediatric Neurology, Second Faculty of Medicine (2.
LF UK) and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,
2Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University Hospital Brno,
Brno, Czech Republic,3Neurogenetic laboratory, Department of
Paediatric Neurology, Second Faculty of Medicine (2. LF UK) and
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic,4Department of
Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
London, United Kingdom.
Background: The causes and manifestations of congenital
myopathy may be diverse. Loss-of-function variants in the SCN4A
gene are the cause of autosomal recessive (AR) severe foetal
hypokinesia and congenital myopathy. Gain-of-function variantswere associated with autosomal dominant myotonia and periodicparalysis.
Patients and Methods: A 17-year old girl with the phenotype
of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy experienced theonset of her symptoms in the neonatal period. The symptomsincluded muscle weakness, predominantly on upper limbs,
scapulae alatae, craniofacial dysmorphia with ptosis and hypomi-
mia. Analysis of the FSHD1 locus was followed by next-generation
sequencing (NGS) using a custom-designed neuromuscular gene
panel. The results were veri ﬁed by Sanger sequencing in both
healthy parents and brothers. In vitro electrophysiologicalcharacterization of the variant was performed in order todetermine its functional impact.
Results: FSHD1 testing was negative. NGS revealed homo-
zygous missense p.(Ala265Val) variant in the SCN4A gene
(NM_000334.4):c.794C>T in the proband. Parents and bothbrothers were heterozygous for the variant. It is classi ﬁed in
ClinVar as a variant of unknown signi ﬁcance, predicted as
deleterious by SIFT and disease-causing by MutationTaster.Population frequency in gnomAD ALL is 0,0018 %. The patch
clamping of the “mutated ”cells showed lower currents compared
to the “wild type ”cells.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the SCN4A variant
c.794C>T may explain the cause of muscular weakness in our
proband and further broaden the spectrum of AR inheritance for
SCN4A .
Supported by MEYS 8F20002 EJP RD and the European Union ’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, EJP RD
COFUND-EJP N° 825575.
B. Plevová: None. J. Zídková: None. P. La ššuthová: None. R.
Männikkö: None. J. Haberlová: None.
P10.043.C Case report: The novel homozygous nebulin
mutation c.18800T>C (p.Leu6267Pro) causes lethal arthrogry-
posis multiplex congenita
Naomi Baba
1, Isolde Schreyer1, Rosemarie Fröber2, Bernhard Theis3,
Ekkehard Schleußner4, Christian Andreas Hübner1, Shoko
Komatsuzaki1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,
Germany,2Institute of Anatomy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
Jena, Germany,3Section Pathology of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany,4Department of
Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
Introduction: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a
clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease characterized bycongenital joint contractures. Several severe fetal neuromusculardisorders are known to cause AMC. Case: We here report aconsanguineous couple with a history of a male deceased
newborn and a female stillbirth. In both siblings, AMC had been
diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound. The male patient was born at
the 37
thweek of gestation and died postpartum. His younger
sister died in the 32ndweek of gestation. Autopsies in both
patients revealed hypoplastic lungs, ﬂexion contractures of hands
and ﬁngers, myocardial hypertrophy and dysmorphic features
including hypotrophic antihelix of ears, hypertelorism and higharched palate.
Results: After genetic counseling, an AMC gene panel was
performed and revealed no disease-causing mutation. Exome
sequencing allowed us to identify the novel homozygous variantc.18800T>C, p.(Leu6267Pro), rs184723737 in NEB in both patients.
Both parents were heterozygous for this variant.
Discussion: NEB encodes nebulin, a giant cytoskeletal protein
(773 kDa) expressed in skeletal muscle. Biallelic pathogenicvariants in NEB cause nemaline myopathy, in which severities
vary from prenatal lethality, severe early infantile neuromuscular
disease to milder adult-onset phenotypes. Patients with severenemaline myopathy show low set ears, high-arched palate,hypertelorism, which were observed in our patients. Because of
the clinical ﬁndings of our patients, the evolutional conservation
of p.Leu6267 and the co-segregation of the variant, we identifythe novel c.18800T>C, p.(Leu6267Pro) variant as disease causing.
Conclusion: Our ﬁnding highlights the importance of whole
exome sequencing in identifying rare genetic causes of AMC.
N. Baba: None. I. Schreyer: None. R. Fröber: None. B. Theis:
None. E. Schleußner: None. C.A. Hübner: None. S. Komatsuzaki:
None.
P10.044.D Antigen presenting cells from PD patients exhibit
an autoin ﬂammatory cytokine pro ﬁle
Camille Michaud
1,2, Camberly Hernandez Paredes1,2, Renaud
Balthazard1,2, Lovatiana Andriamboavonjy1,2, Annie Laplante1,
Sébastien Audet1,2, Martine Tétreault1,2, Diana Matheoud1,2
1Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada,2Université
de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
Introduction: Elevated levels of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines have
been shown in the serum of Parkinson ’s disease (PD) patients and
mouse models suggesting that peripherally occurring in ﬂamma-
tory processes participate in PD pathogenesis. However, the cells
responsible for this dysregulated production of cytokines, theirexact expression pro ﬁle and the consequences on T cell
polarization remain unknown. Furthermore, PINK1, a PD-related
gene, represses pro-in ﬂammatory cytokine production mediated
by the cGAS/STING pathway (an innate immune signalingpathway that detects cytosolic DNA). PINK1 is also a major
repressor of mitochondrial antigen presentation (MitAP), a process
dependent on mitochondrial-derived vesicle (MDV) formation andinvolved in mitochondrial autoimmune responses and PDpathogenesis. We hypothesize that antigen presenting cells (APCs)
exhibit a dysregulated cytokine pro ﬁle in PD that skew T cell
polarization.
Materials and methods: Monocyte-derived dendritic cells
(MDDCs) from PD patients and sex/age matched healthy
individuals were generated from PBMCs to characterize their
cytokine expression pro ﬁle after LPS or bacterial stimulation using
RT-qPCR and ELISA.
Results: We report that MDDCs from PD patients present a
dysregulated cytokine pro ﬁle. Moreover, only a subset of cytokines
is altered which promotes the T cell polarization towardsautoimmune-related Th17 cells.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
319
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: Our results indicate that the dysregulated
inﬂammation observed in PD patients affects APCs by inducing
the production of pro-Th17 cytokines. These data strongly support
the hypothesis that autoimmune mechanisms are implicated inPD. This project should allow us to better understand the role ofautoimmunity in PD and to identify new biomarkers. Acknowl-
edgements: CIHR, FRQS, Courtois foundation and Parkinson
Canada
C. Michaud: None. C. Hernandez Paredes: None. R. Baltha-
zard: None. L. Andriamboavonjy: None. A. Laplante: None. S.
Audet: None. M. Tétreault: None. D. Matheoud: None.
P10.047.C Prediction of Parkinson ’s disease risk based on
genetic pro ﬁle and established risk factors
Paraskevi Chairta
1, Andreas Hadjisavvas2,3, Maria A. Loizidou2,3,
Kristia Yiangou2,3, Andrea N. Georgiou4, Christiana A. Demetriou5,
Yiolanda P. Christou1, Marios Pantziaris1,2, Kyriaki Michailidou2,6,
Eleni Zamba-Papanicolaou1,2
1Neurology Clinics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus,2Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia,
Cyprus,3Department of Electron Microscopy and Molecular Pathol-
ogy, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,
4Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, School of Medicine,
University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece,5Department of Primary
Care and Population Health, University of Nicosia Medical School,Nicosia, Cyprus,6Biostatistics Unit, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology
and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Introduction: Parkinson ’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative
disorder and literature suggests that genetics and lifestyle/
environmental factors may play a key role in the triggering of
the disease. Polygenic risk scor es (PRS) provide an aggregate
score of variants that have been shown to be associated with a
speci ﬁc disease in GWAS. This study aimed to evaluate the
predictive performance of a 12-SNPs PRS in combination withalready established PD-environmental/lifestyle factors.
Materials and Methods: Genotypic, demographic and lifestyle
data on 235 PD-patients and 464 healthy controls were obtained
from a case-control study previously carried out in the Cypriotpopulation. Logistic-regression analysis was used to assess theassociation of PRS with PD-status and each risk factor with PD-
status. Stepwise-regression analysis was used to select the best
predictive-model for PD combining environmental/lifestyle andgenetic factors.
Results: The 12-SNPs PRS was signi ﬁcantly increased in PD
cases compared to controls OR(95%CI). Logistic-regression ana-lyses showed that age, head injury, family history and depressionwere positively associated with PD risk, while BMI was inversely
associated with PD risk. Stepwise-regression suggested that a
model which contains eight-independent factors including PRS ismost predictive of PD.
Conclusions: These results suggest an association between
both genetic and environmental factors and PD, and highlight the
potential for the use of PRS in combination with the classical riskfactors for risk prediction of PD. Further investigation with a largercohort and a PRS with additional variants may increase the
statistical-power and con ﬁrm that the combination of these
factors could be used for prediction.
P. Chairta: None. A. Hadjisavvas: None. M. A. Loizidou: None.
K. Yiangou: None. A. N. Georgiou: None. C. A. Demetriou: None.
Y. P. Christou: None. M. Pantziaris: None. K. Michailidou: None.
E. Zamba-Papanicolaou: None.P10.048.D Identi ﬁcation of a novel mutation of PIEZO2 gene
as a cause of Distal Arthogryposis on a child: a case report
Javier Torres , Fernando Macho, María L. Quintanilla, Esther Simarro,
María C. Carrascosa, Laura Navarro
Hospital General Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain.
Distal Arthrogryposis with Impaired Proprioception and Touch
(DAIPT, MIM #617146) is a rare disease characterized by a partial
loss of mechanosensation. It can result in ataxia, muscle weakness,
dysmetria and other alterations on walk and movement. It isrecessively inherited and caused by homozygous or compoundheterozygous mutations in PIEZO2 gene. This gene codes a large
transmembrane protein having a role in the conversion of
mechanical stimuli into currents in somatosensory neurons.
A 4 year old child was referred with symptoms compatible with
the disease, including (among other symptoms) impaired
proprioception, congenital malformation of the Central Nervous
System and hypotony.
Aﬁrst study found variants in genes SCN9A and SPTAN1 ,b o t h
related with neurological pathologies, but the subsequent segrega-
tion study discarded them as the cause of the pathology. A further
analysis found a novel mutation in PIEZO2 gene (Cr. 18p11,
c.3539_3572delAGTATTTCATCTGCATTGGCATCCCACCTGCTCC, p.(Gln
1180Leufs*19)),combined with a second mutation (c.18885G>T, p.
(Glu*)) found in less than 0.001% of po pulation. Our in-silico study of
the variant ’s effect on the protein showed th at these alterations cause
an important truncation of the protein. Also, the segregation study
demonstrated that each mutation was inherited from a different
parent. All together, we concluded that the combination of bothvariants is the most likely cause of the disease in the child.
Although there is no treatment at the moment for this
pathology, this knowledge can be useful in genetic counseling
in this family and in the case of further research could provide
new treatments for patients.
J. Torres: None. F. Macho: None. M.L. Quintanilla: None. E.
Simarro: None. M.C. Carrascosa: None. L. Navarro: None.
P10.049.A <Frequency of carrier of AAGGG repeat expansions in
RFC1 gene in patients with sensorial peripheral neuropathy.>
María Fenollar-Cortés1,2, Carmen Cotarelo-Pérez1,2, Raluca Oancea-
Ionescu1,2, Alejandro Horga3,2, Antonio Guerrero-Sola3,2, Lucía Galán-
Dávila3,2, Clara Herrero-Forte1,2
1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Instituto de
Medicina del Laboratorio. Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain,
2Instituto de Investigación Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC). Hospital Clínico
San Carlos, Madrid, Spain,3Unidad de Enfermedades Neuromusculares,
Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Biallellic intronic AAGGG expansion in the RFC1 gene
cause cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, and vestibular are ﬂexia
syndrome (CANVAS). It has been estimated that allele frequency
for the heterozygous AAGGG expansion in the general population isbetween 2-4%. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the carrierfrequency of AAGGG and AAAGG repeat expansions in RFC1 in a
cohort of patients with idiopathic sensory peripheral neuropathy.
Materials and Methods: Conventional PCR and repeat-primed
PCR (as described by Cortese et al ) in the RFC1 gene were
analyzed in 95 patients with sensory peripheral neuropathy with
or without additional clinical features. Patients with previously
conﬁrmed CANVAS were excluded.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
320
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: Sixteen patients (16.8% of all tested patients) carried a
heterozygous, pathogenic AAGGG repeat expansion, and ﬁve
patients (5.3%) carried a heterozygous, uncertain pathogenicity
AAAGG repeat expansion. Overall, 22.1% of patients carried aheterozygous AAGGG or AAAGG repeat expansion in RFC1 .
Conclusions: In our cohort, the carrier frequency of AAGGG
repeat expansions in patients with sensory neuropathy was higher
than the expected from general population estimates. Althoughpreviously reported heterozygous carriers are asymptomatic, it hasbeen recently described that the carrier frequency of AAGGG
repeat expansions is up to 21.2% among patients with late-onset
ataxia. Further studies are needed to con ﬁrm the observed high
carrier frequency of heterozygous RFC1 repeat expansions in
patients with sensory neuropathy and to improve the under-
standing of its clinical implications.
M. Fenollar-Cortés: None. C. Cotarelo-Pérez: None. R.
Oancea-Ionescu: None. A. Horga: None. A. Guerrero-Sola: None.
L. Galán-Dávila: None. C. Herrero-Forte: None.
P10.050.B Rhabdomyolysis-myalgia-syndrome in a family-
clinical, molecular and therapy features
Dorothea Wand
Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Pathologie, Basel, Switzer-
land.
Rhabdomyolysis (RM) is de ﬁned as an acute elevation of plasma
creatine kinase (CK>10 000 U/L) with painful muscles. The most
frequent cause are toxic, trauma or external physical activity. Thecommon cause of genetic muscle disorders with RM and myalgiaare metabolic myopathies (e.g. McArdle, muscle glycolysis).
Mutation in the ryanoidine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) is suggest to
the common cause. We present the medical history, clinical,ancillary ﬁndings and an important therapy of two brothers and
her family with hyperCKemia, RM and myalgia. In the metabolic
myopathic panel (64gene) was identi ﬁed a heterozygous patho-
genic mutation c.7360C>T in the RYR1 - gene. Mutations in this
gene are causal for various congenital myopathies including
maligne hyperthermia and susceptibility RM. A possible prophy-
lactic treatment for RYR1- related RM are discussed Dantrolene. Itis a muscle relaxant that selectively blocks the RYR1 channel. Inour family was diagnosed a muscle ryanodine receptor -
rhabdomyolysis- myalgia- syndrome.
D. Wand: None.
P10.051.C Identi ﬁcation by NGS of a novel mutation in the
TTN gene in a Moroccan patient with Salih myopathy
Youssef El Kadiri
1,2, Ilham Ratbi1, Abdellatif Labiad3, Jaber Lyahyai1,
Abdelaziz Se ﬁani1,2
1Research Team in Genomics and Molecular Epidemiology of Genetic
Diseases, Genomic Center of Human Pathologies. Faculty of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco,2Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat,Morocco,3Pediatric practice, Meknes, Morocco.
Introduction: Titin is a giant protein encoded by the TTN gene
with 364 exons. It is considered a principal regulator of thecontractile behavior of striated muscle. Several pathologies are
caused by pathogenic variants in the TTN gene and constitute a
heterogeneous group of diseases. Salih myopathy, also known asearly-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy (EOMFC), is anautosomal recessive congenital titinopathy affecting both skeletaland cardiac muscles. Herein, we describe clinical and molecular
ﬁndings of a female patient analyzed by clinical exome sequen-
cing (CES).
Patient and Methods: In this study, we report the case of a
consanguineous Moroccan child aged 2 years and 5 months at thetime of her genetic assessment. She was referred to our medical
genetic center for clinical features of a congenital myopathy
associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), in favor of Salihmyopathy. CES was performed to screen among the neuromus-cular genes, the disease-causing mutation more precisely.
Results: Bioinformatics analysis identi ﬁed a novel homozygous
truncating mutation NM_001267550.2; LRG391_t1:c.106541delA,p.(Asp35514ValfsTer32) in exon 361 of the TTN gene. It has neverbeen reported previously in public human databases. Prediction
websites considered this mutation as a pathogenic variant. Sanger
sequencing con ﬁrmed it in the affected patient and showed that
both parents were heterozygous.
Conclusions: Nowadays, the application of next-generation
sequencing technology in Moroccan medical practice is becomingpossible. Molecular diagnosis of clinical and genetic heteroge-neous diseases such as titinopathies, allows the detection of a
speci ﬁc variant in the causative gene and expands the mutational
spectrum of Moroccan patients.
Y. El Kadiri: None. I. Ratbi: None. A. Labiad: None. J. Lyahyai:
None. A. Se ﬁani: None.
P10.052.D Pathogenic SAMD9L variants: Differential diagnosis
of CMT and potential pitfall in trio-exome analysis
Katja Eggermann
1, G. Christoph Korenke2, Ingo Kurth1, Matthias
Begemann1, Daniela Dey1, Cordula Knopp1
1Institute of Human Genetics RWTH University Hospital, Aachen,
Germany,2Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
Introduction: Autosomal dominant mutations in SAMD9L cause
Ataxia-pancytopenia (ATXPC-) syndrome characterized by avariable hematological (pancytopenia, predisposition to bonemarrow failure, myelodysplasia, and myeloid leukemia) and
neurological (cerebellar ataxia and atrophy, nystagmus, mild
pyramidal signs and white matter abnormalities) phenotype.Association of peripheral neuropathy has rarely been describedand a pathogenic SAMD9L variant causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth
(CMT) disease has been reported only once. Case Report: A 37-
year-old female presented with demyelinating neuropathy andaxonal involvement. High arched feet and brisk re ﬂexes at the
knees were reported. The 14-year-old daughter was similarly
affected and had an unremarkable brain MRI at age 10 years.There was no history of hematological abnormalities.
Results: Trio whole-exome-sequencing was performed in the
mother and her unaffected parents without conclusive results.
Inclusion of the daughter led to the identi ﬁcation of a previously
reported likely pathogenic variant in the SAMD9L gene
(NM_1512703.4:c.2956C>T; p.(Arg986Cys)). Re-analysis of the
mother ’s data showed low-grade mosaicism for this variant, which
was below the threshold of the analysis pipeline.
Conclusions: 1) The clinical picture of our patients con ﬁrms
that mutations in SAMD9L may present as demyelinating
neuropathy and need to be considered as differential diagnosis
of CMT. This is of particular importance as there is a need forsurveillance of potential hematologic manifestations in patients
with SAMD9L mutations. 2) Low-grade mosaicism of de-novo
mutations may be missed in trio-exome sequencing approaches,which should carefully be taken into account.
K. Eggermann: None. G.C. Korenke: None. I. Kurth: None. M.
Begemann: None. D. Dey: None. C. Knopp: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
321
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P10.053.A Differential diagnosis of SMA and congenital
myopathies using the targeted MPS panel
Polina Chausova , Oksana Ryzhkova, Elena Dadali, Victoria
Zabnenkova, Aleksandr Polyakov
Research Centre for Medical Genetics named after academician N.P.
Bochkov, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most common
hereditary disorder, one of the key symptoms of which is
hypotension since birth or early childhood. The basic methodfor diagnosing SMA is the study of extended deletions in theSMN1 gene with an estimate of the number of copies of the
pseudogene using the MLPA method. For some patients (about
50%), it is not possible to con ﬁrm the disease by molecular genetic
methods, which indicates the presence of another pathology inthis group of patients.
Materials and Methods: Using the MPS method, using the
congenital muscular dystrophies target panel, a sample ofunrelated patients with a referring SMA diagnosis withoutdeletions in the SMN1 gene (78 patients aged 0 to 2) was studied.
Results: Pathogenic and probably pathogenic variants were
detected in the LAMA2 gene in 3 probands, in two in the ACTA1
and MTM1 genes, single patients had mutations in the COL12A1,
LMNA, LMOD, COL6A1, COL6A3 genes. In addition, in 8 patients in
the genes LAMA2, COL5A1, CCDC78, COL12A1, MTMR14 , variants of
uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance were identi ﬁed, which are the most
promising from the point of view of converting them into
probably pathogenic ones after additional studies.
Conclusion: It has been shown that, in a sample of SMA
patients without an extended deletion of exon 7 in the SMN1
gene, in more than 15.4% of cases, the molecular cause of the
disease is mutations in the genes responsible for the development
of congenital myopathies.
P. Chausova: None. O. Ryzhkova: None. E. Dadali: None. V.
Zabnenkova: None. A. Polyakov: None.
P10.054.B Role of SMN in the nucleolar reorganization after
DNA repair
Shaqraa musawi
1,2, Lise-Marie Donnio1, Giuseppina Giglia Mari1
1Institut NeuroMyoGène, LYON, France,2Department of medical
laboratory technology, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction: Most cellular transcriptional activity is carried out by
the RNA polymerase I (RNAP1), which transcribe ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) into ribosomal RNA (rRNA) needed in the ribosomebiogenesis. During DNA Repair of UV-lesions, rDNA/RNAP1 areboth reorganized within the nucleolus, namely, they migrate at
the periphery of the nucleolus during DNA repair reactions and
come back within the nucleolus after DNA repair completion. Theproteins and exact mechanism behind these movements remain
not understood.
Materials and methods: We employed various cellular and
molecular biology methods, combined with confocal microscopeprocedures on knockdown Survival Motor Neurons (SMN) cells,
and on cells of patients affected by Spinal Muscular Atrophy
(SMA), to investigate whether SMN may play a role in the nucleolarreorganization during DNA repair.
Results: Our results clearly demonstrate the involvement of
the SMN in the nucleolar reorganization after DNA repair. In
fact, in the absence of SMN, RNAP1 and Fibrillarin (FBL), anessential nucleolar protein, do not return inside the nucleolus afterDNA repair completion while transcription is fully restored.Interestingly, SMN is strongly, accumulating within the nucleolus
after DNA repair and concomitantly, we revealed a strong
interaction between SMN and FBL after the completion of DNA
repair.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings identify a new function for SMN in
the re-establishment of the proper nucleolar organization after
DNA repair. These results may have important implications in
identifying the biological origins of spinal muscular atrophydisorder.
S. musawi: None. L. Donnio: None. G. Mari: None.
P10.055.C Detection of multiple variants in complex family
trio with neurodegenerative diseases
Sebastien Audet
1,2, Eric Samarut1, Martine Tetreault1,2
1CHUM Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Department of
Neurosciences, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
After thorough yet inconclusive clinical genetic testing to uncover
the cause of neurodegenerative symptoms in a father and his
daughter, our lab was tasked to do a more in-depth genomic
investigation of the family. Previous assessment of phenotypes bymedical professional suggested a probable shared pathology,
albeit with an anticipation effect, since the daughter exhibited
worsened and earlier onset of disease. A repeat expansion variantwas therefore suspected.
We extracted DNA from the saliva of the two patients and the
mother. Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS) was performed. We
used bioinformatics tools for alignment, quality control, andcalling of single nucleotide polymorphism, copy number variantsand repeat expansions. Long-read and Sanger sequencing, as well
as qPCR, were performed to validate the potential pathogenicity
of the candidate variants.
Although both patients underwent multiple gene panels for
neurologic and neuromuscular diseases prior to WGS, we detected
a non-synonymous (R499H) mutation in the SPAST gene of the
daughter. A diagnosis could then be made as the variant waspreviously reported as probably pathogenic for spastic paraplegia
type 4. On the other hand, the father presented a bi-allelic repeat
expansion in RFC1 locus, presumably causing CANVAS disorder,
while the daughter carried only one expanded allele. Sanger andlong-read sequencing respectively con ﬁrmed the variants.
While the father had been previously tested for SPAST , the
assumption of a common genetic cause prohibited an earlydiagnosis of the daughter for spastic paraplegia. These results
highlight the importance of unbiased genetic analyses in clinical
settings.
CIHR, FRQS, National Ataxia FoundationS. Audet: None. E. Samarut: None. M. Tetreault: None.
P10.056.D Phenotype in Associated SMA mutations - experi-
ence of 5 years
Ramona Babici
1, Maria Tonu1, Mihaela Danila1, Doina Ursan1,
Roxana Popescu2,3, Lacramioara Butnariu2,3, Monica Panzaru2,3,
Eusebiu Vlad Gorduza1,3, Cristina Rusu2,3
1"Cuza Voda" Maternity Hospital, Iasi, Romania,2“Saint Mary ”
Emergency Children ’s Hospital - Regional Medical Genetics Centre,
Iasi, Romania,3“Grigore T. Popa ”University of Medicine and
Pharmacy - Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania.
Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal
recessive neuromuscular disorder due to homozygous loss ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
322
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608function in SMN1 gene. The phenotypic severity of the disease
may be in ﬂuenced by several modifying factors: SMN2 gene and
other genes like: BIRC1, NAIP, RAD17, GTF2H2, SERF1A, N-
Cadherin-like. Our aim was to describe the phenotype-genotypecorrelation in SMA patients who associate mutations in modifyinggenes.
Methods: We have analyzed 23 patients from North-Eastern
Romania diagnosed clinically with SMA in Iasi Regional MedicalGenetics Center in the last 5 years. All patients were investigatedby MLPA using the P021-A1 SMA probe mix kit. This is a molecular
genetic screening test to identify variations in the number of
copies (deletions / ampli ﬁcations) of 37 sequences in the 5q13
region. The main genes targeted are SMN1, SMN2, and othergenes from this region that may in ﬂuence the phenotype.
Results: From 23 patients clinically diagnosed with SMA, 22 had
homozygous deletions of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene, while 1patient had a normal number of copies of exon 8 in SMN1. Only
one patient in this group had heterozygous deletion in the SMN2
gene, the rest presented 2-4 copies of the SMN2 gene. 10 patientsassociated changes in at least one of the genes: NAIP, GTF2H2,SERF1B. Nine of them had severe SMA subtypes (I and II).
Conclusion: The presence of homozygous or heterozygous
deletions identi ﬁed in the NAIP, GTF2H2, SERF1B genes may
suggest a more severe phenotype.
R. Babici: None. M. Tonu: None. M. Danila: None. D. Ursan:
None. R. Popescu: None. L. Butnariu: None. M. Panzaru: None. E.
Gorduza: None. C. Rusu: None.
P10.057.A Genomic Precision Diagnosis of a Genetically
Complex Case of Spinocerebellar Ataxia
Saba Habibollah
1,Lova Satyanarayana Matsa2
1Iranian Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates,2Igenomix FZ LLC,
Dubai Healthcare City, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
A 26-year-old male presented with progressive ataxia for the past
3 years, with muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, and slurredspeech. Brain CT showed cerebellar atrophy and expression of
prominent cisterns, cerebellar and vermian folia, given clove leaf-
like appearance consistent with hereditary cerebellar degenera-tion. He was born to a healthy consanguineous couple. He has twohealthy siblings while one of his maternal cousins suffers from
severe tremors and ataxia preceded by fever. He was found to be
negative for the most common trinucleotide repeats expansionsin spinocerebellar ataxia genes. Through whole-exome sequen-
cing, he was found to carry a homozygous frameshift variant in
exon 51 of the SYNE1 gene (NM_182961.4:c.7557delC). Biallelic
SYNE1 mutations are known to cause autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia-8 (SCAR8), which is a slowly progressive
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by gait ataxia with
cerebellar signs, such as nystagmus and dysarthria. The age atonset is highly variable, usually in the second decade. The clinicalproﬁle of the index is more appropriate with the SCAR8
phenotype, and the family history also suggests an autosomal
recessive disorder. Additionally, a heterozygous donor splice sitevariant in intron 5 of the MME gene (NM_000902.3:c.439 +1G>A)
was detected. Heterozygous mutations in the MME gene cause
autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia-43 (SCA43), which is a
slowly progressive neurologic disorder characterized by adult-onset gait, limb ataxia, and often associated with peripheral
neuropathy. Both these identi ﬁed mutations are novel and
classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic as per ACMG guidelines. Segrega-
tion analysis is required to con ﬁrm their ﬁnal signi ﬁcance, which is
under process.S. Habibollah: None. L.S. Matsa: None.
P10.058.B Deep analysis of splicing variants in DMD gene
Mikhail Yu Skoblov , Ksenia Davydenko, Alexandra Filatova
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Mutations in the DMD gene, which encodes the
protein dystrophin, lead to severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy
and milder Becker muscular dystrophy. The type of mutation andthe current molecular mechanism determine the developmentand progression of the disease. Splicing variants are one of such
types of mutations that are not easy to reveal and predict its
effect, and functional analysis is required for their validation.
Materials and methods: SpliceAI (Illumina, USA) and Max-
EntScan (MIT, USA) were used to predict the splicing effect of SNV.
To evaluate the functional effect of SNVs, the minigene expression
assay was performed in HEK293T cells. SNVs were introduced intoexpression plasmids by site-directed mutagenesis.
Results: We carried out deep in silico mutagenesis of the entire
DMD gene sequence to search for all possible splicing variants
with SpliceAI. About 8000 candidate splicing variants were foundin introns and in exons of the gene. We overlapped our splicing
SNVs with variants from the HGMD database and found 90 exoni с
variants and more than 300 SNVs in introns. Only for a few of themthe effect on splicing been con ﬁrmed experimentally. We created
20 minigene systems with coding exons of DMD and performed
the functional analysis for more than 30 SNV (missense, nonsense
and synonymous). For each variant it was demonstrated themolecular mechanism of splicing disruption.
Conclusion: Our analysis revealed all possible splicing variants
in the DMD gene. Functional analysis with minigene systems
conﬁrmed the existence of hundreds of misannotated variants in
HGMD.
M.Y. Skoblov: None. K. Davydenko: None. A. Filatova: None.
P11 Multiple Malformation/Anomalies Syndromes
P11.001.C 10q26 deletion syndrome: a French cohort study
Hugo Thorn
1, Sylvie Odent2,3, Jonathan Levy4,5, Anne-Claude
Tabet4,6, Julien Thevenon7,8, Cedric Le Caignec9, Elise Schaefer10,
Thierry Frebourg11, Caroline Schluth-Bolard12,13, Morgane Plutino14,
Salima El Chehadeh10, Anais Philippe10, Sophie Scheidecker15,
Nadege Calmels15, Audrey Schalk15, Alice Goldenberg11, Anne-Marie
Guerot11, Nathalie Le Meur16, Kevin Cassinari16, Lyse Ruaud4,5,
Myriam Rachid17, Louis Januel12, Marie-Noëlle Bonnet-Dupeyron12,18,
Maryline Carneiro19, Eric Bieth20, Julie Plaisancie20, Charles Cout-
ton21,22, Radu Harbuz21, Klaus Dieterich23,24, Gwenaël Nadeau25,
Gaelle Vieville26, Melanie Fradin27, Celine Poirsier1, Marta Spodenkie-
wicz1, Emilie Landais28, Martine Doco-Fenzy1,28,29
1Département de Génétique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France,2Service
de Génétique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France,3UMR 6290 Université
de Rennes, Rennes, France,4Département de Génétique, APHP Nord,
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France,5Université de Paris, UMR 1141
NEURODIDEROT, INSERM, Paris, France,6Département de neuros-
ciences, Unité GHFC, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France,7Department of
Genetics and Reproduction, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Grenoble, Grenoble, France,8CNRS UMR 5309, INSERM, U1209,
Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Université Grenoble-Alpes CHU
Grenoble, Grenoble, France,9Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU de
Toulouse, Toulouse, France,10Service de Génétique Médicale, Institut
de génétique médicale d ’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires deAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
323
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,11Service de Génétique Médicale,
CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,12Service de Génétique, Centre de
Biologie et de Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France,
13Institut Neuromyogène, Equipe Métabolisme énergétique et dével-
oppement neuronal, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217, UniversitéLyon 1, Lyon, France,14Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de
l’Archet II, CHU Nice, Nice, France,15Laboratoires de Diagnostic
Génétique, Unité de Cytogénétique Chromosomique et Moléculaire,Institut de génétique médicale d ’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires
de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,16Laboratoire de Cytogénétique,
Service de Génétique Médicale , CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,
17Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, D épartement de Génétique, APHP
Nord, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France,18Service de Cytogénétique,
Centre Hospitalier de Valence, Valence, France,19Service de Neuropé-
diatrie, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant , Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron,
France,20Département de Génétique Mé dicale, CHU de Toulouse,
Toulouse, France,21C H UG r e n o b l eA l p e s ,U Md eG é n é t i q u eC h r o m o s o -
mique, Grenoble, France,22Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSERM U1209, CNRS
UMR 5309, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Team GeneticsEpigenetics and Therapies of Infertility, Grenoble, France,23CHU
Grenoble Alpes, UM de Génétique Clinique, Grenoble, France,24INSERM
U1216 Grenoble Institut des Neurosciences, Cellular Myology and
Pathology, Grenoble, France,25Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomi-
que, Centre Hospitalier Métropol e Savoie, Chambery, France,26CHU
Grenoble Alpes, UF de Génétique Chr omosomique, Grenoble, France,
27S e r v i c ed eG é n é t i q u eC H UR e n n e s , Centre de Référe nce Anomalies du
Développement, Rennes, France,28Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et
Génétique Moléculaire, C HU Reims, Reims, France,29EA381 SFR CAP
Santé Reims, Reims, France.
10q26 deletion syndrome (OMIM #609625) is a rare autosomal
dominant genetic disorder with a bout 100 patients reported. Most
cases are sporadic. Global development delay, short stature,
microcephaly and typical facial appearance with triangular face,large forehead, low-set malformed ears, hypertelorism, prominentnose and a thin vermilion of the uppe r lip constitute the main clinical
features. The clinical spectrum is very heterogeneous and neurobe-
havioral manifestations, deafness, limb malformations, cardiac andurogenital abnormalities can be associated. Thus, patients with10q26 chromosomal deletion need multidisciplinary management
strategies from birth. One of the main reasons for this heterogeneity
is the variety of 10qter region ch romosomal deletions summarized
into the “10q26 deletion syndrome ”. Various studies proposed critical
regions to explain the main phenotype (Yatzenko et al., 2009;
Choucair et al., 2015; Lin S et al., 2016) or more speci ﬁc features (Vera-
Carbonell et al., 2015; Choucair et al ., 2015). In addition, these studies
proposed about 20 genes of interest such as DOCK1 and FGFR2 to
explain the different clinical features observed. We report a French
ACLF cohort of 35 patients from 9 centers presenting 10q26complete or partial deletions (size: 64kb to 12.5Mb), complexchromosomal rearrangement and derivative chromosomes diag-
nosed using DNA-array, to bring a further insight of the genotype/
phenotype correlation.
H. Thorn: None. S. Odent: None. J. Levy: None. A. Tabet: None.
J. Thevenon: None. C. Le Caignec: None. E. Schaefer: None. T.
Frebourg: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. M. Plutino: None. S. El
Chehadeh: None. A. Philippe: None. S. Scheidecker: None. N.
Calmels: None. A. Schalk: None. A. Goldenberg: None. A.
Guerot: None. N. Le Meur: None. K. Cassinari: None. L. Ruaud:
None. M. Rachid: None. L. Januel: None. M. Bonnet-Dupeyron:
None. M. Carneiro: None. E. Bieth: None. J. Plaisancie: None. C.
Coutton: None. R. Harbuz: None. K. Dieterich: None. G. Nadeau:
None. G. Vieville: None.
M. Fradin: None. C. Poirsier: None. M.
Spodenkiewicz: None. E. Landais: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None.
P11.002.D Chromosome 13q deletions syndrome and clinical
reﬂections in our case: a case reportbusra goksel tulgar , fahrettin duymus, deniz esin, ebru marzioglu
ozdemir, nadir kocak
Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
Chromosome 13q deletion syndrome is a rare chromosomal
disorder. The patient ’s clinic varies depending on the size and
localization of the deletion. As far as chromosome 13 is known, it
contains about 300 genes that synthesize active proteins. Thedisease creates a broad spectrum in affected individuals, including
developmental delay, intellectual disability, low birth weight,
skeletal abnormalities, and other congenital malformations. Forthese reasons, it is dif ﬁcult to de ﬁne a speci ﬁc clinical phenotype
in these patients. We aimed to present the deletions in the 13q
region of our patient and their clinical implications in our case. Our
case was a 4-year-old male patient at the time of his admission.Basically, we were consulted with the complaint of speech delay.Physical examination revealed a triangular face, broad and ﬂat
nasal bridge, micrognathia, large ears, short neck, undescended
testis, growth retardation. There was retardation in the neuro-motor stages of development. There is no consanguinity betweenhis parents. Two Secundum ASDs were found on echocardio-
graphy. 13q deletion was detected in the chromosome analysis. In
the microarray analysis performed on this, it was con ﬁrmed that
there was a deletion in the chromosome 13q21.1q31.1 region. His
parent ’s chromosome analysis is normal. Genetic consultation was
given to the family of the patient and referred to the relevantdepartments. 13q deletion is a rare phenomenon and each patientshould be evaluated individually. Unfortunately, there is no
deﬁnitive treatment. It is typically not inherited. The loss of part
of the chromosome occurs during gametogenesis, making it a denovo mutation. When inherited, it is usually caused by a mosaic orbalanced translocation parent. As the genes in the deletion area
are enlightened, patients can be diagnosed more easily.
B. goksel tulgar: None. F. duymus: None. D. esin: None. E.
marzioglu ozdemir: None. N. kocak: None.
P11.003.A First case report of deletion 13q22.2q31.1-expand-
ing phenotype spectrum of chromosome 13q deletion
syndrome
Mijana Kero
1,2, Leona Moro žin Pohovski1, Adriana Bobinec1,2,
Nikolina Vidan Rogulj1, Ana-Maria Mea šić1,2, Ljubica Boban1,2, Ivona
Sansovi ć1,2, Ingeborg Bari šić1,2
1Children ’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia,2Department of Medical
Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children ’s Hospital Zagreb,
Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative
Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb,Croatia.
Introduction: Interstitial deletions 13q are rare and characterized
by variable phenotype including psychomotor and growth delay,retinoblastoma, dysmorphic facial features, and various associated
malformations, still without clear correlation between the 13q
deletion intervals to distinct phenotypes.
Patients and Methods: Fifteen-month girl, born premature (29
weeks) with IUGR, birth weight 560 g, and hypoxia signs, spent
262 days in the intensive care unit due to recurrent sepsis,
pancytopenia, and multiple complications of premature birth. Shehas a signi ﬁcant global developmental delay, microcephaly, mild
hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, nystagmus, partial corpus
callosum dysgenesis, hypothyroidism, and bilateral inguinal
hernias. The genomic DNA was isolated, and array CGH with NextGeneration Sequencing (NGS) analysis, focusing on 1937 genesassociated with clinical features, were done.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
324
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: Array CGH detected a de novo interstitial deletion
13q22.2q31.1 (6,13 Mb). NGS revealed a novel heterozygous
missense variant (c.1235G>A, p.Cys412Tyr) in exon 12 of the CUL5
gene (OMIM #601741), categorized as VUS according to ACMG/AMP classi ﬁcation, inherited from a healthy mother.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst patient described
in the literature with de ﬁned breakpoints 13q22.2q31.1. Prema-
turity, pancytopenia, recurrent sepsis, hypothyroidism, andinguinal hernia have not been described so far in patients with13q deletions. Clinical and molecular characterization of further
patients with 13q deletions might contribute to its better
genotype-phenotype correlation and understanding of pathogen-esis. This study was supported by CERRM, Republic of Croatia, andby the EU through ERDF, under grant agreement No.
KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project,,Reproductive and Regenerative Medi-
cine - Exploring New Platforms and Potentials ”.
M. Kero: None. L. Moro žin Pohovski: None. A. Bobinec: None.
N. Vidan Rogulj: None. A. Mea šić:None. L. Boban: None. I.
Sansovi ć:None. I. Bari šić:None.
P11.005.C Neonatal diagnosis of 16p12.2 microdeletion
syndrome
Pamela Paglia
1, Mariateresa Falco2, Dario Di Salvio3, Piero
Pignataro4, Anna Rita Frascogna5, Maria Grazia Corbo5, Rita
Genesio4, Daniela Melis1
1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry “Scuola Medica
Salernitana ”, Section of Pediatrics, University of Salerno, Baronissi
(SA), Italy,2Clinical Pediatrics, University Hospital “San Giovanni di
Dio e Ruggi D ’Aragona ”, Salerno, Italy,3Department of Translational
Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, University of Naples “Federico
II”, Napoli, Italy,4Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical
Biotechnology, University of Naples “Federico II ”, Napoli, Italy,
5Department of Maternal-Infant, Neonatalogy and Intensive Care
Unit, University Hospital “San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi D ’Aragona ”,
Salerno, Italy.
Introduction: 16p12.2 microdeletion syndrome is characterized
by minor facial abnormalities, developmental delay, behaviour
disorders and other variable systemic features, with incompletepenetrance. It is usually diagnosed in children with neuro-behavioral disorders; diagnosis in neonatal period has been
described in only few patients.Clinical report. We report a
newborn of healthy nonconsanguineous parents, born after apregnancy complicated with polyhydramnios, at 36 weeks, by
urgent cesarean delivery. Birth weight was 3,200 g (75-90th),
length 43 cm (<3th), and OFC 34 cm (75th). At birth, he showedgeneralized cyanosis, hypotonia and poor respiratory activitywhich required non-invasive ventilation and admission in
Intensive Care Unit. Poor sucking was also present. Physical
examination showed plagiocephaly, bilateral temporal depression,hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, low-set ears,
depressed nasal root, bulbous nasal tip, anteverted nostrils,
retrognathy with chin dimple, short neck, sacral dimple with
hypertrichosis. Brain ultrasound revealed hyperechoic lobulatedareas in the left ventricle with extension into the subcortical area.Echocardiography showed a slight acceleration of the ﬂow on the
pulmonary branches. Audiologic evaluation, electroencephalo-
gram and abdominal ultrasonography showed normal data.Array-comparative genome hybridization (array-CGH) showed a 478 Kb
pathogenetic deletion in 16p12.2 region (critical region for
16p12.2 microdeletion syndrome), a deletion in the Xp22.33/Yp11.32 region of 13.5 Kb and a duplication in the Xq12 region of671 Kb, containing part of the AR gene.Conclusion: Array-CGH in neonate with hypotonia, feeding
difﬁculties, short-length and craniofacial dysmorphisms could
allow early diagnosis of microdeletion syndromes. This case could
expand the clinical spectrum of 16p12.2 patients.
P. Paglia: None. M. Falco: None. D. Di Salvio: None. P.
Pignataro: None. A. Frascogna: None. M. Corbo: None. R.
Genesio: None. D. Melis: None.
P11.006.D Clinical ﬁndings in 22q11.2 microdeletion syn-
drome: case series
Sule Alt ıner, Timur Tuncal ı, Nüket Yürür Kutlay, Halil G. Karabulut,
Hatice Ilg ın Ruhi
Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome is the most
common microdeletion syndrome with an incidence of 1 in4,000 live births. The syndrome is caused by a 1.5 to 3.0-Mbdeletion in q11.2 region of chromosome 22. Although phenotypic
ﬁndings are highly variable, immune de ﬁciency, congenital cardiac
anomalies, speech delay and palatal anomalies are the mostcommon.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective study investigating
medical records of 22q11.2 microdeletion cases whose deletionwas con ﬁrmed with FISH assay in Ankara University School of
Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics between 1999-2020.
Results: A total of 28 patients (male, n =22 and female, n =6)
were enrolled in this study. Mean age of the patients was 4,6 yearsat the diagnosis (median:0,675, range:0-33). The most commonclinical ﬁndings were immunode ﬁciency/recurrent infections
(75%, 21/28), congenital cardiac defects (75%, 21/28) and
hypocalcemia (57,1%, 16/28). Also, typical dysmorphic featureswere noted in 75% (21/28) of patients. Learning dif ﬁculties,
developmental delay and urogenital defects were subsequent
common
ﬁndings. Co-occurrence of psychiatric ﬁndings with
dysmorphic features was the common cause of referral in adultpatient group. Family study could be performed in 10 cases and
10% of them were found to be familial.
Conclusion: The results of this study are compatible with
current literature. The frequency of psychiatric, neurologic andskeletal ﬁndings may increase with follow-up data of current
patients. Further detailed multidisciplinary studies will better
elucidate 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome.
S. Alt ıner: None. T. Tuncal ı:None. N. Yürür Kutlay: None. H.G.
Karabulut: None. H. Ilg ın Ruhi: None.
P11.007.A Interstitial deletion of 2q32.3q33.3: Two case
reports of SATB2-Associated-Syndrome and Immune System
alterations
Joana Adelaide Catanho
1, Ana Isabel Cordeiro2, Teresa Kay1, Inês
Carvalho1
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal,
2Unidade de Imunode ﬁciências Primárias, Hospital Dona Estefânia,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa,Portugal.
Introduction : Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromo-
some 2 involving the 2q32q33 region encompass SATB2 gene. ItsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
325
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608haploinsuffuciency results in SATB2-Associated-Syndrome (SAS),
characterized by neurodevelopment disorders, behavioral issues,
palatal abnormalities and facial dysmorphism. Within this region,
genes involved in Immune Disorders can be identi ﬁed, among
them, CTLA4 .CTLA4 haploinsuf ﬁciency is associated with auto-
immune cytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, recurrent infec-
tions, diarrhea or in ﬂammatory bowel disease.
Clinical Data: P1 is an 11-year-old boy, born at 36 weeks of
gestation with cleft palate, micrognathia, left inguinal hernia andinteratrial communication (IAC). He has psychomotor delay,
hypotonia, hyperactivity, aggressiveness, epileptogenic activity,
severe intellectual disability (ID), autoimmune thrombocytopenia,neutropenia and hemolytic anemia diagnosed at age 3. P2 is a 5-year-old boy, born at 38 weeks, with cleft palate, micrognathia,
and IAC. He has severe psychomotor delay, behavior abnormal-
ities, failure to thrive (at 14-months was placed with percutaneousendoscopic gastrostomy), epilepsy and recurrent infections.
Methods and Results: P1 microarray analysis identi ﬁed a 12.2
Mb heterozygous deletion involving the interstitial chromosomeregion 2q32.3q33.3. P2 carried a 10.62 Mb heterozygous deletioninvolving the interstitial chromosome region 2q33.1q33.3. Both
deletions encompass SATB2 and CTLA4 genes.
Conclusions: We believe the haploinsuf ﬁciency of both genes
SATB2 and CTLA4 , by 2q32q33.3 microdeletion, might explain the
phenotype of these patients. This report brings to our attention
that 2q32q33.3 microdeletion can be associated with immune
alterations. Recognition of this clinical signs and symptoms is ofthe most importance for patients ’early referral for Immune
Disorder Specialist.
J.A. Catanho: None. A.I. Cordeiro: None. T. Kay: None. I.
Carvalho: None.
P11.008.B COLEC10 and 3MC syndrome: expanding the
genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of a very rare disease
Martina Migliorero
1, Silvia Kalantari2, Valeria Bracciamà2, Monica
Sorbini1, Francesca Arruga1, Licia Peruzzi3, Elisa Biamino4, Antonio
Amoroso1,2, Tiziana Vaisitti1, Silvia Deaglio1,2
1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,
2Immunogenetics and Transplant Biology Service, Città della Salute e
della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy,3Pediatric Nephrology
Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Città della Salute e della ScienzaUniversity Hospital, Turin, Italy,4Department of Pediatrics, AOU Città
della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, University of Torino, Turin,
Italy.
Introduction: 3MC syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder
encompassing a variable spectrum of abnormalities, among whichfacial dysmorphisms are characteristic. Mutations in genes whichencode proteins involved in the lectin complement pathway
MASP1 ,COLEC11 and recently COLEC10 have been identi ﬁed in
patients with 3MC syndrome, supporting their role during humandevelopment. We present a 5 years old patient with typical 3MCphenotypic characteristics, including blepharophimosis, tele-
canthus, high arched eyebrows, ﬁfthﬁnger clinodactyly and
horseshoe kidneys. The diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by sequencing of
COLEC10 gene and the putative pathogenic variant was function-
ally validated through in vitro assays.
Materials and Methods: COLEC10 gene was analyzed through
Sanger sequencing. The variant was introduced by a site-speci ﬁc
mutagenesis approach into a plasmid encoding wild-type human
CL-L1. HeLa cells were transfected with the mutated or wild-type
plasmid and culture supernatant evaluated in a migration assay.
Results: A homozygous frameshift variant c.807_810delCTGT;p.
(Cys270Serfs*33) was identi ﬁed in the patient. Segregation studies
conﬁrmed the parents ’carrier status for the variant. Functionally,the variant affects the chemo-attractive feature of CL-L1, as HeLa
cells are less sensitive to the mutant protein compared to the WT
one, resulting in a reduced migratory response.
Conclusions: We report a patient affected by 3MC syndrome
who, besides typical phenotypic signs, presents a patent ductusarteriosus, never described in association to COLEC10 before. The
variant causative role was functionally con ﬁrmed in an in vitro
assay, where the mutated protein failed to act as a chemo-attractant. We thus provide further evidence for CL-L1 role duringembryonic development.
M. Migliorero: None. S. Kalantari: None. V. Bracciamà: None.
M. Sorbini: None. F. Arruga: None. L. Peruzzi: None. E. Biamino:
None. A. Amoroso: None. T. Vaisitti: None. S. Deaglio: None.
P11.009.C AKT3 variant in a patient with macrocephaly
Florina Victoria Nazarie
1, Simona Bucerzan1,2, Monica Mager3,2,
Diana Miclea1,2
1Genetic Department, Emergency Hospital for Children, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania,2Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania,3Pediatric Neurology Department,Emergency
Hospital for Children, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction: Megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-
hydrocephalus syndrome 2 (MPPH2) is an overgrowth syndrome
comprising megalencephaly, hydrocephalus and polymicrogyria;polydactyly may also be seen. Activating mutations in AKT3 geneare a rare cause of megalencephaly. AKT3 is one of 3 closely
related serine/threonine-protein kinases (AKT1,AKT2 and AKT3)
which regulate processes including metabolism, proliferation, cellsurvival, growth and angiogenesis.
Materials and methods: We present a case of a four month old
girl, who was referred to the genetic department because of
macrocrania (50cm, Z score =+7.44 SDS, >p98), frontal bossing,
generalised hypotonia, delay in m otor acquisitions. Clinical exam
r e v e a l e dl a r g ea n t e r i o rf o n t a n e l l e4 x 6 c ma n db l u es c l e r a e .T r a n s f o n -
tanellle ultrasound was performed and no hydrocephalus was found.Multiple diagnoses were discussed: S otos Syndrome, Glutaric aciduria
type I, Megalencefaly-Capillary Ma lformation-Polymicrogiria Syn-
drome. Multiplex Ligation Probe Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA) with Probemix
P245-B1 Microdeletion Syndromes was done for Sotos syndrome, butcame back with no modi ﬁcation. The level of urinary glutamic acid
was also normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was proposed and
performed on Illumina HiSeq platform.
Results: WES revealed a likely pathogenic variant in AKT3 gene:
exon4:c.250G>A:p.Glu84Lys (hg38), located in a functional region,
“PH”AKT3_HUMAN domain.
Conclusions: Mutations of the AKT3 gene have been reported
in a few individuals with brain malformations, activating variantsare associated with diffuse megalencephaly with intellectual
disability and/or autism spectrum disorder. Early diagnose can
provide the appropriate management of the case and maybe ﬁnd
a suitable drug among inhibitors of PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway.
F.V. Nazarie: None. S. Bucerzan: None. M. Mager: None. D.
Miclea: None.
P11.010.D Identi ﬁcation and characterisation of two novel
mutations in the MAN2B1 gene in middle-aged siblings
Márta Szegedi
1, Gábor Rácz2, Ágnes Palásti1, Zoltán Grosz1, Mária
Judit Molnár1
1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare
Disorders, Budapest, Hungary,2University of Szeged, Department of
Pediatrics, Szeged, Hungary.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
326
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare inherited disorder
caused by mutations in the MAN2B1 gene that encodes the
lysosomal alpha-mannosidase. Our aim was to describe thephenotypes of a middle-aged siblings with alpha-mannosidosistype 2 and two causative mutations.
Patients and Methods: A 45-year old man (Patient A) and his
51-year old sister (Patient B) were investigated. Neurological,psychiatric, electrophysiological, biochemical and genetic testswere performed. MAN2B1 gene was analysed by Sanger sequen-
cing. Segregation analysis was completed in the mother.
Results: Patient A had macrocephaly, coarse face, hypacusis and
hepatomegaly in early childhood. Gait and limb ataxia, mildcognitive impairment occured in adulthood. Patient B has
prominent forehead, hypacusis, generalized muscular atrophy
and lower limb paresis in early childhood. Delusions with adiagnosis of schizophrenia and multiple joint deformities appeared
at young adulthood. Brain MRI detected cerebellar atrophy, X-ray
showed multiple sclerotic-edged cysts in humerus. Signi ﬁcant loss
of axon of motoneurons was found in lower limbs according to theENG.The alpha-mannosidase activities were decreased, under 2%
of the health control. The serum and urine oligosaccharide analysis
showed abnormal patterns. The siblings are compound hetero-zygous for c.283G>C(Ala95Pro) and c.523G>A(Gly175Arg), whichare likely pathogenic variants according to the scienti ﬁc databases.
The mother is heterozygous for c.283G>C(Ala95Pro).
Conclusions: Based on family and clinical history, type 2 alpha
mannosidosis was con ﬁrmed in the siblings with novel compound
heterozygous mutations classi ﬁed as pathogenic. The result of the
segregation analysis strengthened the mutations in trans.Thisstudy was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP and withFIKP program.
M. Szegedi: None. G. Rácz: None. Á. Palásti: None. Z. Grosz:
None. M.J. Molnár: None.
P11.011.A Preclinical studies on Alport Syndrome mice
treated with chemical chaperons
Pavlos Ioannou
1, Christoforos Odiatis1, Apostolos Malatras1, Kyriaki
Antoniadou1, Myrtani Pieri2, Gregory Papagregoriou1, Kostas Stylia-
nou3, Costantinos Deltas1
1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus,2University of Nicosia, Nicosia,
Cyprus,3University of Crete Medical School, Heraklion, Greece.
Introduction: Alport Syndrome (AS) is a severe inherited
glomerulopathy caused by mutations in the genes encoding the
α-chains of type IV collagen, the most abundant component of the
glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Alport patients lackeffective therapies beyond blockade of the renin-angiotensin
system.
Materials and Methods: This work describes the repurposing
of two FDA-approved chemical chaperones (4-PBA and TUDCA) tothe rescue of two AS mouse models: one that carries the Col4a3-p.
Gly1332Glu in homozygosity and one that carries the Col4a3-p.
Gly1332Glu substitution in compound heterozygosity with aCol4a3 knocked-out allele. Mice from each group were treatedwith chaperones or vehicle for 2, 6 or 12 months.
Results: Electron microscopy studies showed that the GBM of
the 4-PBA treated AS mice after the 6-12-month treatment has aconsiderable improvement in the morphology, compared with
placebo-treated or TUDCA-treated mice AS mice. Importantly, EM
measurements displayed a 43% reduction of lesions and asigni ﬁcant decline of the lesions-severity in the GBM of 4-PBA
treated mice. No adverse effects were noted in the GBM of the
chaperone-treated wild type mice. Additionally, albuminuria andserum urea after a 12-month treatment of mice with 4-PBA have
not reached the high values demonstrated by the non-treated AS
mice (p-value <0.01).
Conclusions: The 6-12-month treatment with 4-PBA could
effectively restore to a suf ﬁcient degree the morphology of GBM
in both AS mouse models. Grants: Funded by the Alport Syndrome
Foundation, Inc. (ASF), Pedersen Family and the Kidney Founda-
tion of Canada (KFOC) and by the Cyprus Research and InnovationFoundation.
P. Ioannou: None. C. Odiatis: None. A. Malatras: None. K.
Antoniadou: None. M. Pieri: None. G. Papagregoriou: None. K.
Stylianou: None. C. Deltas: None.
P11.013.C Detection of giant chromosomal material on 7p +
with conventional karyotyping and aCGH
G. Ilieva , E. Sukarova-Angelovska, D. Nestoroska, Lj. Muaremoska-
Kanzoska, M. Pesevska, V. Anastasovska
Genetic laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: Array CGH is widely used in cytogenetics centers for
postnatal constitutional genome analysis with higher resolution
than conventional karyotyping in patients with intellectualdisabilities and multiple malformations. The technique representsan unsurpassed tool for detecting copy number variations (CNVs)
and reveal origin of derivative chromosomes.
Materials and Methods: aCGH analysis was performed on a
DNA sample from a 5-year-old child using the Affymetrix ®
CytoScan
TM750K Array (Applied Biosystems). Each array was
consisted of 200k SNP and 550k non-polymorphic markers. The
data was analyzed and interpreted using Chromosome AnalysisSuite (ChAS) Software (v4.0).
Results: The clinical manifestation of the patient included major
developmental delay, hypotonia, inability to sit and walkindependently, absence of speech and facial dysmorphia.Karyotype showed mosaic presentation of 46,XY,der(7)(p +)i n
10% of the cells. Since the mother had normal karyotype and
father was unavailable for eventual translocation, array CGH wasperformed with the presence of major duplication of 7p21.3p11.2encompassing 46,925 kbp, with 334 genes, estimated as 90% of
the cells. Duplication of 7p is rarely described in the literature, with
variable phenotypic spectrum depending on mosaicism andduplicated region.
Conclusion: Microarray-based comparative Genomic Hybridiza-
tion (aCGH) is essential for evaluating derivative chromosomes ofunknown origin. The reason for different level of mosaicism ofpartial trisomy 7p in our case with both techniques remains
unexplained. One of the explanations is that cells with derivative
chromosomes divide rarely in cell cultures, leading to conclusionthat aCGH is more accurate technique for detecting mosaicchromosomal imbalances.
G. Ilieva: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. D. Nestor-
oska: None. L. Muaremoska-Kanzoska: None. M. Pesevska:
None. V. Anastasovska: None.
P11.014.D Clinical and genomic characterization of 7q31.1
microduplication in a patient with developmental and
neurological disabilities
Dragica Nestoroska
1, V. Anastasovska1, E. Sukarova-Angelovska1,
M. Pesevska1, A. Veseli2, G. Ilieva1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
327
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2University Institute
of Clinical Biochemistry, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje,Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former YugoslavRepublic of.
Introduction: Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH)
represents molecular cytogenetic approach for genome-widedetection of copy number variants (CNVs) that allows ef ﬁcient
genetic diagnosis of pathological conditions, such as develop-
mental delay and neurological disabilities. This technique is highlyrecommended as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test for clinically relevant
CNVs due to its cost and time ef ﬁciency, as well its high detection
rate compared to conventional karyotyping.
Materials and Methods: The aCGH technique was used to
determine the genetic background of dysmorphic, developmental
and neurological abnormalities in a 5-year-old female Macedonian
patient. The blood-derived DNA sample was analyzed usingAffymetrix ®CytoScanTM 750K Array (Applied Biosystems) that
includes 550 k non-polymorphic and 200 k SNP markers. The data
were interpreted using Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) Soft-
ware (v4.0).
Results: The patient showed the following clinical conditions:
developmental delay, epileptic seizures, frequent convulsions, as
well several dysmorhological features (macrocephaly, dolichoce-
phaly, аntimongoloid slanted eyes and micrognathia).The karyo-
typing demonstrated 47,XXX result, which did not correspond to
the phenotype. The aCGH analysis revealed additional CNV
represented as pathological microduplication occurring at the7q31.1 cytoregion (513 kb, including IMMP2L and LRRN3 genes).
According to OMIM and ClinVar database for pathological gene
expression, microduplication of the IMMP2L gene could be
responsible for the severe neurodevelopmental disorders of thepatient.
Conclusion: The aCGH technique is a high-resolution laboratory
setting that allows detection of pathological CNVs. Further studies
are needed for complete understanding of the mechanism relatedto gene duplication in the onset and progression of the presenteddevelopmental and neurological disorders.
D. Nestoroska: None. V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova-
Angelovska: None. M. Pesevska: None. A. Veseli: None. G. Ilieva:
None.
P11.016.B Further delineation of the clinical spectrum of
variants in the ASCL1 gene
Margot Grisval
1, Emma Walkeling2, Odile Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy3,H a
Thi-Tuyet Trang4, Aurore Garde1, Christophe Philippe5, Adélaide
Rega6, Marie Gabrielle Mourot De Rougemont6, Véronique Dar-
mency7, Candace Ben Signor8, Anne Houzel9, Frédéric Huet10, Yannis
Duffourd5, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,11, Tashunka Taylor-Miller12,
Louise Busby12, Laurence Faivre1,11
1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes
Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon,
France,2Consultant in Clinical Genetics, North East Thames Regional
Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, Great Ormond Street, London, United Kingdom,
3Centre de référence des leucodystrophies, service de Neurologie
Pédiatrique et Maladies métaboliques, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP,
Paris, France, Paris, France,4Service de Physiologie –Explorations
Fonctionnelles, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, Paris,France,5Inserm UMR1231 GAD et UF6254, CHU de Dijon et Université
de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Dijon, France,6Service de Radiologie
Pédiatrique, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon,France,7Service de Neurophysiologie Clinique Adultes et Enfants,
Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, France,8Centre de
Compétences Maladies Endocriniennes De La Croissance et du
Développement, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon,
France,9Pneumologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France, Dijon, France,10Pédiatrie pluridisciplinaire, Hôpital
d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, France,11Inserm
UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement,Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Dijon, France,12Rare &
Inherited Disease Laboratory, London North Genomic Laboratory
Hub, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation
Trust, London WC1N 3BH, UK, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: The ASCL1-HOX2A-PHOX2B developmental cascade
has been proposed as a candidate pathway for Congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) and Haddad syndrome (CCHSassociated to Hirschprung disease). ASCL1 has been described in
association with both CCHS and Haddad syndrome. However, only
3 patients have been described in the literature to date (OMIM#100790).
Patients and methods: A French and a UK patient were
referred to their genetic centres for investigation of syndromic
Hirschsprung disease. Trio whole exome or genome sequencingwas performed and details of the ASCL1 variants submitted to the
GeneMatcher data sharing platform in both cases.
Results : The patients were two boys aged 9 and 6 years old
respectively. Their common phenotype includes Hirschprungdisease, strabismus, cardiac dysautonomy and learning disability
with speech delay. Neither patient has CCHS. The older patient is
under investigation for sleep apnea and has stable T2 hyper-intensity in the dentate nuclei on brain MRI. The younger patienthas a normal sleep study and brain MRI scan. Both patients have
the same de novo heterozygous missense ASCL1 variant
(NM_004316.3:c.379G> A p.(Glu127Lys)). This variant is absentfrom the population database GnomAD and affects a conservedamino acid located in the functional domain HLH. Multiple in silico
tools predict pathogenicity.
Conclusion : We report two patients with the same de novo
heterozygous ASCL1 variant and a strikingly similar clinical
phenotype. This observation suggests that the phenotypic
spectrum associated with ASCL1 gene variants is broader than
previously reported. Additional patients, as well as functionalstudies will be required.
M. Grisval: None. E. Walkeling: None. O. Boesp ﬂug-Tanguy:
None. H. Trang: None. A. Garde: None. C. Philippe: None. A.
Rega: None. M. Mourot De Rougemont: None. V. Darmency:
None. C. Ben Signor: None. A. Houzel: None. F. Huet: None. Y.
Duffourd: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. T. Taylor-Miller:
None. L. Busby: None. L. Faivre: None.
P11.017.C Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome the
ﬁrst proved case in Bulgaria
Tsvetina Ivanova Veleva , Hadil Kathom, Trayan Delchev, Daniela
Avdjieva-Tzavella
SBALDB, Medical university - So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome
(BWCFFS) is a rare multisystem developmental disorder character-ized by distinctive craniofacial features, intellectual disability,
ocular colobomata, hearing loss, short stature, brain malformation,
epilepsy, structural anomalies of palate, heart and kidneys.BWCFFS is caused by mutations in two different genes - ACTBand ACTG1, that encode β- and γ-actins. Individuals with ACTB
mutations seem to have more severe phenotype but ACTG1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
328
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608pathogenic variants appear to have more frequent CNS
involvement.
Materials and Methods: We present a 13-year-old boy with
typical craniofacial characteristics (coarse facial features, highlyarched eyebrows, widely spaced eyes, prominent nasal bridge,wide mouth, retrognatia, dysplastic ears, skeletal abnormalities)
and mild intellectual disability. The patient had a normal male
karyotype. Results from multiplex ligation-dependent probeampli ﬁcation analysis, glucosaminoglycans in urine, echocardio-
graphy, renal ultrasound scanning, X-ray examination of the spine
and cranium were normal.
Results: The molecular genetic analysis was performed by NGS
(Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial Syndrome Panel). This diag-nostic test evaluated 3 genes - ACTB, ACTG1 and ANKRD11. The
data interpretation revealed a likely pathogenic variant - c.220G>A
(p.Gly74Ser) in ACTB gene.
Conclusions: Nearly all reported cases of BWFFS syndrome
occur as a result of de novo mutations. The identi ﬁed variant is not
present in population databases. Our study further expanded thegenotypic spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations ofBWCFFS.
T.I. Veleva: None. H. Kathom: None. T. Delchev: None. D.
Avdjieva-Tzavella: None.
P11.018.D Clinical and molecular characterization of
Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum patients conceived throughassisted reproductive technology
Diana Carli
1, Jennifer Spina1, Silvia Russo2, Guido Cocchi3, Donatella
Milani4, Elisabetta Prada4, Daniela Melis5, Luigi Tarani6, Marina
Macchiaiolo7, Angela Sparago8, Laura Pignata8, Pierpaola Tannor-
ella2, Simona Cardaropoli1, Andrea Bartuli7, Andrea Riccio8, Alessan-
dro Mussa1, Giovanni B. Ferrero1
1University of Torino, Torino, Italy,2Istituto Auxologico Italiano,
Milano, Italy,3University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,4Ca’Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,5Federico II University,
Napoli, Italy,6"Sapienza" University of Rome, Roma, Italy,7Bambino
Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Roma, Italy,8Università degli Studi della
Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy.
Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum (BWSp) prevalence
is tenfold increased in children conceived through assisted
reproductive techniques (ART). More than 90% of ART-BWSp
patients reported so far carry Imprinting Center 2 Loss-of-Methylations (IC2-LoM), versus ≃50% of naturally conceived BWSp
patients.
Methods: clinical and molecular features of 50 ART-BWSp
patients were reviewed.
Results: Thirty- ﬁve patients (70%) carried IC2-LoM, 11 (22%)
chromosome 11 paternal uniparental disomy (UPD(11)pat), 1 (2%)
Imprinting Center 1 Gain-of-Methylation (IC1-GoM); 2 (4%) testednegative and 1 (2%) refused testing (the latter were clinicallydiagnosed with BWSp score ≥4). Macroglossia was observed in 39
patients (78%), lateralized overgrowth in 30 (60%), omphalocele in
9 (18%) and prolonged hyperinsulinism in 1 (2%). Malignancies (1Wilms tumor and 1 hepatoblastoma) occured in 2 patients (4%)carrying UPD(11)pat. Data on the type of ART were available in 22
patients: 13 were born from homologous in vitro fertilization (IVF),
4 from homologous intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), 4 fromICSI with egg donation, and 1 from intra-uterine insemination (IUI).
Infertility cause was unknown in 13/22 cases (59.1%), maternal in
4/22 cases (18.2%; 3 bilateral salpingectomies and 1 endome-triosis) and paternal in 5/22 cases (22.7%; all presenting oligo/azoospermia).Conclusions: We found a 22% of UPD(11)pat in our cohort, a
fraction consistent with naturally conceived BWSp and strongly
contradicting literature, reporting almost invariably only IC2-LoM
cases in ART-BWSp cohorts. Since UPD(11)pat likely results frompostfertilization recombination, this ﬁnding allows to hypothesize
that complex molecular mechanisms, besides methylation dis-
turbances, may underlie BWSp increased risk in ART pregnancies.
D. Carli: None. J. Spina: None. S. Russo: None. G. Cocchi:
None. D. Milani: None. E. Prada: None. D. Melis: None. L. Tarani:
None. M. Macchiaiolo: None. A. Sparago: None. L. Pignata:
None. P. Tannorella: None. S. Cardaropoli: None. A. Bartuli:
None. A. Riccio: None. A. Mussa: None. G.B. Ferrero: None.
P11.019.A 11p15 imprinting defects and phenotype expres-
sion in 12 patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Ivona Sansovic , Ljubica Boban, Mijana Kero, Ingeborg Barisic
Children ’s Hospital Zagreb, Scienti ﬁc Centre of Excellence for
Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University ofZagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is caused by
genetic or epigenetic changes that modify expression of genes in
the imprinted region of chromosome 11p15.5. Although recent
studies proved the association between 11p15.5 region defect andBWS clinical features the complex genotype-phenotype relation-ship is still challenging.
Materials and method: The phenotypes of 12 BWS patients
with molecular defect in imprinted 11p15.5 region, detected byMethylation-Speci ﬁc Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampli ﬁ-
cation method, were compared with the literature reports on
genotype-phenotype correlations in four molecular subclasses:
loss of methylation at imprinting center 2 (IC2-LoM, n =8), gain of
methylation at imprinting center 1 (IC1-GoM, n =1), chromosome
11p15 paternal uniparental disomy (UPD, n
=2) and duplication of
paternal IC1 (IC1-dup, n =1).
Results: Macrosomia, macroglossia and neonatal hypoglycemia
were dominant ﬁndings across all subclasses. Hemihyperplasia
was present in both UPD patients. Renal and urinary anomalies,
umbilical hernia, organomegaly and increased cancer risk typicalfor IC1-GoM cases were observed in IC1-GoM patient. Omphalo-cele, ear anomalies, nevus ﬂammeus, preterm birth, and the use of
assisted reproductive technologies were more common in IC2-
LoM genotype. IC1-dup patient have a few BWS characteristicfeatures.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings are in accordance with the largest
recent correlation studies on BWS and support the hypothesis thatdifferent 11p15 alterations are associated with speci ﬁc pheno-
types in BWS. Acknowledgment: This work was supported by
Scienti ﬁc Center of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative
Medicine and by the EU through the European RegionalDevelopment Fund, under grant agreement No.KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project, Reproductive and Regenerative Medi-
cine - Exploring New Platforms and Potentials ”.
I. Sansovic: None. L. Boban: None. M. Kero: None. I. Barisic:
None.
P11.020.B Phenotypically concordant but epigenetically dis-
cordant monozygotic dichorionic diamniotic twins with
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Hidenobu Soejima
1, Feifei Sun1,2, Hitomi Yatsuki1, Ken Higashi-
moto1, Satoshi Hara1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
329
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Saga University, Saga, Japan,2Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an imprinting disorder
with complex and diverse phenotypes caused by (epi)geneticalterations. The incidence of monozygotic (MZ) twins in BWS
patients is higher than in the general population. Most MZ twins
with BWS are female and have phenotypical discordance: one ofthe twins is clinically diagnosed with BWS, while the other shows amild phenotype or a completely normal phenotype. The most
frequent (epi)genetic alteration in MZ twins is loss of methylation
of imprinting control region 2 (ICR2-LOM) at 11p15.5. Intriguingly,ICR2-LOM is usually found in the peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL)of both twins, even if they are clinically discordant. Here, we
present a rare pair of MZ dichorionic diamniotic female twins with
BWS and concordant phenotypes (a Beckwith-Wiedemann spec-trum (BWSp) score of 5 in each twin). Molecular analysis of
genomic DNA from PBL revealed ICR2-LOM in one twin but not
the other. Our analyses suggest that ICR2-LOM occurred betweendays 1 and 3 after fertilization, followed by twinning and an evenmosaic distribution of ICR2-LOM cells at the tissue level between
the twins, except in hematopoietic stem cells, during
embryogenesis.
H. Soejima: None. F. Sun: None. H. Yatsuki: None. K.
Higashimoto: None. S. Hara: None.
P11.021.C Re ﬁnement of the 22q11 duplicated phenocritical
locus in bladder exstrophy epispadias complex
Glenda Maria Beaman
1,2, William G. Newman1,2, Woolf S. Adrian1,2,
Raimondo M. Cervellione2, David Keene2, Imran Mushtaq3
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,2Manche-
ster University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,
3Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom.
The bladder exstrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC) comprises of
a spectrum of anterior midline defects affecting the bladder or
urethra. Despite its clinical importance, the causes of bladder
exstrophy remain unde ﬁned. BEEC affects 1 in 10,000 births,
with a twofold higher incidence in males. Duplications ofchromosome 22q11.2 have been identi ﬁed in approximately 3%
of BEEC cases. This is the stron gest reported association with
BEEC, conferring a greater than twelvefold risk. A comparison ofeight previously reported 22q11.21 duplications in individuals
with CBE de ﬁned a 414 kb ‘phenocritical ’region, harboring 10
candidate protein coding genes. By undertaking CNV analysis inBEEC patients using the In ﬁnium CytoSNP-850K v1.2 Beadchip
Kit (Illumina), we identi ﬁed a British female with classic bladder
exstrophy (CBE) with a maternall y inherited 313kb duplication,
which re ﬁnes the phenocritical region, to include only ﬁve of
the protein coding genes previously identi ﬁed: CRKL, AIFM3,
LZTR1, THAP7 and P2RX6 . The duplication lies within a single
regulatory chromosomal topographical active domain. Subse-
quent copy number analysis using TaqMan assays for these ﬁve
g e n e si n1 1 6i n d i v i d u a l sw i t hB E E Cr e v e a l e dn oe v i d e n c eo fsingle gene duplications. RNA array data from embryonic mice
in GenitoUrinary Development Molecular Anatomy Project
(GUDMAP) detected CRKL ,LZTR1 and THAP7 expressed in
embryonic kidney mesenchyme and interstitium and tubules,
embryonic ureter and embryonic bladder. These data re ﬁne the
size of the duplication at the 22q11.21 also suggesting thatCRKL ,THAP7 ,a n d LZTR 1 are CBE candidate genes and
contribute to the potential di sease-associated mechanism
predisposing to BEEC at this locus.G.M. Beaman: None. W.G. Newman: None. W.S. Adrian: None.
R.M. Cervellione: None. D. Keene: None. I. Mushtaq: None.
P11.022.D Understanding the new BRD4 -related Cornelia de
Lange-like syndrome: clinical, genomic and bioinformaticdelineation with an international cohort study
Guillaume Jouret
1, Solveig Heide2, Arthur Sorlin1,3,4, Laurence
Faivre3,4, Sandrine Chantot-Bastaraud5, Marie Denis-Musquer6, Peter
D. Turnpenny7, Charles Coutton8, Gaëlle Vieville8, Julien Thevenon8,
Austin Larson9, Florence Petit10, Elise Boudry11, Thomas Smol11,
Bruno Delobel12, Bénédicte Duban-Bedu12, Chiara Fallerini13, Fran-
cesca Mari13, Caterina Lo Rizzo14, Alessandra Renieri13,14, Jean-
Hubert Caberg15, Frederic Tran Mau-Them4,16, Isabelle Maystadt17,
Philippe Theis1, Christian Müller1, Didier Menzies18, Dominique
Bourgeois1, Emmanuel Scalais19, Barbara Klink1
1National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire national de santé
(LNS), Dudelange, Luxembourg,2Service de Génétique Cytogénétique
Embryologie Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France,3Centre de
Génétique, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,4Génétique des Anomalies
du Développement, Inserm 1231 GAD, Université de Bourgogne,
Dijon, France,5Service de génétique et embryologie médicales, CHU
Paris Est, Hôpital d ’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France,6Service
d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital-Dieu, Nantes, France,
7Clinical Genetics Department, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital,
Exeter, United Kingdom,8Service de Génétique Médicale, Grenoble,
France,9Clinical Genetics Department, Children ’s Hospital Colorado,
Littleton, CO, USA,10Clinique de Génétique « Guy Fontaine », CHU de
Lille, Lille, France,11Institut de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Lille, Lille,
France,12Centre de Génétique Chromosomique, GH de l ’Institut
Catholique de Lille, Lille, France,13Medical Genetics Department,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,14Genetica Medica, Azienda
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,15Centre de Génétique
Humaine, CHU de Liège, Liège, Belgium,16Unité Fonctionnelle 6254
d’Innovation en Diagnostique Génomique des Maladies Rares, Pôle
de Biologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,17Centre de
Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique (IPG),Gosselies, Belgium,18National Center of Pathology (NCP), Laboratoire
national de santé (LNS), Dudelange, Luxembourg,19Pediatric
Neurology Unit, Pediatric Department, Centre Hospitalier de
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
Introduction: To date, only three patients have been reported in
the literature with BRD4 point mutations. However, a small but
growing body of scienti ﬁc literature is emerging about clinical
ﬁndings in patients with 19p13.12 deletions overlapping BRD4 ,o f
which nine patients have been described. They share a
characteristic common phenotype including growth retardation,microcephaly, intellectual disability, cardiac defects and facialdysmorphism suggestive of Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS).
Interestigly, CdLS is often caused by mutations in NIPBL , which has
recently been shown to interact closely with BRD4 .
Methods: To characterize this novel syndrome, we formed an
international collaborative study, and collected twelve new patients:
six with 19p13.12 deletions overlapping BRD4 and six with BRD4
point mutations. We performed phenotype and genotype analysis,critical region delineation and assessment of the impact of structuralvariants on three-dimensional chr omatin interactions by Topologi-
cally Associating Domains (TADs) analysis. We assessed the
participation of contiguous genes never associated with humandiseases before, by using the data-mining software Manteia to
compare with phenotypes observed in murine knockout models.
Results: We report the ﬁrst cohort of patients with BRD4 -related
Cornelia de Lange-like syndrome and describe new cardinalclinical ﬁndings. By integrating prenatal ﬁndings from fetopatho-
logical examinations, phenotypes of pediatric patients and adults,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
330
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608we describe the speci ﬁc evolution of dysmorphic features during
the different stages of life.
Conclusion: BRD4 -related phenotype is part of the CdLS
spectrum but is characterized by clinically relevant speci ﬁcities
that distinguish it from other cohesinopathies.
G. Jouret: None. S. Heide: None. A. Sorlin: None. L. Faivre:
None. S. Chantot-Bastaraud: None. M. Denis-Musquer: None. P.
D. Turnpenny: None. C. Coutton: None. G. Vieville: None. J.
Thevenon: None. A. Larson: None. F. Petit: None. E. Boudry:
None. T. Smol: None. B. Delobel: None. B. Duban-Bedu: None. C.
Fallerini: None. F. Mari: None. C. Lo Rizzo: None. A. Renieri:
None. J. Caberg: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. I. Maystadt:
None. P. Theis: None. C. Müller: None. D. Menzies: None. D.
Bourgeois: None. E. Scalais: None. B. Klink: None.
P11.023.A miRNA-free rare pathogenic CNVs could drive
toward variable CAKUT phenotypes
Ivan Zivotic , Ivana Kolic, Kristina Popic, Jelena Filipovic Trickovic,
Ana Djordjevic, Maja Zivkovic, Aleksandra Stankovic, Ivan Jovanovic
"Vinca" Institute of nuclear sciences, Insltitute of the national interest
of the Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: Genetic studies of congenital anomalies of the
kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) have demonstrated variablepenetrability and expressivity of the associated genetic defects.Previously, it was shown that deletions of 17q12 and 22q11.2
regions were speci ﬁc for kidney anomalies (KA) while 16p11.2 and
1q21.1 loci showed extensive pleiotropy in CAKUT phenotypes.CNVs affecting miRNA gene dosage have been described to havefunctional in ﬂuence on gene expression. We aimed to conduct
comprehensive in silico analysis using publicly available databases
to analyze miRNA content of CAKUT-associated CNVs in quotedchromosomal loci with regard to pleiotropy.
Methods: Extensive literature review was conducted to collect
data about pathogenic rCNVs associated with CAKUT. UCSCgenome browser tool was employed for mapping miRNAs ontocollected rCNV regions.
Results: Analysis of CNVs in CAKUT included four studies
counting more than 2500 patients. In further analysis we included191 patients harboring pathogenic CNVs. Surprisingly, CAKUTpleiotropic regions (16p11.2, 1q21.2) did not contain any miRNA.
22q11.2 showed the densest miRNAs content (n =21).
Conclusions:
Absence of miRNAs may potentially pronounce
the pleiotropy of the CAKUT genetic defects, thus leading to the
variety of phenotypes. Contrary, abundancy of miRNAs in 22q11.2
might be associated with reproducible phenotype, such as KA,producing the functional effect when deleted. This assumptionagrees with recent results of miRNA expression variability in
22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Acknowledgements: This research
was supported by the Science Fund of the Republic of Serbia,PROMIS, # 6066923, miFaDriCa, and Serbian Ministry of Education,Science and Technological development.
I. Zivotic: None. I. Kolic: None. K. Popic: None. J. Filipovic
Trickovic: None. A. Djordjevic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. A.
Stankovic: None. I. Jovanovic: None.
P11.024.B Are miR-548 family members potential genetic
drivers of CAKUT
Kristina Mitrovic , Ivana Kolic, Ivan Zivotic, Jelena Filipovic Trickovic,
Ana Djordjevic, Maja Zivkovic, Aleksandra Stankovic, Ivan JovanovicInstitute of Nuclear Sciences "Vinca", Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: miR-548 family members, located on all human
chromosomes except chr19 and chrY, regulate podocyte differ-entiation in vitro, important for kidney development. Rare copynumber variants (rCNVs) are the common genetic cause of
Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract (CAKUT)
and could harbour miRNAs. The aim of this study was toinvestigate to which extent rCNVs associated with CAKUT harbourmiR-548 members.
Materials and Methods: Extensive literature review was
conducted to collect data of pathogenic and likely pathogenicrCNVs in CAKUT patients. UCSC genome browser tool wasemployed for mapping of miR-548 members onto collected rCNV
regions and gnomAD SV controls database. Bioinformatic analysis
was conducted using miRPathDB2 tool.
Results: We generated CAKUT database of pathogenic CNVs in
79 chromosome regions from 191 patient and likely pathogenic
CNVs in 74 regions from 87 patients. Pathogenic rCNVs ofseventeen patients, located on 7 chromosomes, contained at leastone miR-548 member. Likely pathogenic rCNVs of 4 patients,
located on 3 chromosomes, contained one of miR-548 members.
Bioinformatic analysis implied the role of mapped miRNAs in theregulation of processes associated with CAKUT. In controls, onlyhsa-mir-548i-3 (out of 73 precursors) was mapped on polymorphic
CNVs (af>1%) and wasn ’t identi ﬁed in patients.
Conclusions: miR-548 members located in rCNVs should be
investigated in future studies as potential genetic drivers of
CAKUT development, beyond protein coding genes. Acknowl-
edgements: This research was supported by the Science Fund ofthe Republic of Serbia, PROMIS, #6066923, miFaDriCa, and SerbianMinistry of Education, Science and Technological development.
K. Mitrovic: None. I. Kolic: None. I. Zivotic: None. J. Filipovic
Trickovic: None. A. Djordjevic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. A.
Stankovic: None. I. Jovanovic: None.
P11.025.C Preeclampsia as a potential clinical feature in Cantú
syndrome
Eirny Thorolfsdottir , Svanborg Gisladottir, Hans T. Bjornsson
Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Introduction: Cantú syndrome (CS) is caused by gain-of-function
pathogenic disease-causing variants in the genes coding for ABCC9and KCNJ8, which together form an ATP-sensitive potassium
channel. CS is a rare systemic syndrome with a great clinical
variability, characterized by coarse facies, hypertrichosis, osteochon-drodysplasia and cardiac anomalies. We present a family with eightindividuals with CS for which the proband was initially diagnosed
with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Whole genome trio sequen-
cing revealed a likely pathogenic missense variant in the ABCC9
gene (NM_005353286.2); c.1745T>A (p.Val582Asp), which the boyshares with seven similarly affected family members (patent ductus
arteriosus, pericardial effusion, cardiomegaly, coarse facial features
and hypertrichosis). Premature births, polyhydramnios and large forgestational age newborns are perinatal factors also seen in thefamily. Furthermore, maternal preeclampsia (n =4) or hypertension
during pregnancy (n =1) is observed in 5 of 6 cases (83%) in this
family, when CS mothers carry CS fetuses.
Discussion: Over-activity of the K
ATPchannel and dysregulation
of renin-angiotensin signaling (RAS) triggers cardiac hypertrophy,
and dysregulation of RAS is also one of multiple factors thought tocontribute to the development of preeclampsia. Here we presentAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
331
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608three CS mothers who experience preeclampsia when carrying
affected CS fetuses.
Conclusion: Preeclampsia as well as maternal preeclampsia has
previously been described for other syndromes, but to ourknowledge preeclampsia has not been associated with CS before,and we speculate that maternal preeclampsia might be an
expansion of the CS phenotypic spectrum. If true, studies of CS
may yield insights into the mechanistic basis of preeclampsia.
E. Thorolfsdottir: None. S. Gisladottir: None. H.T. Bjornsson:
None.
P11.026.D ATP1A3 gene is responsible for isolated and
syndromic auditory neuropathy (CAPOS syndrome)
Margaux Serey-Gaut
1, Sophie Achard2, Laurence Jonard3, Marine
Parodi2, Natalie Loundon2, Christine Poncet4, Bruno Eymard5, Naima
Deggouj6, Yves Sznajer7,Sandrine Marlin1
1Hopital Necker, Service de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France,2Hopital
Necker, Service d ’ORL, Paris, France,3Hopital Necker, Service de
Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France,4Hopital Rothschild, Centre de
Réglage des Implants Cochléaire, Paris, France,5Institut de Myologie,
Unité clinique de pathologie neuromusculaire, Paris, France,
6Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc UCL, service d ’ORL, Bruxelles,
Belgium,7Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc UCL, service de
Génétique, Bruxelles, Belgium.
CAPOS syndrome combines progressive hearing loss (auditory
neuropathy type, (AN)), optic atrophy, hypotonia, and cerebellar
ataxia. The disorder is described as appearing in childhood, withacute episodes of febrile neurological deterioration resemblingencephalitis.We conducted a cohort study of 39 families (43
patients) with isolated (73%) or syndromic (27%) AN without
cochlear nerve malformation. Their DNA was analyzed by NextGeneration Sequencing using a panel of 216 genes involved in
isolated or syndromic deafness.Four unrelated patients had the
same heterozygous pathogenic variant of the ATP1A3 gene,
c.2452G>A, p.(Glu818Lys), already reported as responsible forCAPOS syndrome (OMIM-601338). The diagnosis of the hearing
loss was made in post-lingual period from 5 to 12 years old. The
deafness progressively worsened with very low word recognition(10%) despite a classical hearing aid. A single or bilateral cochlearimplantation allowed recovering a word recognition score close to
100% (up to 12 years post-implant). Two patients have never had
any of the febrile episodes classically described. Optic nervedamage was not present in two patients, one of whom was 16
years old. The ataxia described in the CAPOS syndrome is attributed
to cerebellar damage but the implication of a vestibular de ﬁcit was
present in 2/3 of the patients tested.We have identi ﬁed the ATP1A3
p.(Glu818Lys) variant in patients with isolated neuropathy with or
without inaugural febrile episodes. Balance disorders could involve
peripheral vestibular damage. Cohort studies should con ﬁrm
efﬁcacy in auditory perception in these patients.
M. Serey-Gaut: None. S. Achard: None. L. Jonard: None. M.
Parodi: None. N. Loundon: None. C. Poncet: None. B. Eymard:
None. N. Deggouj: None. Y. Sznajer: None. S. Marlin: None.
P11.027.A A new ocular phenotype in cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome
Maria Tessitore
1, Giulia Abbinante1, Mariateresa Falco2, Flavio
Gallo1, Carnem Plaitano3, Dario Di Salvio4, Adriano Magli1, Daniela
Melis11Scuola Medica Salernitana, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy,
2Pediatric Unit San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona University
Hospital, Salerno, Italy,33. Ophtalmology Department, San Giovanni
di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona University Hospital, Salerno, Italy,44.
Department of Maternal-Infant, Pediatric Section, University ofNaples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
Introduction: Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC syndrome)
is a congenital disorder belonging to RASopathies, a group ofsyndromes caused by mutations in the Ras/mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2 are the most
frequently genes involved. The major clinical manifestationsinclude craniofacial dysmorphic features, growth retardation withshort stature, congenital heart diseases, neurodevelopment delay,
hypotonia and dermatologic abnormalities. Ocular involvement
occurs in the majority of individuals and include: strabismus,refractive errors, nystagmus, ptosis, and optic nerve hypoplasia.
Case report. We describe a 5-year-old girl with a heterozygous
pathogenic variant [c. 1741A>Gp. (Asn581Asp)] in BRAF gene.Thepatient presents typical dysmorphic features (thin and curly hair,bilateral epicanthum, macrostomia, macroglossia), congenital
heart defects (atrial septal defect, pulmonary valve stenosis), and
moderate developmental delay. MRI brain detected thinning ofthe corpus callosum and enlarged periventricular spaces. She alsopresents dental caries, follicular keratosis and laterocervical
infantile hemangioma. Eye examination showed exotropia,
anomalies of the visual evoked potentials and, in particular,excavation of optic disc. Excavation of optic disc is an ocular
manifestation that has not been yet described in patients with
CFC syndrome. This ﬁnding could be associated with optic nerve
atrophy, previously found in some cases of CFC syndrome.
Conclusions: This case report suggest to carry out an accurate
funduscopic examination in order to highlight alterations of the
optic disc in patients with RASopathies to obtain a precociousdiagnosis of optic nerve involvement.
M. Tessitore: None. G. Abbinante: None. M. Falco: None. F.
Gallo: None. C. Plaitano: None. D. Di Salvio: None. A. Magli:
None. D. Melis: None.
P11.028.B Identi ﬁcation of Cenani-Lenz syndrome due to
compound heterozygous variant in APC
Jair A. Tenorio-Castaño
1,2, Pedro Arias1,2, Julian Nevado1,2, Natalia
Gallego1, Cristina Silvan1, Sergio Ramos1, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,
Nuria Rodriguez-Salas3, Leopoldo Martínez4,Pablo Lapunzina1,2
1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain,
2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Madrid, Spain,3Hereditary cancer unit, Oncology, Hospital
Universitario la Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM),
28046., Madrid, Spain,4Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Cenani-Lenz (CLS) is an infrequent congenital malformation
characterized by syndactyly of the hands with abnormalities of
the forearm bones that can be also present in the lower limbs,renal abnormalities and dysmorphism. It is usually caused byautosomal recessive variants in LRP4 , and duplication encompass-
ing GREM1 and FMN1 . More recently, APC pathogenic variants,
mostly truncating, have been also suggested to be related withCLS. APC acts on the WNT signaling pathway as well as LRP4,
which seems to be the canonical pathway associated with CLS.
Here, we report a family in which the index case was diagnosedwith multiple adenomatous polyposis, syndactyly, xerosis cutisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
332
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608and ADHD. Whole exome sequencing revealed that the proband
have two variants in the APC gene, one nonsense
(NM_001354906.2:c.1564C>T: p.Arg522*) at exon 17 and one
intronic variant NM_001354906.2:c.-191T>A. One variant was denovo and the second one inherited from the mother. None of thevariants were detected in the pseudocontrol population databases
(gnomAD exomes, gnomAD genomes, 1000G, ESP, Kaviar) and the
majority of the pathogenic predictors suggested a pathogeniceffect for the nonsense variant. In silico analysis of the intronicvariant suggested that removed the ATG, thus having a damaging
effect at the ORF, based on the 5 ’UTR location of the variant. In
this region, other variants have been previously reported aspathogenic. Altogether suggest that for the ﬁrst time, a compound
heterozygous variant in APC is described in a case with Cenani-
Lenz, expanding the phenotype and molecular features associated
with the disease.Grants: FIS-PI20/01053
J.A. Tenorio-Castaño: None. P. Arias: None. J. Nevado: None.
N. Gallego: None. C. Silvan: None. S. Ramos: None. S. García-
Miñaúr: None. N. Rodriguez-Salas: None. L. Martínez: None. P.
Lapunzina: None.
P11.030.D Vascular, skeletal and endocrine anomalies in
mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome 2 caused by biallelicvariants in CEP57
María Palomares-Bralo
1,2,3, Marta Pacio-Míguez1, Anna María
Cueto-González4,5,6, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3, Ángela del Pozo1,2,
Juan José Menéndez Suso7, Francisco J. Climent Alcalá8, Elena
Mansilla1,2,3, Cristina Schuffelmann7, María Dolores Lledín9, Mario
Solís1,2, Teresa López1, Patricia Valcorba1,2,3, Sofía Siccha10, María
Irene Valenzuela Palafoll4,11, Fermina López Grondona4, Francisca
Nieto Aranda1,11, Eduardo Tizzano4,11, Pablo Lapunzina1,2,3, Fer-
nando Santos-Simarro1,2,3
1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2CIBERER, Centro de Investiga-
ción Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,
3European Reference Network Congenital Malformations & Rare
Mental Disability (ERN -ITHACA), Madrid, Spain,4Departamento de
Genética Clínica y Molecular, Campus del Hospital Vall d ’Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain,5Grupo de Genética Médica, Instituto de Investiga-
ción Vall Hebron (VHIR), Campus del Hospital Vall d ’Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain,6European Reference Network Craniofacial Anoma-
lies and ENT disorders (ERN-CRANIO), Barcelona, Spain,7Servicio de
Cuidados Intensivos Pediátricos, Hospital Universitario La Paz,Madrid, Spain,8Unidad de patología compleja pediátrica, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,9Unidad de hepatología
pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,10Servicio
de pediatría, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,11Grupo de
Genética Médica, Instituto de Investigación Vall Hebron (VHIR),
Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) syndrome is a
rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a variable
percentage of chromosome gains and losses in somatic cells,
leading to constitutional mosaic aneuploidies. Biallelic mutationsinBUB1B ,CEP57 and TRIP13 have been identi ﬁed as the underlying
cause of MVA 1 (OMIM 257300), MVA 2 (OMIM 614114) and MVA 3
(OMIM 617598) respectively. Patients with MVA present with a
non-distinctive phenotype with pre- and postnatal growthretardation, microcephaly, intellectual disability, skeletal anoma-
lies, facial dysmorphisms, heart defects, seizures, hypothyroidism,
ocular defects and childhood cancers associated to BUB1B and
TRIP13 . Biallelic CEP57 variants have only been described in 10
patients so far, and the phenotype is poorly known.Materials and Methods: We have performed a retrospective
analysis on the phenotype of all reported cases presenting with
MVA2 and pathogenic variants in CEP57 and describe the clinical
ﬁndings of 2 additional unrelated patients with MVA2 identi ﬁed
through WES.
Conclusions: Analysis of these 12 cases delineates a complex
phenotype that includes pre and postnatal growth retardation
and characteristic facial features. Cardiac, vascular and skeletalmalformations also seem to be part of the phenotype, as well asendocrine abnormalities such as hypothyroidism and growth
hormone de ﬁcit with or without pituitary anomalies. The
identi ﬁcation of these manifestations will improve the clinical
management of these patients. Grants: Raregenomics network,ﬁnanced by the Consejería de Educación de la C. de Madrid
(S2017/BMD-3721), ISC III, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación
(PI19/01681) and the European Social Fund.
M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. A. Cueto-
González: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. Á. del Pozo: None. J.
Menéndez Suso: None. F.J. Climent Alcalá: None. E. Mansilla:
None. C. Schuffelmann: None. M. Lledín: None. M. Solís: None. T.
López: None. P. Valcorba: None. S. Siccha: None. M. Valenzuela
Palafoll: None. F. López Grondona: None. F. Nieto Aranda: None.
E. Tizzano: None. P. Lapunzina: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None.
P11.031.A Familial cervical ribs associated with azygos lobe
Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA, Amir Karra , Balkiss ABdelmoula
Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17ES36,
Medical University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
Objective: Cervical rib is a congenital over-development of the
costal process of the 7th cervical vertebra (1 to 2% of the
population) which is known to cause brachial plexopathy in up to10% of the affected individuals. Cervical ribs may cause thoracic
outlet syndromes by compression. Their origin is not well
elucidated but it seems that genetic (HOX genes) and environ-mental factors (maternal exposure to chemicals or stress) may beinvolved. Familial cases with a suspected autosomal dominant
inheritance were reported. Here, we describe a Tunisian pedigree
in which a young female was diagnosed as having familial bilateralcervical ribs. This congenital abnormality was associated withanother congenital variation of the lung (0.2-1.2% of the
population) which was an azygos lobe of the right lung.
Material and Methods: A Tunisian 29-years-old female was
referred to us for brachial plexopathy. Thoracic X-ray as well as
cervical spine thoracic MRI and scan were performed.
Results: The interpretation of the chest X-ray revealed the
presence of bilateral cervical ribs as well as a pulmonary opacity ofthe right apex. The MRI con ﬁrmed the presence of two
supernumerary cervical ribs at the 7th cervical vertebra. There
was also a Tornwaldt cyst which is a common incidental benignmidline nasopharyngeal mucosal cyst. More over, there was apulmonary nodule at the apical segment of the right lung. The
thoracic scan identi ﬁed the pulmonary lesion as an azygos lobe.
Conclusion : Our patient had cervical ribs inherited from her
father associated to multiple other congenital conditions.
N.B. Abdelmoula: None. A. Karra: None. B. ABdelmoula:
None.
P11.032.B Diagnostic WES-based gene panel testing in (non)-
syndromic patients with cleft lip and/or palate in theNetherlandsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
333
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Inge L. Cox1,Lisca F. Fockema Wurfbain1, M F. van Dooren2,V
Verhoeven2, E K. Bijlsma3, A van Hagen4, M Heijligers5, S M. Maas6,H
E. Veenstra-Knol7, H K. Ploos van Amstel1, M Massink1, Marie-Jose H.
van den Boogaard1, Aebele Mink van der Molen1
1Wilhelmina Children ’s Hospital, University Medical Center, Utrecht,
Netherlands,2Erasmus University Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
3Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,4Amsterdam
University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands,5Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,6Amsterdam
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,7University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) are the most common
craniofacial congenital malformations in humans involving various
genetic and environmental risk factors and can be divided intoisolated non-syndromic and syndromic forms. Many CL/P syn-dromes are characterized as clinically variable, genetically hetero-
geneous disorders, making it dif ﬁcult to distinguish syndromic and
non-syndromic cases. Recognition of a syndromic/genetic cause isimportant for personalized tailored care, including (unrecognized)co-morbidities and accurate genetic counselling. Therefore, gene
panel testing is increasingly considered in the diagnostic work-up
of CL/P. In this retrospective study we evaluate the yield of gene-panel CL/P testing.
Material and Methods: We included 212 CL/P cases eligible for
WES-based gene panel testing between 2015 and 2020 as part ofroutine care. All cases were included after pre-test geneticcounselling. Medical records including family history were
evaluated.
Results: In 24 cases (11,3 %) causative variants underlying the
CL/P were identi ﬁed, including rare genetic causes requiring
speci ﬁc monitoring and follow-up. For example, identi ﬁcation of a
pathogenic KCNJ2 variant (Andersen-Tawil syndrome) led to
cardiac follow-up in a CP patient and his parent, revealing acardiac arrhythmia phenotype. Also in apparently non-syndromic
cases a genetic diagnosis was made after testing. In 8 cases (3,8 %)
a causative genetic diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by performing
additional genetic testing, including trio WES analyses and SNParray.
Conclusions: This study exempli ﬁes the bene ﬁt of WES- based
gene panel analyses in CL/P patients in Dutch experts centres.Early diagnoses led to personalized care for patients and accurategenetic counselling of their families.
I.L. Cox: None. L.F. Fockema Wurfbain: None. M.F. van
Dooren: None. V. Verhoeven: None. E.K. Bijlsma: None. A. van
Hagen: None. M. Heijligers: None. S.M. Maas: None. H.E.
Veenstra-Knol: None. H.K. Ploos van Amstel: None. M. Massink:
None. M.H. van den Boogaard: None. A. Mink van der Molen:
None.
P11.034.D Two cases of complex constitutional chromosomal
rearrangements - familial implications and geneticcounselling
Diana A. Ozunu
1, Vasilica Pl ăiaşu1, Gabriela Motei1, Mihaela Ivan1,
Adelina Dobre2, Ana-Maria Caia-Hoan ăș2, Irina Apostol2, Lucica
Ghi ță3, Tatiana Ciomârtan2,4
1Genetics Departament, Regional Center of Medical Genetics,
National Institute for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu-
Rusescu ”, Bucharest, Romania,2Pediatrics Departament, National
Institute for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu-Rusescu ”,
Bucharest, Romania,3Neurology Departament, National Institute
for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu-Rusescu ”, Bucharest,Romania,4University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila ”,
Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: Complex constitutional chromosomal rearrange-
ments (CCRs) describe structural rearrangements involving at least2 chromosomes and 3 breakpoints. Depending on their structure,
CCRs can be classi ﬁed as: three-way exchange, double two-way
exchange and exceptional CCRs. Most double two-way transloca-tions are de novo rearrangements, with a few familial casesreported. We present two new unrelated familial cases of
imbalanced transmission for double two-way CCRs, one of
maternal origin involving chromosomes 4, 5, 10 and 13, andanother one of paternal origin involving chromosomes 6, 10, 12and 18.
Materials and methods: Peripheral blood karyotyping and
FISH using whole chromosome, subtelomeric and mFISH probeswas applied for testing of probands and their families.
Results: Proband I is a 1 year 3 months old boy with
neuromotor delay, facial dysmorphism, failure to thrive, hypospa-dias, behaviour problems. Conventional karyotype showed a add(10)(q26). Subsequent parental karyotype and FISH analysis
described a maternal balanced CCR t(4;13)(q26-28;q22),t(5;10)
(q34;q25).Proband II is a 1 month 3 weeks old boy that showedfacial dysmorphism, hypospadias, pre- and postnatal growth anddevelopmental delay. The karyotype result indicated a add(18)
(q21.1). Cytogenetic investigation and FISH testing identi ﬁed a
paternal balanced CCR t(6;12)(p21;p13),t(10;18)(p13;q21.1).
Conclusions: Accurate characterization of CCRs by molecular
cytogenetic methods is important because carriers of such
rearrangements can display a wide array of phenotypes. Geneticcounselling for families with CCR is dif ﬁcult and should consider
the fact that the risk of imbalances probably varies greatly with
the nature of the rearrangement, the number of chromosomes
involved and the number of breakpoints.
D.A. Ozunu: None. V. Pl ăiaşu:None. G. Motei: None. M. Ivan:
None. A. Dobre: None. A. Caia-Hoan ăș:None. I. Apostol: None.
L. Ghi ță:None. T. Ciomârtan: None.
P11.035.A Clinical relevance of postzygotic mosaicism in
Cornelia de Lange Syndrome
Ana Latorre-Pellicer
1,Marta Gil-Salvador1, Cristina Lucia-Campos1,
Rebeca Antoñanzas-Perez1, Laura Trujillano2, Maria Arnedo1, Ilaria
Parenti3, Paulino Gómez-Puertas4, Beatriz Puisac1, Frank J. Kaiser5,6,
Feliciano J. Ramos1,2, Juan Pié1
1Unit of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of
Pharmacology-Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Zara-goza, CIBERER-GCV02 and IIS-Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain,2Unit of
Clinical Genetics, Service of Paediatrics, University Hospital "Lozano
Blesa", Zaragoza, Spain,3Institute of Science and Technology (IST)
Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria,4Molecular Modelling Group, Centro
de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CBMSO (CSIC-UAM), Madrid,Spain,5Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany,6Section for Functional
Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lubeck,Germany.
Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS, OMIM #122470, #300590,
#610759, #614701, #300882) is a multisystemic genetic spectrumcharacterized by a recognizable craniofacial phenotype, limb
malformations, intellectual disability and a wide range of other
health conditions. To date, CdLS has been mainly associated withloss-of-function pathogenic variants in genes of proteins related tothe cohesin complex ( NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21 ,HDAC8, BRD4,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
334
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608ANKRD11 or MAU2) . Three main genetic subgroups of CdLS
patients are currently recognized based on heritability: patients
with hereditary pathogenic variant, with a de novo mutation
(DNM) or with a post-zygotic mutation (PZM). In contrast to whatis normally seen in other conditions, most of the affectedindividuals with mosaicism have a clinical phenotype at least as
severe as those with constitutional pathogenic variants. Here we
will discuss and expand the crucial role of genetic mosaicism inCdLS by reviewing a cohort of 40 CdLS patients with clinical andmolecular diagnosis. We assesed the prevalence of mosaicism and
present three additional patients with mosaic disease-causing
variants in NIPBL. Overall, the high prevalence of mosaicism inCdLS as well as the disparity in tissue distribution should be takeninto account when molecular diagnosis and familial cosegregation
studies are planned.
A. Latorre-Pellicer: None. M. Gil-Salvador: None. C. Lucia-
Campos: None. R. Antoñanzas-Perez: None. L. Trujillano: None.
M. Arnedo: None. I. Parenti: None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. B.
Puisac: None. F. Kaiser: None. F. Ramos: None. J. Pié: None.
P11.036.B A functional mutation in HDAC8 gene as novel
diagnostic marker for cornelia delange syndrome
Xueren Gao
Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai, China.
Introduction: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare
genetic disorder classically characterized by distinctive facies,
growth retardation, intellectual disability, feeding dif ﬁculties, and
multiple organ system anomalies. Previously, the diagnosis ofCdLS was based mainly on identifying the typical phenotype in
patients. However, with the advances in clinical molecular genetic
diagnostic techniques, more patients, especially patients withmilder phenotypes, are being diagnosed from detecting patho-
genic mutation.
Materials and Methods: Pathogenic mutation in a female
patient with a milder phenotype was detected using whole-exomesequencing, and was further characterized using bioinformatic
analysis and in vitro functional experiments, including
X-chromosome inactivation analysis, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and enzyme activity assay.
Results: This patient was found to harbor a novel missense
mutation (c.806T>G, p.I269R) in the coding region of the HDAC8
gene, which was predicted to be pathogenic. Compared withother CdLS patients with HDAC8 mutation, the patient lacked
typical facies, including synophrys and arched eyebrows. In vitro
functional experiments showed the presence of skewedX-chromosome inactivation. Furthermore, the novel mutationdecreased the dissolubility and enzymatic activity of HDAC8
protein.
Conclusions: The present study identi ﬁed a novel missense
mutation (c.806T>G, p.I269R) in the HDAC8 gene leading to CdLS,which not only provided strong evidence for diagnosis in this
present patient, but also expanded the spectrum of pathogenic
mutations for CdLS. The information on grants: the “National
Natural Science Foundation of China ”(No.81800780)
X. Gao: None.
P11.037.C Dominantly transmitted HRAS p.(Thr58Ile) patho-
genic variants associated with a variable phenotype and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in four individuals in a singlefamily
Emily Sloper , Oliver Murch, Arveen KamathAll Wales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare condition caused by heterozygous
gain-of-function germline alterations in HRAS . CS typically causes
coarse facial features, macrocephaly, growth and developmentaldifﬁculties and skeletal, ocular and neurological problems. Cardiac
features are present in the majority of individuals, with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) occurring in approximately2 in 3. Typically, CS arises de novo on the paternal allele. However,
there are two previous reports of inheritance from parents with
heterozygous germline HRAS alterations.
We present a family who share a rarely observed pathogenic
variant in HRAS (NM_005343.2; c.173C>T, p.(Thr58Ile)). This has
been reported in four other individuals previously, often in
association with an attenuated phenotype. Our proband has short
stature, feeding and learning dif ﬁculties, a borderline long QT and
right-sided ptosis. He has distinctive features consistent with a
Rasopathy, but not typical of CS. There is a variable phenotype in
the family. The proband ’s father has longstanding HCM, a dilated
aortic root and atrial ﬁbrillation. The proband ’s paternal uncle has
HCM and previously had a normal HCM gene panel through his
Cardiology team. Cascade testing in the family has identi ﬁed the
c.173C>T p.(Thr58Ile) variant in the proband ’s father, uncle and
cousin.
This report expands the phenotype caused by c.173C>T
missense variants. It emphasises that HRAS variants should be
considered in individuals with a broad phenotype, includingindividuals with unexplained and apparently isolated hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. It also reinforces the importance of familial
testing despite the high de novo mutation rate, to enable
appropriate access to screening, particularly cardiac screening.
E. Sloper: None. O. Murch: None. A. Kamath: None.
P11.038.D A case of moyamoya disease in a child with Costello
syndrome: Expanding phenotype and proposed genotype-
phenotype correlation
Norah Alsaleh1, Abdulaziz AlGhamdi2, Amal Alhashem1,3, Abdullah
M Alhashem4, Fowzan S Alkuraya5,3
1Division of Genetics and Metabolic Medicine, Department of
Pediatric, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatric, Prince
Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Division of Neuroradiology, Department of
Radiology, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,5Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic
Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh,Saudi Arabia.
Background: Costello syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant
RASopathy typically caused by de novo variants in HRAS .I ti s
characterized by coarse facial features, central nervous system
involvement and multiple congenital anomalies including con-
genital heart defects and skeletal anomalies.CNS anomalies thathave been reported include cerebral atrophy, ventriculomegaly,hydrocephalus and progressive posterior fossa crowding.Moya-
moya disease is a progressive cerebral angiopathy characterized
by bilateral internal carotid artery stenosis and abnormal collateralvessels resemble a ‘puff of smoke ’(moyamoya) on angiogram.
Several inherited disorders have been associated with increased
risk for development of moyamoya disease including the twoRASopathies neuro ﬁbromatosis and Noonan syndrome. Only two
cases of Costello syndrome have been reported with moyamoya
disease. However, one lacked molecular con ﬁrmation and theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
335
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608other had limited clinical and molecular information.Case Study:
We report a 13-year-old female with history of psychomotor delay
most signi ﬁcantly speech, focal epilepsy, congenital heart disease,
myopia, thin sparse hair with brittle nails, relative macrocephaly,short stature and coarse facial features. Chromosomal microarraywas normal. MRA brain revealed moyamoya disease.
Result: A previously described disease-causing variant in the
HRAS gene consistent with the diagnosis of Costello syndrome
was detected on whole exome sequencing.
Conclusion: Here we report the ﬁrst case of a clinically and
molecularly con ﬁrmed Costello syndrome presented with moya-
moya disease. We propose a genotype-phenotype correlationrelated to Gly13Cys variant.
N. Alsaleh: None. A. AlGhamdi: None. A. Alhashem: None. A.
Alhashem: None. F. Alkuraya: None.
P11.039.A Allelic heterogeneity and clinical polymorphism in
patients with Cowden syndrome
Varvara A. Galkina
1, Lyudmila A. Bessonova1, Tatyana A.
Vasilyeva1, Rena A. Zinchenko1,2
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2N.A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The syndromes of multiple congenital malformations (MVP) are a
large group of clinical forms of hereditary diseases. More than
3000 associated variants have been described. Currently, the
concept of MVP syndromes is de ﬁned as " a stable combination of
two or more non-induced by each other malformations indifferent systems ”. 4 patients from 3 unrelated families were
consulted to clarify the diagnosis. Only one patient had a guiding
diagnosis of Cowden syndrome. The rest of the patients haddifferent guiding diagnoses, Sotos syndrome (patient A), Lermitt-
Duclos syndrome (C), psycho-speech development disorder with
convulsive syndrome (B), macrocephaly (D). Sanger sequencingrevealed de novo pathogenic variant c.830C>A in exon 8 in thePTEN gene in patient D. Sequencing of "hereditary nonsyndromal
mental retardation" genes panel by NGS method found mutations,
c.445_450delCAAGASinsGGT in exon 5 of the PTEN gene in patientA in heterozygous state, the variant arose de novo, c.388C> inexon 5 of the PTEN gene in heterozygous state in patient B, it was
inherited from his affected mother, c.59delG in exon 1 of the PTEN
gene in heterozygous state in patient С, the variant arose de novo.
Perhaps, allelic heterogeneity in Cowden syndrome determines
the clinical polymorphism of the disease, and the molecular
genetic analysis by NGS allows to clarify the diagnosis and tocounsel affected families on the possibilities of prenatal diagnosisand risk of fetus pathology. Research was partially supported by
RSF grant №17-15-01051 and within the state task of the Ministry
of education and science of Russia.
V.A. Galkina: None. L.A. Bessonova: None. T.A. Vasilyeva:
None. R.A. Zinchenko: None.
P11.041.C Importance of X-rays diagnostic for targeted
molecular genetic analysis: Case report of rare craniometa-
physeal dysplasia
Natalie Friedova
1,2,3, Alice Baxova1, Antonin Sipek Jr.1,2,4, Blanka
Chylikova1, Renata Formankova5, Eva Fronkova5, Frantisek Liska1
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague,Czech Republic,2Department of Medical Genetics, ThomayerUniversity Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,3Internal Department,
Third Faculty of Medicine and Thomayer Faculty Hospital, Charles
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic,4Institute of Medical
Genetics, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague,Prague, Czech Republic,5Department of Paediatric Haematology and
Oncology, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague
and Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background: Autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia
(AD-CMD) is a rare condition de ﬁned by the occurrence of
progressive diffuse hyperostosis of cranial bones with manifesta-
tion as a broad nasal bridge, widely spaced eyes, paranasalbossing and prominent mandible. Clinical diagnosis is based onradiographic ﬁndings and phenotypic features. ANKH is known to
be the only gene associated with AD-CMD so far. We present a
case of a 17-months boy with macrodolichocephaly, hypertelor-ism, paranasal thickening and gingival hypertrophy, coming from
the physiological gravidity.
Methods: The patient was referred with a presumed diagnosis
of osteopetrosis for genetic examination. Physical examination,X-ray and DNA analysis were performed. All exons and ﬂanking
intron regions (min. 10 bp) of ANKH were ampli ﬁed by PCR and
directly sequenced using Sanger method. The presence of thedeletion variant was also supported by detection of a correspond-ing electrophoretic mobility shift using polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis.
Results: X-ray of the skull showed diffuse sclerotization in the
area of facial skeleton and skull base. On X-rays of limbs club-
shaped enlargement of the metaphysis of the distal femur and the
proximal tibia were described. The DNA analysis showed thatpatient is a heterozygous carrier of the CTC deletion in exon 9 ofthe ANKH gene, resulting in a serine deletion at position 375
(rs121908406_c.1122-4delCTC_p.Ser375del). This mutation has
been already described in patients with CMD.
Conclusion: We present a case report of successful molecular
genetic diagnosis of rare CMD, that shows the important role of
X-ray diagnosis in targeted molecular genetic diagnosis of skeletal
dysplasia.
N. Friedova: None. A. Baxova: None. A. Sipek Jr.: None. B.
Chylikova: None. R. Formankova: None. E. Fronkova: None. F.
Liska: None.
P11.042.D Small deletion in the CREBBP gene detected in a
fetus with short long bones, abducted thumbs and nuchaledema
Silvia Sera ﬁm
1, Barbara Marques1, Sonia Pedro1, Ana R. Tarelho1,
Cristina Ferreira1, Laurentino Simao1, Cristina Alves1, Marisa Silva1,
Jose Furtado1, Sara Rangel1, Ricardo Peliano1, Neuza Silva1,
Filomena Brito1, Ines Carvalho2, Ana Bernardo2, Alvaro Cohen2,
Hildeberto Correia1
1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Departamento de
Genética, Unidade de Citogenética, Lisboa, Portugal,2Maternidade
Alfredo da Costa, Lisboa, Portugal.
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is an extremely rare auto-
somal dominant genetic disease, with an estimated prevalence
of one case per 100,000-125,000 live births and it´s not usually
diagnosed by prenatal ultrasoun d. Nevertheless, pregnancies
with ultrasound abnor malities are more likely to have a fetus
affected by a genetic alteration, and chromosomal microarray
analysis (CMA) is still the recommended genetic test in useallowing the identi ﬁcation of small pathogenic deletions/
duplications. Here we report a fetus referred for prenatal
diagnosis due to an increased nuchal translucency in the 1st-Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
336
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608trimester, and nuchal edema, abducted thumbs and short long
bones, in the 2nd-trimester ultr asound. Affymetrix Cytoscan 750
CMA revealed a 128 Kb interstiti al deletion at 16p13.3, in a male
fetus: arr[GRCh37] 16p13.3 (3840720_3969211)x1. The deletion
includes the ﬁrst four exons of CREBBP . Pathogenic mutations in
CREBBP or deletions in the 16p13.3 region including CREBBP are
causal for RSTS. Patients with RSTS mainly exhibit distinctive
facial features, broad and often angulated thumbs and halluces,intellectual disability, and po stnatal growth retardation. The
syndrome is almost always sporadic, and after parental analysis
this deletion was shown to be de novo. After genetic counseling
the parents opted to terminate the pregnancy. Even ifultrasound abnormalities n ot always suggest a speci ﬁcs y n -
drome, after a pathogenic CNV is identi ﬁed a correlation may be
possible. In this case the abducted thumbs have been previously
observed in patients and the short long bones may already
reﬂect the short stature often typical only in adulthood,
s u g g e s t i n gi tc a nb em o r ec o m m o np r e n a t a l l y .
S. Sera ﬁm:None. B. Marques: None. S. Pedro: None. A.R.
Tarelho: None. C. Ferreira: None. L. Simao: None. C. Alves: None.
M. Silva: None. J. Furtado: None. S. Rangel: None. R. Peliano:
None. N. Silva: None. F. Brito: None. I. Carvalho: None. A.
Bernardo: None. A. Cohen: None. H. Correia: None.
P11.043.A Diet nutrition of patients with mitochondrial
dysfunctions against the background of persistent microbialand viral infections
Olena Grechanina
Interregional Specialized Medical Genetic Center - Center of Rare
(Orphan) Diseases, Kharkiv, Ukraine.
Рurpose: to study the effect of complex treatment of mitochon-
drial dysfunction using cofactor-vitamin and dietary therapy,
rehabilitation.
Materials and methods : over the past 10 years, 1754 patients
with mitochondrial dysfunction. T he genetic epidemiology of mtDNA
haplotypes was studied in the population and patients with clinically
established diagnosis of MtD. Among 236 examined patients, 36.5%
have mitochondrial syndromes (M ERRF, MELAS, NARP, Leigh,Leber,
Kearns-Sayre, Fahr) and mtDNA polymorphisms (tRNA gene-lysine,mutations 8836A/G (met/val), 8472C/T(pro/leu2), 8614T/C; tRNA
gene-leucine, mutations 3624A/G , 3705G/A; full sequence - mtDNA,
mutations 1888G/A, 2706A/G, 8697G/A, 8860G(thr/ala), 11251A/G,11719G/A, 11812A/G, 14687A/G, 14766C/T, 14905G/A, 15326A/G,
15452C/A, 15607A/G, 15928G/A). Persistent viral and microbial
infections were detected in 73% of patients.
Results : clinical and genetic features of mtDNA polymorphism
carriers were characterized by multiple organisms, clinical poly-
morphisms, predominant involvement of energotropic organs. It
was suggested that in ﬂuence of mtDNA polymorphisms on MtD
expression occurs as a result of adaptive role replacement by apathogenic one, due to altered methylation. Cofactor-vitamin and
dietary therapy was used. An individual diet was developed, the
nature of changes in biomarkers con ﬁrming the disorder (level of
amino acids, organic acids, trace elements, carbohydrates, metals,vitamins), which provided evidence of treatment, constant
monitoring of specialists. The results were highly effective (up to
83%). A new understanding of the integrated energy network ofcells gives new understanding of the need for an integrated
approach to restore cellular energy (D.Wolles). Conclution :W e
consider that problem solution is associated with trinity realizationof genome, microbiome and virome, external environment,epigenetic status interaction.O. Grechanina: None.
P11.044.B A rare duplication in 8p11 region
Marta Souto
1, Pedro Botelho1, Márcia Martins2, Osvaldo Moutinho3,
Rosário Pinto Leite1
1Laboratório de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto
Douro, Vila Real, Portugal,2Consulta de Genética, Centro Hospitalar
de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal,3Serviço de
Ginecologia/Obstetrícia, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e AltoDouro, Vila Real, Portugal.
Introduction: The partial duplication of the short (p) arm of
chromosome 8 is a rare syndrome. Clinical manifestations varyfrom healthy to several degrees of mental retardation, multiplecongenital anomalies - like hypotonia, heart defects, brain
malformations (Dandy-Walker syndrome, dilation of the third
ventricle and agenesis of the corpus callosum) and facialdysmor ﬁsm. The authors presented a rare duplication involving
8p11 region. Clinical Report: 12 years old girl with mental
retardation and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Cytogenetics
analysis revealed extra material on the short arm of chromosome8. Parents karyotype were normal. Fluorescence in situ hybridiza-
tion (FISH) technique identi ﬁed the extra material as chromosome
8. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) techniquerevealed a duplication of 8p11.23 to 8p11.1. The segmentduplicated had 6.4 Mbp and involved 62 genes. The karyotype
was 46,XX,dup(8)(p11.23p11.1). arr 8p11.23p11.1 (37,348,105-
43,754,516)x3.
Discussion: The present case has a 6.4Mb duplication in
8p11.23p11.1 region. The phenotypic characteristic observed in
the girl included mental retardation and agenesis of the corpus
callosum, which are consistent with partial trisomy 8p phenotype.There are only ten cases described with, complete or partially,
8p11.23p11.1 region duplication, most of them higher than 20Mb
and consequently with more severe clinical manifestations.
Conclusion: Every new case of a rare chromosomal alteration
should be reported in order to obtain a more precise genotype/
phenotype correlation, improving risk evaluation and genetic
counselling.
M. Souto: None. P. Botelho: None. M. Martins: None. O.
Moutinho: None. R. Pinto Leite: None.
P11.045.C New case of Dyskeratosis congenita 4 mimicking
Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome with novel TERT gene
mutation
Ece Çepni
1, Sahin Avci2, N. Bilge Satk ın2, Hülya Kayserili1,2,3
1Institute of Health Sciences, Koç University School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey,2Diagnostic Center for Genetic Diseases, Koç
University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,3Medical Genetics Department,
Koç University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Dyskeratosis congenita(DC) is a rare, multisystemic telomere
biology disorder classically characterized by a triad of mucocuta-
neous features: abnormal skin pigmentation, oral leucoplakia, nail
dysplasia; accompanied by various somatic ﬁndings. Bone marrow
failure, pulmonary disease and predisposition to malignancy arethe primary causes of mortality. We here report a consanguineous
DC family, displaying autosomal recessive inheritance. Index, 9-
month-old girl, was consulted due to growth retardation ofantenatal onset with delayed achievement of developmentalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
337
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608milestones. She had microcephaly, hypoplastic labia minora, mild
facial dysmorphism comprising bitemporal narrowing, strabismus,
prognathism(mild), prominent nasal root(mild), smooth philtrum
and low-set ears. The family had undergone genetic counselingbut deferred molecular testing at that moment. At 22 months, shepresented immunode ﬁciency, complicated with recurrent infec-
tions/intractable diarrhea and anemia. Physical examination
showed oral leukoplakia, thin/sparse hair, lacy reticular hyperpig-mentation on left axillary region and right hemithorax; cranial MRIshowed cerebellar hypoplasia. WES revealed a homozygous
missense variant in the reverse transcriptase domain of the TERT
gene. Short relative telomere length(TL), measured by ﬂow-FISH,
was compatible with infancy-onset short telomere syndrome.Detailed pedigree analysis showed no clinical evidence of DC
except premature hair graying, anemia and cancer in blood
relatives across three generations. Identi ﬁcation of heterozygous
TERT mutation and short TL in extended family members,
segregating with the phenotype, highlighted disease anticipation
and further con ﬁrmed the diagnosis of DC. Our ﬁndings expand
the genotype-phenotype correlation of DC; thus underline theimportance of integrating clinical information, molecular data and
TL to facilitate the recognition of the etiopathogenesis of telomere
syndromes.
E. Çepni: None. S. Avci: None. N. Satk ın:None. H. Kayserili:
None.
P11.046.D Detection of 3p25 microdeletion syndrome in the
Macedonian patient with signi ﬁcant psychomotor retardation
Violeta Anastasovska
1, Elena Sukarova-Angelovska1, Dragica
Nestoroska1, Nikolina Zdraveska2, Gordana Ilieva1, Milica Pesevsa1,
Ivana Stojanova3
1Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Department of
Neonatology, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and MethodiusUniversity in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, TheFormer Yugoslav Republic of,
3In vitro Fertilization and Andrology
Laboratory, University Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ss. Cyril
and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje,Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: The array Comparative Genomic Hybridization
(aCGH) is a ﬁrst tier diagnostic tool for detection of sub-
microscopic genomic changes and pathogenic copy number
variants (CNVs) in the patients with pathological conditions and
wideranging phenotypes.
Materials and Methods: aCGH was performed in a 7.5-year-old
female Macedonian patient with clinical signs of dysmorphia and
signi ﬁcant developmental delay using the Affymetrix ®CytoScanTM
750K Array (Applied Biosystems), that comprises 550 k non-
polymorphic and 200 k SNP markers. The data was analysed usingChromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) Software (v4.0).
Results: The child was referred for further evaluation on 8th
postnatal day because of dysmorphic features. She was born smallfor gestational age, after 39 weeks of gestation with a birth weightof 2340g and birth length of 45cm. Hypertelorism and anti-
mongoloid eye slant, micrognathism, webbed neck, pyelonidal
cyst and preaxial polydactily both on the left foot and right handwere noticed. During the follow up the child had several
hospitalizations because of failure to thrive requiring a tube
feeding, anemia and signi ﬁcant psychomotor retardation. The
karyotype was normal (46,XX). aCGH analysis showed deletion of3,243 segment on 3p25.3 chromosome (30 OMIM genes) classi ﬁed
as pathogenic according to aDGV, ClinVar and OMIM databases.The genes, SETD5, SLC6A1 and SLC6A11, have been proposed as
the main candidates that when deleted contribute to the key
features associated with 3p25 deletion syndrome.
Conclusions: The aCGH analysis as a widely accepted tool that
supplements conventional karyotyping allowed genetic diagnosisof our patient with signi ﬁcant psychomotor retardation.
V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. D.
Nestoroska: None. N. Zdraveska: None. G. Ilieva: None. M.
Pesevsa: None. I. Stojanova: None.
P11.047.A Evaluation of the diagnostic rate in children with
dysmorphic features - one genetic center experience
Milena Stoyanova
1,2, Mari Hachmeriyan1,2, Mariya Levkova1,2,
Valentina Miteva1,2, Lyudmila Angelova1
1Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria,2University Hospital Saint
Marina, Varna, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Dysmorphic features/multiple congenital anomalies
in children are common indication for genetic counseling. In somepatients the cause is a recognizable syndrome, but in most casesthe initial diagnosis is unclear, the process is time-consuming and
difﬁcult. Moreover, the condition often cannot be con ﬁrmed
etiologically. The aim of the study is to summarize our experiencein establishing the diagnoses in dysmorphic children.
Materials and methods: The study includes 706 pediatric
patients (0-18 years), referred to the Genetics Unit of theUniversity Hospital Saint Marina, Varna for a period of ﬁve years
(2015-2019). Clinical phenotyping, imaging examinations, appro-
priate genetic and metabolic investigations were offered to
children with dysmorphic features/ multiple congenital anomalies.Specialized computer programs/dysmorphology databases wereapplied.
Results: 336 out of 706 (47.5%) consulted children (mean age
3.9 years) with multiple congenital anomalies with or withoutdevelopmental delay were suspected of malformative/dysmorphic
syndrome. Karyotyping, molecular genetic or metabolic tests were
performed in 306 (92%) children ( ≥2 genetic tests were
appropriately applied to 104 patients). Based on these analyses,121(36%) children were genetically diagnosed: 70 patients (25%)
with chromosomal pathology, 32 (9.5%) with single-gene pathol-
ogy and 19 (5.6%) with microdeletion/microduplication disorder.Other 41(12%) children were clinically diagnosed based onspeci ﬁc phenotype.
Conclusion: The role of the medical geneticist in achieving an
accurate diagnosis among children with dysmorphic features isessential. Once con ﬁrmed, it could affect the disease manage-
ment, as well as provide more personalized approach and
contribute families with proper evaluation of the recurrence risk.
M. Stoyanova: None. M. Hachmeriyan: None. M. Levkova:
None. V. Miteva: None. L. Angelova: None.
P11.048.B A new heterozygous c.730T>A, p.(Cys244Ser)
variant in TP63 associated with severe hydronephrosis and
volar nails
Mariana Tomásio Neves , Patricia Dias, Ana B. Sousa
CHULN - Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction: TP63 -related pathologies are a group of autosomal
dominant phenotypes with variable features of ectodermal
dysplasia, distal limb malformations/dysplasia and lip/palate clefts.
These can occur as distinct syndromes (AEC, ADULT, EEC3, LMS) orhas isolated malformations (split-hand/foot malformation andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
338
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608isolated cleft lip/ palate). Although these conditions exhibit
variable expressivity, incomplete penetrance and clinical overlap,
some genotype-phenotype correlations have been described. We
report a case of EEC3 syndrome with minor hand/foot anomaliesand severe prenatal hydronephrosis associated with a new TP63
variant. Case report: A 3-month-old girl, who was diagnosed with
severe bilateral hydronephrosis at 15 weeks of gestation,
presented post-natally with cleft palate, bilateral volar nails oftheﬁfthﬁnger and second toe and lacrimal duct obstruction. Left
ureterostomy and right ureter endoscopic dilation were per-
formed at 2 months. On follow-up, subtle ectodermal dysplasia
was noticed. Sequencing of TP63 (NM_003722.4) identi ﬁed a
heterozygous c.730T>A, p.(Cys244Ser) variant, located in amutational hot-spot in the DNA binding domain.
Discussion: This patient ’s phenotype is best classi ﬁed as EEC3
syndrome. Volar nails are a peculiar minor anomaly and constitutean important clue to this speci ﬁc diagnosis. This case highlights
the association of severe congenital genitourinary malformations
with EEC3 syndrome, a feature not described in other TP63 -related
pathologies. Several patients carrying a variant in the adjacent 243codon are published presenting EEC3 (predominantly) and ADULT
phenotypes. On follow-up, it will be interesting to check whether
this patient develops features of ADULT syndrome, namely breasthypoplasia and skin freckling.
M.T. Neves: None. P. Dias: None. A.B. Sousa: None.
P11.049.C Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly due
to EFTUD2 gene mutation. Expanding phenotypic spectrum
with ﬁrst prenatal case reported
Soﬁa Ourani
1, Elisabeth Gabau2, Nuria Capdevilla2, Miriam Guitart3,
Neus Baena3, Anna Ruiz3
1Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,
2Paediatric Unit, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, Institut d ’Investiga-
ció i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain,3Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre
Diagnòstic, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, Institut d ’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly
(MFDM) is a multiple malformation syndrome due to haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency of EFTUD2 gene. Major clinical characteristics include malar
and mandibular hypoplasia, variable intellectual disability, externalear malformations, and hearing loss mainly conductive. Associated
craniofacial malformations include cleft palate, choanal atresia,
zygomatic arch cleft and facial asymmetry. Other ﬁndings
reported are cardiac anomalies, thumb anomalies, esophagealatresia, short stature, spine anomalies.
Material and methods: We present the phenotype and genetic
ﬁndings of three unrelated patients with MFDM con ﬁrmed by
EFTUD2 mutations. Case 1: girl of healthy nonconsanguineousparents delivered at 35 +5weeks of gestation and diagnosed with
esophageal atresia type I, macroglossia, hemifacial microsomia,
cleft palate, muscular ventricular septal defect, severe globaldevelopmental delay. Case 2: eight month toddler asked forgenetic evaluation for antecedents of prenatal polyhydramnios,
esophageal atresia type III, cleft palate and moderate develop-
mental delay. Case 3: fetus of pregnancy interrupted at 19+4weeks of gestational age for ultrasound ﬁndings of hydro-
cephalus, cerebellum hypoplasia, retrognathia, lumbar lordosis,
varus feet. Autopsy con ﬁrmed ecographic ﬁndings and addition-
ally revealed microstomia, tongue agenesis and fusion of ﬁve
thoracic vertebras, corpus callosum agenesis, esophageal atresia
type III. Three different pathogenic mutations in EFTUD2 genewere found, in cases 1 and 2 through targeted gene sequence and
in case 3 through exome sequence.
Conclusion: Expanding the clinical heterogeneity of MFDM and
its connection with major congenital defects. Additionally, wereport the ﬁrst prenatal case diagnosed with the disease and
clinical ﬁndings not yet described in the phenotypic spectrum.
S. Ourani: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevilla: None. M.
Guitart: None. N. Baena: None. A. Ruiz: None.
P11.050.D High prevalence of gene dosage anomalies in
patients with Ellis Van Creveld syndrome
FRANCESCA PICECI-SPARASCIO
1,2, Isabella Torrente1, Maria Cecilia
D’Asdia1, Valentina Guida1, Federica Consoli1, Annamaria Onori1,
Barbara Torres1, Laura Bernardini1, Tommaso Mazza3, Paolo
Versacci4, Maria Cristina DiGilio5, Bruno Marino4, Alessandro De
Luca1
1Medical Genetics Division, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,2Department of Experi-
mental Medicine, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy,3Laboratory of
Bioinformatics, Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, IRCCS, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,4Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza
University, ROMA, Italy,5Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù
Children ’s Hospital and Research Institute, IRCCS, ROMA, Italy.
Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome (EvC) is a rare autosomal recessive
skeletal ciliopathy presenting with postaxial polydactyly, ectoder-mal dysplasia and congenital heart disease. EvC is due to biallelic
mutations in EVC orEVC2 . We scanned for mutations by Next-
Generation-Sequencing (NGS) the EVC and EVC2 genes in a cohort
of 99 suspected EvC individuals. Analysis identi ﬁed the cause of
the disease in 49 patients (49%). 33/49 (67%) were mutated in EVC
and 16/49 (33%) in EVC2 . Mutation-negative patients underwent
NGS analysis using an extended ciliary targeted panel. Analysisallowed to genetically-characterizing additional 14 patients, found
to be mutated in ciliary genes related to skeletal ciliopathies other
than EvC. To search for gene-dosage anomalies, the remaining 36mutation-negative patients were further tested by MultiplexLigation-Dependent Probe Ampli ﬁcation (MLPA), Chromosomal
Microarray (CMA), or both. MLPA/CMA analysis identi ﬁed com-
pound heterozygous or homozygous deletions in 9 patients. Inparticular, 6 had deletions in EVC and 3 in EVC2 . Of note, two EVC
recurrent deletions were identi ﬁed, affecting 4 and two patients
respectively. Present study shows that gene-dosage anomalies
represent a signi ﬁcant proportion (approximately 15%) of the EVC/
EVC2 mutation spectrum. Considering the clinical overlapping
between skeletal ciliopathies, and the prevalence of EVC/EVC2
gene-dosage anomalies, we recommend a two-tier diagnosticapproach integrating a primary search for point mutations by aciliary targeted NGS analysis, followed by a quantitative assay
(MLPA/CMA), waiting for reliable pipelines for the detection of
intragenic CNVs throughout NGS technologies.This research wasfunded by the Italian Ministry of Health, grant numbers RC2019/RC2020
F. Piceci-sparascio: None. I. Torrente: None. M. D ’Asdia: None.
V. Guida: None. F. Consoli: None. A. Onori: None. B. Torres:
None. L. Bernardini: None. T. Mazza: None. P. Versacci: None. M.
DiGilio: None. B. Marino: None. A. De Luca: None.
P11.051.A A case of ESCO2 spectrum disorder without limb
reduction defects
Sofía M. Siccha-Arancibia
1,2, María Palomares-Bralo1,3, Marta
Pacio-Miguez1, Gloria Lopez-Sobrino2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jimenez1,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
339
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ángela del Pozo1,3, Elena Mansilla1,3,4, Fé García-Santiago1,3,4, Sixto
García-Miñaúr1,3, Fernando Santos-Simarro1,3,4
1Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Department of Pediatrics,
Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain,3Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, U753), Instituto
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,4Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit
(UMDE) and ERN BOND, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid,Spain.
Introduction: Roberts syndrome (MIM 268300) at the severe end
and SC phocomelia syndrome (MIM 269000) at the mildest endbelong to the RBS/SC or ESCO2 (establishment of cohesion1
homolog 2) spectrum disorder, a rare limb reduction defect
syndrome, caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the ESCO2
gene. ESCO2 encodes an essential protein that establishes the
sister chromatid cohesion during S phase, therefore the premature
centromere separation (PCS)/heterochromatin repulsion (HR) is atypical cytogenetic anomaly of the condition. Mortality is highamong the severely affected patients, while SC phocomelia
individuals usually survive to adulthood. Phocomelia is universally
described. Interestingly, there is one case published, with mildclinical features and no limb reduction abnormalities (Gogh et al.,2010). We report a case of an 8-year-old girl with mild dysmorphic
facial features and no major structural defects.
Materials and Methods: We performed a NGS custom panel
containing 1663 genes involved in common genetic disorders (RDseq (R) v6.0), and a karyotype using G- and C-banding techniques.
Results: Our patient shows limb rhizomelic shortening and a
progressive brain leukopathy with normal neurologic examination.We found a homozygous ESCO2 variant (NM_001017420.2:
c.307_311del;p.Lys103Glufs*2), classi ﬁed as pathogenic, following
ACMG guidelines (Richards et al., 2015). Her consanguineous
parents were both heterozygous for the variant. The patient ’s
karyotype con ﬁrmed premature centromere separation (PCS)/
heterochromatin repulsion (HR).
Conclusions: Our case supports a wider clinical spectrum of
manifestations in RBS/SC spectrum, highlighting that phocomeliamight not be universally present. In addition, it illustrates the
importance of cytogenetics in the diagnosis of this disorder.
S.M. Siccha-Arancibia: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M.
Pacio-Miguez: None. G. Lopez-Sobrino: None. C. Rodríguez-
Jimenez: None. Á. del Pozo: None. E. Mansilla: None. F. García-
Santiago: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. F. Santos-Simarro:
None.
P11.052.B Getting the most out of Exome sequencing data
Javier López , María José Roca, Laura González, Daniel Trujillano,
Cristina Camprubí, Irina Royo, Xavier Pinasa, Luisa Aparicio, Raquel
Nava, Albert Torrents
Reference Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Exome sequencing (WES) currently is a solid
diagnostic tool for heterogeneous genetic diseases. However, apartial and insuf ﬁcient analysis of WES data could lead to
misdiagnoses. We compiled 13 cases with previous negative
WES results, in which a thorough reanalysis of the data yieldednew candidate genes with diagnostic potential.
Materials-and-Methods: Our cohort included 300 patients with
syndromic neurodevelopmental abnormalities. WES analyses were
guided by HPO terms and custom gene panels based on literature.For those inconclusive results, a secondary and more objectiveinspection was performed.Results: Based on thorough reanalysis of existing WES data, we
identi ﬁed six variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) in PHF12,
SYNPO2L, KCNJ16 and XKR6 genes that could explain the patients´
phenotype; three pathogenic variants in SCN2A ,DPYS and MVK
related to phenotypes not described for them until now; twopathogenic variants in BBS1/ALG8 and POGZ/TRIO
genes that could
explain a particular mixed phenotype of two patients. Finally, we
report ﬁve novel pathogenic variants in SMARCA2, MECP2, KRT14,
NOTCH3 and SHANK3 , not present in any database.
Conclusions: The results highlight the clinical diagnostics
potential of a thorough reanalysis of previously negative WES
cases. Based on the identi ﬁcation of new candidate genes, the
increase of phenotypic spectrum of the diseases diagnosed (evenreporting cases with a dual diagnosis) and the ﬁnding of novel
pathogenic variants, in 5% of cases, we recommend going beyond
the basic guided genetic analysis for HPO terms, especially incases with a strong suspicion of an underlying genetic disease and
a previous inconclusive WES result.
J. López: None. M. Roca: None. L. González: None. D.
Trujillano: None. C. Camprubí: None. I. Royo: None. X. Pinasa:
None. L. Aparicio: None. R. Nava: None. A. Torrents: None.
P11.054.D The Wales Infants ’and childreN ’s Genome Service ’
(WINGS): Diagnostic rapid whole genome sequencing for
unwell children with a suspected rare genetic diagnosis
Emily Sloper, Oliver Murch , Jana Jezkova, Megan Fealey, Joseph
Halstead, Thomas Stoneman, Elle McNeil, Angharad Williams,
Michelle Wood, Katherine Burke, Siva Oruganti, Jennifer Calvert,Hywel Williams, Caroline Pottinger, Francis H. Sansbury, Sian M.Morgan, Sian Corrin
All Wales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
A signi ﬁcant proportion of unwell neonates and children have an
underlying, rare genetic diagnosis. Rapid whole genome sequen-
cing (rWGS) has a positive impact on care by reducing the needfor multiple diagnostic tests and facilitating treatment decisions. Itmay also reduce the length of time infants and children require
intensive care and prevent repeat inpatient admissions.
In 2019, the All Wales Medical Genomics Service formed a
multidisciplinary working group to establish a rWGS service foracutely unwell infants and children. The group consisted of
intensive care clinicians, geneticists and laboratory staff. A
diagnostic pipeline was developed using previous research resultsand laboratory testing procedures were validated. Variants are
interpreted and reported by applying the latest ACGS/ACMG
guidelines. In April 2020, the ‘Wales Infants ’and childreN ’s
Genome Service ’(WINGS) was launched.
WINGS is the ﬁrst commissioned, diagnostic rWGS service for
acutely unwell children in the UK National Health Service. Patients
are eligible if a monogenic cause for their illness is suspected, atrio structure is available, and a timely genetic diagnosis mightalter clinical management.
Fourteen families have completed testing to date. Pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 5 probands.
Additionally, a ‘hot’variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance in a candidate
gene was reported in another patient. Mean time to reporting was
11 calendar days (range 6-26 days).
In summary, we have introduced the UK ’sﬁrst national
diagnostic rWGS service for acutely unwell children. We will
present early service outcomes and the impact from a laboratory
and clinical perspective.
E. Sloper: None. O. Murch: None. J. Jezkova: None. M. Fealey:
None. J. Halstead: None. T. Stoneman: None. E. McNeil: None. A.
Williams: None. M. Wood: None. K. Burke: None. S. Oruganti:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
340
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608None. J. Calvert: None. H. Williams: None. C. Pottinger: None. F.
H. Sansbury: None. S.M. Morgan: None. S. Corrin: None.
P11.055.A Full penetrance of craniofacial midline traits in a
large multigenerational family with a nonsense GLI2 variant
and highly variable phenotypic expression
Francisco J. Rodríguez-Contreras1,2, Puri ﬁcación Ros-Pérez3,F eA .
García Santiago1, Elena Vallespín1,4, Ángela Del Pozo1,5, Mario Solís-
López1, Angel Campos-Barros1,4
1INGEMM, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
2Centro de Salud Galapagar, Galapagar, Madrid, Spain,3Hospital
Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain,4CIBER
de Enfermedades Raras (U753), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,5CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras (U753), Madrid, Spain.
GLI2 encodes a transcription factor involved in the Sonic Hedge-
hog signaling pathway which plays a key role in pituitary
development. Loss of function pathogenic GLI2 variants have
been implicated in the etiology of congenital hypopituitarismspectrum and Culler-Jones syndrome (MIM#615849) with incom-plete penetrance and a highly variable clinical expression. Aim: To
identify common phenotypic traits, especially midline craniofacial
anomalies (hypotelorism and palate alterations), in a family withmultiple members presenting with a pathogenic heterozygous
nonsense GLI2 variant, NM_005270.4:c.3676C>T, p.(Arg1226*),
detected in a proband with combined pituitary hormonedeﬁciency (CPHD).
Methods: Targeted NGS analysis (custom panel HIPOPIT_V3;
310 genes) of three generations family members (n =12).
Phenotypic evaluation by physical examination and/or medicalrecords review. Evaluation of internal, external and interpupillaryinterchantal distances (by transparent ruler and comparison with
reference tables) and palate (by direct visual examination and on
images).
Results: 8 out of 12 family members presented the pathogenic
GLI2 variant. Although they presented with highly variable
phenotypic features, including holoprosencephaly (unborn fetus),CPHD (index case), postaxial polydactyly (grandfather, grand-uncle), syndactyly (proband sisters), or congenital renal dysplasias,
all 8 shared common midline craniofacial defects, such as
decreased inner- and/or outer interchantal distance and higharched or narrow palate.
Conclusions: Loss-of-function GLI2 mutations are characterized
by highly variable expressivity, which suggests the oligomeric
contribution of additional genetic determinants. In contrast tophenotypic traits such as polydactyly and hypopituitarism, which
show incomplete penetrance, midline craniofacial anomalies seem
to segregate with complete penetrance, with variable severity,among the examined family members. GRANT: PI18/00402 ISCIII
F.J. Rodríguez-Contreras: None. P. Ros-Pérez: None. F.A.
García Santiago: None. E. Vallespín: None. Á. Del Pozo: None.
M. Solís-López: None. A. Campos-Barros: None.
P11.056.B Familial Grange syndrome: 1st case report of
YY1AP1 homozygous deletion
Eléonore Viora-Dupont
1, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon1,2, Martin
Chevarin2, Olivier Patat3, Marjolaine Willems4, Juliette Albuisson1,
Ange-Line Bruel2, Marion Aubert-Mucca3, Michel Galinier5,6,7, Romain
Itier5, Amélie Piton8, Bénédicte Gerard9, Patrick Callier2, Christel
Thauvin1,2, Christophe Philippe2, Laurence Faivre1,2, Antonio
Vitobello21Genetics Department and Reference Center for Developmental
Disorders and Malformative Syndromes for East France, Dijon
University Hospital, Dijon, France,2Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Faculty
of Health Sciences, University of Burgundy and Franche-Comté,Dijon, France,3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Toulouse, France,
Toulouse, France,4Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies
Rares et Médecine Personnalisée, Univer Montpellier, CHU de
Montpellier, CLAD ASOOR Montpellier, Montpellier, France,5Fédéra-
tion des Services de Cardiologie, CHU Toulouse-Rangueil, Toulouse,France,6UMR UT3 CNRS 5288 Evolutionary Medicine, Obesity and
heart failure: molecular and clinical investigations. INI-CRCT F-CRIN,
GREAT Networks, Toulouse, France,7Université Paul Sabatier-
Toulouse III; Faculté de Médecine, Toulouse, France,8Unité de
Génétique Moléculaire, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg,
France,9Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Génétique
Médicale d ’Alsace, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France.
Grange syndrome (GRNG - MIM#135580) is a rare recessive
disorder associating variable features including diffuse vascularstenoses, brachysyndactyly and osteopenia with increased bone
fragility. Some individuals also present with cardiac malformations
as well as mild to moderate mental retardation. Since its ﬁrst
description in 1998, only 12 individuals from 7 families have beenreported, carrying homozygous or compound heterozygous
frameshift or nonsense variants in YY1AP1 .
We performed exome sequencing in a patient presenting with
cutaneous and bone syndactyly and negative array-CGH and limb
malformations panel results. After a hemorrhagic stroke at the age
of 16 months, a clinical diagnosis of GRNG was hypothesized.Copy number variant analysis from exome data, identi ﬁed a
homozygous intragenic non in-frame deletion of 1.84 Kb
encompassing exons 8 and 9 of YY1AP1 conﬁrming a molecular
diagnosis of GRNG. Genetic data revealed several regions ofhomozygosity indicating a possible consanguinity. The research ofsmall intragenic YY1AP1 deletions in our local database identi ﬁed
the same homozygous variant in another individual presenting
with cutaneous syndactyly, cardiac malformation and intellectualdisability and referred for an unspeci ﬁc malformative syndrome.
Familial analysis revealed a close relatedness between the two
individuals and the identi ﬁcation of additional members of the
family compatible with GRNG.
Here, we describe the ﬁrst familiar case of GRNG caused by a
small homozygous intragenic deletion in YY1AP1 . Taken together,
our results advocate the interest in applying exome or genomesequencing to detect causative variants not identi ﬁable by other
methods in heterogeneous malformative genetic disorders.
E. Viora-Dupont: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. M.
Chevarin: None. O. Patat: None. M. Willems: None. J. Albuisson:
None. A. Bruel: None. M. Aubert-Mucca: None. M. Galinier:
None. R. Itier: None. A. Piton: None. B. Gerard: None. P. Callier:
None. C. Thauvin: None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. A.
Vitobello: None.
P11.057.C H3.3 variants: from cancer to neurodevelopmental
disorders
Fernando Santos-Simarro
1,2,3, Marta Pacio-Míguez1, Ángela del
Pozo1,2, Carmen Jiménez Rodríguez1, Cristina Cruz Castellanos4,
Mario Solís1, Victoria Eugenia F. Montaño1, María Victoria Gomez del
Pozo1, Natividad Gallego Onís1, María Esther Rubio Martín1, Pablo
Lapunzina1,2,3, María Palomares-Bralo1,2,3, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
341
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2CIBERER, Centro de Investiga-
ción Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,
3European Reference Network, ERN ITHACA, Madrid, Spain,4Servicio
de Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: In the past years, somatic mutations affecting
H3F3A and H3F3B genes coding for Histone 3 variant H3.3 have
been established as well-known drivers for tumour development.In addition, de novo germline missense variants in these genes
have been recently associated with a novel neurodegenerative
disorder apparently not related with cancer development.However, the complete phenotypical impact of these germlinemutations remains unknown. Here we describe the ﬁrst case
carrying a H3F3B de novo germline variant showing the
neurological phenotype associated with lung carcinoma.
Materials and methods: We performed a WES study through a
trio approach (SureSelect Human All Exon V6 technology) in a
HiSeq 4000 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA).
Results: A de novo, heterozygous, germline missense variant in
H3F3B NM_005324.4:c.71A>G p.(Lys24Arg) was identi ﬁed in a 36
year-old woman presenting with severe intellectual disability,
dysmorphic facial features and congenital anomalies. Interestingly,she developed a typical carcinoid tumour of the pulmonarymiddle lobe at the age of 32, although the patient did not report
toxic habits or a family history of cancer.
Conclusions: Given the well-known role of H3.3 somatic
mutations in oncogenesis, the description of this new case with an
H3F3B germline variant and an unusual form of cancer, should
prompt us to investigate and follow up these patients accordingly inorder to try to ascertain the precise role of germline H3.3 variants incancer predisposition. MPM is supported by the Raregenomics
network (S2017/BMD-3721). This wo rk is partially funded by the ISCIII,
MICINN (PI19/01681) and the European Social Fund.
F. Santos-Simarro: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. Á. del Pozo:
None. C. Jiménez Rodríguez: None. C. Cruz Castellanos: None.
M. Solís: None. V.F. Montaño: None. M. Gomez del Pozo: None.
N. Gallego Onís: None. M. Rubio Martín: None. P. Lapunzina:
None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None.
P11.058.D Novel CNS malformations in De Barsy syndrome A
Hanem S. Abdelraouf , Amal M. Alhashem
Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Title: Novel CNS malformations in De Barsy syndrome A.Author:
Abdelraouf Hanem
1,Alhashem Amal1(1)Genetic Division, pediatric
Department, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, SaudiAr-abiaIntroduction: De Barsy syndrome was ﬁrst reported in 1968.
The disorder is now classi ﬁed asautosomal recessive cutis laxa
type3A.This disorder involves a wide spectrum of symptomsandsigns that result from defects in connective tissue. Most casesare characterized by cutis laxa, aprogeria-like appearance, and
ophthalmologic abnormalities.
Method: Observational studyResult: A full term baby with
intrauterine growth retardation.He has dysmorphic facial features;hypertelorism, large low set ears, thin lips, and prominent hairy
forehead.He has the classic picture of cutis laxa type lllA in the
form of bilateral corneal clouding,strabismus, bilateral inguinalhernia,micropenis,hypotonia,hyperre ﬂexia, clonus, multiplejoints
hypermobility,adducted thumbs with ﬁxed extension of inter
phalangeal joint of thethumb and clenched hands, abnormal fatpad at buttocks and upper thighs,and developmentaldelay. Thepatient has laryngomalacia and brain malformations ;cerebellar
atrophic changes,hypoplastic pons, vascular tortuosity andelongation of the vessels of the circle of Willis withaneurysmal
dilatation,and Short dysgenic corpus callosum. Baby has abnormal
lipid pro ﬁle.Genetic testing done showed homozygous variant in
ALDH18A1 (AR cutis laxa type III)in additionto heterozygous variant
inLDLR (AD familial hypercholesterolemia).
Conclusion: phenotypic features of De Barsy syndrome A
include CNS malformation asCerebellar atrophic changes, hypo-
plastic pons, vascular tortuosity and elongation of the vesselsofthe circle of Willis,and corpus callosum malformation.
H.S. Abdelraouf: None. A.M. Alhashem: None.
P11.059.A Detection of a rare ADNP variant causing
Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome: A Case Report
Boban Dobrevski
1, Aleksandar Petlichkovski1, Meri Kirijas1, Gorjan
Milanovski1, Todor Arsov1, Teodora Brnjarchevska Blazevska1, Olivija
Eﬁnska-Mladenovska1, Olgica Sibinovska1, Elena Shukarova
Angelovska2
1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-
Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,2Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-Skopje, PHIUniversity Clinic for child diseases, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of.
Introduction: Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome, or Intellectual
Disability Autosomal Dominant 28 (MDR28, OMIM 61 5873) is a rare
neurodevelopmental genetic disorder affecting about 1-9/100 000
individuals (0.17% of patients with i ntellectual disability and autism).
The broad and variable spectrum of clinical manifestations includesglobal developmental delay, autistic features and neuropsychiatric or
behavioral issues, seizures and distinct dysmorphic facial features. We
report a case of a nine-month old girl with delayed motordevelopment (delays in sitting and holding head up), general
hypotonia, dysmorphic facial featur es (prominent forehead, discrete
strabismus) and noticeable happy demeanor.
Materials and Methods: The initial metabolic screen and array-
CGH results were normal and the additional genetic testing
included an NGS gene panel of 37 spinal muscular atrophy
associated genes (AARS1, ASAH1, ASCC1, ATP7A, BICD2, BSCL2,CHCHD10, DCTN1, DNAJB2, DYNC1H1, EMILIN1, EXOSC3, EXOSC8,FBXO38, GARS1, HEXA, HSPB1, HSPB3, HSPB8, IGHMBP2, LAS1L,
PLEKHG5, RBM7, REEP1, SCO2, SETX, SIGMAR1, SLC25A21, SLC5A7,
SPTAN1, SYT2, TRIP4, TRPV4, UBA1, VAPB, VRK1, WARS1) includingADNP using Illumina NGS platform, SMN1/SMN2 deletion/duplica-
tion by MLPA and AR-repeat by PCR analysis.
Results: The genetic testing identi ﬁed a heterozygous patho-
genic ADNP frameshift variant c.539_542delTTAG, p.Val180-Glyfs*17, not present in the databases of human genetic
variation (gnomAD) and reported as pathogenic in 6 other cases
(ClinVar). The variant is predicted to create a premature stopcodon and protein truncation and results in a loss-of function ofADNP, affecting chromatin packing and transcription.
Conclusion: New sequencing technologies, such as gene panel
testing, allow early diagnosis and better management of raregenetic diseases.
B. Dobrevski: None. A. Petlichkovski: None. M. Kirijas: None.
G. Milanovski: None. T. Arsov: None. T. Brnjarchevska
Blazevska: None. O. Eﬁnska-Mladenovska: None. O. Sibinovska:
None. E. Shukarova Angelovska: None.
P11.060.B HHAT -related multiple congenital anomalies:
Report of an additional family and delineation of the
syndromeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
342
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Shruti Pande1, Periyasamy Radhakrishnan1, Naveenchandra M.
Shetty2, Anju Shukla1,Katta M. Girisha1
1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Udupi, India,2Mediscan
Diagnostic Centre, Mangalore, Manglore, India.
Introduction: HHAT (Hedgehog acyl-transferase) mediates the
post-translational modi ﬁcation of downstream proteins in the
hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway. There are two reports fromtwo unrelated families with sequence variants in HHAT . We hereby
report the third family with three affected conceptuses.
Methods: We performed clinical evaluation of a seven years
female child born to a consanguineous couple who also had twoother affected pregnancies. We did chromosomal analysis
followed by exome sequencing for the living proband and her
parents.
Results: The proband had severe microphthalmia, microce-
phaly, skeletal dysplasia (bell-shaped thorax, short and angel
shaped epiphyses of hands and feet), midface retrusion, short
columella, depressed nasal bridge, everted lower lip, and a singlecentral incisor. Her karyotype is 46, XY. Exome sequencingrevealed a novel biallelic in-frame deletion, c.365_367del; (p.
Thr122del) in exon 5 of HHAT (NM_001122834.3). Additionally, in
this family, one of the affected fetuses had alobar holoprosence-phaly. The key features of the HHAT-related multiple congenital
anomaly syndrome are anophthalmia/microphthalmia, short
stature, skeletal dysplasia, microcephaly, holoprosencephaly,cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and sex reversal.
Conclusion: We describe the third family with multiple
malformations in three conceptuses with identi ﬁcation of the
biallelic variant c.365_367del; (p.Thr122del) in exon 5 of HHAT in
the living proband. It appears that the defective functioning ofHHAT affects the downstream proteins in the pathway including
the Sonic (SHH), Indian (IHH), and Desert (DHH), the alterations in
which are associated with abnormalities of the eyes, face, nervoussystem, skeleton and the genitourinary system during the
embryonic development.
S. Pande: None. P. Radhakrishnan: None. N.M. Shetty: None.
A. Shukla: None. K.M. Girisha: None.
P11.061.C Variant in HNRNPR leading to developmental delay
with facial dysmorphism and bone abnormalities: a casereport
Marie Massier
1, Marta Spodenkiewicz1, Nathalie Bednarek2, Boris
Keren3, Emilie Landais1, Lucas Hérissant1, Céline Poirsier-Violle1,
Martine Doco-Fenzy1
1Department of Genetics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France,
2Department of Pediatrics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France,
3Department of Genetics, La Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
Case report: The patient is a boy aged 14 years with a severe
developmental delay, feeding problems and behavioral disorder.
He also presents microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, strabismusand ﬁfth digits with bilateral hypoplastic distal phalanges. Using
Exome sequencing a heterozygous de novo missense variant in
HNRNPR , p.Arg588His was identi ﬁed.
Literature: Only ﬁve individuals carrying de novo variants in
HNRNPR gene are reported to date (F.A. Duijkers et al . 2019 ). All
patients share a similar phenotype to our patient, with develop-
mental delay, hypotonia, feeding problems, behavioral disorder,
microcephaly, strabismus, digits abnormalities and facial dys-morphism. Additional symptoms as epilepsy also reported.HNRNPR code the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein R,involved in RNA expression of human development homeobox
and T-box genes. All the reported patients present truncating
variants of HNRNPR , except one with the same heterozygous
missense variant p.Arg588His as our patient.
Discussion: The aim of this work is to report a patient with a
HNRNPR variant and to establish the pathogenicity of this de novo
missense HNRNPR variant p.Arg588His. Less than 10 patients are
reported in literature to date, we thus collect patients forcollaborative clinical research on HNRNPR variants in order to
understand the phenotypic spectrum of this disease.
M. Massier: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None. N. Bednarek:
None. B. Keren: None. E. Landais: None. L. Hérissant: None. C.
Poirsier-Violle: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None.
P11.062.D A novel frameshift variant in PIEZO1 responsible
for hydrops fetalis in a Cypriot family
Andri Miltiadous
1, Petroula Gerasimou1, Ioannis Kyprianou1,
Jianxiang Chi2, Carolina Sismani3, Paola Evangelidou3, Angelos
Alexandrou3, Violetta Christophidou Anastasiadou4, Paul Costeas1
1Molecular Hematology-oncology, Karaiskakio Foundation, Nicosia,
Cyprus,2The Center for the Study of Haematological Malignancies,
Nicosia, Cyprus,3Cytogenetics Department, Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Department of Clinical
Genetics, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Introduction : Hydrops fetalis is a life threatening condition
characterised by accumulation of ﬂuid in a fetus ’or a newborn ’s
body compartments. The most common type is non-immune
hydrops fetalis (NIHF) which has var ious causes including cardiovas-
cular and haematological defects and chromosomal aberrations.
PIEZO1, a mechanosensitive ion channel has been linked to NIHF
cases in an autosomal dominant and recessive manner.
Materials and Methods : Family with three recurrent stillbirths
and a newborn that deceased a few days after birth. DNA was
extracted from skin tissue of one stillbirth and peripheral blood ofthe newborn, both presenting with hydrops. Exome sequencingwas performed with SureSelect Clinical Research Exome and data
analysed with SureCall (Agilent) and ClinicalVarsome (Saphetor).
Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed ﬁndings. Parents and their ﬁrst
degree relatives were tested by Sanger sequencing.
Results: A PIEZO1 intron-exon junction pathogenic variant,
(c.4496-3_4499dupCAGGCCG) was found in homozygous state in
the two probands with hydrops fetalis and in heterozygous statein their parents. The variant was inherited from the maternal
grandfather, while it was not possible to determine its origin from
the paternal side (grandfather deceased). All three maternal auntsdid not give any hydrops fetalis births and did not carry thisvariant.
Conclusions: The PIEZO1 variant presents as an important
candidate for the cause of the hydrops fetalis in an autosomalrecessive manner in this Cypriot family. Functional studies on RNAlevel will shed light on the effect of this variant on splicing.
A. Miltiadous: None. P. Gerasimou: None. I. Kyprianou: None.
J. Chi: None. C. Sismani: None. P. Evangelidou: None. A.
Alexandrou: None. V. Christophidou Anastasiadou: None. P.
Costeas: None.
P11.063.A Role of imprinting disorders in short children born
SGA and Silver-Russell syndrome spectrum
Masayo Kagami
1, Tomoko Fuke1, Akie Nakamura1,2, Takanobu
Inoue1, Sayaka Kawashima1, Kaori Isno-Hara1, Shinichiro Sano1,3,
Kazuki Yamazawa1,4, Maki Fukami1, Tsutomu Ogata1,3Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
343
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081National Research Institute for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan,2Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan,3Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Japan,4National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical
Center, Tokyo, Japan.
Background: (Epi)genetic disorders associated with small-for-
gestational-age with short stature (SGA-SS) include imprintingdisturbance (IDs). Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a representativeID in SGA-SS and has heterogenous (epi)genetic causes.
Subjects and Methods: To clarify the contribution of IDs to
SGA-SS and the molecular and phenotypic spectrum of SRS, werecruited 249 patients with SGA-SS consisting of 92 and 157patients without structural abnormalities referred to us for genetic
testing for SGA-SS and SRS, respectively. 249 patients were
classi ﬁed into three subgroups based on the Netchine-Harbison
clinical scoring system (NH-CSS), diagnostic criteria for SRS. We
screened various IDs by methylation analysis for differentially
methylated regions related to known IDs. We also performedclinical analysis.
Results: These 249 patients with SGA-SS were classi ﬁed into the
SRS-compatible group (n =148), non-SRS with normocephaly or
relative macrocephaly at birth group (n =94), and non-SRS with
relative microcephaly at birth group (n =7) according to NH-CSS.
Various IDs were detected in each group (Table).
Conclusion: We clari ﬁed the contribution of IDs as (epi)genetic
causes of SGA-SS and the molecular and phenotypic spectrum ofSRS. Various IDs constitute underlying factors for SGA-SS,
including SRS.
Abbreviations: SRS, Silver-Russell syndrome; H19LOM, loss of
methylation of the H19/IGF2 :intergenic differentially methylated
region; UPD(7)mat, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 7;
UPD(20)mat, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 20; UPD
(6)mat, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 6; UPD(16)mat,maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 16; UPD(11)mat,
maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 11.
M. Kagami: None. T. Fuke: None. A. Nakamura: None. T.
Inoue: None. S. Kawashima: None. K. Isno-Hara: None. S. Sano:
None. K. Yamazawa: None. M. Fukami: None. T. Ogata: None.
P11.065.C Oxidative stress elicited by a DNA-demethylating
teratogen 5-azacytidine in the mammalian placenta can bealleviated by antioxidant pretreatment
Nikola Sobocan1,2, Ana Katusic-Bojanac3,2, Marta Himelreich-Peric3,2,
Nino Sincic3,2, Jure Krasic3,2, Ljiljana Serman3,4, Davor Jezek5,4,
Floriana Bulic-Jakus3,2
1Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, University
Hospital Merkur, Zagreb, Croatia,2Center of Excellence in Reproduc-
tive and Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,
3Department of Medical Biology, University of Zagreb School of
Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia,4Center of Excellence in Reproductive and
Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, Zagreb,Croatia,5Department of Histology and Embryology, University of
Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction: Our experiments showed that the DNA-
demethylating epigenetic drug 5-azacytidine (5azaC) is a terato-
gen causing oxidative stress and intrauterine growth restriction
(IUGR), alleviated in rat fetuses by an antioxidant-pretreatment.We hypothesized such effects will be con ﬁrmed in the placenta.
Materials and Methods: On day 12 and 13 of gestation, Fisher
rat dams received intravenously N-tert- Butyl- α-phenylnitron (PBN)
(40 mg/kg) and one hour later intraperitoneally 5azaC (5mg/kg) oronly 5azaC. Controls received PBN or were untreated. Placentaswere isolated on the gestation day 15 and day 20. Immunohis-
tochemical signals of the Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA)
and markers of oxidative/nitrosative processes (8-oxoDG andnitrotyrosine, respectively) were stereologically quanti ﬁed by the
numerical density (Nv). The apoptotic index was calculated, and
DNA-methylation was assessed by pyrosequencing.
Results: Pretreatment with PBN of 5azaC-treated dams during
the trophoblast invasion and intense proliferation phases sig-
niﬁcantly improved the weight of 15- and 20-days old placentas.
In 20-days-old placentas, the apoptotic index and Nv of 8-oxoDGand nitrotyrosine were signi ﬁcantly higher in placentas of dams
treated by 5azaC than in those pretreated with PBN. Nv for PCNA
was signi ﬁcantly lower in all placentas of 5azaC-treated dams than
in controls.
Conclusions: In the placenta, we con ﬁrmed the association of
DNA-demethylating agent ’s growth restriction with oxidative/
nitrosative stress. These experimental results are of importance forunderstanding the mechanism of intrauterine growth restriction(IUGR) and its prevention by antioxidant activity. Financed by EU
project, ERDF, Operational Programme Competitiveness and
Cohesion, No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, Reproductive and RegenerativeMedicine - Exploring New Platforms and Potentials.
N. Sobocan: None. A. Katusic-Bojanac: None. M. Himelreich-
Peric: None. N. Sincic: None. J. Krasic: None. L. Serman: None. D.
Jezek: None. F. Bulic-Jakus: None.
P11.066.D Diagnosis and veri ﬁcation of the autosomal
dominant form of Kabuki makeup syndrome in a child with
congenital heart disease. Clinical case
Iryna Lastivka
1, Vita Antsupova2, Ljudmila Brisevac3, Larysa Sheiko3,
Iana Ushko2, Volodymyr Davydiuk4Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
344
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Bukovinian State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine,2Bohomo-
lets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine,3Shupyk National
Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine,
4National Pirogov Memorial Medical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine.
Introduction: Kabuki Makeup Syndrome (KMS) OMIM 147920 is a
rare genetic disease characterized by phenotypic traits, mental
retardation, and autistic symptoms. KMS is caused by pathogenicmutations in the genes KMT2D, KDM6A. Mutation of the KMT2Dgene is inherited by autosomal dominant type; mutation of the
KDM6A gene is inherited X-linked dominantly.
Materials and Methods: A clinical case of KMS in a 2-year-old
girl. Syndromological, "Face2gene", cytogenetic, moleculargenetic, instrumental methods of examination were used.
Results: Girl from the third planned pregnancy; which was on
the background of the threat of miscarriage, polyhydramnios,hypothyroidism. The baby was born at 36 weeks of pregnancy
weighing 2930 g, length 49 cm, on the Apgar scale 8/8 points.
Phenotype: cleft palate, protruding ear shells, arched eyebrows,long oblique eye slits, blue sclera, epicanthus, ectropion of thelower eyelids, wide tip of the nose, hypoplasia of the nails on the
V-ﬁngers of the wrists of the hands, congenital, muscular
hypotension, delay of stato-kinetic development. Syndromologicaldiagnostics was performed using the diagnostic program "Face2-gene"; suspected KMS; cytogenetic, molecular genetic research is
recommended to verify the diagnosis. Karyotype of a child 46,XX.
Molecular genetic analysis revealed a pathogenic mutation(c.11884C>T) (p.Gln3962*) in the KMT2D gene, which is associated
with an autosomal dominant type of KMS (MedGen UID: 893727).
Conclusions: Diagnosis of KMS is possible by speci ﬁc pheno-
typic characteristics. Veri ﬁcation of the diagnosis is based on the
results of molecular genetic analysis. The prognosis of this disease
depends on the severity of heart disease and intelligence.
I. Lastivka: None. V. Antsupova: None. L. Brisevac: None. L.
Sheiko: None. I. Ushko: None. V. Davydiuk: None.
P11.067.A Clinical features of Malaysians with Kabuki syn-
drome and identi ﬁcation of KMT2D and KDM6A mutations by
exome sequencing
H Y. Leong , M A. Haniffa, M Y. Chan, S Sivapatham, H B. Chew, L H.
Ngu
Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Introduction: Kabuki syndrome 1 and 2 (OMIM #147920 and
#300867) characterized by distinctive facies, learning disability and
multiple congenital anomalies are caused by pathogenic muta-tions in the lysine-speci ﬁc methyltransferase 2D ( KMT2D ) and
lysine-speci ﬁc demethylase 6A ( KDM6A ) genes respectively.
Methods: This is a descriptive cohort study of Malaysians
diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome in Hospital Kuala Lumpur. Wholeexome sequencing was performed for variant detection andconﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: There were seven Malaysians diagnosed with Kabuki
syndrome, 57% males. Their ethnicity were Malay (5/7) andChinese (2/7). All had global developmental delay and learningdifﬁculty. Five patients had attention de ﬁcit and/or hyperactivity.
Common dysmorphic features in at least 50% of the cohort
included long palpebral ﬁssures, arched eyebrows, broad nasal tip,
prominent ears and brachydactyly. Other systemic anomalies
reported were short stature (5/7), infantile feeding dif ﬁculties (3/7),
hearing loss (3/7), cleft lip/ palate (2/7), high arched palate (2/7),developmental dysplasia of the hip (2/7), kyphosis/ scoliosis (2/7),pulmonary artery stenosis (1/7) and multicystic kidney (1/7). Six
patients had heterozygous pathogenic KMT2D variants ( ﬁvenonsense and one missense variants). One female patient had a
nonsense variant in the KDM6A gene. Four variants in the KMT2D
gene (p.Cys1534Ter, p.Leu3542ValfsTer13, p.Gln4412Ter and p.
Glu4422Ter) were novel.
Conclusions: Most Malaysians with Kabuki syndrome in our
cohort had truncating mutations leading to haploinsuf ﬁciency in
the KMT2D and KDM2A protein. This study expanded our
knowledge of the clinical and molecular features of Kabukisyndrome in the South East Asian population.
H.Y. Leong: None. M.A. Haniffa: None. M.Y. Chan: None. S.
Sivapatham: None. H.B. Chew: None. L.H. Ngu: None.
P11.068.B Two distinct recessive conditions in two Pakistani
sisters: molecular diagnosis using targeted gene panels may
require subsequent whole exome sequencing in sibs ofconsanguineous parents
FRANCESCA PELUSO
1, Stefano G. Caraf ﬁ1, Roberta Zuntini1,
Gabriele Trimarchi1, Ivan Ivanovski1,2, Veronica Barbieri1, Maria
Marinelli1, Alessia Pancaldi3, Nives Melli3, Claudia Cesario4, Emanuele
Agolini4, Elena Cellini5, Renzo Guerrini5, Antonio Novelli4, Giancarlo
Gargano3, Orsetta Zuffardi6, Livia Garavelli1
1Medical Genetics Unit, Azienda USL, IRCCS, Arcispedale Santa Maria
Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy,2Institut für Medizinische Genetik,
Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland,3Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU), Obstetric and Pediatric Department, Azienda USL, IRCCS,Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy,4Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, IRCCS, Roma,
Italy,5Pediatric Neurology, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and
Laboratories, Meyer Children ’s Hospital, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy,6Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular
Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
We describe two sibilings with two different autosomal recessive
conditions born to consanguineous parents. The older sister
featured the homozygous c.1416 +1del variant in KATNB1 gene,
while the younger had the homozygous c.9729delT variant in FAT1
gene. The diagnosis in the ﬁrst sister was achieved by a NGS
microcephaly genes panel. After birth of the second sibling, due to
the different clinical features not consistent with phenotypicheterogeneity of a KATNB1 -related syndrome in the same family,
we performed Trio Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). The clinical
picture in the ﬁrst child corresponds to Autosomal recessive
Lissencephaly 6 and microcephaly (MIM 616212). However, theclinical features of the younger sister consist of bilateral
anophthalmia, congenital heart defect (CHD), right split foot with
4 toes and 5 metatarsal, second toe polydactyly, right handpreaxial polydactyly and mild bilateral deafness. The constellationof these features is entirely compatible with a very rare FAT1 -
related condition hitherto described in only 5 families, but
including previously unreported clinical features, namely splitfoot, preaxial polydactyly and CHD. We expand the phenotype ofthis condition, speci ﬁcally regarding the involvement of the limbs
and heart not previously reported. In the case of consanguineous
parents, Trio WES should be prioritised with respect to a panel ofgenes, since parents could be carriers for two or more differentautosomal recessive conditions, and in order to fully delineate
recurrence risk for prenatal counselling.
F. Peluso: None. S.G. Caraf ﬁ:None. R. Zuntini: None. G.
Trimarchi: None. I. Ivanovski: None. V. Barbieri: None. M.
Marinelli: None. A. Pancaldi: None. N. Melli: None. C. Cesario:
None. E. Agolini: None. E. Cellini: None. R. Guerrini: None. A.
Novelli: None. G. Gargano: None. O. Zuffardi: None. L. Garavelli:
None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
345
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P11.069.C New pathogenic variant in GPC4 gene in a patient
with Keipert syndrome
Katarzyna Wojciechowska1, Borys Styka2, Wiktor Wojczakowski1,
Anna Lipi ńska3, Aleksandra Pietrzyk3, Monika Lejman2
1Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantol-
ogy, Children ’s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland,2Laboratory of
Genetic Diagnostics, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, Lublin,Poland,3MedGen Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland, Lublin, Poland.
Background: Keipert syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder caused
by pathogenic variants in GPC4 gene. In literature, there are only a
few such cases discussed. Among the most distinctive features of
the patients with Keipert syndrome are: craniofacial and digital
abnormalities, learning dif ﬁculties and sensorineural deafness. Our
aim is to discuss the case of a patient with a new hemizygousmutation in GPC4 gene.
Methods: Molecular analysis showed a new hemizygous
mutation p. Ser236Phe in GPC4 gene. The genetic analysis was
performed by whole-exome sequencing. The library was preparedusing Agilent Sureselect VI exome Kit and analyzed with a
NovaSeq sequencing platform. The presence of the detected
variant was con ﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Our patient was born of healthy, nonconsanguineous
parents at 39 weeks of gestation by cesarian section. His birth
weight was 3040g, length- 52 cm, OFC-35 cm. After birth,dysmorphic facial features were diagnosed. The patient also didnot have the right testicle in the scrotum. Karyotyping and array
CGH testing showed normal balanced male karyotype. The whole-
exome sequencing showed mutation in GPC4 gene. Among the
main health problems of our patient at the age of two years were:short stature (<3
rdcentile), delayed motor development (he started
sitting without support at the age of 12 months, walking at the
age of 24 months) and distinctive dysmorphic facial features.
Conclusion: The case of our patient contributes to the studies
of the phenotypes of patients with Keipert syndrome which occur
as a result of GPC4 mutation.
K. Wojciechowska: None. B. Styka: None. W. Wojczakowski:
None. A. Lipi ńska: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. M. Lejman: None.
P11.070.D Mosaicism for a lethal GJB2 mutation causes
Keratitis-Ichthyosis-Deafness (KID) syndrome
Aurora Sánchez Díaz1,2, Paula Aguilera3,2, Marta Gracia1, Concha
Vidales4, Celia Badenas1,2
1Servicio de Bioquímica y Genética Molecular Hospital Clínic,
Barcelona, Spain,2CIBER de enfermedades raras (CIBERER), Barce-
lona, Spain,3Servicio de Dermatología Hospital Clínic, Barcelona,
Spain,4DNA data Biomedical Company, San Sebastian, Spain.
Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome is a rare congenital
disorder caused by autosomal dominant gain of function
mutations in the GJB2 gene that encodes connexin 26 (Cx26).
Affected individuals typically are born with erythrokeratodermaand may develop degrees of sensorineural hearing loss and/orprogressive vascularizing keratitis. Loss of function GJB2 mutations
are related with nonsyndromic deafness. Some GJB2 mutations are
related with lethal course of KID syndrome by abnormalities inorgans other than skin, cornea or inner ear which may contributeto infant death more than severe skin infections. We present a
clinically affected KID syndrome patient who is carrier of the G45E
mutation in GJB2 gene in mosaicism. The patient requested thestudy, previous to undergo arti ﬁcial reproductive techniques with
preimplantation genetic test.
Material and Methods: Sanger sequencing of GJB2 , NGS panel
for erythrokeratodermia and clinical exome were performed.
Results: GJB2 Sanger study did not detect any mutation. We
performed an erythrokeratodermia panel and then a clinical
exome. Mutation G45E in GJB2 gene was detected in 31.25% of
reads. Sanger sequencing con ﬁrmed the mosaicism for the
mutation.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst case affected by KID syndrome due
to G45E GJB2 mosaicism mutation. Heterozygous carriers of G45E
GJB2 mutation, suffer a severe disease and die in infancy. We
speculate that only in the mosaic form it is possible the survival ofheterozygous carriers. This information is decisive for genetic
counseling since the risks for their offspring are extremely low,
due to the low probability that germ-line cells carry the mutation.
A. Sánchez Díaz: None. P. Aguilera: None. M. Gracia: None. C.
Vidales: None. C. Badenas: None.
P11.071.A Expanding the KIF4A-associated phenotype
Silvia Kalantari
1,2, Norah Alsaleh3, Ghada M. H. Abdel-Salam4,
Fowzan Alkuraya5, Mitsuhiro Kato6, Naomichi Matsumoto7, Satoko
Miyatake8, Lucas Fares-Taie9, Caleb Bupp10, Lia Zitano10, Marcello
Niceta11, Claudia Cesario12, Roberta Milone13, Bill Dobyns14,15,16,
Isabel Filges2,17,18
1Immunogenetics and Transplant Biology Service, Città della Salute e
della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy,2Medical Genetics,
Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University HospitalBasel, Basel, Switzerland,3Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolic
Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical
City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Department of Clinical Genetics, Human
Genetics and Genome Research Division, National Research Centre,Cairo, Egypt,5I4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,6Department
of Pediatrics, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan,
76Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan,8Department of
Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan,97INSERM UMR1163, Imagine –
Institute of Genetic Diseases, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France,
10Spectrum Health, Grand Rapids, MI, USA,11Genetics and Rare
Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,
Rome, Italy,12Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Ospedale Pediatrico
Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,13I11Department of Develop-
mental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone,
Italy,14Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children ’s
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA,15Department of Pediatrics
(Genetics), University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA,16Department
of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA,17Depart-
ment of Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzer-land,18University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Introduction: KIF4A belongs to the family of kinesins which are
molecular motors involved in intracellular traf ﬁcking, whose function
is critical during human development. KIF4 is involved in theanterograde transport of non-synaptic membrane organelles in
developing neurons including the transport of L1 glycoprotein-
containing vesicles, being part of L1CAM (L1)-pathway. A disruptivevariant in KIF4A has been described to cause X-linked intellectual
disability and epilepsy. KIF4A w a sa l s op r o p o s e da sac a n d i d a t eg e n e
for congenital hydrocephalus. Our aim is to describe the clinicalspectrum associated with KIF4A variants.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
346
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: Through GeneMatcher we collected
clinical data of 13 patients harboring likely causal variants in KIF4A .
We compared phenotypes and genotypes in this case series.
Results: We identi ﬁed 6 patients presenting with congenital
hydrocephalus and/or ventriculomegaly with or without asso-ciated brain anomalies. 7 Patients had intellectual disability
without evidence for brain anomalies. Associated CAKUT, ocular,
skeletal and dental anomalies were variably observed. Except forone splice site variant, all other were hemizygous missensevariants affecting the kinesin motor or PRC1 binding domain of
KIF4A.
Conclusion: This case series allows to extend the phenotypic
spectrum associated with KIF4A in broadly two categories.
Although the number of patients is small, we provide evidence
for the role of KIF4A in congenital hydrocephalus and brain
anomalies. The functional relationship between L1CAM and KIF4Asupports this evidence, but the mechanism needs to be further
elucidated. Genotype-phenotype comparison between the group
of patients with intellectual disability versus structural brainanomalies so far remains inconclusive.
S. Kalantari: None. N. Alsaleh: None. G.M.H. Abdel-Salam:
None. F. Alkuraya: None. M. Kato: None. N. Matsumoto: None. S.
Miyatake: None. L. Fares-Taie: None. C. Bupp: None. L. Zitano:
None. M. Niceta: None. C. Cesario: None. R. Milone: None. B.
Dobyns: None. I. Filges: None.
P11.072.B Implementation and comprehensive management
of a colletion of fetal brain samples obtained from volunteer
termination of pregnancies
Puriﬁcacion Marin Reina
1, Inmaculada Lara Cantón2, Álvaro Solaz
García2, M Isabel Torres Cuevas2, Iván Millán Yañez2, Jaime Ferrer
Lozano3, Vicente Herranz Pérez4, Mª José Ulloa Navas4, Susana
Gonzalez Granero4, Francisco Martínez Castellanos5, Ana Gimeno
Navarro6, Juan Rubio Moll7, Rosa Gómez Portero7, Ramiro Quiroga
de la Cruz8, Raquel Amigo Moreno9, Jose María García Verdugo4,
Maximo Vento Torres10
1Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain,2Instituto de Investigación
S a n i t a r i aL aF e ,V a l e n c i a ,S p a i n ,3Pathology Department. Hospital
La Fe, Valencia, Spain,4Cavanilles Institute. University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain,5Genetics Department. Hospital UyP La Fe,
Valencia, Spain,6Neonatology Department. Hospital UyP La Fe,
Valencia, Spain,7Prenatal Diagnosis. Obstetric Department.
Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain,8Prenatal Diagnosis. Obstetric
Department. Hospital UyP La FeHospital UyP La Fe, Valencia,
Spain,9Biobank. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain,10Perinatol-
ogy Research Unit. Instituto de investigación Sanitaria La Fe.,Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: Obtaining fetal brain samples requires a coordi-
nated multidisciplinary approach. Therefore, a comprehensivemanagement within the framework of an authorized andcertiﬁed biobank is crucial.
Materials and methods: Prospective and observational study
started in September 2019. It included fetuses from legal termina-tion of pregnancies (TOP) from 12 weeks of gestation onwards, withprenatal diagnosis of genetic abnormalities and major malforma-
tions. The candidates were identi ﬁed by the obstetricians, and
families were recruited by neonatologists before delivery. After theexpulsion, fetuses were either immediately autopsied or preserved
overnight at 4ºC and transferred to the Pathology Department
within maximum 12 hours. An in toto extraction of the brain was
made in each case. The right hemisphere was sliced and sampleswere preserved in 4% paraformaldehyde for ultrastructural studies
or snap-frozen at -80ºC, for omic studies, immunohistochemistryanalysis or preserved for future research. The left hemisphere was
submitted for pathology.
Results: We have recruited 18 fetuses (55,5% affected from
aneuploidies) in the ﬁrst year. Participation in the study was
offered to 21 families, of which 19 accepted. We lost 3 cases dueto technical problems.In all but one case, the quality of fetal brain
tissue was good, as assessed in the gross dissection and in later
histologic examination.
Conclusion: 1. Setting up a collection of fetal brain is a complex
process which requires a coordinated and motivated team. 2. The
biobank facilitates the management of such a collection making it
technically and ethically suitable for research.
P. Marin Reina: None. I. Lara Cantón: None. Á. Solaz García:
None. M. Torres Cuevas: None. I. Millán Yañez: None. J. Ferrer
Lozano: None. V. Herranz Pérez: None. M. Ulloa Navas: None. S.
Gonzalez Granero: None. F. Martínez Castellanos: None. A.
Gimeno Navarro: None. J. Rubio Moll: None. R. Gómez Portero:
None. R. Quiroga de la Cruz: None. R. Amigo Moreno: None. J.
García Verdugo: None. M. Vento Torres: None.
P11.073.C Two novel presentations of KCNMA1-Related
Pathology - Expanding the Clinical Phenotype of a RareChannelopathy
Jotte Rodrigues Bento
1, Candice Feben2, Marlies Kempers3, Maartje
Van Rij3,4, Mallory Woiski4, Koenraad Devriendt5, Luc De Catte6,
Marcella Baldewijns6, Josephina Meester1, Aline Verstraeten1, Willy
Hendson7, Bart Loeys1,3
1Centre of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital/University
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,2Division of Human Genetics, National
Health Laboratory Service & The School of Pathology, University of
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa,3Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands,4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Department of
Human Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
6Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Catholic University of
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,7Department of Paediatrics, Rahima Moosa
Mother and Child Hospital & The University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
Background: KCNMA1 mutations have recently been associated
with a wide range of dysmorphological, gastro-intestinal, cardio-
vascular and neurological manifestations.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed in order to
identify the underlying pathogenic mutation in two cases
presenting with diverse phenotypical manifestations that did notﬁt into well-known clinical entities.
Results: In an 8-years old boy presenting with severe aortic
dilatation, facial dysmorphism and overgrowth at birth a de novo
p.Gly375Arg KCNMA1 mutation, which has been reported pre-
viously in association with gingival hypertrophy, aortic dilatationand developmental delay, was identi ﬁed. Secondly in a 30-week
old fetus with severe growth retardation and duodenal atresia a de
novo p.Pro805Leu KCNMA1 mutation was identi ﬁed. The latter has
also been reported before in a boy with severe neurologicalmanifestations, including speech delay, developmental delay and
cerebellar dysfunction.
Conclusion: The current report presents the ﬁrst antenatal
presentation of pathogenic KCNMA1 mutation and con ﬁrms the
speci ﬁc association of the p.Gly375Arg variant with early onset
aortic root dilatation, gingival hypertrophy and neonatalovergrowth.
J. Rodrigues Bento: None. C. Feben: None. M. Kempers: None.
M. Van Rij: None. M. Woiski: None. K. Devriendt: None. L. DeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
347
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Catte: None. M. Baldewijns: None. J. Meester: None. A.
Verstraeten: None. W. Hendson: None. B. Loeys: None.
P11.075.A An atypical phenotype in a patient carrying a
deletion and a missense variant of LTPB3: search for over-
lapping cases for further delineation of the disease
Mathys Wéber1, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon2,3, Antonio Vito-
bello2,3, Patrick Callier4,3, Nadine Hanna5, Pauline Arnaud5, Carine Le
Goff6, Pauline Marzin7,8, Catherine Boileau5,6, Agnès Bloch-Zupan9,10,
Valérie Cormier-Daire7,8, Christel Thauvin-Robinet11,3, Laurence
Faivre1,3
1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes
Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon,
France,2Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation en diagnostic des maladies
rares (UF6254), FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,3Inserm
UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université
de Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau
Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,5Centre National de
Référence pour le syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Hôpital Bichat,
A P H P ,P a r i s ,F r a n c e ,6Inserm U1148 Laboratoire de recherche vasculaire
translationelle, Mal adies structurelles cardiov asculaires, Hôpital Bichat,
A P H P ,P a r i s ,F r a n c e ,7Centre de Référence Mal adies Rares MOC, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France,8INSERM U1163 Institut
Imagine, Bases moléculaires et p hysiopathologiques des chondrodys-
plasies, IMAGINE - Institut des Mal adies Génétiques, Paris, France,
9Centre National pour les Manifestations Bucco-Dentaires des Maladies
Rares, ERN CRANIO, Hôpital Civil, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,10INSERM U1258, CNRS-UMR7104, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire ( IGBMC), Université de Strasbourg,
Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,11Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences Intel-
lectuelles de Causes Rares, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU
Dijon, Dijon, France.
Background: LTBP3 , involved in the TGF-beta signaling path-
way, is known to be associated with two autosomal dominantdiseases (Geleophysic Dysplasi a (GD) and Acromicric Dysplasia
(AD)) and an autosomal recessive disease (Dental Anomalies and
Short Stature (DASS)). Here we report a patient with an atypical
DASS phenotype.
Material and methods: The patient is an 18-year-old male
referred for developmental disorders. Since birth, nail and toe
brachydactyly with marked hypoplasia of the 3rd and 4th rays and
hallux were noted. At tooth eruption stage, microdontia,dyschromia, agenesis and amelogenesis imperfecta appeared.
Clinically at age 17, he had short stature (160 cm; -2.5 SD) and a
triangular face with severe maxillary prognathism. He alsodeveloped ascending aorta dilatation, white matter anomalies,dilatated Virchow-Robin spaces and syringomyelia. Besides, his
mother had toe amputations compatible with amniotic bands,
dentine defects, syringomyelia and Arnold-Chiari malformation.
Results: Genetic investigations identi ﬁed two compound
heterozygous variants in LTBP3 . Array CGH ﬁrst uncovered a
maternal inherited heterozygous 3 ’partial deletion that could not
alone explain the patient ’s phenotype as his asymptomatic sister
also carried it. Targeted re-evaluation of exome sequencingenabled the discovery of a heterozygous missense variant
inherited from the father, chr11:g.65308661G>C. This result
correlated with the published literature can explain some of thepatient ’s phenotype. However, cerebral, spinal and lower limb
abnormalities haven ’t been described in DASS.
Conclusion: We wondered whether these manifestations could
broaden the LTBP3 phenotype spectrum especially for hetero-
zygous patients. Description of further patients with similar
ﬁndings would be needed to draw any inferences.M. Wéber: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. A. Vitobello:
None. P. Callier: None. N. Hanna: None. P. Arnaud: None. C. Le
Goff: None. P. Marzin: None. C. Boileau: None. A. Bloch-Zupan:
None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L.
Faivre: None.
P11.076.B Luscan-Lumish Syndrome, a fatal disease
Susana García-Linares
1, Antonio Miguel Poyatos-Andújar1, Margar-
ita Martínez-Atienza2, Irene Sofía Machado-Casas1, Antonio Emilio
Jerez-Calero1, Susana Pedrinaci-Rodríguez2, María Luz Bellido-Díaz2,
Matías Pérez-Sánchez2
1Hospital Universitario Clínico San Cecilio, Granada, Spain,2Hospital
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Luscan-Lumish syndrome is a rare disorder
characterized by macrocephaly, intellectual disability, speechdelay, low sociability and behavioral problems. More variable
features include postnatal overgrowth, obesity, advanced carpal
ossiﬁcation, developmental delay, and seizures. The recurrent
c.5218C>T p.(Arg1740Trp) variant in the SETD2 gene appears to beassociated with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with
multiple congenital anomalies involving several organ systems.
We describe a patient with this variant and fatal outcome (shedied from complications of cardiovascular surgery).
Material and Methods: We present a 7-months-old girl who
was born after a complicated pregnancy at 37 weeks of gestation(screening of ﬁrst trimester of high risk and anormal Doppler,
aberrant subclavian artery and intrauterine growth restriction in
ecography). The patient present at birth absence of suction re ﬂex,
hypotonia, perimembranous VSD with increased pulmonarypressures, severe retrognathia and cleft palate. All molecularstudies performed during the fetal period were normal. We
performed a clinical exome sequencing (CES) analysis at birth.
Results: We found the pathogenic variant c.5218C>T p.
(Arg1740Trp) in the SETD2 gene, this variant was determined as
de novo with the segregation analysis.
Conclusions: Has been described phenotypic heterogeneity
associated with SETD2. Our patient have a variant affecting codon1740 of SETD2, in this case the variant appears to be associated
with a severe multisystemic disorder with multiple congenital
anomalies involving several organ systems, especially heart, with afatal outcome.
S. García-Linares: None. A. Poyatos-Andújar: None. M.
Martínez-Atienza: None. I. Machado-Casas: None. A. Jerez-
Calero: None. S. Pedrinaci-Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz:
None. M. Pérez-Sánchez: None.
P11.077.C Biallelic truncating variants in MAPKAPK5 cause a
new developmental disorder involving neurological, cardiac,
and facial anomalies combined with synpolydactyly
Denise Horn
1, Elisa Fernández-Núñez2, Ricardo Gomez-Carmona2,
Ana Rivera-Barahona2,3, Julian Nevado3,4,5, Sarina Schwartzmann1,
Nadja Ehmke1, Pablo Lapunzina3,4,5, Ghada A. Otaify6, Samia
Temtamy6, Mona Aglan6, Felix Boschann1, Victor L. Ruiz-Perez2,4,5,3
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,2Instituto de Investiga-
ciones Biomédicas “Alberto Sols ”, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientí ﬁcas (CSIC)-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid,
Spain,3CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain,4ITHACA, European Reference
Network on Rare Congenital Malformations and Rare IntellectualDisability, Paris, France,5Instituto de Genética Médica y MolecularAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
348
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608(INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autón-
oma, Madrid, Spain,6Department of Clinical Genetics, Division of
Human Genetics and Genome Research, Center of Excellence for
Human Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways
are involved in key physiological processes such as cell prolifera-
tion, differentiation, apoptosis, survival, gene expression, and cellmotility. Using exome sequencing, we detected biallelic truncatingvariants in MAPKAPK5 in three individuals from two unrelated
consanguineous families with a novel syndromic form of
neurocardiofaciodigital anomalies. We identi ﬁed the homozygous
frameshift variant c.207_208dupTG; p.(Ala70Valfs*7) in the twoaffected members of family 1 and the homozygous 1-bp
duplication c.1077dup, p.(Leu360Serfs*21) in the patient of family
2. The affected individuals showed a clinically recognizablephenotype characterized by severe developmental delay, variable
brain anomalies, congenital heart defects, dysmorphic facial
features, and a distinctive type of synpolydactyly. Features alsoincluded ophthalmologic abnormalities, hearing impairment, andEEG anomalies. No expression of MAPKAPK5 protein isoforms and
reduced levels of the MAPKAPK5-interacting protein ERK3 were
detectable in patient derived cells. Furthermore, F-actin recoveryafter latrunculin B treatment was impaired, indicating thatMAPKAPK5 is implicated in F-actin polymerization. Together, our
ﬁndings show that biallelic loss-of-function variants in MAPKAPK5
result in a severe developmental disorder and demonstrate a keyrole of this gene in human brain, heart, and limb development.
D. Horn: None. E. Fernández-Núñez: None. R. Gomez-
Carmona: None. A. Rivera-Barahona: None. J. Nevado: None.
S. Schwartzmann: None. N. Ehmke: None. P. Lapunzina: None.
G. A. Otaify: None. S. Temtamy: None. M. Aglan: None. F.
Boschann: None. V. L. Ruiz-Perez: None.
P11.078.D Variable expressivity of 22q11.2 microduplications:
an investigation of 13 cases toward a phenotype-genotype
correlation
Eunice Matoso
1,2,3, Alexandra Estevinho2, Susana I. Ferreira4, Luís M.
Pires4, Joana B. Melo3,4,5, Fabiana Ramos6, Lina Ramos6, Jorge M.
Saraiva1,6, Isabel M. Carreira3,4,5
1University of Coimbra, Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal,
2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Medical Genetics Unit, Pediatric Hospital,
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,
3iCBR- CIMAGO/CACC –Center of Investigation on Environment
Genetics and Oncobiology of iCBR/ Clinical Academic Center of
Coimbra, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,Portugal,4Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,5CIBB- Center
for Innovative Biomedicine and Biotechnology, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal,6Medical Genetics Unit, Pediatric Hospital, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
The 22q11.2 microduplication syndrome shows highly variable
phenotypes with reduced penetrance. This region harbors eightsegmental duplicated genomic regions termed low-copy repeatsA-H (LCR22A-LCR22H) that mediate nonallelic homologous
recombination resulting in rearrangements of 22q11.2. The most
frequently reported are imbalances with the breakpoints encom-passing LCR22A to LCR22D. Atypical deletions and duplications
are rare and can provide valuable information of dosage effects of
a subset of genes within the 22q11.2 genomic disorder region.Wereport the identi ﬁcation by array-CGH of 13 patients with
microduplications within the 22q11.2 region. Ten of the patients
were male and only three female, the clinical phenotypes range frompsicomotor delay, microcephaly, d ysmorphisms, seizures, skills of
behavioral disturbance and cardiopathy, among the most frequently
observed. Eight of the patients carry the most common duplication
extending between LCR22A-LCR22D, one of them the duplicationbetween LCR22A-LCR22B, two of the patients the atypical duplicationbetween LCR22B-LCR22D and other two the duplication between
LCR22D-LCR22E. When available parents were studied, a maternal
origin was observed in four patie nts and paternal origin in one.
Attending the pnenotypic variabilit y of the patients, even with similar
genomic regions involved, a better clinical characterization is
important particularly in duplications sharing a smaller subset of
genes. In the more atypical 22q11 .2 duplications, like the ones
involving LCR22B-LCR22D or LCR22D -LCR22E, a detailed character-
ization can expand and provide valuable information in the
phenotype-genotype interpretation and investigate candidate genes
that may be relevant to distinct clinical features.
E. Matoso: None. A. Estevinho: None. S.I. Ferreira: None. L.M.
Pires: None. J.B. Melo: None. F. Ramos: None. L. Ramos: None. J.
M. Saraiva: None. I.M. Carreira: None.
P11.079.A MID1 gene variations in a Brazilian cohort with cleft
lip with or without palate and ocular hypertelorism. Implica-tion for diagnosis
Roseli M. Zechi-Ceide
1, Nancy M. Kokitsu-Nakata1, Camila Wence-
slau Alvarez1, Chiara Migliore2, Marina Bigeli Rafacho1, Maria
Eugênia Siemann1, Rosana M. Candido-Souza1, Siulan Vendramini-
Pittoli1, Cristiano Tonello3, Luciana P. Maximino4, Germana Meroni5,
Maria Leine Guion-Almeida6, John M. Opitz7, Antonio Antonio
Richieri-Costa11
1Department of Clinical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Hospital for
Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies (HRCA), University of São
Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil., Bauru, Brazil,2Department of Life Sciences,
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy,3Craniofacial Team,
Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies (HRCA, University
of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, Bauru, Brazil,4Department of Audiology and
Speech-Language Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of SãoPaulo, São Paulo, Brazil, Bauru, Brazil,5Department of Life Sciences,
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy., Trieste, Italy,6Hospital for Rehabilita-
tion of Craniofacial Anomalies, Un iversity of São Paulo (HRCA-USP).,
Bauru, Brazil,7Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
Human Genetics, Pathology, and Obste trics & Gynecology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA., Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Introduction : Orofacial clefts is the most common craniofacial
anomalies. It occur isolated or ass ociated to other anomalies. The
combination of cleft lip and ocular h ypertelorism can represents the
Opitz G/BBB syndrome, a rare genetic condition with hypospadia,laryngo-tracheo-esophageal abn ormalities, and heart and brain
defect. The X-linked form is caused by MID1 gene.
Methods : Screening of the MID1 gene variation (Sanger
Sequencing) or deletion (MLPA) was performed in 44 patientswith cleft lip with or without cleft palate and ocular hypertelorism,
enrolled in HRCA-USP. All patients and their families were
evaluated by a craniofacial clinical geneticist.
Results: MID1 gene variations were found in 22 individuals (21
male and 1 female). Four missense variations were not previously
reported and were considered of unknown signi ﬁcance. The
heterozygous variations c.1305A>G was found in an affected girl.About 95% of the patients had a bilateral cleft lip and palate.
Other frequent clinical signs were hypospadia (~85 %), brain
anomalies (100% of 11 images evaluated) and learning dif ﬁculties
(42%). Dandy-Walker malformation was present in 72% of the 11images evaluated.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
349
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusion : MID1 gene contributes with occurrence of cleft lip
associated to ocular hypertelorism and this combination can be a
mild form of the G/BBB syndrome. The expanding of frontonasal
process can be contributed with the fusion of upper lip and palatefailure. Despite of Dandy-Walker malformation is present in 100%of the images evaluated, the development was normal in most
patients and learning dif ﬁculties was a frequent feature.
R.M. Zechi-Ceide: None. N.M. Kokitsu-Nakata: None. C.
Wenceslau Alvarez: None. C. Migliore: None. M. Bigeli Rafacho:
None. M. Siemann: None. R.M. Candido-Souza: None. S.
Vendramini- Pittoli: None. C. Tonello: None. L.P. Maximino:
None. G. Meroni: None. M. Guion-Almeida: None. J.M. Opitz:
None. A. Antonio Richieri-Costa1: None.
P11.080.B MNS1 gene alterations are associated with situs
inversus and male infertility
Joseph Leslie
1, Lettie E. Rawlins1,2, Barry A. Chioza1, Oluwaseun R.
Olusanya1, Claire G. Salter1, James Fasham1, Harold E. Cross3, Simon
Lam1, Gaurav V. Harlalka1, Martina M. A. Muggenthaler1,4, Emma L.
Baple1,2, Andrew H. Crosby1
1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, RILD Wellcome Wolfson
Centre, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom,
2Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital,
Exeter, United Kingdom,3Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, USA,4Department of
Cardiology, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
United Kingdom.
Motile cilia are hair like structures on the cell surface that protrude
into the extracellular space and beat in a coordinated manner. This
performs a number of important roles in the body including the
clearance of mucus, the propulsion of sperm and the determinationof left-right patterning during development. Ciliopathy disorders
arise due to abnormalities in the function of motile cilia and
encompass a group of autosomal recessive conditions typi ﬁed by
chronic otosinopulmonary disease, infertility and situs abnormalities.
We used a combination of genetic studies to investigate the
cause of a ciliopathy disorder identi ﬁed in four Amish individuals
with situs inversus and male infertility. Genome-wide SNP mapping
identi ﬁed a single small (2.34Mb) autozygous region common to
all four affected individuals of on chromosome 15q21.3, demar-
cating the likely disease locus. Whole exome sequencing
identi ﬁed a single candidate variant genome wide, located in
the autozygous region, in the MNS1 gene (NM_018365.2:
c.407_410del;p.(Glu136Glyfs*16)). Genotyping of members of the
extended family identi ﬁed randomisation of the laterality defects
in other affected individuals homozygous for the MNS1 alteration,
while all unaffected individuals were wild type or heterozygous.
Our studies in the Amish are consistent with previous
investigations of MNS1 de ﬁcient mice, which display situs
randomisation and male infertility. Importantly, a number of otherstudies have recently been published identifying MNS1 mutations
in individuals worldwide with situs abnormalities and/or male
infertility. Together these ﬁndings identify MNS1 alterations as a
potential under recognised cause of male infertility and highlightthe importance of including MNS1 on gene testing panels globally.
J. Leslie: None. L.E. Rawlins: None. B.A. Chioza: None. O.R.
Olusanya: None. C.G. Salter: None. J. Fasham: None. H.E. Cross:
None. S. Lam: None. G.V. Harlalka: None. M.M.A. Muggenthaler:
None. E.L. Baple: None. A.H. Crosby: None.
P11.081.C Unraveling the genetic causes of Moebius
syndromeGiada Moresco
1, Ornella Rondinone1, Jole Costanza1, Carlo
Santaniello1, Laura Fontana1,2, Alessia Mauri1, Marco Venturin3,
Odoardo Picciolini4, Roberta Villa5, Monica Miozzo1,2, Maria
Francesca Bedeschi5
1Research Laboratories Coordination Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,2Department of
Health Science, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy,
3Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy,4Pediatric Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,5Medical Genetic Unit,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano,
Italy.
Moebius syndrome (MBS; OMIM #157900) is a rare congenital
disorder characterized by nonprogressive facial and ocularabduction paralysis, and impairment to the facial (cranial VII)
and abducens (cranial VI) nerves, respectively, possibly due to
hindbrain defects. Additional features can include hearing loss,other cranial nerve dysfunctions, motor, orofacial, musculoskeletal,neurodevelopmental and behavioral complications. Most are
sporadic cases, but familial occurrence has also been reported,
with both autosomal dominant/recessive and X-linked inheritance.Diagnostic molecular criteria for MBS are still unde ﬁned. De novo
heterozygous pathogenetic variants of REV3L and PLXND1 genes
are considered to be causative for MBS, although they occur in aminority of cases. With the aim to uncover novel genes associatedwith this condition, we recruited a cohort of 35 Moebius and
Moebius-like patients and performed trio-WES. No de novo
variants were identi ﬁed in the REV3L and PLXND1 genes, strongly
suggesting the need to discover possible additional causativegenes. We selected the most frequently mutated genes among
the 35 probands, and performed Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
to identify possibly altered pathways. Our preliminary resultssuggest that axon guidance pathways, such as the Semaphorin
and Netrin signaling pathways, are likely to be involved in the
disease pathogenesis, as well as GP6, nNOS and protein kinase Asignaling pathways.
G. Moresco: None. O. Rondinone: None. J. Costanza: None. C.
Santaniello: None. L. Fontana: None. A. Mauri: None. M.
Venturin: None. O. Picciolini: None. R. Villa: None. M. Miozzo:
None. M. Bedeschi: None.
P11.082.D Expanding the phenotype of NADSYN1 associated
congenital NAD de ﬁciency disorder - the ﬁrst reported adult
patient
Emilie Erbs
1, Claus Lohmann Brasen2,3, Maria Rasmussen1,3
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lilebælt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark,
2Department of Biochemistry and Immunology Lillebælt Hospital,
Vejle, Denmark,3Department of Regional Health Research, University
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
Introduction: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is an
essential coenzyme in multiple cellular redox processes and asubstrate for signalling enzymes in non-redox reactions. NADSYN1
encodes NAD synthetase 1 an enzyme in the ﬁnal step of the NAD
de novo synthesis pathway and part of the Preiss-Handler
pathway. Szot et al. recently reported ﬁve patients from four
families with bi-allelic deleterious variants in NADSYN1 . These
patients all had kidney anomalies and some had additional
malformations of the heart, vertebrae and limbs. Neither of thepatients had survived past three months postnatally.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
350
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and methods: Here we present a 30-year-old male
patient with a height of 130 cm and numerous skeletal
malformations including segmentation defects of the spine,
rib anomalies and unequal leg length. Additionally, the patienthad bilateral ptosis, cleft palate and asymmetric dysmorphicfacial features. The patient underwent surgery for an aortic
stenosis due to a bicuspid valve, but no malformations of the
kidneys or urinary tract have been identi ﬁed. Intelligence was
normal.
Results: Trio exome sequencing revealed a variant in NADSYN1
c.1717G>A (p.Ala573Thr) in homozygous form. Both parents were
carriers of the variant in heterozygous form.
Conclusion: This missense variant was reported in three of the
patients described by Szot et al. Previous functional analyses have
supported the pathogenicity of the variant. We report the ﬁrst
adult patient with NADSYN1 associated congenital NAD de ﬁciency
disorder and thus greatly expand the phenotypic spectrum.
Photos of the patient and measurements of NAD metabolites will
be provided.
E. Erbs: None. C. Brasen: None. M. Rasmussen: None.
P11.083.A Functional analysis of a novel 5 ’UTR variant of the
LMX1B gene associated with a familial case of Nail-Patella
Syndrome
Serena Cappato
1, Aldamaria Puliti1,2, Maria Teresa Divizia2,
Margherita Lerone2, Federico Zara1,2, Renata Bocciardi1,2
1Dept of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics,
Maternal and Child Sciences (DINOGMI), University of Genova,Genova, Italy,2UOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Giannina Gaslini,
Genova, Italy.
Introduction: Nail-Patella Syndrome (NPS, MIM#161200) is an
autosomal dominant disorder due to mutation or partial/complete
deletion of the LMX1B gene, causing haploinsuf ﬁciency. Dysplasia
of the nails, absent/hypoplastic patellae, presence of iliac hornsand elbow deformities are the cardinal features. Glaucoma andrenal involvement from subclinical hematuria/proteinuria to end
stage renal failure can be also present.A family with recurrence of
NPS was negative for canonical molecular and cytogeneticanalysis of the LMX1B gene. The screening of the 5 ’UTR of the
gene revealed the presence of a novel heterozygous c.-174C>T
variant, segregating with the phenotype.
Materials and Methods: Investigation of the role of the variant
followed this work ﬂow: in silico analysis of the 5 ’UTR; study of
allele-speci ﬁc expression in patients derived cells; evaluation of
the impact of 5 ’UTR variant, relative to the WT allele, on LMX1B
expression in heterologous cell-based assays.
Results: In postnatal life, expression of LMX1B is restricted to
poor accessible tissues. Therefore, we established a protocol to
induce its expression in patients and controls derived lympho-blasts and observed that the mutated allele was less expressed atRNA level. The analysis of the WT and 5 ’UTR variant in
heterologous cell-based assays demonstrated a negative effect
of the variant on LMX1B protein expression, according tohaploinsuf ﬁciency mechanisms suggested for NPS.
Conclusions: 5’UTR sequences play an important role in the
regulation of gene expression by different mechanisms. We
provide evidence that a variant in the 5 ’UTR of LMX1B can affect
expression of the gene and may be involved in NPS pathogenesis.
S. Cappato: None. A. Puliti: None. M.T. Divizia: None. M.
Lerone: None. F. Zara: None. R. Bocciardi: None.P11.084.B Three Nance Horan syndrome families from Turkey;
Three different approaches for molecular diagnosis
Hilal P ırıl P. Saraço ğlu
1, Yeliz Güven2, Sermin Dice Aksakal2,T uğba
Kalayc ı3, Umut Altuno ğlu4,5, Zehra Oya Uyguner6, Serpil Eraslan5,
Esra Börklü-Yücel5, Hülya Kayserili Karabey4,5,7
1Koç University, Graduate School of Health Science, Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey,2İstanbul University, Faculty of
Dentistry, Department of Pedodonty, İstanbul, Turkey,3İstanbul
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine,
İstanbul, Turkey,4Koç University, School of Medicine, Department of
Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey,5Koç University Hospital, Genetic
Diseases Evaluation Center, İstanbul, Turkey,6İstanbul University,
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey,
7Koç University, Graduate School of Health Sciences, İstanbul, Turkey.
Nance-Horan Syndrome (NHS,MIM: #302350) is an X-linked domi-
nant disease, featuring ocular abnormalities (congenital cataracts,
microphthalmia), dental abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms andintellectual disability and/or autism. Males show full penetrance withvariable expressivity while carrier females manifest mild features. It is
caused by loss-of-function variants in NHS (Xp22.2). A regulator of
actin remodeling, NHS may orchestrate actin regulatory proteinfunction in response to signaling events during development. It is
ultra-rare, with 60 reported cases till 2018. Patient1(P1) was clinically
diagnosed with NHS at 15 years, due to bilateral cataracts andmicrocornea, Hutchinson incisors, mild intellectual defect. Hismother had mild cataracts. Both had heterochromia iridis as
additional ﬁnding. Their diagnoses were con ﬁrmed by sequencing.
Patient2(P2), boy aged 6 months, was evaluated due to globaldevelopmental delay accompanying microphthalmia, cataracts, VSD.SNP-array testing was performed , with preliminary diagnosis of
syndromic microphthalmia, revealing a deletion encompassing NHS.
In Family3(F3), maternal half-brothers [23(P3), 36(P4)] and theirmaternal uncle(P5), had congenital cataracts. Additionally, F3 was
consulted due to neurobehavioral ﬁndings. P3 ’s solo-WES analysis
revealed an NHS variant, segregating with the phenotype.
Patient Methods
P1;Mother Sequencing c.246C>T (hemizygote;heterozygote)
P2 SNP-Array 2.26Mb deletion
P3 WES c.1867delC
Here, we report ﬁve affected males and a manifesting female
from three unrelated families. While direct sequencing con ﬁrmed
the clinical diagnosis of NHS in P1, P2 not showing distinct
features of NHS, algorithmic diagnostic approach was applied. F3had pedigree suggestive for X-linked inheritance and WES, widelyused technique, was utilized.
H.P. Saraço ğlu:None. Y. Güven: None. S. Aksakal: None. T.
Kalayc ı:None. U. Altuno ğlu:None. Z. Uyguner: None. S. Eraslan:
None. E. Börklü-Yücel: None. H. Kayserili Karabey: None.
P11.085.C Genetics of neural tube defects: new candidate
genes and complex mode of inheritance
Marie Faoucher
1,2, Artem Kim1, Marie Beaumont1, Wilfrid Carre1,2,
Hubert Journel3, Linda Akloul4, Laurent Pasquier4, Mélanie Fradin4,
Chloé Quelin4, Andrea Manunta5, Erwan Watrin2, Marie De Tayrac1,2,
Sylvie Odent4,2, Christèle Dubourg1,2, Valérie Dupé2, Véronique
David1,2Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
351
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Genetics laboratory, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France,2UMR 6290
CNRS, IGDR, Univ Rennes1, Rennes, France,3Genetics department, CH
Vannes, Vannes, France,4Genetics department, CHU Pontchaillou,
Rennes, France,5Urology department, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes,
France.
Neural tube defects (NTDs) are developmental disorders that
affect approximately 1 out of 1000 pregnancies and result in anincomplete closure of the neural tube. Defects in the planar cellpolarity (PCP) and the folates metabolism pathway have been
strongly associated with NTDs in animal models and recent
studies of human cohorts. Furthermore, multifactorial andoligogenic pattern of inheritance have been suggested for thisrare disease. We present high throughput sequencing results from
a cohort of 102 patients with NTDs. Medical Exome Sequencing or
Whole Exome Sequencing was performed on 74 solo cases and 28families. Variants analysis was focused on an in silico panel of 250
genes previously implicated in NTDs.Deleterious variants in
candidate genes have been detected in more than half of thecohort. Most represented pathways in terms of mutationalfrequencies are: PCP (32% of variants), folate metabolism (15%),
embryonic development (11%), SHH pathway (8.4%), apoptosis
genes (7%) and primary cilia (4.2%). The most recurring genes areCELSR1 (8 patients), FREM2 (5),GLDC (4) or APAF1 (3). Moreover, we
describe oligogenic mode of inheritance in 33% of our families.
These results con ﬁrm the main implication of PCP and folate
genes and enhance the role of SHH pathway, apoptosis and cilium
genes in NTDs. Functional explorations are needed to con ﬁrm the
implication of these genes and oligogenic combination analysis
on our cohort is necessary to investigate the complex mode ofinheritance of NTDs.
M. Faoucher: None. A. Kim: None. M. Beaumont: None. W.
Carre: None. H. Journel: None. L. Akloul: None. L. Pasquier:
None. M. Fradin: None. C. Quelin: None. A. Manunta: None. E.
Watrin: None. M. De Tayrac: None. S. Odent: None. C. Dubourg:
None. V. Dupé: None. V. David: None.
P11.086.D Novel homozygous missense mutation in NARS1
gene: A new neurodevelopmental disorder with microcephaly
Sehime Gulsun TEMEL
1, Sebnem Ozemri Sag1, Erdal Eren1, Engin
Deniz2
1Bursa Uludag University, BURSA, Turkey,2Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) are enzymes essential for
protein translation. Asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase1 (NARS1)belongs to the class IIa family, based upon a 7 beta-strandprotein structure, and functions in the cytoplasm responsible for
asparagine tRNA charging in these locations. More recently it was
reported that de Novo and Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in NARS1Cause neurodevelopmental delay due to toxic gain-of-functionand partial loss-of-function effects. We report 10 month old
deceased boy who initially presented with microcephaly and
dismorphic features. He was the second-born from a consangui-neous marriage at 33 +5 week gestational age. Clinical ﬁndings
included resistant epilepsy, neurodevelopmental delay, neonatal
diabetes, inguinal hernia, hydrocele testis, humoral immunode ﬁ-
ciency. Multiple cavernous malformation were observed on hisbrain tomography. ECHO ﬁndings revealed VSD and pulmonary
stenosis. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous missense
mutation c.866A>G, (p.Tyr289Cys) in the NARS1 gene. The
segregation of this rare variant in the family was con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing. The 3D structure of the mutant protein was
predicted computationally. Based on our modeling analyses wecan speculate on two different effects of Tyr289Arg mutation. First,
mutation of aromatic bulky Tyr to non-aromatic much less bulky
Cys amino acid may inhibit the NARS homodimer formation or
weaken the interaction between chains of the homodimer.Second, since Tyr289 is in the tRNA and NARS binding region,Tyr289Cys mutation may attenuate the speci ﬁc tRNA-enzyme
binding.
S.G. Temel: None. S. Ozemri Sag: None. E. Eren: None. E.
Deniz: None.
P11.087.A Position effect and of modi ﬁer Ras pathway genes
in Neuro ﬁbromatosis type I microdeletion syndrome
Paola Bettinaglio
1,2, Viviana Tritto1, Eleonora Mangano3, Roberta
Bordoni3, Chiara Castronuovo3, Marinella Volontè1, Claudia Cesar-
etti4, Giulia Anna Cagnoli4, Cristina Battaglia1,3, Veronica Saletti5,
Donatella Bianchessi6, Federica Natacci4, Marica Eoli6, Paola Riva1
1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Segrate, Italy,2Università degli Studi
di Brescia, Brescia, Italy,3Institute of Biomedical Technologies,
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Segrate, Italy,4Medical Genetics
Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milano, Italy,5Developmental Neurology Unit,Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy,6Molecular Neuroncol-
ogy Unit,Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano,
Italy.
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis type1(NF1) microdeletion syn-
drome (MD)accounting for 5-11% of NF1 patients is characterized
by a severe phenotype.70% of patients show the 1.4 Mb type1
deletion and variable expressivity of the phenotype suggestingthe involvement of different mechanisms.
Materials-And-Methods: We studied 19 NF1-type1-MD
patients by targeted-NGS analysis with a panel of RAS/MAPK
pathway genes, genes within and ﬂanking the 17q11.2 micro-
deletion, to investigate pseudo-dominance and genetic modi ﬁer
effect.We assayed position effect of deleted region by gene
expression analysis of 10 genes ﬂanking the deletion by RT-PCR on
RNA from peripheral blood comparing a subgroup of 15 NF1-MDpatients with 15 patients with an NF1 gene mutation.Haploinsuf-
ﬁciency was established by evaluating the probability of LoF
intolerance.
Results: We identi ﬁed 14rare variants(Table1) and classi ﬁed
“likely pathogenic ”two variants in Ras pathway genes RAF1 and
RASA1.The RAF1 variant is present in a patient with a cerebro-
vascular pathology while the RASA1 in a patient with anuncommon glioma of the brainstem developed during infancy.
Expression analysis showed ﬁve hypo-expressed( IFT20 ,SSH2 ,
RHOT1 ,ZNF207 ,PSMD11 ) and two over-expressed genes( ABHD15 ,
BLMH ) in NF1-MD patients compared to classical NF1 patients,with
a statistical signi ﬁcance of p < 0.05.Furthermore,we found that
ATAD5,NF1,OMG,RAB11FIP4,andSUZ12 genes are intolerant to
haploinsuf ﬁciency.
Conclusions: Besides haploinsuf ﬁciency,position effect of NF1
microdeletion and possible modi ﬁer gene variants of Ras pathway
could have a role in phenotype severity.Further genetic and
functional studies in a larger cohort of NF1-type1-MD will beperformed to improve genotype-phenotype correlation.
Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
352
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608*Novel variants, not reported in any of the consulted databases
P. Bettinaglio: None. V. Tritto: None. E. Mangano: None. R.
Bordoni: None. C. Castronuovo: None. M. Volontè: None. C.
Cesaretti: None. G. Cagnoli: None. C. Battaglia: None. V. Saletti:
None. D. Bianchessi: None. F. Natacci: None. M. Eoli: None. P.
Riva: None.
P11.088.B Whole genome sequencing reveals the breakpoints
disrupting the NHS gene on a balanced pericentric inversionin a patient with Nance-Horan syndrome
Alejandra Damián1,2, Raluca O Ionescu3, Marta Rodríguez de
Alba1,2, Alejandra Tamayo1,2, María José Trujillo1,2, María Carmen
Cotarelo3, Olga Pérez3, Lorena de la Fuente1,2, Pablo Mínguez1,2,
Cristina Villaverde1,2, Carmen Ayuso1,2, Marta Corton1,2
1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz,
Madrid, Spain,2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare
Diseases, Madrid, Spain,3University Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Inversions are structural genomic variants that are
generally balanced and detected by cytogenetic approaches.
However, they could lead to gene disruptions or even have
positional effects leading to diseases. Nance-Horan syndrome is anX-linked disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, dental
anomalies, and other features. It is caused by mutations in the NHS
gene on chromosome Xp22.13. Here, we present a strategy tocharacterize the breakpoints by Whole Genome Sequencing(WGS) on an apparently balanced pericentric inversion X
(p22.13-q27.3), maternally inherited, in a child with syndromic
bilateral cataracts and its implications in the phenotype.
Material and methods: 30X short-read Illumina paired-end
WGS was performed in the proband and inversion breakpoints
were con ﬁrmed by PCR of the speci ﬁc fragment junctions and
Sanger sequencing. EdU incorporation on lymphocytes cultureand FISH analysis were used to asses skewed X-inactivation
patterns. Expression of involved genes was evaluated by ddPCR-
based Taqman analysis from blood RNA.
Results: We characterized the breakpoint position in Xp22.13,
with a 15pb deletion, disrupting the intron 1 of NHS. In Xq27.3, the
breakpoint is situated in an intergenic region. A microhomology of
5 pb (TTATA) was found in both sides. Skewed X-inactivation was
not detected in his clinically unaffected mother. Topologicallyassociated domains (TADs) are disrupted by the inversion.
Conclusions: We report the ﬁrst chromosomal inversion
disrupting the NHS gene, ef ﬁciently characterized by WGS, likely
caused by microhomology ‐mediated end ‐joining mechanism.
Moreover, we discussed the implication of ﬂanking genes and X
inactivation on the differential features or expressivity of the
phenotype.
A. Damián: None. R. Ionescu: None. M. Rodríguez de Alba:
None. A. Tamayo: None. M. Trujillo: None. M. Cotarelo: None. O.
Pérez: None. L. de la Fuente: None. P. Mínguez: None. C.
Villaverde: None. C. Ayuso: None. M. Corton: None.
P11.089.C Prenatal detection of a new disease-causing
mutation in a preterm neonate with NP-C disease
Sinje Geuer
Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany.
Niemann-Pick C disease (NP-C) is an ultra-rare, autosomal
recessive, neurovisceral lysosomal lipid storage disorder (LSD)
with impaired intracellular lipid traf ﬁcking, and an estimated
incidence of at least 1/120 000 live births. The ﬁrst neurological
symptoms vary with age of onset and include delay of
developmental motor milestones, gait disturbances, increased
falls, clumsiness, cataplexy, supranuclear gaze palsy, schoolproblems and ataxia. Other common features are seizures and
dystonia as well as dementia. Due to the extreme rarity of NP-C
disease, establishing a correct diagnosis is challenging, and isoften realized with a substantial delay. Here we report a pretermmale with postnatal severe respiratory problems, hepatospleno-
megaly, bilateral hydroceles, anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, but no
neurological abnormalities. Prenatally, antenatal scans at 25 weeksof gestation demonstrated ascites. Prenatal trio whole exomesequencing (WES) detected two compound-heterozygous frame-
shift mutations in the gene NPC1 of which one was novel
(c.3294dup p.(Ile1099Tyrfs*22)). This result yielded to the diag-nosis of NP-C disease. Thus early diagnosis of rare and ultra-rare
metabolic diseases (eg, LSDs) can be facilitated by using (prenatal)
trio exome analysis, thus establishing an early de ﬁnite diagnosis.
S. Geuer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Bioscientia.
P11.090.D Genetic and phenotypic spectrum in the NONO-
associated syndromic disorder
Franziska Roessler1, Tobias Bartolomaeus2, Norman Delanty3,
Marie T Greally4, Chiara Klöckner1, Bernt Popp1, Michael Weiden-
bach5, Dominik Westphal6, Cordula M Wolf7, Vincent Strehlow1
1University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany,2Praxis für
Humangenetik, Tübingen, Germany,3FutureNeuro SFI Research
Centre, The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland,
4School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, The Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland,5Department of Pediatric
Cardiology, Helios Leipzig Heart Center, Leipzig, Germany,6InstituteAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
353
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany,7Department of Congenital Heart Defects and Pediatric
Cardiology, German Heart Center Munich, Technical University
Munich, DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partnersite Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany.
The non-POU domain-containing octamer-binding (NONO)
protein is involved in multipl e steps of gene regulation such
as RNA metabolism and DNA repair. Hemizygous pathogenicvariants in the underlying X-chromosomal NONO gene were
conﬁrmed to cause a rare syndromi c disorder. Through our in-
house diagnostics and subsequent matchmaking, we identi ﬁed
three unrelated male indi viduals with pathogenic NONO
variants. For detailed compari son, we reviewed all published
characterizations of the NONO -associated disorder. To date, ten
live-born and seven prenatal cases with either maternallyinherited or de novo variants in NONO were reported in fourteen
families. All live-born individuals demonstrated global develop-
mental delay. Most had heart malf ormations (7/10), consistently
including non-compaction cardiomyopathy (7/7). Brain abnorm-alities were reported in 8/10, con sistently including dysgenesis
or thickening of the corpus callosum (8/8). Seizures were
described once in an individual additionally carrying a de novo
15q13.3 microdeletion. Prenatal cases were de ﬁned by their
cardiac phenotype encompassing non-compaction cardiomyo-
pathy (5/7), cardiomegaly (1/7) and hypoplastic left heart
syndrome (1/7). Variant spectrum comprised truncating (10/14)and splice (4/14) variants. Our thr ee patients carry two unique
frameshifting variants and a nov el splice variant. RT-PCR showed
that the c.651-1G>C variant causes an in-frame deletion of 32amino acids (p.Phe218_Lys249del) . Modelling indicated that the
aberrant protein is likely misfolded and degraded. Based on our
cohort and literature review, we provide a comprehensive
overview of the genetic and phenotypic spectrum in the NONO-
associated syndromic disorder. We further undermine loss-of-
function as the pathomechanism and extend the phenotypic
spectrum through a second case wi th epilepsy but without heart
malformations.
F. Roessler: None. T. Bartolomaeus: None. N. Delanty: None.
M. Greally: None. C. Klöckner: None. B. Popp: None. M.
Weidenbach: None. D. Westphal: None. C. Wolf: None. V.
Strehlow: None.
P11.091.A Molecular and clinical spectrum of patients
included in RASopathies group with Noonan phenotype froma Romanian cohort
VASILICA PLAIASU
1, Diana Ozunu1, Gabriela Motei1, Mihaela Ivan1,
Camelia Procopiuc2, Iuliana Gherlan2, Luiza Vitan3
1INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Regional Center of Medical Genetics,
Bucharest, Romania,2National Institute of Endocrinology CI Parhon,
Bucharest, Romania,3Clinical Hospital CF2, Bucharest, Romania.
Background: The RASopathies are a group of rare genetic
conditions caused by mutations in genes of the Ras-MAPKpathway but together represent one of the most common groupsof genetic disorders, affecting approximately 1 in 1,000 indivi-
duals. Most individuals with RASopathies share common pheno-
types, such as a short stature, heart defects, facial abnormalities,and cognitive impairments, but with vast heterogeneity in clinical
and genetic features.
Materials and Methods: We describe 7 unrelated probands
with clinical features highly suggestive of Noonan syndrome.Genetic analyses using RASopathy genetic panel comprising 18
genes (PTPN11, BRAF, CBL, HRAS, KAT6B, KRAS, LZTR1, MAP2K1,MAP2K2, NF1, NRAS, RAF1, RASA2, RIT1, SHOC2, SOS1, SOS2,
SPRED1) or WES were applied.
Results: We retrospectively reviewed the mutation spectrum
and clinical outcome of patients with Noonan phenotype,conﬁrmed by molecular testing. Phenotypic data recorded
included all clinical characteristics: abnormal growth, facial,
cardiac, thorax, and other features: learning dif ﬁculties, ocular
anomalies, cryptorchidism, and disorders of pubertal timing,lymphatic anomalies. Our study highlights the role of moleculargenetic testing in the process of differential diagnosis of Noonan
syndrome. Among these mutations, the majority were previously
reported and predicted to be pathogenic: PTPN11-c.923A>G fortwo cases, SHOC2-c.4A>G, RAF1-c.788T>C, KRAS-c.178G>C, exceptone of SHOC2 gene with paternal inheritance c.1582C>T which is
unknown.
Conclusions: Early, accurate diagnosis of Noonan syndrome has
important implications for genetic counseling and monitoring for
a large number of potential health conditions. The clinical pro ﬁle
and the genetic heterogeneity of RASopathies could makechoosing between panel testing and WES analysis dif ﬁcult.
V. Plaiasu: None. D. Ozunu: None. G. Motei: None. M. Ivan:
None. C. Procopiuc: None. I. Gherlan: None. L. Vitan: None.
P11.092.B European Medical Education Initiative on Noonan
Syndrome: A clinical practice survey assessing the diagnosis
and clinical management of individuals with Noonan Syn-drome across Europe
Sixto García-Miñaúr
1, Emma Burkitt-Wright2, Alain Verloes3, Guftar
Shaikh4, Jan Lebl5, Ingegerd Östman-Smith6, Cordula Wolf7, Eduardo
Ortega Castelló8, Marco Tartaglia9, Martin Zenker10, Thomas
Edouard11
1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital
Universitario La Paz Research Institute (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain,
2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University
NHS Foundation Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester,United Kingdom,3Department of Genetics, Hospital Robert Debré,
Assistance Publique des Hopitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France,
4Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Hospital for
Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom,5Department of Pediatrics,
Charles University, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic,
6Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg
University, Gothenburg, Sweden,7Department of Pediatric Cardiol-
ogy and Congenital Heart Diseases, German Heart Center Munich atthe Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany,8Department of
Statistics and Data Science, Faculty of Statistical Studies, Complu-
tense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain,9Genetics and Rare
Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,IRCCS, Rome, Italy,10Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany,11Endocrine, Bone Diseases, and
Genetics Unit, Children ’s Hospital, Toulouse University Hospital,
Toulouse, France.
Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) is a developmental disorder
caused by Ras/MAPK signalling pathway gene variants, withvariable features including cardiac defects, short stature, distinc-tive facial appearance, skeletal abnormalities, variable cognitive
deﬁcits, and predisposition to certain cancers. Little is known
about differences in the diagnosis and clinical management ofindividuals with NS across Europe.
Materials and Methods : The European Medical Education
Initiative on NS developed a 60-question clinical practice survey toexamine the diagnosis and clinical management of NS acrossEurope. Physicians from specialities particularly involved in the
management of these patients (clinical geneticists, paediatricAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
354
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608endocrinologists, paediatric cardiologists) were invited via Survey-
Monkey, with support from several European societies. Differences
between specialties and countries were statistically assessed.
Results: Data were analysed from 364 respondents from 20
European countries. Most respondents came from France (20.9%),Spain (17.6%), Italy (15.4%), Germany (15.7%), UK (8.2%) and the
Czech Republic (5.8%). Respondents were evenly distributed
across clinical genetics (29.7%), paediatric endocrinology (40.1%)and paediatric cardiology (30.2%). A high degree of concordanceabout care practices was apparent across participating countries.
While delayed diagnosis did not emerge as a critical issue, unmet
needs regarding transition and increased awareness of familysupport groups were identi ﬁed as common challenges.
Conclusion: Results from this survey provide a comprehensive
diagnosis and clinical management overview for patients with NS
across Europe. Work is ongoing to further analyse the results toidentify key targets for improvement of patient care. The initiative
was supported by an unrestricted grant from Novo Nordisk
Europe A/S.
S. García-Miñaúr: None. E. Burkitt-Wright: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-
ness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, Springer. A. Verloes: None. G.
Shaikh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Greater
Glasgow & Clyde NHS trust. B. Research Grant (principalinvestigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Modest; Soleno Therapeutics, Inc,
OPKO Health. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau,symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, P ﬁzer,
Ferring. J. Lebl: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau,
symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, P ﬁzer,
Merck, Sandoz. I. Östman-Smith: None. C. Wolf: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; German
Society Congenital Heart Disease and Pediatric Cardiology,Deutsche Herzstiftung, Deutsche Stiftung für Herzforschung,Stiftung Kinderherz, Else Kröner-Forschungs-Stiftung, Deutsches
Zentrum Herz-Kreislauf-Forschung. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Novo Nordisk, Adrenomed AG, SIRS Therapeutics, Pliant,KLIFO, Myokardia. E. Ortega Castelló: None. M. Tartaglia: E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Icahn School of Medicine. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novo Nordisk. M. Zenker: D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and
expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, AstraZeneca. F. Consul-
tant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novo Nordisk, FDNA. T. Edouard: C.
Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs orother in-kind support); Modest; Novo Nordisk.
P11.093.C A systematic review of lymphatic disorders in
Noonan Syndrome:
Jos Draaisma
1,Lotte Kleimeier1, Julia Sleutjes1, Erika leenders2,
Willemijn Klein1
1Rradboudumc Amalia children ’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Rradboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: This review aims to give an overview of the
prevalence and clinical presentation of lymphatic disorders in
genetically proven Noonan syndrome.
Methods: Literature search through Pubmed and EMBASE was
performed until May 2020. All articles that included one or more
genetically proven RASopathy and described the lymphaticphenotype were included. Quality assessment was performedusing checklists developed by the Joanna Briggs Institute. Cohortswere combined to give insight in the prevalence, case reports and
case series were used to analyze the clinical presentation and
severity of these abnormalities.
Results: Searches through Pubmed and EMBASE resulted in 451
and 608 publications, respectively. In total, 59 publications could be
included. Among these articles were 23 case reports, 17 case series
and 19 cohort studies. The prevalence of lymphatic disorders was
described in 14 cohorts. Prenatal lymphatic anomalies had aprevalence of 25% for increased NT, 19% for pleural effusions and33% for cystic hygroma in Noonan Syndrome. The prevalence of
postnatal lymphatic disorders c aused by pathogenic variants in RIT1
was 32.6%, caused by pathogenic variants in SOS1 44.4% and in
pathogenic PTPN1 variants 16.5%.
Conclusion: Based on the available published literature about
genetically proven Noonan Syndrome, it appears likely that the
lifetime prevalence of lymphatic disorders in Noonan syndrome ismore than the generally accepted 20%.
J. Draaisma: None. L. Kleimeier: None. J. Sleutjes: None. E.
leenders: None. W. Klein: None.
P11.094.D Lymphatic problems in patients with Noonan
Syndrome
Jos Draaisma
1,Jessie Swarts2, Lotte Kleimeier1, Erika Leenders3,
Willemijn Klein1
1Rradboudumc Amalia children ’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Radboudumc Amalia children ’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Rradboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) has been associated with an
increased risk of lymphatic problems. An estimated prevalence of
20% has commonly been reported, however, cohort studies are
scarce. The prevalence of lymphatic problems seem to differbetween genes. Therefore, this study provide an overview of the
clinical presentation and prevalence of lymphatic problems in
patient with NS and Noonan-like syndromes. In addition,genotype-phenotype correlations will be investigated.
Methods: This retrospective cohort study included patients
from the Radboud University Medical Center, who were clinically
and genetically diagnosed with NS or Noonan-like syndrome tillSeptember 2020.
Results: The study population consisted of 267 patients, with a
median age of 18 years (IQR: 9-34). Prenatal lymphatic problems
most often presented as an increased nuchal translucency and/orchylothorax. Prenatal lymphatic problems increased the risk of
lymphatic problems during infancy (odds ratio 10.5, 95%
conﬁdence interval 3.6-30.1). Postnatal lymphatic problems most
often presented as lymphedema. The lifetime prevalence oflymphatic problems was 21%. Genotype-phenotype correlations
showed a higher lifetime prevalence in patients with a SOS2 or
SHOC2 variants compared to NS patients with a PTPN11 variant
(NSPTPN11 vsSOS2 :p=0.01; NS PTPN11 vsSHOC2 :p=0.02).
Conclusion: Prenatal and postnatal lymphatic problems are
common in NS and Noonan-like syndrome patients. Patients with
prenatal lymphatic problems had an increased risk of lymphaticproblems during infancy. An especially high lifetime prevalence oflymphatic problems was found in patients with a SOS2 orSHOC2
variant.
J. Draaisma: None. J. Swarts: None. L. Kleimeier: None. E.
Leenders: None. W. Klein: None.
P11.095.A Clinical and molecular characterization of a group
of Spanish and German patients with Noonan syndromeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
355
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Vanesa López González1, Mary Ballesta-Martínez1, M. José
Sánchez-Soler1, Ana Teresa Serrano-Antón1, Guillermo Glover-López2,
Begoña Ezquieta-Zubicaray3, Alma Küchler4, Beate Albrecht4, Dag-
mar Wieczorek5, Esther Zorio6, Christina Lissewski7, Martin Zenker7,
Encarna Guillén-Navarro1
1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,2Centro de
Bioquímica y Genética Clínica. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen dela Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,3Laboratorio de Diagnóstico Molecular.
Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain,
45Institut für Humagenetik, Universtitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Ger-
many,5Institüt für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany,6Servicio de Cardiología. Hospital Universitari i
Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain,7Institut für Humangenetik,
Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
Introduction: Noonan syndrome represents one of the most
prevalent disorders of multiple congenital anomalies. Objective .
Clinical and molecular characterization of patients with NS. Estima-tion of its prevalence and genotype -phenotype correlation analysis.
Material and methods: Retrospective, descriptive and interna-
tional collaborative study. Review of medical records of patients
with a molecularly con ﬁrmed NS diagnosis.
Results: 88 cases. Main referral units: General Pediatrics and
Pediatric Cardiology. Mean age at referral: 12.2 years. Estimated
prevalence for NS: 1/6054 live newborns. Main ﬁndings: heart
defects (76%), short stature (53%), microcephaly (40%) andintellectual disability (ID) (35%). All those classi ﬁed as typical
met van der Burgt diagnostic criteria compared to 75% of the
atypical ones (p =0.003). Association between low weight, short
stature, microcephaly, motor delay and cardiac surgery with ID,also between central nervous system abnormalities and seizures.
PTPN11 was the most frequently mutated gene (74%). Higher
percentage of microcephaly in PTPN11 and hypertrophic cardio-myopathy in RAF1. Neurodevelopment and height were less
affected in SOS1.
Conclusions: We present a wide series of NS cases with clinical
manifestations, mostly, in accordance with previous publications.There is a large prevalence of microcephaly, higher in PTPN11,
associated with ID and behavioral alteration, not previously
reported. There appears to be greater severity of systemicinvolvement accompanying the severity of the craniofacialphenotype. The estimated prevalence in Murcia is lower than
previously reported, the development of strategies to improve its
detection being necessary. Greater awareness of adult specialtiestowards this group of diseases is necessary.
V. López González: None. M. Ballesta-Martínez: None. M.
Sánchez-Soler: None. A. Serrano-Antón: None. G. Glover-López:
None. B. Ezquieta-Zubicaray: None. A. Küchler: None. B.
Albrecht: None. D. Wieczorek: None. E. Zorio: None. C.
Lissewski: None. M. Zenker: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None.
P11.096.B Typical clinical diagnosis and negative ﬁrst-line
molecular results: when genome sequencing and transcrip-
tomics integration helps untangle unexplained rare Mende-lian diseases
Estelle Colin
1,2, Yannis Duffourd1, Patrick Callier1,3, Emilie Tisserant1,
Thomas Besnard4,5, Alice Goldenberg6, Benjamin Cogné4,5, Bertrand
Isidor4,5, Arthur Sorlin1,7, Sébastien Moutton1,7, Julian Delanne1,7,
Ange-Line Bruel1,3, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,3, Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon1,3, Mélanie Fradin8, Christel Dubourg9,10, Magali
Gorce2, Salima El chehadeh11, François-Guillaume Debray12, Martine
Doco Fenzy13,14, Kévin Uguen15, Anne Boland16, Robert Olaso16,Jean-François Deleuze16, Damien Sanlaville15,17, Christophe Phi-
lippe1,3, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,3,7, Laurence Faivre1,7,18, Antonio
Vitobello1,3
1UFR Des Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne
UMR1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du Développement »,FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,2Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU
d’Angers, Angers, France,3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en
Diagnostic Génomique des Maladies Rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHUDijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique
Médicale, Nantes, France,5INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU Nantes,
l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France,6Department of Genetics and
Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, Normandy Center forGenomic and Personalized Medicine, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France,7Centre
de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement etsyndromes malformatifs, Centre de Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD,CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,
8CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique
Clinique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, Rennes,
France,9Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU,
Rennes, Rennes, France,10Univ Rennes, CNRS, IGDR, UMR 6290,
Rennes, France,11Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de
Hautepierre, CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,12Metabolic Unit-
Department of Medical Genetics, CHU & University Liège Domaine LSart-Tilman Bât B35, Liège, Belgium,13Université de Reims Cham-
pagne-Ardenne, Reims, Reims, France,14Service de Génétique, CHU
Reims, Reims, France,15Department of Genetics and Reference Center
for Developmental Disorders, Lyon University Hospital, GroupementHospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,16Université
Paris-Saclay, CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique
Humaine, Evry, France,17GENDEV Team, CRNL, INSERM U1028 CNRS
UMR5292 UCBL1, Lyon, France,18Institut GIMI, CHU de Dijon, Hôpital
d’Enfants, Dijon, France; Oncogénétique, Centre de Lutte contre le
Cancer Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France.
Developmental disorders are extremely heterogeneous, but
typical clinical features reminiscent of recognizable OMIM
syndromes, associated with well-known causative genes, repre-sent a valuable help in the identi ﬁcation of causative genetic
variants. However, ﬁrst-line genetic investigations such as targeted
sequencing, gene panel or exome sequencing may fail to reach a
molecular diagnosis, resulting in a multiplication of diagnostictests.
We recruited 15 individuals with typical clinical diagnosis of
OMIM diseases with autosomal recessive mode of inheritance and
a single heterozygous variant (9/15), or with X-linked recessive orautosomal dominant inheritance and no causative variant (6/15),
identi ﬁed by ﬁrst-line genetic tests. We applied a two-step analysis
including singleton genome sequencing (GS) complemented withtranscriptomics analysis in blood or ﬁbroblasts samples when
required.
GS alone identi ﬁedﬁve causal single nucleotide variants (SNVs)/
indels, four of which missed by ﬁrst-line targeted tests, and four
structural variants (including two deletions (6,5 kb and 4,2 kb), onebalanced translocation and one complex rearrangement). mRNA-
seq analysis permitted to validate the deleterious outcome of two
complex rearrangements detected by GS and also ﬁnd one
structural variant and one deep intronic SNV not previouslyidenti ﬁed by GS alone.
We show that typical OMIM disorders with negative or
inconclusive ﬁrst-line results can be solved by a sequential
deployment of GS and mRNA-seq. These approaches allowed us
to con ﬁrm a molecular diagnosis in 87% (13/15) of our cohort.
Overall, GS and mRNA-seq can be integrated in the diagnosticroutine, allowing to establish new molecular diagnoses nototherwise identi ﬁable by standard approaches.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
356
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608E. Colin: None. Y. Duffourd: None. P. Callier: None. E.
Tisserant: None. T. Besnard: None. A. Goldenberg: None. B.
Cogné: None. B. Isidor: None. A. Sorlin: None. S. Moutton: None.
J. Delanne: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A.
Denommé-Pichon: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Dubourg: None.
M. Gorce: None. S. El chehadeh: None. F. Debray: None. M. Doco
Fenzy: None. K. Uguen: None. A. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None.
J. Deleuze: None. D. Sanlaville: None. C. Philippe: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Vitobello: None.
P11.097.C Contribution of genomic copy-number variations in
a Brazilian cohort of syndromic orofacial clefts
Rosana M. Candido-Souza1, Roseli M. Zechi-Ceide1, Nancy M.
Kokitsu-Nakata1, Camila W. Alvarez1, Siulan Vendramini-Pittoli1,
Juliana F. Mazzeu2, Hubertus J. Eussen3, Annelies de Klein3,
Fernanda S. Jehee3
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of
Craniofacial Anomalies (HRCA), University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil,
2Federal University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil,3Department of Clinical
Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether-
lands.
Background : Orofacial clefts represent ~30% of all congenital
malformations being 30% of cleft lip with or without cleft palateand 50% of cleft palate cases syndromic. Chromosomal abnorm-alities, mainly in chromosomes 13, 18 and 22, are found in 11 to
23% of syndromic cases. Incomplete penetrance and the of
investigation in large cohorts make it dif ﬁcult to identify other
chromosomal regions highly related to this malformation. Aims :
Investigate the contribution of CNVs in syndromic orofacial clefts
and identify new regions and genes herewith associated.
Methods : 62 syndromic orofacial clefts patients were analyzed
using MLPA for subtelomeric and common microdeletion/micro-
duplication syndromes. Patients with normal or inconclusive
results were analyzed with microarray.
Results: MLPA detected six abnormalities (9.7%): two deletion
22q11.21, two unbalanced translocations (dup 3p/del 7q; del 4p/
dup 11p) and two terminal deletions (del 18p; del18q). Microarray
showed pathogenic CNVs in 11 patients (17.7%): deletions at 1q,16p11.2, 18q, 19p13.2, distal 22q11.21 and Xp11; duplications at15q13 and 18q12 and a complex rearrangement in chromosome
13. One patient had a deletion at NRXN1 and six patients (9.7%)
presented variants of unknown signi ﬁcance. A strong suggestion
of consanguinity was found in 8.9% of the cases.
Conclusion : Genomic microrearrangements (27.4%) play an
important role in syndromic orofacial clefts. We detected CNVs inregions not frequently related to oral clefts (1q, 15q13, 16p11) anddescribe cleft lip in Malan syndrome (19p13.2). Consanguinity
plays an important role in onset of orofacial clefts, by increasing
the risk of a recessive disease or incrementing risk alleles.
R.M. Candido-Souza: None. R.M. Zechi-Ceide: None. N.M.
Kokitsu-Nakata: None. C.W. Alvarez: None. S. Vendramini-
Pittoli: None. J.F. Mazzeu: None. H.J. Eussen: None. A. de Klein:
None. F.S. Jehee: None.
P11.098.D A gain of one copy at band 14q22.3q23.1 that
involves the OTX2 gene is implicated in hemifacial microsomia
Raluca Oancea-Ionescu
1,2, Clara Herrero-Forte1,2, Maria Fenollar-
Cortés1,2, Enrique Criado-Vega1,3, Maria Calvente -Garcia4, Dan
Diego-Álvarez5, Carmen Cotarelo-Pérez1,21Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain,2Unidad de Genética
Clínica, Servicio de Análisis Clínicos, Instituto de Medicina del
Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain,3Servicio de Neonatología, Instituto del
Niño y Adolescente., Madrid, Spain,4Nimgenetics New Integrated
Medical Genetics, Madrid, Spain,5Sistemas Genómicos Grupo
Biomédico ASCIRES, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: The hemifacial microsomia (HMF) is a heteroge-
neous genetic disorder affecting the development of the
structures derived from the ﬁrst and second branchial arches
such the jaw, the buccal structures and the hearing system.
Material and methods: The patient is a 7-month-old female
who presents the following clinical manifestations: right HMF; leftpreauricular tag; microtia and absence of auditory canal in the
right ear with hearing loss; absence of right ascending ramus and
mandibular body; right zygomatic arch hypoplasia with deviationof the mouth commissure; mild micrognathia; normal palate and
an interventricular communication spontaneously closed. Cerebral
ultrasound was normal. X-ray showed no vertebral abnormalities.Next-generation sequencing using a virtual panel of 55 genes forHMF and/or preauricular tags and array-CGH were performed.
Results: Both tests detected a de novo copy number variation
consisting in a pathogenic interstitial gain of one copy at band14q22q23.1, which is at least 1,33 megabases. It involves fourOMIM genes, of which the OTX2 stands out because its duplication
was previously associated with HMF as it is shown in following
table:
Conclusions: This result and the previous cases suggest that
the gain of one copy at band 14q22.3q23.1 is one of the
etiological region of HMF and the OTX2 is the most likely causal
gene. Determining the HFM etiology allows an accurate diagnosisand offers reproductive and familial genetic advice.
R. Oancea-Ionescu: None. C. Herrero-Forte: None. M. Fenol-
lar-Cortés: None. E. Criado-Vega: None. M. Calvente -Garcia:
None. D. Diego-Álvarez: None. C. Cotarelo-Pérez: None.
P11.099.A PACS2, PACS1 and VACTERL a clinical overlap
Hannah Massey , John Dean, Dawn O ’Sullivan, Stephen Tennant
Aberdeen royal in ﬁrmary, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) has led to the discovery of new
genes involved in developmental delay. Two of these are the
evolutionary linked proteins PACS1 and PACS2, which function asmetabolic switches. We present a case of patient with the
previously described PACS2 c.624G>A; p.Glu209Lys variant.
However, while our patient has the infantile epilepsy, develop-mental delay and cerebella hypoplasia previously described, healso had novel features. This included anal atresia, Tetralogy of
Fallot and vertebral abnormalities, meaning he was previously
diagnosed with VACTERL. Cardiac abnormalities are morecommonly seen in PACS1 variants and this case strengthens thephenotypic similarities between the two conditions. There are
plausible genetic mechanisms causing the cardiac and anal
anomalies seen in our patient and suggest the PACS2 diseasespectrum should be expanded.
H. Massey: None. J. Dean: None. D. O ’Sullivan: None. S.
Tennant: None.
P11.101.C Low risk of embryonal cancer in PIK3CA -Related
Overgrowth Spectrum: impact on screening recommendationsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
357
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Laurence Faivre1,2, Jean-Charles Crépin1,3,4, Manon Réda5, Sophie
Nambot5, Virginie Carmignac1,4, Caroline Abadie6, Audrey Putoux7,
Juliette Mazereeuw-Hautier8, Aude Maza8, Maxime Luu9, Yannis
Duffourd1, Christophe Philippe1, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1, Martin
Chevarin1, Claire Abasq-Thomas10, Jeanne Amiel11, Stéphanie
Arpin12, Geneviève Baujat13, Didier Bessis14, Emmanuelle Bourrat15,
Odile Boute16, Anne-Claire Bursztejn17, Nicolas Chassaing18, Christine
Coubes19, Patrick Edery7, Salima El Chehadeh20, Alice Goldenberg21,
Smail Hadj-Rabia22, Damien Haye23, Bertrand Isidor24, Marie-Line
Jacquemont25, Didier Lacombe26, Bruno Leheup27, Ludovic Martin28,
Anabel Maruani29, Fanny Morice-Picard26, Florence Petit16, Alice
Phan30, Lucille Pinson19, Eve Puzenat31, Massimiliano Rossi7, Renaud
Touraine32, Clémence Vanlerberghe16, Marie Vincent24, Catherine
Vincent-Delorme16, Sandra Whalen33, Marjolaine Willems19, Tristan
Mirault34, Paul Kuentz1,35, Pierre Vabres1,3,4,2
1Equipe INSERM UMR1231, Génétique des Anomalies du Développe-
ment, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,2Fédéra-
tion Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies
du Développement, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,3Service de
Dermatologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4Centre de
référence Maladies Rares Génétiques à Expression Cutanée (MAGEC),
CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,5Service de génétique, CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France,6Département d ’Oncologie Médicale,
Saint-Herblain, France,7Département de Génétique, Hospices Civils
de Lyon, Lyon, France,8Service de Dermatologie, CHU Toulouse,
Toulouse, France,9Centre d ’Investigation Clinique –module plur-
ithématique, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,10Département de
Pédiatrie et Génétique Médicale, CHU Brest Morvan, Brest, France,
11Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades,
Paris, France,12Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU de Tours, Tours,
France,13Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, Paris, France,14Département de Dermatologie, CHRU de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,15Service de dermatologie, CHU St-
Louis Lariboisière, Paris, France,16Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU
Lille, Lille, France,17Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Nancy, Nancy,
France,18Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse,
France,19Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies rares et
Médecine Personnalisée, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
20Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,21Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen et Centre Normand de
Génomique Médicale et Médecine Personnalisée, Rouen, France,
22Service de Dermatologie et Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares
Génétiques à Expression Cutanée (MAGEC), Université Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Universitaire
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,23Service de Pédiatrie, CHU de
Tours, Tours, France,24Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de
Nantes, Nantes, France,25Unité de Génétique Médicale, CHU de la
Réunion, Saint Pierre, France,26Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU
de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,27Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU
de Nancy, Nancy, France,28Service de Dermatologie, CHU d ’Angers,
Angers, France,29Service de Dermatologie, Unité de Dermatologie
Pédiatrique, Tours, France,30Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Lyon,
Lyon, France,31Service de Dermatologie, CHU Besançon, Besançon,
France,32Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Saint-Etienne, Saint-
Etienne, France,33Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital
Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France,34Centre de référence des maladies
vasculaires rares, Centre Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France,
35Génétique Biologique Histologie, CHRU de Besançon, Besançon,
France.
Introduction: The PIK3CA -Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS)
encompasses various conditions caused by mosaic activating
PIK3CA mutations. PIK3CA somatic mutations are frequently
involved in various cancer types. Some overgrowth syndromesare associated with an increased risk of Wilms ’tumour (WT)
warranting screening. In PROS, abdominal ultrasound monitoringevery 3 months has been discussed for the risk of WT. We aimed
to determine the risk of cancer in patients with con ﬁrmed PROS to
evaluate the relevance of screening recommendations.
Patients and methods: The development of a cancer was
searched within 267 PROS patients. A literature review of cancerreports in PROS was performed.
Results: Median age at last visit was 11.2 years (range 4
months-68 years). Five patients developed cancer (1.9%): nephro-blastoma at age 9; granulosa juvenile tumor at age 16; gastricadenocarcinoma at age 52 ; myelodysplasic syndrome at 55 and
basocellular carcinoma at 59 in the same patient; clear cell renal
carcinoma at age 38. In the literature, 6 cases of WT (0.12%) and 4cases of other cancers have been reported out of 483 PIK3CA
patients, carying p.His1047Leu/Arg in particular (15 patients with
WT, 40 with other cancer out of 820 patients with no molecular
conﬁrmation). A focus has been given to the location of the
hypertrophy.
Discussion: The risk of WT in PROS appears lower than 5%,
therefore with insuf ﬁcient evidence to recommend routine
abdominal imaging. Long-term follow-up studies are needed toconclude for other cancer types, as well as a relationship with the
extent of tissue mosaicism.
L. Faivre: None. J. Crépin: None. M. Réda: None. S. Nambot:
None. V. Carmignac: None. C. Abadie: None. A. Putoux: None. J.
Mazereeuw-Hautier: None. A. Maza: None. M. Luu: None. Y.
Duffourd: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None.
M. Chevarin: None. C. Abasq-Thomas: None. J. Amiel: None. S.
Arpin: None. G. Baujat: None. D. Bessis: None. E. Bourrat: None.
O. Boute: None. A. Bursztejn: None. N. Chassaing: None. C.
Coubes: None. P. Edery: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. A.
Goldenberg: None.
S. Hadj-Rabia: None. D. Haye: None. B.
Isidor: None. M. Jacquemont: None. D. Lacombe: None. B.
Leheup: None. L. Martin: None. A. Maruani: None. F. Morice-
Picard: None. F. Petit: None. A. Phan: None. L. Pinson: None. E.
Puzenat: None. M. Rossi: None. R. Touraine: None. C.
Vanlerberghe: None. M. Vincent: None. C. Vincent-Delorme:
None. S. Whalen: None. M. Willems: None. T. Mirault: None. P.
Kuentz: None. P. Vabres: None.
P11.102.D A 3,195 kb duplication at 2q14.3 in a proband with
a t(17;19)(p13.1;p13.3)mat is most likely associated withcraniofacial dimorphisms, developmental and neurological
anomalies
Natália Oliva-Teles1,2,3, Mariana Marques4, Manuela Mota-
Freitas1,2, Cristina Candeias1,2, Joana Fino4, Ana Fortuna1,2, Dezso
David4
1Centro de Genética Médica Dout or Jacinto Magalhães/Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal,2Unit for Multi-
disciplinary Research in Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences
Abel Salazar, University of Porto (UMIB/ICBAS/UP), Porto, Portugal,
3Departamento de Medicina da Comunidade Informação e Decisão em
Saúde, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,
4National Health Institute “Doutor Ricardo Jorge ”,L i s b o n ,P o r t u g a l .
Introduction : Characterization of naturally occurring, cytogenomi-
cally visible or cryptic structural variants associated with human
disorders is important for identi fying pathogenic alterations that
otherwise could be dif ﬁcult or impossible to identify.
Case Report/Methods: Proband DGRC0021 presents with a
familial apparently balanced t(17;19)(p13.1;p13.3)mat, craniofacial
dysmorphisms, global developmental delay and aggressivebehavior. Her carrier mother and grandmother were phenotypi-cally normal, whereas her father died of a cerebral aneurysm
rupture in his late 20s. Long-insert genome and SangerAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
358
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608sequencing were performed for identifying structural variants in
their responsible for the clinical phenotype.
Results : The 17p13.1 breakpoint at g.9,819,770 disrupts IVS 1 of
GSG1L2 , whereas the 19p13.3 breakpoint at 6,573,218, is
within a low-complexity region. Based on deletions atthe breakpoint regions the seq[GRCh38/hg38] t(17;19)
(19pter→19p13.3::17p13.1 →17qter;17pter →17p13.1::19p13.3
→19qter)mat is considered unbalanced. Neither the disrupted
gene nor those localized in the disrupted topologically associateddomains (TADs) explained the reported phenotype. Subsequently
a 3,195 kb duplication was identi ﬁed at 2q14.3. Two genes
associated with autosomal dominant disorders, PROC
(
OMIM*612283) and HS6ST1 (OMIM*604846) are localized within
the duplicated region. This alteration is either paternally inherited
orde novo .
Conclusions : We showed that the translocation is nonpatho-
genic and identi ﬁed a most likely pathogenic paternally inherited
duplication. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reported case
leading to duplication of PROC . While the pathogenic effect of
PROC deﬁciency is well known, the effect of a possible duplication
ofPROC is unknown. Nevertheless, we propose that the clinical
phenotypes in the proband and her father are caused by this
duplication.
N. Oliva-Teles: None. M. Marques: None. M. Mota-Freitas:
None. C. Candeias: None. J. Fino: None. A. Fortuna: None. D.
David: None.
P11.103.A Implementation and assessment of a rapid Whole
Exome Sequencing protocol in paediatric patients admitted tointensive care units or highly complex paediatric units in atertiary hospital of the Spanish National Health System
Marta Pacio Miguez
1, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3, Ángela del Pozo1,2,
Juan José Menéndez Suso4, Francisco J. Climent Alcalá5, Patricia
Álvarez García6, María Sánchez Holgado6, Carmen Jiménez Rodrí-
guez1, Juan Manuel Montejo1, Rocío Mena1, Sofía Siccha7, Mario
Solís1, Victoria Eugenia Fernandez Montaño1, Mª Victoria Gomez del
Pozo1, Natividad Gallego Onís1, María Esther Rubio Martín1, Pablo
Lapunzina1,2,3, Sonia Rodríguez Novoa1, Fernando Santos-
Simarro1,2,3, María Palomares-Bralo1,2,3
1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, INGEMM, Madrid, Spain,
2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enferme-
dades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,3European Reference Network, ERN
ITHACA, Madrid, Spain,4Servicio de Cuidados Intensivos Pediátricos,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,5Unidad de PatologíaCompleja pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
6Unidad de cuidados intensivos neonatales, Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Madrid, Spain,7Servicio de pediatría, Hospital Universitario La
Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Genetic disorders contribute signi ﬁcantly to the
mortality and morbidity of affected paediatric patients, requiring
prolonged admissions in NICU, PICU or complex hospitalizationfacilities. Early identi ﬁcation of the genetic cause favour the
efﬁcient management of these children, provide prognostic
information and allow genetic counselling of families. We have
tested and set up a rapid work ﬂow method for achieving a genetic
diagnosis through rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) incritically ill or children with high complexity with a suspected
genetic disorder in the environment of a tertiary paediatric
hospital of the Spanish National Health System.
Materials And Methods: Over the last year, our working group
identi ﬁed and implemented the clinical and laboratory needs to
achieve a genetic diagnosis through rWES. Thirteen childrenmeeting the inclusion criteria were studied using a trio approach.
Results: We found a causative variant in genes known to be
associated with developmental disorders in 6 of the 13 cases
(46%). Additionally, we found variants of potential researchinterest in 3 cases. Mean time for achieving a genetic result was30,8 days (median =30, std =9.2) after enrolment in the study.
Conclusions: We have set up a work ﬂow to assess the impact of
rWES in paediatric patients admitted to NICU, PICU or complexpaediatric unit. A genetic result was achieved in a mean time of
30,8 days. The diagnostic and clinical utility is veri ﬁed by a
diagnostic rate of 46%. Impact in patient management and costsderived from this protocol during the ﬁrst year of implementation
will be discussed.
M. Pacio Miguez: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. Á. del Pozo:
None. J. Menéndez Suso: None. F. Climent Alcalá: None. P.
Álvarez García: None. M. Sánchez Holgado: None. C. Jiménez
Rodríguez: None. J. Manuel Montejo: None. R. Mena: None. S.
Siccha: None. M. Solís: None. V. Fernandez Montaño: None. M.
Gomez del Pozo: None. N. Gallego Onís: None. M.E. Rubio
Martín: None. P. Lapunzina: None. S. Rodríguez Novoa: None. F.
Santos-Simarro: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None.
P11.104.B Spectrum of mutations in Ras-MAPK pathway in
Russian probands
Anna Orlova , Alexander Polyakov, Polina Gundorova, Oksana
Ryzhkova
Clinical phenotype comparisons between our patient and the previous cases with gain of one copy at band 14q22q23.1 that include OTX2 gene
Our
patientBallesta-Martínez MJ, 2013PMID: 23794319 Zielinski D, 2014PMID: 24816892 Ehrenberg
M,2019PMID:31814694
Family relationship Index
caseIndex
caseFather Uncle Cousin Cousin
´s sonCousin´s
daughterMaternal
grand-motherMaternal
great-uncleMother Brother index
caseIndexcase Father
Facial asymmetry ++ + -- ++ + + ++ + + +
Facial cleft - ++ -- + - ++ + + + -N D
Temporo-mandibular
joint abnormality++ - - ND ND ND ++ + + + -N D
Ear constriction/cleft/
microtia++ -- - ++ -- - - ++ ND
Auricular pits - + -- - ++ ND ND ND ND ND - ND
Pre- or post-auricular
tags++ + + + ++ + - +++ -N D
Stenoticnarrow ear
canals++ -N D N D ++ ND ND ND ND ND - ND
Abnormal palate - - - - - - - ND ND ND ND ND - ND
Micrognathia ++ -- - - - - + - ++ + ND
Hearing loss ++ - - ND - - ND ND ND ND ND + NDAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
359
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Federal State Budgetary Scienti ﬁc Institution "Research Centre for
Medical Genetics", Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Variants in genes related to the Ras-MAPK pathway
cause diseases that form the large group of rasopathies. The mostcommon syndrome in this group is Noonan syndrome. To date,
the incidence of rasopathiesis 1-2 per 20000 newborns. It is
difﬁcult to clinically differentiate Rasopathies.
Materials and Methods: DNA of 308 unrelated probands with
Rasopathies were analysed with a custom panel (23 genes) for
new generation sequencing on Ion Torrent S5. The coverage was
91-100% of the major Ras-MAPK genes.
Results: Out of 308 probands, pathogenic and likely pathogenic
variants were found in 121 cases. The results are shown in the
table. Novel variants classi ﬁed as VOUS were found in 5,2% cases
and they require further research.
Gene Number(percent) of
pathogenic and Likely
pathogenic variantsNumber of mutations
haven ’t been described
earlier
PTPN11 63(52%) 1
SOS1 11(9%) 2
BRAF 11(9%)
NF1 9(7.4%) 3
SHOC2 8(6.6%) 1
HRAS 4(3.3%)
RIT1 3(2.5%)
KRAS 3(2.5%) 1
MAP2K1 3(2.5%) 2
SPRED1 2(1.65%) 1
CBL 1(0.83%)
LZTR1 1(0.83%) 2
NRAS 1(0.83%)
RAF1 1(0.83%) 3
Conclusions: The proportions of diseases and mutation
spectrum in the group of patients with Rasopathies from the
Russia were determined. Most of the the cases (52%) are due tomutations in the PTPN11 gene, followed by the frequency of SOS1,
BRAF, NF1, SHOC2 and others. This data is comparable with the
incidence in other populations. It was not possible to identify thecause of the disease in 61% of cases.
A. Orlova: None. A. Polyakov: None. P. Gundorova: None. O.
Ryzhkova: None.
P11.105.C Risk of autoimmune diseases in patients with
RASopathies: systematic study of humoral and cellular
immunity
Maria Anna Siano
1, Mariateresa Falco2, Valeria Marchetti3, Stefano
Pagano3, Francesca Di Candia3, Daniele De Brasi4, Alessandro De
Luca5, Valentina Pinna5, Simona Sestito6, Daniela Concolino6, Marco
Tartaglia7, Pietro Strisciuglio3, Vittoria D ’Esposito8, Serena Cabaro8,
Giuseppe Perruolo8, Pietro Pietro Formisano8, Daniela Melis1
1Postgraduate School of Pediatrics, Department of Medicine, Surgery
and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", University of Salerno,
Salerno, Italy,2Pediatric Unit, San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona
University Hospital, Salerno, Italy,3Postgraduate School of Pediatrics,
Faculty of Medicine University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy,
4Unit of Pediatrics, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon, Naples, Italy,5Molecular Genetics Unit, Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy,6Department of
Medicine, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy,7Genetics
and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico BambinoGesù, Rome, Italy,8Department of Translational Medical Sciences,
University of Naples Federico II & Institute of Endocrinology and
Experimental Oncology, National Research Council, Naples, Italy.
Introduction: Abnormalities of the immune system are rarely
reported in patients with RASopathies. The aim of this study was
to investigate the prevalence of immune system dysfunction in a
cohort of patients affected by RASopathies.
Materials and Methods: A cohort of 69 patients and age- and
sex-matched control group were enrolled. Autoimmune disorders
were investigated according to international consensus criteria.
Immune framework was also evaluated by immunoglobulin levels,lymphocyte subpopulations, autoantibodies levels and panel of
inﬂammatory molecules, in both patients and controls.
Results: Frequent upper respiratory tract infections were
recorded in 2 patients (2.89%), psoriasis was diagnosed in 1(1.45%), as well as alopecia. Low IgA levels were detected in 8/44
patients (18.18%), low CD8 T cells in 13/35 (37.14%). Anti-tg and
anti-TPO antibodies were detected in 3/24 patients (12.5%), antir-TSH in 2 (8.33%), all in euthyroidism. All tested patients showedincreased in ﬂammatory molecules compared to controls. Serum
IgA and CD8 levels were signi ﬁcantly lower in patients than in
controls (p 0,00685; p 0,000656 respectively).
Conclusions . A major tendency to autoimmune phenomena
than to immunode ﬁciency was recorded in patients as demon-
strated by the ﬁnding of circulating autoantibodies, low levels of
CD8 T cells and high levels of in ﬂammatory cytokines. These
ﬁndings may anticipate the detection of overt autoimmune
disease. In order to recommend routine screening for autoimmu-
nity in asymptomatic patients, continuous monitoring will berequired for possible emergence of autoimmune disease.
M.A. Siano: None. M. Falco: None. V. Marchetti: None. S.
Pagano: None. F. Di Candia: None. D. De Brasi: None. A. De
Luca: None. V. Pinna: None. S. Sestito: None. D. Concolino:
None. M. Tartaglia: None. P. Strisciuglio: None. V. D ’Esposito:
None. S. Cabaro: None. G. Perruolo: None. P. Pietro Formisano:
None. D. Melis: None.
P11.106.D Novel mutation and report of two new physical
ﬁndings in renpenning syndrome
Hande Kaymakcalan
1, Adife Gulhan Ercan Sencicek2, Ayse Nurcan
Cebeci3, Ali Sey ﬁYalim Yalcin4
1Demiroglu Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey,2Masonic Medical
Research Institute, Utica, NY, USA,3Private practise, Erlangen,
Germany,4Private practise, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: We report a novel deleterious hemizygous X
chromosome variant in PQBP1 (NM_001167989:p.Arg153fs) that
leads to Renpenning syndrome (OMIM#309500).
Materials and methods: 17 years old Turkish male patient with
tetrology of fallot and pulmonary atresia was seen due todysmorphic features and short stature. Fish test was negative forDiGeorge Syndrome when he was 2 years old. Whole exome
sequencing was done.
Results: On physical examination, his height was 149,4 cm
(-3,92 SDS), weight was 38,2 kg (-4,43 SD). His body mass index
was 17.11 kg/m
2(-2,5 SD). His head circumference was 48 cm
(-6,34 SD). He had long narrow face, bulbous nose, sparse lateraleye brows and strabismus. He had webbed neck. He had leanbody build, muscular atrophy of upper back and scoliosis. He hadAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
360
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608slender feet and overriding 5th right toe over 4th toe. This feature
has not been described before. On genital examination his left
testis could not be palpated in scrotum and in inguinal canal. His
right testis was 20 cc. This feature has not been described beforeeither. He also had mild intellectual de ﬁciency. Unfortunately, he
died due to endocarditis complication. Sanger sequencing
conﬁrmed that he had deleterious hemizygous X chromosome
variant in PQBP1 (NM_001167989:p.Arg153fs) inherited from an
unaffected heterozygous mother. Three unaffected sisters allinherited the variant.
Conclusion: Patients with previous inconclusive genetic test
results must be reevaluated. Diagnosis is important for manage-ment and genetic counselling. Grant: This work was supported byU54HG006504 (Yale Center for Mendelian Disorders, to MG).
H. Kaymakcalan: None. A. Ercan Sencicek: None. A. Cebeci:
None. A. Yalcin: None.
P11.107.A Unpredictable results of undiagnosed patients via
exome sequencing: Ribosomopathies
Saide Betül Arslan Sat ılmış
1, Busranur Cavdarli1, Ahmet Cevdet
Ceylan2, Ebru Tuncez1, Cavidan Nur Semerci Gündüz2
1Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey,2Ankara Yildirim Beyazit
University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Ribosomopathies caused by abnormalities of
ribosomal proteins and on biogenesis factors are a broad
spectrum that affects various tissues including the nervous
system, bone marrow, and ectoderm or causes developmental-delay or cancer-susceptibility. Although the most commonribosomopathies are Diamond-Blackfan anemia, 5q-Syndrome,
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, Dyskeratosis Congenita, Carti-
lage hair hypoplasia, new diseases have been de ﬁning by the
development of new technologies.
Material/Method: Five undiagnosed patients with growth
retardation, epilepsy, cerebellar hypoplasia, hepatic dysfunctionor metabolic disease were examined. Conventional-karyotype andmicroarray analyses were normal. Whole-exome-sequencing was
performed via XGEN.
Results: The determined variants wer e evaluated according to the
patients ’clinical features. One pathogenic variant of the EIF2B3 gene
for a 7-year-old boy with leukodys trophy and one likely pathogenic
variant of the MRM2 gene for an 18-year-old male with hepatosple-
nomegaly and tremor were thought to be causative, respectively.Three variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance(VUS); in the POLR3A gene (3-
year-old girl with cerebellar atrophy and epilepsy), TAF6 gene(3-year-
old boy with developmental delay and mental de ﬁciency), and PARN
gene(3-year-old girl with microcephaly and cerebellar vermisatrophy), were detected. Although these variants are VUS, they were
thought to be clinically responsible in the light of segregation
analyses in the family.
Conclusion: Ribosomopathies are a broad-spectrum of diseases
those molecular basis has been better understood as the whole-
exome-sequencing becomes viable. Therefore, the new mutations
reported and their clinical relevance is important. The spectrum ofribosomopathies will be extended by reporting the new mutationsin the genes on the ribosomal-pathway and by enlightening their
reﬂections on the phenotypes.
S.B. Arslan Sat ılmış:None. B. Cavdarli: None. A.C. Ceylan:
None. E. Tuncez: None. C.N. Semerci Gündüz: None.
P11.108.B Novel missense variant in CCDC22 causes X-linked
Ritscher-Schinzel/3C syndrome: further evidence on the
prenatal and postnatal clinical phenotypeEmanuela Ponzi , Paola Orsini, Romina Ficarella, Antonia Lucia
Buonadonna, Maria Fatima Antonucci, Mattia Gentile
Di Venere Hospital-Unit of Medical Genetics, Bari, Bari, Italy.
Introduction: Ritscher-Schinzel Syndrome (RSS) is a rare devel-
opmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, cere-
bellar/brain-malformations, congenital heart defects and
craniofacial abnormalities.
Materials and Methods: We report a male infant with prenatal
history of fetal ascites and postnatal typical dismorphic facial
features, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, enlarged cisterna magnaand hepatomegaly. Karyotype and CGH-array were performedprenatally and whole-exome sequencing (WES), performed
postnatally.
Results: Karyotype and CGH-array were normal. WES detected a
novel maternal X-linked missense variant (c.49A>C; p.Thr17Pro) inexon 1 of the CCDC22 gene. The variant, not previously reported, has
been classi ﬁed as uncertain/likely pathogenic (ACMG criteria). Allelic
variant in the same position c.49A> G (p.Thr17Ala) is reported inClinVar as pathogenic. CCDC22 is a highly conserved and broadly
expressed protein that has been shown to interact through its
N-terminal part with COMMD proteins that take part in multiple
processes including regulation of NF-kB signaling, copper export fromthe liver and sodium transport. Patients with RSS, c.49A>G in CCDC22
gene and elevated serum copper and ceruloplasmin concentration
have been previously reported. Recently, murine model study showedthat COMMD protein de ﬁciency leads to a defect in the transport of
ATP7B (copper membrane trasporter) from cytosolic vescicles to the
plasma membrane, resulting in he patic copper accumulation. Serum
and urinary copper and ceruloplasmi n dosage are progress to test this
hypothesis.
Conclusion: on the basis of the recent scienti ﬁc evidence we
speculate that the prenatal ﬁnding of ascites and the postnatal
ﬁnding of hepatomegaly could be an additional clinical features of
RSS.
E. Ponzi: None. P. Orsini: None. R. Ficarella: None. A.
Buonadonna: None. M. Antonucci: None. M. Gentile: None.
P11.110.D Truncating mutations in MAGEL2 cause alterations
in Aβ1-40 levels and gene expression in ﬁbroblasts
Laura Castilla-Vallmanya1,2, Mónica Centeno-Pla1,2, Héctor Franco-
Valls1,2, Aina Prat-Planas1,2, Elena Rojano3, Pedro Seoane3,2, James R.
Perkins3,2,4, Juan A. García-Ranea3,2,3, Clara Oliva5, Aida Ormaza-
bal5,2, Rafael Artuch5,2, Raquel Rabionet1,2, Daniel Grinberg1,2,
Susanna Balcells1,2, Roser Urreizti1,2,5
1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of
Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, 08028, Barcelona,Spain,2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Raras (CIBERER)- Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain,
3Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of
Malaga, 29010, Málaga, Spain,4Institute of Biomedical Research in
Malaga (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain,5Clinical Biochemistry Department,
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, 08950, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
Introduction: Truncating mutations in MAGEL2 , a gene mapping
in the Prader-Willi region (15q11-q13), are associated with Schaaf-
Yang syndrome (#MIM 6615547;SYS), a severe ultra-rare neurode-velopmental disease. SYS patients show a clinical phenotypepartly overlapping the one typically observed in Prader-Willi
syndrome patients (#MIM 176270;PWS). MAGEL2 contributes to
the regulation of the retrograde transport and protein recyclingpathways and previous studies show that impairment of VPS35, aAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
361
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608MAGEL2 partner in retromer function, lead to dysregulation of APP
transport and cleavage.
Materials & Methods: Inﬁbroblasts from SYS and PWS patients
and healthy controls, we analysed the excretion levels of amyloid-β1-40 peptide (A β
1-40). We also analysed targeted metabolomics
patterns (by mass spectrometry) and gene expression (by
mRNAseq). ExpHunter Suite was used to identify differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) and co-expression modules and performfunctional enrichment.
Results: We observed a signi ﬁcant decrease of A β
1-40levels in
the extracellular media of SYS ﬁbroblasts compared to both PWS
patients and controls. Preliminary results show small but statisti-cally signi ﬁcant metabolomic alterations, being glycine especially
relevant. We identi ﬁed 132 DEGs, some of them related to mitotic
mechanisms and extracellular matrix formation and organization.
Conclusions: Aβ
1-40excretion level is a promising biomarker for
SYS, and could help to better understand its pathophysiology. The
identi ﬁed DEGs in SYS ﬁbroblasts suggest a potential novel role for
MAGEL2 in mitosis and extracellular matrix homeostasis thatshould be further studied. Funding: Associació Síndrome Opitz C,
Spain; Spanish Government (CIBERER -U720; PID2019-107188RB-
C21, SAF2016-75948-R, FECYT-PRECIPITA); Catalan Government
(PERIS SLT002/16/00174).
L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. M. Centeno-Pla: None. H.
Franco-Valls: None. A. Prat-Planas: None. E. Rojano: None. P.
Seoane: None. J.R. Perkins: None. J.A. García-Ranea: None. C.
Oliva: None. A. Ormazabal: None. R. Artuch: None. R. Rabionet:
None. D. Grinberg: None. S. Balcells: None. R. Urreizti: None.
P11.111.A The ﬁrst two Portuguese patients with Schuurs-
Hoeijmakers syndrome: case report and review of the literature
Susana Lemos Ferreira1, Pedro Maia Almeida2, Catarina Silva
Rosas2, Mafalda Santos Melo1, Sérgio Bernardo Sousa2, Marta
Amorim1, Teresa Kay1
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal,
2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar
e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction: Schuurs-Hoeijmakers Syndrome (SHS, OMIM #615009)
is a rare cause of developmental del ay with distinctive dysmorphic
features. SHS is characterized by variable degrees of intellectual
disability with language skills typically affected, hypotonia, epilepsy,behaviour issues, feeding dif ﬁculties, constipation, cryptorchidism,
short stature, and structural malformations (cardiac, brain, ocular,
kidney and skull anomalies). The majority of cases results from a de
novo heterozygous pathogenic variant in PACS1 c.607C>T p.
(Arg203Trp). So far, only 52 individuals were reported in the literature.
Here, we aim to better characterize SHS phenotype.
Methods: We inquired all Portuguese medical genetics depart-
ments, collected clinical data and compared with previousdescribed cases.
Results: One patient, a 2-year-old male, presented with
developmental delay, facial dysmorphisms, hypotonia, coloboma,cryptorchidism, plagiobrachycephaly and single umbilical artery. Asecond patient, a 4-year-old male, was referred for developmental
delay, epilepsy, facial dysmorphisms, prenatal macrocephaly,
congenital heart defect, cryptorchidism, umbilical hernia andprior history of constipation. In both cases, previous investigation
was normal and molecular con ﬁrmation of SHS was obtained by
exome sequencing that identi ﬁed a de novo pathogenic variant in
PACS1 c.607C>T p.(Arg203Trp).The overall phenotypes were
consistent with the reported cases, sharing the most frequentdescribed clinical features such as facial dysmorphisms, intellec-
tual disability, epilepsy, and congenital heart defects, but also less
frequent features as umbilical hernia.
Conclusions: SHS is a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder
with multiple congenital anomalies, and the identi ﬁcation of
additional cases increases the current understanding of its clinical
spectrum. To our knowledge, these cases represent the ﬁrst
molecular con ﬁrmed SHS patients in Portugal.
S.L. Ferreira: None. P.M. Almeida: None. C.S. Rosas: None. M.S.
Melo: None. S.B. Sousa: None. M. Amorim: None. T. Kay: None.
P11.112.B Heterozygous mutation in SCRIB gene in adult
patient with myelomeningocele and primary infertility
Zohor Asaad Azher
Umm Al-Qura university, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
Abstract :SCRIB gene is a member of planar cell polarity (PCP)
genes which are involved in the process of neural tube closure (1).Homozygous Scrib mutations in mice cause craniorachischisis, the
most severe typeof NTD. In humans, SCRIB mutations are
associated with craniorachischisis (2). Recently, ﬁve deleterious
mutations were identi ﬁed in ﬁve infants with spins bi ﬁda,
indicating that heterozygous SCRIB mutations may underlie
thepathogenesis of human spina bi ﬁda (3).Here, we describe a
29 year- old male presenting with primary infertility due to non-obstructive azoospermia. In addition, he is suffering from urinary
and fecal incontinence and club foot due to sacral myelomenin-
gocele which was operated during the ﬁrst weeks of his life. WES
revealed de novo heterozygous variant p.(Arg277Trp) in SCRIB
gene. In silico analysis imply potentially deleterious effect of this
change. Mutations in SCRIB gene have been reported in few
infants with variable NTDs. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case
to be reported in adult patient. SCRIB gene role in spermatogenic
failure has not been reported. Additional studies are required to
evaluate its role in male infertility.
References: 1. Juriloff DM, Harris MJ (2012) A consideration of
the evidence that genetic defectsin planar cell polarity contribute
to the etiology of human neural tube defects. BirthDefects Res A
Clin Mol Teratol 94: 824-840.2. Robinson A, Escuin S, Doudney K,.3.Lei, Y., Zhu, H., Duhon, C., Yang, W., Ross, M. E., Shaw, G. M., Finnell,R.H.Mutations in planar cell polarity gene SCRIB are associated
with spinabi ﬁda.
Z.A. Azher: None.
P11.113.C SCUBE3 loss-of-function causes a recognizable
developmental disorder due to defective bone morphogeneticprotein (BMP) signaling
Marcello Niceta
1, Yuh-Charn Lin2,3, Valentina Muto1, Barbara
Vona4,5, Alistair T. Pagnamenta6, Reza Maroo ﬁan7, Christian Beetz8,
Hermine van Duyvenvoorde9, Maria Lisa Dentici1, Peter Lauffer10,
Sadeq Vallian11, Andrea Ciol ﬁ1, Simone Pizzi1, Peter Bauer8, Nana-
Maria Grüning8, Emanuele Bellacchio1, Andrea Del Fattore1, Stefania
Petrini12, Ranad Shaheen13,14, Dov Tiosano15,16, Rana Halloun15, Ben
Pode-Shakked17,18, Hatice Mutlu Albayrak19, Emregül I şık20, Jan M.
Wit20, Marcus Dittrich4,21, Bruna L. Freire22, Debora R. Bertola23,
Alexander A. L. Jorge22, Ortal Barel24, Ataf H. Sabir25,26, Amal M. Al
Teneiji27, Sulaima M. Taji27, Nouriya Al-Sannaa28, Hind Al-
Abdulwahed28, Maria Cristina Digilio1, Melita Irving25, Yair Anik-
ster17,18,29, Gandham SL Bhavani30, Katta M. Girisha30, Thomas
Haaf4, Jenny C. Taylor6, Bruno Dallapiccola1, Fowzan S. Alkuraya13,
Ruey-Bing Yang2,31,32, Marco Tartaglia1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
362
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, IRCCS, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,2Department of Physiology,
School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan,
3Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan,
4Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians University, Würz-
burg, Germany,5Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck
Surgery, Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, Germany,6NIHR Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics,University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,7Genetics and
Molecular Cell Sciences Research Centre, St George ’s University of
London, Cranmer Terrace, London, United Kingdom,8Centogene AG,
Rostock, Germany,9Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden Uni-
versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,10Department of
Paediatric Endocrinology, Emma Children ’s Hospital, Amsterdam
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,11Department of
Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology, University of Isfahan,Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of,12Confocal Microscopy Core Facility,
Research Laboratories, IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,
Rome, Italy,13Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,14Qatar Biomedical
Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar,
15Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Ruth Rappaport Children ’s Hospital,
Rambam Healthcare Campus, Haifa, Israel,16Ruth and Bruce
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute ofTechnology, Haifa, Israel,17Edmond and Lily Safra Children ’s
Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel,18The Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel,19Department
of Pediatric Endocrinology, Gaziantep Cengiz Gökcek Maternity &
Children ’s Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey,20Department of Pediatrics,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,21Institute of
Bioinformatics, Julius Maximilians University, Würzburg, Germany,
22Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética, Hospital das Clínicas da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
Brazil,23Unidade de Genética do Instituto da Criança, Hospital das
Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo,Sao Paulo, Brazil,24Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel,25Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy ’s
and St Thomas ’NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,
26Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom,27Depart-
ment of Paediatrics, Sheikh Khalifa Medical City, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates,28Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi
Arabia,29Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel,30Department of Medical Genetics,
Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India,31Ph.D. Program in Drug
Discovery and Development Industry, College of Pharmacy, TaipeiMedical University, Taipei, Taiwan,32Institute of Pharmacology,
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
In the extracellular microenvironment, auxiliary proteins control
cell behavior and coordinate embryo development by acting as
co-receptors or direct antagonists of defective bone morphoge-
netic protein (BMP), Activin and TGF- βligands. Pathogenic
variants in genes encoding these proteins can dramatically affect
development and physiology. Signal peptide-CUB-EGF domain-
containing protein 3 (SCUBE3) is a member of a small family ofmultifunctional secreted or cell surface-anchored glycoproteinsfunctioning as co-receptors for a variety of growth factors. Here
we report that biallelic inactivating variants in SCUBE3 have
pleiotropic consequences on development and cause a previouslyunrecognized syndromic disorder. Eighteen affected individualsfrom nine unrelated families showed a consistent phenotype
characterized by re growth restriction, skeletal defects, distinctive
craniofacial appearance, and dental anomalies. In vitro functionalvalidation studies demonstrated a variable impact of disease-
causing variants on transcript processing, protein secretion andfunction, and their dysregulating effect BMP signaling. We show that
SCUBE3 is an auxiliary protein that acts as a BMP2/BMP4 co-receptor,
recruits the BMP receptor complexes into raft microdomains, and
positively modulates signaling possibly by augmenting the speci ﬁc
interactions between BMPs and BMP type I receptors. Scube3
-/-mice
showed craniofacial and dental defects, reduced body size and
defective endochondral bone growth due to impaired BMP-
mediated chondrogenesis and osteogenesis, recapitulating thehuman disorder. Our ﬁndings identify the ﬁrst human disease
caused by defective function of a member of the SCUBE family, and
link SCUBE3 to processes controlling growth, morphogenesis, and
bone and teeth development through modulation of BMP signaling.Grant: Fondazione Bambino Gesù (Vite Coraggiose) .
M. Niceta: None. Y. Lin: None. V. Muto: None. B. Vona: None.
A.T. Pagnamenta: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:None. C. Beetz: None. H.
V. Duyvenvoorde: None. M.L. Dentici: None. P. Lauffer: None. S.
Vallian: None. A. Ciol ﬁ:None. S. Pizzi: None. P. Bauer: None. N.
Grüning: None. E. Bellacchio: None. A. Del Fattore: None. S.
Petrini: None. R. Shaheen: None. D. Tiosano: None. R. Halloun:
None. B. Pode-Shakked: None. H. Albayrak: None. E. Işık:None.
J.M. Wit: None. M. Dittrich: None. B.L. Freire: None. D.R. Bertola:
None. A.A.L. Jorge: None. O. Barel: None. A.H. Sabir: None. A.M.
Al Teneiji: None. S.M. Taji: None. N. Al-Sannaa: None. H. Al-
Abdulwahed: None. M.C. Digilio: None. M. Irving: None. Y.
Anikster: None.
G.S. Bhavani: None. K.M. Girisha: None. T. Haaf:
None. J.C. Taylor: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. F.S. Alkuraya:
None. R. Yang: None. M. Tartaglia: None.
P11.114.D Genetic testing algorithms for fetal malformations
malformations
Viorica Radoi1, Radu-Ioan Ursu1, Cristina Dragomir2, Andreea
Ionescu2, Iuliana Chelu2, Laurentiu Camil Bohiltea1
1INSMC Alessandrescu-Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania,2Synevo Roma-
nia, Bucharest, Romania.
Fetal abnormalities are diagnosed in 3-5% of all pregnancies. In
the case of perinatal death, congenital anomalies occur in 20-25%
of the patients. The prenatal genetic tests recommended are QF-
PCR for rapid aneuploidy testing, the G ‐banded karyotyping and
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for the detectionof chromosomal anomalies and CNVs. QF-PCR identi ﬁes trisomies
in around 30% of dysmorphic fetuses. Karyotyping detects
pathogenic chromosomal rearrangements in a further 5%. aCGHﬁnds additional pathogenic CNVs in 3% to 6.5% of structurally
abnormal fetuses with normal karyotypes. Using these tests in
combination, an underlying genetic aetiology can be identi ﬁed in
up to 40% of dysmorphic fetuses, still leaving the majority of casesundiagnosed.Whole exome sequencing (WES) offers the chance of
identifying the ﬁnal genetic diagnosis, accurate estimation of
recurrence risks, but is recommended in speci ﬁc selected
situations and comes with certain disadvantages.Case reportPa-tient: 27 years old, 23 weeks pregnancy,with negative medical
family history.Ultrasound revealed strawberry shaped head, mid-
face hypoplasia Amniocentesis: fetal karyotype and aCGH –
normal resultFetal DNA testing by WES identi ﬁed TWIST1 gene
with variant c.82C>T (p.Gln28Ter) mutation - pathogenic - Saethre
Chotzen syndromeThe advances of genomic medicine are
impacting prenatal diagnosis, just like any other medical ﬁeld.
While these innovations offer exciting new opportunities and can
empower families with increased knowledge about their repro-
ductive risks and with decision-making autonomy, they have to becarefully introduced in an evidence-based and ethically respon-sible manner and monitored after implementation.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
363
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608V. Radoi: None. R. Ursu: None. C. Dragomir: None. A. Ionescu:
None. I. Chelu: None. L. Bohiltea: None.
P11.115.A Diagnostic utility of next-generation sequencing
panel tests in the diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias
Tiia Kangas-Kontio1, Alicia Scocchia2,Satu Valo1, Kimberly Gall2,
Liisa Pelttari1, Johanna Huusko1, Jonna Tallila1, Inka Saarinen1,
Johanna Sistonen1, Juha Koskenvuo1, Tero-Pekka Alastalo2
1Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland,2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest
Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA, USA.
Introduction: Skeletal dysplasias encompass over 450 heritable
conditions with signi ﬁcant phenotype overlap. In this study, we
retrospectively assessed the diagnostic utility of next-generationsequencing (NGS) panel tests containing genes associated with
skeletal dysplasias and growth disorders.
Materials and Methods: Clinical reports of 543 patients who
underwent panel testing at Blueprint Genetics with an indicationof suspected skeletal dysplasia or growth disorder were examined.
The patients received one of three nested panel tests containing
113, 251 and 374 genes, respectively. Panel testing included bothsequence and copy number variant (CNV) analyses of NGS data
from a clinically validated exome assay .
Results: A molecular diagnosis was established in 42.0% of
patients. Diagnostic yield was signi ﬁcantly higher among fetal
samples (62.5%, n =55/88) compared to post-natal samples (38%,
n=173/455; z =4.2489, P< 0.00001). Twelve diagnostic CNVs were
reported, ranging in size from 241 bp to 6.7 Mb, representing 5.3% ofdiagnostic ﬁndings. Five diagnostic CNVs involved loss of the SHOX
gene in the pseudoautosomal re gion. Diagnostic variants were
identi ﬁed in 71 genes, with nearly half of these genes (n =33, 46.5%)
contributing uniquely to a molecular diagnosis for a single patient.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates the utility of panel
testing for patients with a suspected skeletal dysplasia or growth
disorder, with diagnostic yield of 42%. Additionally, the highdiagnostic yield seen in prenatal cases is valuable information forgenetic counseling regarding natural history and prognosis.
Pursuing comprehensive panel testing with high-resolution CNV
analysis can provide a time-sensitive diagnostic bene ﬁt, given the
considerable phenotype overlap amongst skeletal dysplasias.
T. Kangas-Kontio: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Blueprint Genetics. A. Scocchia: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics
Company. S. Valo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company.
L. Pelttari: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. J. Huusko: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. J. Tallila: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J.
Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ
cant; Blue-
print Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company.
P11.116.B Novel SMARCA4 mutation identi ﬁed in a patient
with a mild phenotype of Cof ﬁn-Siris syndrome
Beata Aleksiuniene1,2, Loreta Cimbalistiene1,2, Algirdas Utkus1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros
Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare syndrome characterized by
developmental delay, craniofacial abnormalities, hypoplastic orabsent ﬁfth digits/nails of the hands and feet and other variable
clinical manifestations. CSS is caused by mutations in several
genes encoding components of the BAF complex. It has beendemonstrated that CSS clinical manifestation may vary, dependingon the variants in the particular gene. We report on a 7-years-old
female referred for evaluation because of mild dysmorphic
features and congenital heart disease - supravalvular aorticstenosis. She was born in a normal delivery but with lowerbirth-weight (2850 g). Psychomotor developmental delay was
observed since infancy, and then she was diagnosed with mixed
developmental disorder, learning dif ﬁculties. The following
dysmorphic features were noted: facial coarseness was minimal -
thick eyebrows, mild micrognatia, long broad philtrum, nose with
bulbous tip and anteverted nostrils. Hypoplasia of bilateral ﬁfth
toes as well as hypoaplasia of bilateral ﬁfth toenails were
signi ﬁcant. Whole exome sequencing analysis of patient ’s DNA
revealed the novel heterozygous nonsense variant c.646C>T, p.
(Gln216Ter) in the SMARCA4 gene. The variant was con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing. This alteration causes a cytosine to thyminetransition, resulting a premature termination codon in the
SMARCA4 protein. According to in silico analysis, the identi ﬁed
c.646C>T variant is classi ﬁed as pathogenic. Our report futher
supports the notion that nonsense variants of SMARCA4 cause
mild delay phenotype of CSS. However, further studies are needed
in order to better characterize the phenotype and establishgenotype-phenotype correlation.
B. Aleksiuniene: None. L. Cimbalistiene: None. A. Utkus:
None.
P11.117.C SNP array analysis as a detection tool for single
gene disorders
Elanur Yilmaz
1,2, Esra Borklu1, Umut Altunoglu1, Sahin Avci1, Serpil
Eraslan1, Hulya Kayserili1
1Medical Genetics Department, Koç University School of Medicine
(KUSOM), ISTANBUL, Turkey,2Koç University Research Center for
Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), Istanbul, Turkey.
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism array(SNP-a) provides an ef ﬁ-
cient,powerful, and high-throughput analysis for structural chro-
mosomal variations,microdeletions and microduplications.
Furthermore,single-gene disorders can also successfully bedetected by SNP-a. SNP-a was performed on 37 postnatal casesin 2020 to identify the genetic etiopathogenesis of congenital/
neurodevelopmental anomalies by Illumina CytoSNP v12. Patho-
genic/possibly pathogenic variations were found in 21. Fourmicrodeletions were considered suggestive for well-delineatedsingle-gene syndromes, namely Nance-Horan(NHS),Phelan-McDer-
mid(PMS),Hand-Foot-Genital(HFGS),and Feingold Type2(FS2).The
ﬁrst microdeletion,harbored the NHS along with 21 other genes in
Xp22.2p22.13(16051468_18313707)(GRCh37/hg19).The boy hadmicrophthalmia/cataract,mild global developmental delay,ventri-
cular septal defect which was well overlapped with the clinical
ﬁndings of NHS. The second microdeletion,7.17Mb,encompassed
51 OMIM-genes including the SHANK3 in 22q13.2q13.33
(43996288_51169045)(GRCh37/hg19).The 22q13 microdeletion or
mutations of the SHANK3 are associated with psychomotor and
speech delay.Accompanying features of the case excluded forBeckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome were large for gestational age,
macroglossia,renal anomalies, asymmetric growth could due toAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
364
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608the impact of other deleted genes.The third case displayed 0.3Mb
deletion in 7p15.2(26,938,809_27,262,849)(GRCh37/hg19) harbor-
ing the HOXA13 . Skeletal ﬁndings,borderline intellectual disability,
vesicoureteral re ﬂux of the case could be explained by HFGS. The
fourth, 4.17Mb deletion harbored nine OMIM-genes includingMIR17HG in 13q31.3(90513153_94681840)(GRCh37/hg19).The
phenotypic features like microcephaly,brachydactylic ﬁngers and
toes,dysmorphisms,borderline intellectual disability of the girl wasin correlation with FS2 diagnosis.
Conclusion: Chromosomal microdeletions/microduplications
are one of the key classes of variations that could reveal the
etiopathogenesis of single-gene disorders.In the case of non-speci ﬁc,or missing pivotal clinical ﬁndings for a syndrome,
following an algorythmic diagnostic approach and performing
the SNP-a can pinpoint a single-gene disorders and together with
the reverse phenotyping,the clinical diagnosis can also bedetermined.
E. Yilmaz: None. E. Borklu: None. U. Altunoglu: None. S. Avci:
None. S. Eraslan: None. H. Kayserili: None.
P11.119.A Beyond the known phenotype of Sotos Syndrome:
Spanish cohort of 31 pediatric patients
Antonio F. Martinez-Monseny
1, Lourdes R. Vega-Hanna1, Mario
Sanz-Cuesta2, Didac Casas-Alba1, Mercè Bolasell1, Loreto Martorell1,
Leticia Pias1, Mercedes Serrano1
1Sant Joan de Deu Hospital, Barcelona, Spain,2Hospital de Sant Boi,
Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Sotos Syndrome (SS, OMIM#117550) is a hetero-
geneous genetic condition, recognized by overgrowth, macro-
cephaly, typical facial appearance and intellectual disability. SS can
be classi ﬁed in three different subtypes according to molecular
ﬁndings in NSD1, NFIX and APC2 genes. We aim to expand the
phenotype studying a cohort of patients, describing their
expected and unexpected clinical features.
Methods: descriptive and retrospective study including geneti-
cally con ﬁrmed SS subjects, followed at a tertiary pediatric hospital
from June 2019 to December 2020.
Results: Thirty-one patients (16 males) with SS were included,
27 with NSD1 variants and 4 with NFIX variants, bearingpredominantly point mutations in both cases. Seven individuals
were born prematurely. All individuals presented with overgrowth,
typical dysmorphic features and different degrees of intellectualdisability. Although structural cardiac defects are frequent, here
we describe a statistically signi ﬁcant concomitant presentation
with hypotonia (p =0.04), as well as non-structural diseases
(pericarditis and arrhythmia) that were outstanding in our cohort.Epilepsy was observed in 14 (45.2%) and scoliosis in 11 (40.7%).
We describe novel oncological malignancies not previously linked
to SS such as splenic hamartoma, retinal melanocytoma, acutelymphocytic leukemia and prenatal neuroblastoma, which weremore prevalent in patients with missense mutations (p =0.04).
Five patients suffered from recurrent onychocryptosis that
required surgical procedures, as an unreported medical condition.Interestingly, this ﬁnding was more prevalent in patients with
macrocephaly (p =0.04).
Conclusions: Our study focuses on undescribed features in SS,
expanding the clinical and molecular spectrum and advisingclinicians about some unreported clinical complications. We
suggest novel genotype-phenotype correlations.
A.F. Martinez-Monseny: None. L.R. Vega-Hanna: None. M.
Sanz-Cuesta: None. D. Casas-Alba: None. M. Bolasell: None. L.
Martorell: None. L. Pias: None. M. Serrano: None.P11.120.B Two different syndromic craniosynostosis in the
same family
Semra Gürsoy
1, Filiz Hazan2
1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children ’s Hospital,
Izmir, Turkey,2Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz
Children ’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
Introduction: Craniosynostosis is characterized by the premature
fusion of calvarial sutures and can be isolated without any
additional anomalies, or as a part of a syndrome. Syndromiccraniosynostosis with a certain genetic cause is more likely toinvolve multiple sutures or bilateral coronal sutures. FGFR2 ,FGFR3 ,
FGFR1 ,TWIST1 and EFNB1 are major causative genes of genetic
syndromes associated with craniosynostosis. Herein, we presenttwo different syndromic craniosynostosis in the same family.
Material and Methods: TWIST1 and EFNB1 genes were
sequenced by using Sanger sequencing.
Results : A 7-month-old female patient was referred to our
genetic clinic for dysmorphic features including hypertelorism,broad forehead, down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures and brachyce-
phaly, compatible with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Bilateral
coronal synostosis was detected on three dimensional cranialcomputed tomography. TWIST1 gene was sequenced and a
nonsense mutation (c.301C>T; p.Q101X) was revealed. The father
of the patient who had similar phenotypic features, also had thesame mutation. Additionally, the index patient had a 4,5 year-oldsister whose facial features were compatible with Craniofronto-
nasal syndrome. A heterozygous nonsense mutation of EFNB1
gene (c.196C>T; p.R66X) was detected in this patient. The motherhad also unilateral coronal craniosynostosis, unilateral proptosisand unilateral ptosis, longitudinal splitting of nails and clinodac-
tyly. The same EFNB1 gene mutation was detected in the mother.
Conclusions : The detailed clinical evaluation is crucial for the
correct diagnosis of genetic syndromes associated with craniosy-
nostosis due to its phenotypical variability. Furthermore, molecular
diagnosis may have an important role for genetic counceling andprediction of the prognosis.
S. Gürsoy: None. F. Hazan: None.
P11.121.C Analysis of exome data of a nationally identi ﬁed
cohort of 603 patients with syndromic orofacial clefting
Kate Wilson
1, Dianne Newbury2, Usha Kini1,3
1Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Faculty of Health
and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UnitedKingdom,3Spires Cleft Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
Introduction: Syndromic orofacial clefting (OC) accounts for 30%
of cleft lip and/or palate. We reviewed variants identi ﬁed by exon-
arrayCGH and exome sequencing (ES) in patients with syndromic
OC within the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) studyto investigate molecular pathways associated with syndromic OC.
Materials and Methods: Patients with HPO terms containing
‘cleft ’and ‘biﬁd uvula ’were identi ﬁed through a complementary
analysis project within the DDD study. Possible diagnostic variantswere identi ﬁed by automated variant ﬁltering and manual review
and deposited into DECIPHER. Single nucleotide variants within
known disease-causing genes and copy number variants were
classi ﬁed according to ACMG guidelines, the ACGS Best Practice
Guidelines and consensus opinion. Molecular pathway analysesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
365
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608were performed within STRING to investigate patterns of gene
function in syndromic OC and across OC types.
Results: 603/13612 (4.4%) patients were identi ﬁed of whom
453/603 (75.1%) had trio ES. 448/603 (74.3%) patients had cleftpalate, 132/603 (21.9%) had cleft lip +/- palate and 23/603 (3.8%)
had oral clefting. 259/603 (43%) patients had moderate to
profound intellectual disability and/or global developmental
delay. Likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed
for 220/603 (36.5%) patients in 124 known disease-causing geneswith SATB2 being the most common (16/220, 7.3%). Gene
ontology and pathway analyses suggested that the molecular
mechanisms underlying syndromic OC were distinct from those innon-syndromic OC.
Conclusions: Using an ES approach in a large cohort of patients
with syndromic OC we identi ﬁed molecular pathways and several
new genes that are not traditionally known to be associated withclefting.
K. Wilson: None. D. Newbury: None. U. Kini: None.
P11.122.D TAB2 deletions and loss-of-function variants cause
a Noonan-like syndrome with mitral valve disease, cardiomyo-
pathy and hypermobility
Aafke Engwerda
1, Erika K. S. M. Leenders2, Barbara Frentz3, Paulien
A. Terhal4, Katharina Löhner1, Bert B. A. de Vries2, Trijnie Djikhuizen1,
Yvonne J. Vos1, Tuula Rinne2, Maarten P. van den Berg5, Marc T. R.
Roofthooft6, Patrick Deelen1,4, Conny M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1,
Wilhelmina S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands,2Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Vanboeijen, Assen, Netherlands,4Department of
Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands,
5University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Cardiology, Groningen, Netherlands,6University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Beatrix Children ’s
Hospital, Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Groningen, Nether-lands.
Introduction: TAB2 loss-of-function variants and deletions includ-
ing TAB2 are associated with congenital heart defects and
cardiomyopathy. In literature occasionally other features have
been mentioned, including, short stature, facial dysmorphisms,
connective tissue abnormalities and a variable degree ofdevelopmental delay. However, these features have not been
linked to TAB2 thus far. We aimed to con ﬁrm that the phenotype
in 6q25.1 deletion patients is caused by haploinsuf ﬁciency of
TAB2 .
Materials and Methods: Within the Chromosome 6 Project, a
large social media ‒based study, we observed a shared phenotype
among 6q25.1 deletion patients. We identi ﬁed our candidate gene
TAB2 and subsequently sequenced TAB2 in patients with matching
phenotypes. We also recruited patients with pathogenic TAB2
variants detected by exome sequencing. Clinical data were
compared with literature cases.
Results: We identi ﬁed 11 patients with a deletion containing
TAB2 (size 1.68-14.31 Mb) and 14 patients from six families with
novel truncating TAB2 variants. Twenty (80%) patients had cardiac
diseases, often mitral valve defects and/or cardiomyopathy.Eighteen (72%) had short stature and 18 (72%) had hypermobility.
Twenty patients (80%) had facial features suggestive for Noonan
syndrome. No substantial phenotypic differences were notedbetween patients with deletions and those with intragenicvariants. In comparison, all 45 patients from literature had cardiac
diseases but syndromic features were reported infrequently.
Conclusions: This study shows that the 6q25.1 deletion
phenotype is caused by haploinsuf ﬁciency of TAB2 and that
TAB2 is not just associated with cardiac disease, but also with a
distinct Noonan-like phenotype. We propose the name “TAB2 -
related syndrome ”.
A. Engwerda: None. E.K.S.M. Leenders: None. B. Frentz: None.
P.A. Terhal: None. K. Löhner: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. T.
Djikhuizen: None. Y.J. Vos: None. T. Rinne: None. M.P. van den
Berg: None. M.T.R. Roofthooft: None. P. Deelen: None. C.M.A.
van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None.
P11.123.A Tenorio syndrome: description of 9 new cases and
review of the clinical and molecular features
Jair Tenorio1, Pedro Arias1, Alberto Fernandez-Jaen2, Guillermo Lay-
Son3, Allan Bayat4, Laurence Olivier-Faivre5, Natalia Gallego1, Sergio
Ramos1, James Lespinasse6, Frederic Tran-Mau-Them7, Fernando
Santos-Simarro1, Lucile Pinson8, Antonio Federico Martinez-
Monseny9, María del Mar O´Callaghan Cord9, Pablo Lapunzina1
1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM) - Hospital
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,2Hospital Universitario Quirón de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain,3Ponti ﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile,
Santiago de Chile, Chile,4Department of Pediatrics, Hvidovre
Hospital. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,5Hôpital
d’enfants CHU Dijon Bourgogne - Hôpital François Mitterrand 2 bd
Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny 21000 Dijon, Dijon, France,6Service
de Cytogenetique, Centre Hospitalier de Chambéry, Chambéry,France, Chambéry, France,7UF6254 Innovation en Diagnostic
Genomique des Maladies Rares Bat B3, 15 boulevard du Maréchal
de Lattre de Tassigny 21000 Dijon, France, Dijon, France,8Départe-
ment de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personna-lisée, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Montpellier, France,
9Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain.
Tenorio syndrome (TNORS) is a relatively recent disorder with
very few cases described so far. Clinical features include
macrocephaly, intellectual disab ility, hypotonia, enlarged ven-
tricles and autoimmune diseases. M olecular underlying mechan-
ism included missense variants and large deletionsencompassing RNF125, a gene that encodes for an U3 ubiquitin
ligase protein, involved in the regulation of several proteins by
its binding and degradation through the proteasome. Since theinitial description of the disorder and families, several new
patients were diagnosed, adding more evidence of the clinical
manifestations. Thus, the aim of this project is to perform a deepphenotyping of the current cases and review all cases in which apathogenic variant has been foun d in RNF125. Interestingly, not
all patients with pathogenic variants in RNF125 manifest
overgrowth, but instead, there is a common pattern of
neurodevelopmental disease, with mild to moderate degrees.
Segregation analysis showed that in some cases, though the
variant was inherited by an apparently normal parent, deep
phenotyping suggested a mild form of the disease in theirprogenitors. The mechanism unde rlying the development of this
disease is not well understood yet and the description of more
cases will help to a better understanding and clinical character-
ization. In summary, we report nine new cases of Tenoriosyndrome (MIM, 616260), in patie nts with a variable degree of
the disease, and a common concurrent neurodevelopmental
disorder. Not all cases have overgrowth, and this must beconsidering for a correct di agnosis. Grants: FIS-PI20/01053Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
366
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608J. Tenorio: None. P. Arias: None. A. Fernandez-Jaen: None. G.
Lay-Son: None. A. Bayat: None. L. Olivier-Faivre: None. N.
Gallego: None. S. Ramos: None. J. Lespinasse: None. F. Tran-
Mau-Them: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. L. Pinson: None. A.
Martinez-Monseny: None. M. O´Callaghan Cord: None. P.
Lapunzina: None.
P11.124.B Unravelling terminal 6p deletions with the help of
social media
Eleana Rraku1, Aafke Engwerda1, Jennifer Geurink1, Laura Mon-
sma1, Pauline Bouman2, Morris A. Swertz1, Trijnie Dijkhuizen1, Conny
M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands,2Chromosome 6
Facebook Group, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Introduction: Chromosome 6 deletions are rare, and information
on their clinical consequences is scarce. Parents of affected
individuals often turn to the internet for information and support.
The Chromosome 6 Project collaborates with parents to study thephenotypes of chromosome 6 aberrations. We hereby present ourresults on terminal 6p deletions.
Materials and Methods: Parents were noti ﬁed of the study
through social media and were requested to upload a microarrayreport. Phenotype data was collected directly from parents via amultilingual online questionnaire, which was also used for cases
collected through a literature search. Four subgroups were created
based on deletion sizes. The phenotypes of the total group andeach subgroup were described.
Results: Twelve Chromosome 6 Project participants and 32
literature cases were included, making this the largest cohort of
terminal 6p deletions. Deletion sizes ranged from 0.3 to 22.3 Mb(median 4.0 Mb). The total group was characterized by an
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, vision problems, hearing impairment,
hypotonia, dysmorphic features, cardiac and brain defects(cerebellar abnormalities and ventriculomegaly). Developmentaldelay was mostly mild. These traits were observed in all
subgroups, suggesting a dominant role for the most distally
deleted genes. One of these genes is FOXC1 , known to cause
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. In the subgroup with the largestdeletions (>7.15 Mb), ventricular septal defects and kidney
abnormalities were also observed.
Conclusions: The most distally located genes play a determin-
ing role in the phenotypes of terminal 6p deletions. Furthermore,
we demonstrate the power of social media in studying rare
diseases.
E. Rraku: None. A. Engwerda: None. J. Geurink: None. L.
Monsma: None. P. Bouman: None. M.A. Swertz: None. T.
Dijkhuizen: None. C.M.A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None.
P11.125.C TNRC6A is a candidate gene for a phenotype with
multisystem involvement
Sanna Puusepp
1,2, Tiia Reimand1,2, Chris Pruunsild3, Nina Powell-
Hamilton4, Kari Magnussen5, George Anadiotis5, Katrin Õunap1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,2Department
of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital,
Tartu, Estonia,3Department of General Pediatrics and Neurology,
Children ’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,4Division of
Medical Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,Wilmington, DE, USA,5Randall Children ’s Hospital at LegacyEmanuel, Portland, OR, USA.
Trinucleotide repeat-containing gene 6A ( TNRC6A )e n c o d e st h e
GW182 protein, which is involved in miRNA induced genesilencing by assembling Argonaute proteins with target mRNA.Studies of the de ﬁciency of GW182 in mice and its orthologue
gawky in Drosophila demonst rated defects in embryonic
development. Patients with GW182 autoantibodies showed
neuropathy, ataxia, arthritis, rheumatologic diseases, andcancers. Recently, pathogenic heterozygous TTTCA repeat
expansion in TNRC6A was identi ﬁed in ﬁve related patients with
benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy. We report threeunrelated male patients with loss-of-function variants in TNRC6A
and partially overlapping pheno types. Patient 1 presented with
speech delay, autism, frequent headaches, balance problems,
muscular hypotonia, mild proximal and facial muscle weakness,dysarthria, fatigue, scoliosis, co nnective tissue weakness, joint
hypermobility, juvenile idiopathi c arthritis, osteoporosis with
compression fractures, arterial hypertension, and obesity.Notable ﬁndings for Patient 2 include neonatal stroke, develop-
mental delay, seizures, patent foramen ovale, cervical ribs,
unilateral auricular tag, and sacral dimple. Interestingly, these
two patients share similar facial features with epicanthic foldsa n dc u p p e de a r s .P a t i e n t3h a sa history of autism spectrum
disorder, migraines, chronic fatigue, muscle weakness, and
gastroesophageal re ﬂux. Whole exome sequencing revealed
different de novo het erozygous variants in TNRC6A : c.4405C>T,
p.(Q1469X); c.3474dupA, p.(E1159RfsX3) and c.2570G>A, p.
(W857X). All variants are absent from the gnomAD database.
In conclusion, we are highly suspicious that the de novo variantsin the candidate gene TNRC6A are clinically relevant, however,
additional cases with overlapping ﬁndings and functional
studies are needed to reach mor e solid conclusions. Funding:
Estonian Research Council grant PRG471
S. Puusepp: None. T. Reimand: None. C. Pruunsild: None. N.
Powell-Hamilton: None. K. Magnussen: None. G. Anadiotis:
None. K. Õunap: None.
P11.126.D Unravelling the effects of germline missense
variants in TRAF7
Aina Prat-Planas
1, Laura Castilla-Vallmanya1, Miguel Subías1,
Mónica Centeno-Pla1, Daniel Grinberg1, Raquel Rabionet1, Roser
Urreizti1,2, Susanna Balcells1
1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of
Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, CIBERER, 08028,
Barcelona, Spain,2Clinical Biochemistry Department, Hospital Sant
Joan de Déu, CIBERER, 08950, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
Introduction: TRAF7 codes for a protein that acts as E3 ubiquitin
ligase in several signalling pathways mediated by TumourNecrosis Factor (TNF) family ligands. Somatic mutations in TRAF7
have been associated with tumorigenic processes, while germline
mutations have been described as disease-causing for the TRAF7
syndrome, an ultra-rare disorder characterized by intellectualdisability, motor delay, cardiac alterations and dysmorphicfeatures. Our aim was to explore the biological effects of germline
missense variants in TRAF7 .
Material and Methods: We performed an mRNA-Seq analysis
in skin ﬁbroblasts from 3 TRAF7 syndrome patients and 6 controls,
with and without TNF- αstimulation. Results were subjected to
differential expression, pathway enrichment analysis and qPCRvalidation. Additionally, we used a siRNA strategy to knock-downTRAF7 in control ﬁbroblasts and analysed the expression of
selected genes by qPCR.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
367
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: We identi ﬁed 78 differentially expressed genes
between patients and controls, 8 of which successfully validated
by qPCR. Enrichment analysis highlighted several pathways that
are associated with the most relevant phenotypes of thesyndrome (Genet Med 2020; 22:1215-1226). The analysis of theexpression of candidate genes in TRAF7-KD ﬁbroblasts showed
promising results for ANGPT1 and CASK , found downregulated in
patients but signi ﬁcantly upregulated in TRAF7-silenced cells.
Conclusions: Gene expression alterations caused by germline
missense variants in TRAF7 partly explain the phenotype observed
in patients. TRAF7 knockdown data suggest that these variants
cause a gain-of-function effect in some of TRAF7 functions.
Funding: Associació Síndrome Opitz C, Spain; Spanish Govern-
ment (CIBERER-U720; PID2019-107188RB-C21; SAF2016-75948-R,
FECYT-PRECIPITA); Catalan Government (PERIS SLT002/16/00174).
A. Prat-Planas: None. L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. M. Subías:
None. M. Centeno-Pla: None. D. Grinberg: None. R. Rabionet:
None. R. Urreizti: None. S. Balcells: None.
P11.127.A Array CGH con ﬁrmation of a de novo reciprocal
translocation involving X and 16 chromosomes
Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA, Balkiss Abdelmoula , Sonda Kam-
moun, Saloua Ben Amor, Souad Kammoun
Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17ES36,
Medical University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
Objective: Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is
nowadays the best tool to identify chromosomal abnormalities.
The aim of this study was to identify a de novo reciprocaltranslocation.
Material and Methods: A Tunisian 13-day-old male newborn
was referred to our genetic counselling for complex congenital
heart disease (CHD) combining tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonaryarteries hypoplasia. Conventional and molecular cytogenetic
analysis were carried out to delineate the genetic aetiology of
his syndromic CHD. Array-CGH was conducted using optimizedDNA preparations and constitutional chip 4.0 microarray fromPerkinElmer, USA.
Results: the newborn had dysmorphic features with dolicho-
cephaly, micro-retro-gnathism, narrow/high-arched palate, low-setmalformed ears, long philtrum, thin superior lip, upturned naresand periorbital fullness. Further ﬁndings were right hydrocele
testis, and a small sacral dimple. Karyotyping revealed a de novo
unbalanced translocation: 46,XY,der(16) t(?;16). The additionalmaterial in the distal extremity of the chromosome 16 was dif ﬁcult
to identify by RHG banding. Array-CGH analysis identi ﬁed the Xp
chromosome origin of the additional chromosomal materialtranslocated to the subtelomeric region of chromosome 16q. Itwas therefore possible to reveal an Xp duplication but without
detection of a distal 16q monosomy. However, breakpoints
mapping and eventual deletion of the distal part of chromosome16q were not possible. Although partial X duplication, the patienthad no genital ambiguity or psychomotor disabilities until 7
months of age.
Conclusion: Our patient may have a KBG (MIM 148050)
overlapping phenotype.
N.B. Abdelmoula: None. B. Abdelmoula: None. S. Kammoun:
None. S. Ben Amor: None. S. Kammoun: None.
P11.129.C Looking beyond mitral valve prolapse and ischae-
mic stroke - a late diagnosis of trichorhinophalangealsyndrome type IMarta P. Soares
1, Márcia Rodrigues1, Daniela P. Silva2, Teresa Pinho
Melo2, Ana Berta Sousa1
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal,2Serviço de
Neurologia, Departamento de Neurociências e Saúde Mental,Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa
Norte, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction : Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS1) is a
rare genetic disorder characterized by distinctive facial features
(bulbous pear-shaped nose), ectodermal anomalies (sparse hair,dental anomalies, dystrophic nails), and skeletal ﬁndings (brachy-
dactyly, cone-shaped epiphyses of phalanges, short stature). Less
frequently (15%), variable cardiac abnormalities have been
described, including mitral valve prolapse (MVP), reported in onlyseven patients.
Case report: A 36 year-old man was referred to Genetics due to
facial dysmorphism, MVP and stroke at a young age. He was the
second child of non-consanguineous parents with no relevantfamily history. Pregnancy and birth were uneventful; growth andpsychomotor development were normal. At age 5, he was
diagnosed and treated for unilateral Perthes disease. He evolved
with arterial hypertension, and severe mitral regurgitation withMVP diagnosed at 30 years, requiring mitral valve plasty and
anticoagulation therapy for two years. At 36 years, he had an
ischaemic stroke, causing left-sided hemiparesis, treated with t-PA.After young stroke investigation, cardioembolic aetiology wasconsidered and anticoagulation was reinitiated. Physical examina-
tion revealed short stature, sparse scalp hair, macrocephaly, facial
dysmorphism (down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, peculiar nose
with broad ridge and tip and underdeveloped alae, and low-setears), and brachydactyly.
Results : Skeletal survey showed brachydactyly and cone-
shaped epiphyses of phalanges, corroborating the clinical suspi-cion of TRPS1. A custom skeletal dysplasia NGS panel identi ﬁed a
heterozygous pathogenic variant in TRPS1 : c.2831G>T, p.(Arg944-
Met), con ﬁrming TRPS1.
Conclusion : This case illustrates a rare cardiac anomaly with
impact on prognosis, warranting systematic screening for MVP in
the management of TRPS1.
M.P. Soares: None. M. Rodrigues: None. D.P. Silva: None. T.P.
Melo: None. A.B. Sousa: None.
P11.130.D Epileptic encephalopathy as a new feature of
TSPYL1 variants, associated with sudden infant death with
dysgenesis of the testes
Benoit Mazel
1,2,3, Candace Ben Signor4, Véronique Darmency5,
Delphine Mallet6, Valentin Bourgeois7, Margot Grisval1, Alexandra
Pillard3, Charlotte Poe7, Marie Bournez1, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,2,7,
Antonio Vitobello3,7, Yannis Duffourd3,7, Christophe Philippe3,7,
Laurence Faivre1,2,7, Sophie Nambot1,2,7
1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD - CentreHospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,2Fédération
Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du
Développement (FHU TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Dijon Bourgogne et Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon,France,3Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique et moléculaire,
UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4Centre de
référence du syndrome de Prader-Willi et autres syndromes avecAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
368
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608troubles du comportement alimentaire, Centre Hospitalier Universi-
taire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,5Service de Neurophysiologie
Clinique, Hôpital d ’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France,6Service d ’hormonologie, endocrinologie
moléculaire et maladies rares, CPBE, groupement hospitalier Lyon-Est, Lyon-Bron, France,7Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des
Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon,
France.
Introduction: Sudden infant death with dysgenesis of the testes
syndrome (SIDDT) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder associat-
ing developmental sex disorder (DSD) in patients with 46,XYkaryotype and visceroautonomic dysfunction responsible forsudden death before twelve months of age. It has been ﬁrst
described in 2004 and very few patients were since reported. We
describe here a new patient issued from non-consanguineousparents with SIDDT and epileptic encephalopathy.
Methods: We provide the phenotypic description and genetic
results of the ﬁrst case carrying compound heterozygous TSPYL1
variants. We also reviewed the data of the 21 initially describedand the 5 recently reported patients with SIDDT.
Results: All literature ’s cases carried homozygous variants in
TSPYL1 and were issued from consanguineous parents. All 27
patients presented with sudden infant death and all patients with a46,XY karyotype had DSD. Our patient presented at the age of 4.5
months with repeated seizures. Within a month, his neurological
status deteriorated leading to a severe intractable epilepticencephalopathy. He died at age ten months of cardiorespiratory
arrest. Four other reported patients among two families presented
with progressive epilepsy, including one with severe epilepticencephalopathy. They died between ﬁve and nine months. No
similar phenotype was described in the 22 other patients.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings expand the phenotypic spectrum
of SIDDT, by reporting progressive epilepsy and severe epilepticencephalopathy as a possible outcome. This information may helpin managing patients with SIDDT.
B. Mazel: None. C. Ben Signor: None. V. Darmency: None. D.
Mallet: None. V. Bourgeois: None. M. Grisval: None. A. Pillard:
None. C. Poe: None. M. Bournez: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet:
None. A. Vitobello: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C. Philippe: None.
L. Faivre: None. S. Nambot: None.
P11.131.A X-linked variants in SHROOM4 are implicated in the
formation of VACTERL
Caroline M. Kolvenbach
1,2,3, Tim Felger2, Luca Schierbaum1,3, Isabelle
Thiffault4, Thomas Smol5, Allan Bayat6, Frederic Thieme3, Kerstin U.
Ludwig3, Öznur Yilmaz2, Tobias Lindenberg2, Ute Moog7, Alina C.
Hilger1,3, Phillip Grote8, Benjamin Odermatt2, Heiko Reutter3,9,
Gabriel C. Dworschak1,2,3
1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Institute
of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,4Center for Pediatric Genomic Medicine, Children ’s Mercy
Hospital, Kansas City, KS, USA,5Institut de Génétique Médicale,
Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France,
6Department of Genetics and Personalized Medicine, Danish Epilepsy
Centre, Dianalund, Denmark,7Institute of Human Genetics, Uni-
versity of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,8Institute of Cardiovas-
cular Regeneration, Center for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany,9Department of Neonatology and
Pediatric Intensive Care, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Introduction: The acronym VATER/VACTERL association refers to
the non-random co-occurrence of the following componentfeatures: vertebral defects (V), anorectal malformations (A), cardiac
defects (C), tracheoesophageal ﬁstula with or without esophageal
atresia (TE), renal malformations (R), and limb defects (L). Recently,
exome survey and large-scale re-sequencing con ﬁrmed TRAP1 and
ZIC3 as VATER/VACTERL disease genes. For the majority of affected
individuals, the genetic cause remains elusive.
Methods: We performed exome sequencing in a multiplex
family previously reported by Hilger et al. (2012). Re-sequencingwas performed on an Illumina MiSeq ®platform. Candidate gene
characterization was performed using embryonic mouse expres-
sion studies and zebra ﬁsh knockdown experiments.
Results: Exome survey of the index family prioritized a rare
variant in the X-chromosome residing gene SHROOM4 (c.940C>A,
p.Glu314Lys). Targeted re-sequencing of 310 male individuals with
VATER/VACTERL features and use of GeneMatcher identi ﬁed two
additional families with novel variants in SHROOM4 . Expression
studies in mouse embryos and in zebra ﬁsh larvae showed
expression in brain, heart, genitourinary tract and developing
cloaca. Knockdown experiments in zebra ﬁsh larvae using a splice
blocking Morpholino revealed cloacal malformations, renal cysts,and heart anomalies. Further analysis showed increased apoptosis
in the brain and a higher mortality in comparison with the
controls. These phenotypes which strongly resemble the VATER/VACTERL features could be rescued by human wildtype SHROOM4
RNA.
Conclusions: Previously, variants in SHROOM4 have been
reported in Stocco dos Santos syndrome [MIM #300434] causingintellectual disability. Our genetic and functional data in mouse
and zebra ﬁsh implicate SHROOM4 in the expression of a human
VATER/VACTERL phenotype.
C.M. Kolvenbach: None. T. Felger: None. L. Schierbaum:
None. I. Thiffault: None. T. Smol: None. A. Bayat: None. F.
Thieme: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. Ö. Yilmaz: None. T.
Lindenberg: None. U. Moog: None. A.C. Hilger: None. P. Grote:
None. B. Odermatt: None. H. Reutter: None. G.C. Dworschak:
None.
P11.132.B A microdeletion on Xq22.1 in a girl with develop-
mental delay and epilepsy may help de ﬁne a critical region of
pathogenicity
Stefano G. Caraf ﬁ1, Gabriele Trimarchi1, Sara Giangiobbe1,2, Chiara
Cattani1, Benedetta Cavirani1,3, Michela Malacarne4, Francesca C.
Radio5, Livia Garavelli1
1Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy,2San
Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy,3Azienda USL di Parma, Parma, Italy,
4IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,5Ospedale Pediatrico
Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy.
Deletions in the chromosomal region Xq22 have been associated
with intellectual disability, epilepsy and various developmentaldefects in heterozygous female patients, while they are oftenlethal in males. Recent reports mainly focus on structural variants
encompassing the PLP1 gene, encoding the major myelin protein,
responsible for a variable phenotype in females ranging from late-onset spastic paraplegia to early-onset neurological disease (Hijaziet al ., Hum Mut 2020;41:150-68). Here we describe a novel female
patient presenting with developmental delay, intellectual dis-
ability, behavioral anomalies and epilepsy. CGH-array analysisshowed a de novo 350 Kb deletion in the Xq22.1 region,
encompassing the genes TMSB15A ,NFX4 ,ARMCX5 ,GPRASP1 ,
GPRASP2 and BHLHB9 . X-chromosome inactivation assay revealed
a random inactivation pattern. Various known pathogenicdeletions overlap with our patient ’s, but the majority are larger,
sometimes extending into Xq22.2-Xq22.3. The most similar variantAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
369
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608is a 1.1 Mb deletion in a female patient who had clinical features
comparable to our case (Grillo et al., Eur J Med Genet 2010;53:113-
6). The 350 Kb deletion in our patient could therefore represent a
critical region within the Xq22.1 locus. Strikingly, a previouslypublished mouse model (Zhou et al ., Hum Mol Genet
2014;23:3823-9) suggested that the developmental delay and
epilepsy phenotype associated with Xq22.1 deletions could be
recapitulated in female mice bearing a minimal heterozygousdeletion spanning Armcx5 ,Gprasp1 ,Gprasp2 and Bhlhb9 . Our
report supports the notion of a Xq22.1 microdeletion syndrome
not comprising PLP1 but still associated with severe intellectual
disability, and sheds some light on its genotype-phenotypecorrelations.
S.G. Caraf ﬁ:None. G. Trimarchi: None. S. Giangiobbe: None.
C. Cattani: None. B. Cavirani: None. M. Malacarne: None. F.C.
Radio: None. L. Garavelli: None.
P11.133.C A ZFHX4 mutation associated with a recognizable
neuropsychological and facial phenotype
Paolo Fontana
1, Monia Ginevrino2,3, Kristel Bejo2, Giuseppina
Cantalupo1, Maria Ciavarella1, Cinzia Lombardi1, Marianna Maioli1,
Francesca Scarano1, Antonio Novelli2,Fortunato Lonardo1
1AORN San Pio, Benevento, Italy,2Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital,
Roma, Italy,3Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.
Introduction: ZFHX4 is a gene codifying for a transcription factor
involved in the development of various embryonic processes,
including brain differentiation. The main features of patients with
an 8q21.11 deletion encompassing this gene are intellectualdisability, hypotonia, short stature, and a peculiar facial pheno-type. Corneal opacity has been frequently reported and some of
the subjects also show a wide range of severe eye abnormalities.
Case report: We describe a female patient with mild intellectualdisability and autism spectrum disorder. She had brachycephaly
with ﬂat occiput, wide forehead, strabismus, monolateral ptosis,
epicanthic folds, low-set, prominent, posteriorly rotated ears, longand smooth philtrum, thin lips, high-arched palate, microretrog-nathia, short 4
thand 5thmetacarpal bones, lumbar hyperlordosis.
Clinical Exome Sequencing revealed the presence of the hetero-
zygous de novo pathogenic variant c.3093 +1G>T in the ZFHX4
gene. This variant is located in a canonical donor splice site,suggesting a possible alteration of the splicing process and a loss
of protein function.
Conclusions: Severe eye abnormalities occur with a high
frequency in patients with large 8q21.11 deletions. They range
from Peters anomaly to cataract, microphthalmia, sclerocornea,
corneal opacity, pigmentary retina degeneration. None of theseabnormalities have been reported in patients with ZFHX4 point
mutations, intragenic deletions, or small deletions encompassing
only ZFHX4 . We propose that ZFHX4 loss-of-function is associated
with an autosomal dominant condition, characterized by aneurobehavioural phenotype and a recognizable pattern of facialfeatures. Despite a partial phenotypic overlap, 8q21.11 microdele-
tion syndrome should be considered as a distinct entity.
P. Fontana: None. M. Ginevrino: None. K. Bejo: None. G.
Cantalupo: None. M. Ciavarella: None. C. Lombardi: None. M.
Maioli: None. F. Scarano: None. A. Novelli: None. F. Lonardo:
None.
P11.134.D Zhu-Tokita-Takenouchi-Kim syndrome: the ﬁrst
case due to a 21q22.1 microdeletion encompassing SON gene
Mafalda Santos Melo , Susana Lemos Ferreira, Diana Antunes, Rui
Gonçalves, Teresa KayServiço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction : Zhu-Tokita-Takenouchi-Kim syndrome (ZTTK, OMIM
#617140) is a recently described multisystemic disorder caused byde novo heterozygous pathogenic variants in SON gene. ZTTK
syndrome is characterized by developmental delay, poor overall
growth, facial dysmorphisms and structural malformations (cleftpalate, brain, eye, heart, kidney, and skeletal anomalies). To date,only 35 patients were reported. Here, we present a new case of
ZTTK syndrome aiming to contribute to its clinical and mutational
spectrum characterization.
Methods : Clinical data was collected from the patient ’s medical
record and compared with literature.
Results : A six-year-old boy was referred for syndromic
developmental delay evaluation. He was the ﬁrst child of a non-
consanguineous couple. Previous medical history included con-
genital heart defect, cleft palate, hypermetropia and recurrent
infections. Physical examination showed short stature and facialdysmorphisms including mild frontal bossing, midface retraction,low-set-ears, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, broad and
depressed nasal bridge, full cheeks, short philtrum, small mouth
and micrognatia. Abdominal, renal and central nervous systemimaging excluded other structural anomalies. Microarray analysisdetected a 59.17 kb microdeletion of chromosome region 21q22.1
encompassing SON gene (arr[hg19] 21q22.11 (34,892,568-
34,951,737)x1).
Discussion : The patient ’s phenotype was strinkingly similar to
ZTTK syndrome. All previous cases were due to loss-of-function
mutations in SON. To our knowledge, our case was the ﬁrst
associated with a 21q22.1 microdeletion involving a whole SON
gene deletion. Apparently, the co-deleted genes ( GART, MIR6501
and DONSON ) did not contribute to the clinical phenotype.
Conclusion : This report con ﬁrms that ZTTK syndrome can be
caused by 21q22.1 microdeletions, further broadening ZTTKmutational spectrum.
M.S. Melo: None. S.L. Ferreira: None. D. Antunes: None. R.
Gonçalves: None. T. Kay: None.
P12 Cancer Genetics
P12.001.A The copy number loss heterozygosity in hyperdi-
ploid pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Monika M. Lejman1, Katarzyna Wojciechowska1, Agata Pastorczak2,
Zuzanna Urba ńska3, Paulina Skowera4, Borys Styka4, Anna Past-
wińska5, Joanna Zawitkowska1, Jerzy R. Kowalczyk1
1Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland,2Medical University of
Lodz, Łódź, Poland,3Medical University of Łódź,Łódź, Poland,
4Children ’s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland,5Medical University of
Warsaw, Warszawa, Poland.
Introduction: Genetic abnormalities such as hyperdiploidy and
hypodiploidy in ﬂuence outcome during therapy of childhood
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Pure trisomies andtetrasomies are the hallmark of hyperdiploid (>47 chromosomes)ALL in children. Studies in ALL show that SNP microarray can
reveal a copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) of disomic
chromosome in hyperdiploid karyotype. Identi ﬁcation of recurrent
CN-LOH raises the question of their clinical impact in pediatric
leukemia.
Materials and Methods: Between October 2018 and December
2020 400 consecutive children with newly diagnosed BCP-ALL andtreated according to AIEOP-BFM ALL 2017 Poland protocol were
enrolled into this study. SNP microarray tests (CytoScan HD) and
metaphase cytogenetics were performed in patients.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
370
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: Our analyses identi ﬁed so far eleven such cases (8 girls,
3 boys). Their chromosome copy number ranged from 49 to 59
and included tetrasomies of chromosomes 21(7x), 18(4x), 10 (2x),
X (2x), 14 (1x). We observed CN-LOH of various chromosomes,including chromosomes 1, 3, 11, 13, 15, 16, 20 as a frequentlyrecurrent. All patients continue treatment or remain in remission.
Conclusion: There are no enough comprehensive studies in the
literature that reported outcome for patients with CN-LOH ofdisomic chromosome in hyperdiploid karyotype. Our resultsindicate that prognostic overview of patients with a CN-LOH
hyperdiploid karyotype seems relatively promising. Considering
relatively short follow-up, further prospective observation ofevents in the study cohort is indispensable to assess prognosticvalue of a CN-LOH hyperdiploid karyotype.
M.M. Lejman: None. K. Wojciechowska: None. A. Pastorczak:
None. Z. Urba ńska: None. P. Skowera: None. B. Styka: None. A.
Pastwi ńska: None. J. Zawitkowska: None. J.R. Kowalczyk: None.
P12.002.B Clonal architecture of pediatric core binding factor-
acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML)
Tatiana Nasedkina
1, Lilit Ghukasyan1, Georgii Krasnov1, Lyudmila
Baidun2
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology of the Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Russian Children ’s Clinical
Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Intratumoral heterogeneity and clona l variability is one of the central
problems in clinical oncology, being the reason for the developmentof resistance to therapy and relapses. The use of bioinformaticprocessing algorithms allows analysis of subclonal tumor organization
based on high-throughput sequencing data. In total, 16 patients with
t(8;21) and 6 patients with inv(16 ) were investigated (15 boys and 7
girls, mean age 8.5 years). The paired samples at diagnosis and
remission were analyzed, in four patients also relapsed samples were
available. Target sequencing of 84 genes, involved in the pathogen-esis of AML, or whole-exome sequencing was performed usingNextSeq500 Illumina platform. Com parative analysis of target panel
and whole-exome sequencing in CB F-AML patients was carried out.
Target sequencing showed the prese nce of several potential driver
mutations in KIT, NRAS, KRAS, CBL, FLT3 signaling pathway genes. In
22% of patients, the presence of two or more signaling mutations
with different variant allele frequencies was detected, which may
reﬂect the complex clonal structure of tumor substrate. Additional
mutations in ASXL1, ASXL2, RAD21, ETV6, WT1, SMC3, FBXW7, TET2
were revealed. Analysis of whole-exome sequencing data from the
AML patients allowed the isolation of clusters of mutant alleles mostlikely corresponding to different po pulations of leukemic cells in the
sample. Comparison of the mutation pro ﬁle of primary AML sample,
samples in remission and relapse makes it possible to trace the
dynamics of the clonal composition of the tumor. The work wassupported by the Russian Science Foundation (grant # 18 −15-00398).
T. Nasedkina: None. L. Ghukasyan: None. G. Krasnov: None. L.
Baidun: None.
P12.004.D RNA guided CRISPR-Cas protein downregulates the
oncogenic driver ALK expression in human lung cancer cell
Saifullah Saifullah
1, Sakari Matomo1, Takeshi Suzuki2,3, Toshifumi
Tsukahara1,4
1Area of Bioscience and Biotechnology, School of Materials Science,
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST), NomiCity, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan,2Division of Functional Genomics,Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-Machi,
Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan,3Molecular Therapeutic Target Research
Unit, Institute for Frontier Science Initiative, Kanazawa University,
Kakuma-Machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan,4Division of Transdisci-
plinary Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology(JAIST), Nomi City, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan.
Introduction: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK) gene transloca-
tion within chromosome 2 results in EML4-ALK oncofusion, drivers
for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). ALK inhibitors like crizotinib
have shown tremendous antitumor activity for ALK-positive
cancer. However, a complete and long-lasting response to theALK inhibitor is rare and patients become resistant to the therapyfollowing an initial response. Substitutive therapy that can inhibit
overexpression of ALK is desired for precision medicine.
Materials and Methods: Here, we used the CRISPR-Cas13a tool
for RNA downregulation. To evaluate the selectivity of CRISPR-
Cas13a on guide RNA (gRNA) design, we ﬁrst knocked down the
ﬁreﬂy luciferase mRNA. Next, we simply knocked down the
oncogenic driver EML4-ALK mRNA in the lung cancer cell (H3122)
using the tool. The downregulation was then endorsed by western
blot, qPCR, and cell viability assays.
Results: Based on the Cas13a selectivity results, we observed
restricted endonuclease activity in 3 ′crRNA-gRNA orientation. We
found the highest activity between 24-30 bp long gRNAs with
limited mismatch tolerance. In the case of EML4-ALK oncofusion,
the ALK protein was prominently downregulated (>80%), whichwas also re ﬂected at the mRNA level. This downregulation resulted
in substantial inhibition ( ̴40%) of the lung cancer cell viability. We
further found that tyrosine phosphorylation was signi ﬁcantly
reduced, which is one of the important features for activating thedownstream signaling in LUAD. Collectively, this study suggested
that the CRISPR-Cas13a protein downregulated the ALK expres-
sion in the lung cancer cell.
Conclusion: CRISPR-Cas13a mediated EML4-ALK mRNA down-
regulation could be a potential therapeutic strategy for ALK
+lung
cancer.
S. Saifullah: None. S. Matomo: None. T. Suzuki: None. T.
Tsukahara: None.
P12.005.A MDC1 restrains ATR-mediated resection of DNA
double-strand breaks in human cells
Stephen Meyn1,2,3, Paul S. Bradshaw2,3
1Center for Human Genomics and Precision Medicine, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA,2Genetics and Genome Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) are a potentially lethal form of
DNA damage that can cause genomic instability and contribute tocarcinogenesis. Human cells primarily repair induced DSBs via theerror-prone classical-Non Homologous End Joining (c-NHEJ)
pathway, which occurs throughout the cell cycle. During S and
G2, repair also occurs via the error-free Homologous Recombina-tion (HR) pathway. A critical early step in the DNA damageresponse is resection of DSB ends, which has a major effect on
genome stability, as it commits the cell to error-free HR repair.
HR-mediated DSB repair requires the ATM-dependent gen-
eration of 3 ’single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) via CtIP-mediated
DNA end resection. However, we ﬁnd that DNA end resection
can also be regulated by the DNA damage checkpoint proteinMDC1 independently of ATM. In human cells, MDC1 losspromotes unrestrained resection of DNA ends, as indicated by
increases in the number and intensity of RPA-coated ssDNA fociAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
371
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608in a process that is dependent upon ATR and CtIP. Further,
optimal loading of Rad51 onto RPA coated ssDNA requires
MDC1. While ATM promotes HR repair by initiating CtIP
dependent DNA end resection, MDC1 can affect pathway choicethrough restraining HR repair by preventing ATR- and CtIP-dependent resection.
Our work identi ﬁes a role for MDC1 in the control of DNA end
resection in human cells that is independent of ATM and shedsmechanistic insight into the processing of DNA damage that isrequired for faithful DNA repair, maintenance of genome stability
and prevention of tumorigenesis.
S. Meyn: None. P.S. Bradshaw: None.
P12.006.B Phenotype of six families with AXIN2 -oligodontia-
colorectal cancer syndrome. Cleft palate as a new feature of
this syndrome?
Laura Roht
1,2, Hanne K. Hyldebrandt3, Astrid T. Stormorken3, Hilde
Nordgarden4, Rolf H. Sijmons5, Dennis K. Bos5, Douglas Riegert-
Johnson6, Sarah Mantia-Macklin6, Kai Muru1,2, Tiina Kahre1,2, Katrin
Õunap1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of Clinical Genetics,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway,4National Resource Centre for Oral Health in Rare Disorders,
Lovisenberg Diaconal Hospital, Oslo, Norway,5Department of
Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Nether-
lands,6Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville,
FL, USA.
Introduction: Oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome (OMIM
608615) is an autosomal-dominant disease, which prevalence
according to Orphanet is <1: 1,000,000. It is caused by pathogenicgermline variants in AXIN2 gene. Our cohort consists of 13
individuals from six families carrying AXIN2 disease-causing
variants and presenting variable clinical expression ofoligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome.
Aim: To give an overview of our cohort`s clinical phenotype and
AXIN2 gene variants.
Material and methods: Data was gathered through ERN-
GENTURIS collaboration and includes ﬁve Estonian, ﬁve Norwe-
gian, one Dutch and two North-American patients.
Results: Of the 13 AXIN2 gene variant carriers, 8 were males
and 5 were females aged 4-95 years. All were Caucasians, 11from Europe, two from North-America. The most common
symptom was hypodontia/oligodontia and the number of
m i s s i n gt e e t hr a n g e df r o m2 - 2 2 . Eight of the individuals had
some type of gastrointestinal polyps, one individual hadadenocarcinoma of the coecum and abdominal super ﬁcial
melanoma, the other had olfactory neuroblastoma and the third
individual had unknown skin cancer and prostate adenocarci-noma. Phenotype was normal in nine cases. In one case, Silver-Russell syndrome was additionally diagnosed and one family
had three cases of cleft palate. Frameshift mutations in exon 8
were by far the most frequent and in most cases we know AXIN2
variant was inherited.
Conclusions: Most of the individual presented some symptoms
of oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome. In one family, cleft
palate was associated with the AXIN2 pathogenic variant and
therefore this characteristic should be considered as part of AXIN2
phenotype. Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PRG471
L. Roht: None. H.K. Hyldebrandt: None. A.T. Stormorken:
None. H. Nordgarden: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. D.K. Bos: None.
D. Riegert-Johnson: None. S. Mantia-Macklin: None. K. Muru:
None. T. Kahre: None. K. Õunap: None.P12.008.C BAP1 germline variations in Finnish patients with
malignant mesothelioma
Pauliina Repo
1,2, Aleksandra Staskiewicz1,2, Eva Sutinen3, Mikko
Rönty4, Tero T. Kivelä2, Marjukka Myllärniemi3, Joni A. Turunen1,2
1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland,2Ocular Oncology
Service, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki andHelsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,3Department of
Pulmonary Medicine, Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University
Hospital and Individualized Drug Therapy Research Program, Facultyof Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,4Department of
Pathology, HUS Diagnostic Center, Helsinki University Hospital and
Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Pathogenic germline variations in tumour suppressor BRCA1-
associated protein 1 ( BAP1 ) gene cause a dominantly inherited
tumour predisposition syndrome (BAP1-TPDS). Tumours asso-
ciated with BAP1-TPDS are uveal melanoma (UM), malignantmesothelioma (MM), cutaneous melanoma and renal cell carci-noma. Patients also exhibit cutaneous BAP1 ‐inactivated naevi
(BIN), the frequency of which is unknown. BINs may arise
sporadically, but patients with pathogenic germline BAP1 variant
might harbor multiple BINs even before other tumours. In this
study, we sequenced for germline BAP1 variations 58 DNA
samples archived in the Helsinki Biobank from Finnish patientswith MM. They were diagnosed in 2010-2019. Sanger sequencingidenti ﬁed one patient (1.7%; 95% CI, 0.04 to 9.2) with a pathogenic
variation c.1780_1781insT, p.(G549Vfs*49) in exon 14, a putative
founder variant that has been described in ﬁve Finnish families
with UM. The patient was approximately twenty years youngerthan the mean of the study cohort when diagnosed with MM
(mean 68, range 27 to 82), a nonsmoker with no exposure to
asbestos, and without family history of BAP1-TPDS. The tumourshowed loss of nuclear BAP1 staining in immunohistochemistry.
Additionally, ﬁve naevi removed before the MM were analyzed for
genetic alterations. Three combined BAP1 ‐inactivation with BRAF
V600E, identi ﬁed alone in the fourth (compound) naevus, whereas
theﬁfth (intradermal) naevus harbored NRAS Q61K. The overall
frequency of pathogenic germline BAP1 variations in Finnish
patients with MM was similar to that in Finnish patients with UM(9/433; 2.1%).
Funding: the Helsinki University Hospital Research Fund; the
Cancer Foundation; the Eye Foundation.
P. Repo: None. A. Staskiewicz: None. E. Sutinen: None. M.
Rönty: None. T.T. Kivelä: None. M. Myllärniemi: None. J.A.
Turunen: None.
P12.011.C First case of comprehensive genetic diagnostics of
Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome in a Russian patient
Dmitry S. Mikhaylenko
1,2, Margarita G. Filippova3, Kirill I.
Anoshkin1, Nikolay A. Kozlov3, Vsevolod B. Matveev3, Alexander V.
Khachaturyan3, Alexandra V. Semyanikhina3, Alexander S. Tanas1,
Marina V. Nemtsova1,2, Dmitry V. Zaletayev1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov
University), Moscow, Russian Federation,3N.N. Blokhin National
Medical Research Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federa-tion.
Here we report a case study of Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome
(BHDS) in a 26-year-old female patient. The patient wasAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
372
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608admitted to a clinic for diagnosis and treatment with a
neoplasm of the left kidney and had a history of renal cell
cancer (RCC) of the right kidney and spontaneous pneu-
mothorax. Multiple tumors of t he left kidney and lung cysts
were observed upon clinical and l aboratory testing. Tumors of
the left kidney were resected and diagnosed by pathologist as
chromophobe renal cell carcinomas. PCR and Sanger sequen-
cing of FLCN exons 4-14 from blood DNA revealed the
heterozygous germline nonsense mutation c.1429C>T (p.R477*) and thus con ﬁrmed the diagnosis of BHDS. Multiple
ﬁbrofolliculomas, which are the most common BHDS symp-
toms, were not observed possibly because the patient was tooyoung to develop them. Four variants of uncertain clinicalsigni ﬁc a n c ew e r ed e t e c t e di nt u m o rD N Ab yu s i n gt h eC C Pa n d
the IonChef/S5 platform; know n cancer driver mutations were
not detected. Based on the ﬁndings, medical-genetic counsel-
ling was carried out, and a follow-up management was
outlined. As far as we know, this case study is the ﬁrst
comprehensive clinical and genetic examination of a BHDSpatient in Russia. The p.R477* mu tation has been described in
patients with ﬁbrofolliculomas and lung cysts, but not RCC,
while RCC was the ﬁrst manifestation of BHDS in our case. The
case report may help geneticists and oncologists to betterunderstand the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of BHDS invarious populations.
D.S. Mikhaylenko: None. M.G. Filippova: None. K.I. Anoshkin:
None. N.A. Kozlov: None. V.B. Matveev: None. A.V. Khachatur-
yan: None. A.V. Semyanikhina: None. A.S. Tanas: None. M.V.
Nemtsova: None. D.V. Zaletayev: None.
P12.012.D Frequency of pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes in a Russian population-based sample and in
patients with breast or ovarian cancer
Alena Limonova
1, Alexey Meshkov1, Alexandra Ershova1, Anna
Kiseleva1, Olga Skirko1, Marina Klimushina1, Evgeniia Sotnikova1,
Olga Kurilova1, Irina E ﬁmova1, Ludmila Lyubchenko2, Margarita
Filippova2, Andrey Poloznikov3, Vladimir Kutsenko1, Maria Pokrovs-
kaya1, Oxana Drapkina1
1National Medical Research Centre for Therapy & Preventive Medicine,
Moscow, Russian Federation,2N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research
Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation,3National Medical
Research Radiological Center, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Progress in genetics and molecular research enabled
discovery of mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, leading to the
development of hereditary breas t( B C )a n do v a r i a n( O C )c a n c e r .
Genetic testing contributes to early diagnosis and targeted preven-tion of these cancers. Objective: To investigate the prevalence of
pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in patients with BC/
OC and in a population-based sample without oncological diseases.
Materials and Methods: 156 patients (mean age ± SD: 52 ± 13
years old) with diagnosed BC/OC were included in the study
consecutively. In addition to it, 672 (mean age ± SD: 45 ± 12 years
old) and 1191 (mean age ± SD: 48 ± 11 years old) women from twoRussian population-based cohorts of the ESSE-RF study (ESSE-Vologda and ESSE-Ivanovo, respectively) were recruited in the
analysis. Variants of BRCA1 (rs80357713, rs80357711, and
rs80357906) and BRCA2 (rs80359550) were detected using acustom panel.
Results: Among cancer patients there were 5 carriers (3.21%) of
mutations in BRCA1 (4 - rs80357906, 2.56%; 1 - rs80357711, 0.64%)and 1 carrier (0.64%) of rs80359550 in BRCA2. In the population-based samples no mutations were identi ﬁed. The presence of
BRCA1 (rs80357906, rs80357711) or BRCA2 (rs80359550) variantsincreases the risk of BC/OC statistically signi ﬁcantly (<0,0001). As
no carriers were detected in the population-based samples, only
lower limit of con ﬁdence interval for OR was calculated and was
found to be 14,4.
Conclusion: Detection of pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 could facilitate early diagnosis and timely prevention of BC
and OC.
A. Limonova: None. A. Meshkov: None. A. Ershova: None. A.
Kiseleva: None. O. Skirko: None. M. Klimushina: None. E.
Sotnikova: None. O. Kurilova: None. I. Eﬁmova: None. L.
Lyubchenko: None. M. Filippova: None. A. Poloznikov: None.
V. Kutsenko: None. M. Pokrovskaya: None. O. Drapkina: None.
P12.013.A A 15 and 28 Gene Panel for BRCA1, BRCA2 and DDR
Genes for Reporting Variants on FFPE Samples
Fiona Hyland
1, Charles Scafe1, Yun Zhu2, Chenchen Yang2, Yu-Ting
Tseng2, Steven Roman2
1Thermo Fisher, South San Francisco, CA, USA,2Thermo Fisher, San
Mateo, CA, USA.
There is broad interest in detection of germline and somatic
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and other DNA damage response
(HR DDR) genes, including detect SNPs, Indels, CNVs, and exon
deletions on FFPE samples.We describe analytical veri ﬁcation of
15-gene and 28-gene DDR next-generation sequencing assays,covering BRCA1 and BRCA2 and additional DDR genes. These
panels can be customized, adding up to 250 optimized and
performance veri ﬁed genes. These panel detects germline and
somatic mutations on FFPE samples, with sensitive and speci ﬁc
detection of variants down to 5% LOD. Exon deletions and long
deletions are reported for BRCA1 and BRCA2 . The panels perform
well with low input (20ng) and degraded DNA.The OncomineBRCA Expanded Panel has excellent performance. 92% of reads
are on target, and panel uniformity is 97%. Panel uniformity at
hotspot positions (alleles of known relevance) ranges from 98-100%. Performance was measured with the Ion GeneStudio S5system, with FFPE samples and cell line controls. An integrated
bioinformatics pipeline with a visual user interface provides
variant calling, functional annotation of variants, presence inpopulation, phenotype and oncology databases including ClinVar,COSMIC etc, and predicted protein effect. Filtering tools enable
variant prioritization. We create a report describing drug labels
and clinical trials relevant for the variants detected in the sample.
This assay enables BRCA1/2 and HR DDR translational research
into the effects of relevant mutations. For Research Use Only. Not
for use in diagnostic procedures
F. Hyland: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Thermo Fisher. C. Scafe: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher. Y. Zhu: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc.C. Yang: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc.Y.
Tseng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Thermo
Fisher Scienti ﬁc.S. Roman: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc.
P12.014.B Harnessing national pan-laboratory data for accu-
rate quantitation of PS4 in cancer susceptibility genes: CancerVariant Interpretation Group UK (CanVIG-UK)
Alice Garrett
1, Chey Loveday1, Miranda Durkie2, George J. Burghel3,
James Drummond4, Rachel Robinson5, Ian Berry5, Andrew Wallace3,
Laura King1, Subin Choi1, Eleni So ﬁanopoulou6, Fiona McRonald7,
Francesco Santaniello7, John Burn8, Jem Rashbass9, Steven Hardy7,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
373
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Diana Eccles10,11, Mark Tischkowitz12,13, Clare Turnbull1,14, on behalf
of CanGene-CanVar consortium and CanVIG-UK
1Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research,
London, United Kingdom,2Yorkshire and North East Genomic
Laboratory Hub, Shef ﬁeld Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust, Shef ﬁeld,
United Kingdom,3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine and
North West Genomic Laboratory Hub, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,4East Genomic
Laboratory Hub, Cambridge University Hospitals Genomic Labora-
tory, Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
5Yorkshire and North East Genomic Laboratory Hub, Leeds Teaching
Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom,6Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,7National Disease Registration, Public
Health England, London, United Kingdom,8Institute of Genetic
Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UnitedKingdom,9National Cancer Registration and Analysis Service, Public
Health England, London, United Kingdom,10Cancer Sciences, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UnitedKingdom,11Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United King-
dom,12East Anglian Medical Genetics Unit, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom,13Department of
Medical Genetics, National Institute for Health, Research Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,14Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
For genes associated with incomplete, late-onset penetrance for
common phenotypes, the lines of evidence available for inferenceof pathogenicity are often limited. Individual labs in isolationtypically lack suf ﬁcient data to undertake informative case-control
analyses. Given the national infrastructure of the NHS and strong
professional cohesion afforded by ACGS/BSGM, the UK is well-placed to address this issue through amalgamation of data, but
has been perennially limited by issues of governance and
infrastructure.
Precipitated in 2016 by the BRCA Challenge, all 19 English NHS
molecular genetics laboratories now regularly submit pseudony-
mised individual-level variant data to the National Cancer
Registration and Analysis Service of Public Health England (PHE).Via the CRUK-supported CanGene-CanVar initiative, these data areharmonised, cleaned and ethnicity-matched in PHE. In total to
date we have had submissions for >100,000 BRCA tests and
>20,000 CRC/MMR gene tests. Variant counts are then releasedback to the clinical community via an online portal ( http://www.
canvaruk.org/ ).
We shall present UK NHS data on analysis of >1500 BRCA
variants to exemplify our proposed approach to graded quanti-tative application of ACMG evidence item PS4, namely use of
variant-level case control data. We shall demonstrate key elements
to our PS4 approach, including (i) how to approximate anappropriate control denominator when a variant is absent ingnomAD (ii) how to derive from an odds ratio of association a
likelihood ratio for pathogenicity and (iii) adjustment for sample
series enrichment incurred from recruitment based on familyhistory.
Grant reference: C61296/A27223
A. Garrett: None. C. Loveday: None. M. Durkie: None. G.J.
Burghel: None. J. Drummond: None. R. Robinson: None. I. Berry:
None. A. Wallace: None. L. King: None. S. Choi: None. E.
Soﬁanopoulou: None. F. McRonald: None. F. Santaniello: None.
J. Burn: None. J. Rashbass: None. S. Hardy: None. D. Eccles:
None. M. Tischkowitz: None. C. Turnbull: None.P12.015.C Clinical practice guidelines for BRCA1 and BRCA2
genetic testing
Marion Imbert-Bouteille
1, Massimo Barberis2, Philip Beer3, Eitan
Friedman4, Josep M. Piulats5, Ettore D. Capoluongo6, Jesus Garcia
Foncillas7, Isabelle Ray-Coquard8, Frédérique Penault-Llorca9, William
D. Foulkes10, Clare Turnbull11, Helen Hanson11, Steven Narod12, Banu
K. Arun13, Matti S. Aapro14, Jean-Louis Mandel15, Nicola Normanno16,
Diether Lambrechts17, Ignace Vergote18, Bernard Baertschi19, Karen
Baudry1, Yves-Jean Bignon9, Marc Bollet20, Carole Corsini1, Olivier
Cussenot21, Thibault De la Motte Rouge22, Marie Duboys de Labarre1,
Florence Duchamp1, Clarisse Duriez23, Karim Fizazi24, Virginie
Galibert1, Laurence Gladieff25, Joseph Gligorov21, Pascal Hammel26,
William Jacot27, Tatiana Kogut-Kubiak1, Pierre-Jean Lamy28, Sophie
Nambot29, Yann Neuzillet30, Sylviane Olschwang31, Jean-Marc Rey1,
Chloé Rideau1, Jean-Philippe Spano32, Frédéric Thomas33, Marion
Vandromme23, Julie Vendrell1, Daniel Zarca34, Kevin S. Hughes35, José
E. Alés Martínez36, Pascal Pujol1
1CHU Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France,2European Institute of
Oncology, MILAN, Italy,3University of Glasgow, GLASGOW, United
Kingdom,4Chaim Sheba Medical Center, TEL-HASHOMER, Israel,
5Institut Català d ’Oncologia (ICO), HOSPITALET DE LLOBREGAT, Spain,
6Federico II School of Medicine, NAPLES, Italy,7Oncohealth Institute,
MADRID, Spain,8Centre Léon Bérard, LYON, France,9Centre Jean
Perrin, CLERMONT-FERRAND, France,10The Research Institute of the
McGill University, MONTREAL, QC, Canada,11The Institute of Cancer
Research, LONDON, United Kingdom,12Women ’s College Research
Institute, TORONTO, ON, Canada,13University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, HOUSTON, TX, USA,14Clinique de Genolier, GENOLIER,
Switzerland,15The Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular
Biology, STRASBOURG, France,16Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione
G. Pascale", NAPLES, Italy,17VIB Center for Cancer Biology, LEUVEN,
Belgium,18Catholic University of Leuven, LEUVEN, Belgium,19University
of Geneve, GENEVE, Switzerland,20Institut Rafaël, LEVALLOIS-PERRET,
France,21Hôpital Tenon AP-HP, PARIS, France,22CRLCC Eugène
Marquis, RENNES, France,23Association BRCA France, LILLE, France,
24Institut Gustave Roussy, PARIS, France,25Institut Claudius Regaud,
TOULOUSE, France,26Hôpital Beaujon AP-HP, MONTPELLIER, France,
27Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France,28Institut
Imagenome, MONTPELLIER, France,29CHU Dijon, DIJON, France,
30Hôpital Foch, SURESNES, France,31Hôpital Européen Marseille,
MARSEILLE, France,32Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière AP-HP, PARIS, France,
33CNRS Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France,34Institut Français du Sein,
PARIS, France,35Massachusetts General Hospital, BOSTON, MA, USA,
36Hospital Nuestra Senora de Sonsoles, AVILA, Spain.
BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene pathogenic variants account for most
hereditary breast cancer and are increasingly used to determineeligibility for PARP inhibitor (PARPi) therapy of BRCA-related cancer.Because issues of BRCA testing in clinical practice now overlap with
both preventive and therapeutic management, updated and
comprehensive practice guidelines for BRCA genotyping areneeded. The integrative recommendations for BRCA testingpresented here aim to 1) identify individuals who may bene ﬁtf r o m
genetic counseling and risk-reducing strategies; 2) update germline
and tumor-testing indications for PARPi-approved therapies; 3)provide testing recommendations for personalized management ofearly and metastatic breast cancer; and 4) address the issues of rapid
process and tumor analysis. An international group of experts
including geneticists, medical and surgical oncologists, pathologists,ethicists and patient representatives was commissioned by the
French Society of Predictive and Personalized Medicine. The group
followed a methodology based on speci ﬁc formal guidelines
development including 1) evaluating the likelihood of BRCAm fromAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
374
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608a combined systematic review of the literature, risk assessment
models and expert quotations and 2) therapeutic values of BRCAm
status for PARPi therapy in BRCA-related cancer and for manage-
ment of early and advanced breast cancer. These internationalguidelines may help clinicians comprehensively update andstandardize BRCA testing practices.
M. Imbert-Bouteille: None. M. Barberis: None. P. Beer: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genomic Strategy, OncoDNAcancer theranostics, K arus therapeutics, Cambridge Cancer Geno-
mics. E. Friedman: None. J.M. Piulats: None. E.D. Capoluongo:
None. J. Garcia Foncillas: None. I. Ray-Coquard: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collabora tor or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁc a n t ;M S D .F .C o n s u l t a n t /
A d v i s o r yB o a r d ;M o d e s t ;A s t r a Z e n e c a ,M S D ,T e s a r o ,R o c h e ,G e n M a b ,
Pﬁzer, Clovis Oncology. F. Penault-Llorca: F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; AstraZeneca, MSD, Tesaro, GSK, Illumina, MyriadGenetics, Roche. W.D. Foulkes: None. C. Turnbull: None. H. Hanson:
None. S. Narod: None. B.K. Arun: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consu ltant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; CIPRIT, NCI, Susan Komen,PharnaMar, AbbVie, Astra Zeneca. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; AbbVie. M.S. Aapro: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Elsai, Helsinn, Merck, Mundipharma, Roche, Tesaro. J. Mandel: None.
N. Normanno: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Modest; Roche, Astra Zeneca, Biocartis, Illumina. F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; MSD, Bayer, Biocartis, Incyte, Roche, BMS,Merck, Thermo ﬁscher, Boehringer, Ingelheim, Astra Zeneca, Sano ﬁ,
Eli-Lilly. D. Lambrechts: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; F.
Hoffmann, Roche, Sano ﬁaventis, Bayer. I. Vergote: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collabora tor or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Oncoinvent AS, Genmab,
Amgen, Roche, Strichting tegen Kanker. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Advaxis, Eisai, MSD belgium, Roche NV, GenMab, F.Hoffmann-La Roche, PharmaMar, M illenium Pharmaceuticals, Clovis
Oncology, Astra Zeneca NV, Tesaro, Oncoinvent AS, Immunogen,
Sotio. B. Baertschi: None. K. Baudry: None. Y. Bignon: None. M.
Bollet: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche, Novartis, Sano ﬁ,
Pﬁzer, Amgen, Chugai, Archimedes. C. Corsini: None. O. Cussenot: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Novartis,
Pﬁ
zer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Janssen, Takeda. T. De
la Motte Rouge: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Novartis, P ﬁzer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Astra Zeneca, Tesaro-GSK, Clovis Oncology, P ﬁzer, Roche,
MSD. M. Duboys de Labarre: None. F. Duchamp: None. C. Duriez:
None. K. Fizazi: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Janssen,
Bayer, Astellas Pharma, Sano ﬁ,O r i o nP h a r m a ,C u r e v a c ,A s t r aZ e n e c a ,
ESSA Pharma, Roche, Amgen. V. Galibert: None. L. Gladieff: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modes t; Roche, Astra Zeneca, Tesaro. J.
Gligorov: F. Consultant/Advisory Board ; Modest; Roche-Genentech,
N o v a r t i s ,D a i c h i ,M S D ,E i s a i ,G e n o m i cH e a l t h ,I p s e n ,M a c r o g e n i c s ,Pﬁzer.P. Hammel: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra
Zeneca, BMS, Celgene, OSE Immunotherapeutics. W. Jacot: B.
Research Grant (principal investi gator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; AstraZeneca. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca, P ﬁzer.T.
Kogut-Kubiak: None. P. Lamy: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Astra Zeneca, Novartis, Janssen, Roche. S. Nambot: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca. Y. Neuzillet: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; MSD, Astra Zeneca, Sano ﬁ,
IPSEN, Bouchara-Recordiatet, BMS, Astellas. S. Olschwang: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca. J. Rey: None. C.
Rideau: None. J. Spano: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
R o c h e ,M S D ,B i o g a r a n ,A s t r aZ e n e c a ,L E OP h a r m a ,M y l a n ,P ﬁzer, BMS,
Novartis, PFO, Myriads, Gilead and Lilly. F. Thomas: None. M.Vandromme: None. J. Vendrell: None. D. Zarca: F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; Exa ct Sciences, Astra Zeneca. K.S. Hughes:
B. Research Grant (principal investi gator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; CRAHealth LLC. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Hologic Inc,Myriads Genetics. J.E. Alés Martínez: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Roche, P ﬁzer, BMS, Tesaro. P. Pujol: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collabora tor or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Novartis, P
ﬁzer. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca, P ﬁzer, Exact
Sciences.
P12.016.D Uptake and ef ﬁcacy of bilateral risk reducing
surgery in unaffected female BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers
Ruta Marcinkute1, Emma Roisin Woodward1, Ashu Gandhi2, Sacha
Howell2, Emma J Crosbie3, Julie Wissely2, James Harvey2, Lindsay
Highton2, John Murphy2, Cathrine Holland4, Richard Edmondson4,
Richard Clayton4, Lester Barr2, Elaine F Harkness5, Anthony Howell6,
Fiona Lalloo1, D Gareth Evans1
1Clinical Genetics Service, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,United Kingdom,2Prevent Breast Cancer Centre, Wythenshawe
Hospital Manchester Universities Foundation Trust, Manchester,
United Kingdom,3Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, St Mary ’s Hospital, University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom,4Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, St Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,Manchester, United Kingdom,5Division of Informatics, Imaging and
Data Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine
and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom,6Manchester Breast
Centre, The Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background: Women testing positive for BRCA1/2 pathogenic
variants have high lifetime risks of breast cancer (BC) and ovariancancer (OC). The effectiveness of risk reducing surgery (RRS) has
been demonstrated in numerous previous studies. We evaluated
long-term uptake, timing and effectiveness of risk reducingmastectomy (RRM) and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO)in healthy BRCA1/2 carriers.
Methods: Women were prospectively followed up from positive
genetic test (GT) result to censor date. χ² testing compared
categorical variables; Cox regression model estimated HRs and
95% CI for BC/OC cases associated with RRS, and impact on all-
cause mortality; Kaplan-Meier curves estimated cumulative RRSuptake. The annual cancer incidence was estimated by women-years at risk.
Results: In total, 887 women were included in this analysis.
Mean follow-up was 6.26 years (range =0.01-24.3; total =4685.4
women-years). RRS was performed in 512 women, 73 before GT.Overall RRM uptake was 57.9% and RRSO uptake was 78.6%. The
median time from GT to RRM was 18.4 months, and from GT to
RRSO-10.0 months. Annual BC incidence in the study populationwas 1.28%. Relative BC risk reduction (RRM versus non-RRM) was94%. Risk reduction of OC (RRSO versus non-RRSO) was 100%.
Conclusion: Over a 24-year period, we observed an increasing
number of women opting for RRS. We showed that the timing ofRRS remains suboptimal, especially in women undergoing RRSO.
Both RRM and RRSO showed a signi ﬁcant effect on relevant cancer
risk reduction. However, there was no statistically signi ﬁcant RRSO
protective effect on BC.
R. Marcinkute: None. E. Woodward: None. A. Gandhi: None. S.
Howell: None. E. Crosbie: None. J. Wissely: None. J. Harvey:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
375
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608None. L. Highton: None. J. Murphy: None. C. Holland: None. R.
Edmondson: None. R. Clayton: None. L. Barr: None. E. Harkness:
None. A. Howell: None. F. Lalloo: None. D. Evans: None.
P12.020.D Nearly all multiple-case breast cancer families with
HRD tumors are detected by clinical gene panels
Thibaut S. Matis1,2,3, Nadia Zayed2,3, Bouchra Labraki4, Manon de la
Durantaye5, Théophane A. Matis6, Nancy Hamel3, Adrienne Atayan2,
Barbara Rivera7,8,9, Yuval Tabach10, Patricia N. Tonin2,3,11, Alexandre
Orthwein7,8, Anne-Marie Mes-Masson5,12, Zaki El Haffaf4, William D.
Foulkes2,3,7, Paz Polak13
1Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France,2Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada,3Cancer Research
Program, Centre for Translational Biology, The Research Institute of
the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, QC, Canada,4Divison
de Médecine Génétique, CRCHUM-CHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada,
5Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier de l ’Université de Montréal
and Institut du cancer de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada,6Ecole
Supérieur de Génie Informatique, Paris, France,7Gerald Bronfman
Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada,
8Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital,
Montréal, QC, Canada,9IDIBELL Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute, Barcelona, Spain,10Department of Developmental Biology
and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical Research-Israel-Canada,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,11Department of
Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada,12Department of
Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada,13Depart-
ment of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
Germline pathogenic variants (GPVs) in BRCA1 ,BRCA2 ,PALB2 ,a n d
RAD51C/D account for about two- ﬁfths of multi-case breast cancer
(BC) families. Because the known germline pathogenic variants are
mostly related to homologous recombination repair (HR) pathwaygenes, it has been hypothesized that variants in unknown genes or
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance that lead to HR de ﬁciency (HRD)
can contribute to a large fraction of the unsolved cases. Through apipeline optimized for archival formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn-embedded
tumor tissues, we studied 39 whole-exome sequencings normal/
tumor pairs from French-Canadian patients with either early-onset
BC or a strong family history of BC negative for known breast cancersusceptibility genes (BCSGs). Consistent with previous studies, lessthan 15% of tumors demonstrated HRD, and one of which harbored
a founder missense mutation in RAD51D ,r e c e n t l yc l a s s i ﬁed as
pathogenic. No other samples revealed novel candidate HRD-associated genes, selected on their co-evolution with HR genes.
Thirteen patients harbored loss of heterozygosity in the matched
tumor that retained variants in a candidate gene, but tumors did nothave a mutational signature indicating HRD. We showed that ourpipeline could be used to identify rare GPV that lead to HRD, but our
results suggest that in French Canadians it is unlikely that a
signiﬁcant fraction of unexplained multi-case families is due to HRD-
associated variants. This pipeline will be useful for investigatingunderstudied populations. In well-studied populations, these results
suggest that current gene testing panels will be able to detect most
pathogenic variants in the known cancer-predisposing HRD genes.
T.S. Matis: None. N. Zayed: None. B. Labraki: None. M. de la
Durantaye: None. T.A. Matis: None. N. Hamel: None. A. Atayan:
None. B. Rivera: None. Y. Tabach: None. P.N. Tonin: None. A.
Orthwein: None. A. Mes-Masson: None. Z. El Haffaf: None. W.D.
Foulkes: None. P. Polak: None.
P12.021.A The clinical signi ﬁcance of combined effect in
BRCA1 and p53 genes variants on breast cancer treatment
courseOlha Lobanova
1, Z Rossokha2, V Cheshuk1, N Medvedieva2,R
Vereshchako1, N Gorovenko3
1National Medical University Bogomolets, Kyiv, Ukraine,2State
Institution Reference-centre for Molecular Diagnostic of Public HealthMinistry of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine,3Shupyk National Medical
Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction: BRCA 1/2 genes identi ﬁed as hereditary determi-
nants of a high risk breast cancer (BC). The pathogenic variants
inBRCA genes is detected in familial BC, in contrast the benign
and drug response variant with uncertain signi ﬁcance in p53
gene (G119C). The aim of our stud y was to evaluate the combine
effect of these gene variants on the clinical course of the
disease.
Materials and Methods: The study group included 165 BC
patients with a follow-up period of 28-36 months. Variants in theBRCA1 gene ( 5382insC , rs80357906; 4153delA, rs80357711; T300G,
rs28897672) and in the p53 gene (G119C, rs1042522) were
detected by PCR and PCR-RFLP.
Results: BRCA1 pathogenic variants were found in 12.7% cases,
p53 single variants - in 52.1 %. 5,5 % patients had combined
variants in pathogenic BRCA1 with variants of P53gene (5382insC/
G119C - 4,8%; 4153delA/G119C - 0,6%). The p53 single variants
was de ﬁned in 76.7% of familial BC. Triple-negative BC type
detected in 37% of all patients. Among triple-negative patients
with pathogenic BRCA1 was 81%, with the p53variants - 36%, with
combined variants of two genes - 100% patients. Disease-freesurvival and overall survival was decreased in patients with
combined variants compared with other patients (44.4% vs 87.3%;
66.7 % vs 96.4%, p < 0.05, respectively). Brain metastases wereidenti ﬁed more often in patients with combined genes variant
(60% vs 28,6%, p < 0.05, respectively).
Conclusions: The unfavorable effect of combined BRCA1 and
p53 gene variants with aggressive course and resistance to
treatment in patients with breast cancer was de ﬁned.
O. Lobanova: None. Z. Rossokha: None. V. Cheshuk: None. N.
Medvedieva: None. R. Vereshchako: None. N. Gorovenko: None.
P12.022.B Case-control likelihood ratio calculation for clinical
classi ﬁcation of variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in the BRCA1
and BRCA2 genes
Maria Zanti
1, Fergus Couch2, Denise O ’Mahony1,3, Breast Cancer
Association Consortium, Joe Dennis4, Douglas Easton4, Amanda
Spurdle5, David Goldgar6, Kyriaki Michailidou1,3
1Biostatistics Unit, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus,2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA,3Cyprus School of
Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Centre for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,5Division of
Genetics and Population Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical ResearchInstitute, Brisbane, Australia,6Huntsman Cancer Institute, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA.
Introduction: It is well established that the most prevalent
inherited pathogenic variants (PVs) contributing to breast
cancer (BC) risk occur in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Individuals
carrying PVs can bene ﬁt from risk management strategies
including closer surveillance at an earlier age, prophylactic
surgery and targeted therapies. However, BRCA1 and BRCA2
genetic testing often (5-20%) identi ﬁes a variant of uncertain
clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS), complicating clinical management of
patients and their families.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
376
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: After quality control, genotype data
generated as part of the Breast Cancer Association Consortium
(BCAC) OncoArray project was available for 184 BRCA1/2 variants.
Data from up to 75,657 BC cases and 52,987 healthy controls (agesbetween 18-80) were used to estimate likelihood ratios (LRs) ofpathogenicity. LRs were calculated by comparing the probability
of observing the data assuming the variant has similar penetrance
as the “average ”truncating pathogenic variant with the prob-
ability that the variant under study has no effect on risk. LRs werecategorised into American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics and Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP)
code strength categories following published recommendations.
Results: Our analysis provides supporting, moderate or strong
classi ﬁcation evidence for 70.1% of the variants. Of these, LR
estimates in favour of pathogenicity were estimated for 17
variants, whereas LRs providing evidence of being benign wereestimated for 112 variants.
Conclusions: These results may be used to inform BRCA1 and
BRCA2 variant classi ﬁcation, with potential implications for patient
management. Grant: Research Promotion Foundation; RESTART2016 - 2020; CULTURE/AWARD-YR/0418/0017
M. Zanti: None. F. Couch: None. D. O ’Mahony: None. J.
Dennis: None. D. Easton: None. A. Spurdle: None. D. Goldgar:
None. K. Michailidou: None.
P12.023.C Association of XRCC1-Arg399Gln and XPG-
Asp1104His polymorphisms with reproductive risk factors
and increased risk of breast cancer in Tanzanian patients
Ismael C. Adolf
1, Gokce Akan2, Linus P. Rweyemamu1, Fatmahan
Atalar2
1University of Dar es Salaam Mbeya College of Health and Allied
Sciences, Mbeya, Tanzania, United Republic of,2Child Health
Institute, Department of Rare Diseases, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background: Variations in DNA repair genes can alter protein
function, resulting in the accumulation of DNA damage and
mutations, and contribute to the development of cancer. Recent
ﬁndings have shown the association between DNA repair gene
polymorphisms and pathogenesis of breast cancer(BC). In thisstudy, we investigated the role of the following polymorphisms;
hOGG1-Ser326Cys(rs1052133), APE1-Asp148Glu(rs1130409),
XRCC1-Arg399Gln(rs25487), XPG-Asp1104His(rs17655), XPD-Lys751Gln(rs13181), hMSH2-Gly322Asp(rs4987188), XRCC3-
Thr241Met(rs861539), XRCC2-Arg188His(rs3218536), RAD51-
4719A/T(rs2619679) and RAD51-4601A/G(rs5030789) in suscept-ibility in BC in Tanzania. The impact of reproductive risk factors onBC was also evaluated.
Methods & Results: A hospital based case-control study was
carried out in Tanzanian population(263 BC patients and 250controls matched for sex and age). QRT-PCR was used forgenotyping assay. Allelic, genotypic and haplotype association
analyses with disease risk and reproductive risk factor were
performed. The frequency of genotypic and allelic variants ofXRCC1-Arg399Gln, XRCC2-Arg188His, XRCC3-Thr241Met, XPG-Asp1104His and MSH2-Gly322Asp were signi ﬁcantly different
between the groups( p<0.05,respectively). Moreover, XRCC1-
Arg399Gln, XRCC3-Thr241Met and XPG-Asp1104His polymorph-isms were associated with the increased risk of BC in dominant,
recessive and co-dominant genetic-inheritance models( p<0.05,
respectively). Association analysis between reproductive riskfactors and DNA repair gene polymorphisms revealed thatXRCC1-Arg/Gln genotypes had 3.1-fold increased risk of BC in
pre-menopausal patients compared to their post-menopausal
counterpart( p=0.001 ). Also, XPG-His/His genotypes had 1.2-fold
increased risk of BC in younger BC patients(<40years)compared toolder patients( ≥40years)( p=0.028 ). Moreover, XPG-Asp1104His
was associated with Luminal-A subtype and PR-positivity( p=
0.042 ,p=0.021 , respectively). And, MSH2-Gly322Asp was signi ﬁ-
cantly associated with HER2-positivity( p=0.028 ) in Tanzanian BC
patients.
Conclusion : Our studies may well con ﬁrm that XRCC1-
Arg399Gln and XPG-Asp1104His polymorphisms may in ﬂuence
the reproductive risk factors and increased risk of BC in Tanzania.
I.C. Adolf: None. G. Akan: None. L.P. Rweyemamu: None. F.
Atalar: None.
P12.024.D Pathogenic Variants in Hereditary Cancer Syn-
drome Genes are Prevalent Among Breast Cancer Patients Not
Meeting Various International Genetic Testing Guidelines
Sarah M. Nielsen
1, Emily Decker1, Natalie Rickers1,Alekhya
Narravula1, Pat W. Whitworth2, Peter D. Beitsch3, Edward D. Esplin4,
Robert L. Nussbaum1
1Invitae Corp., San Francisco, CA, USA,2Nashville Breast Center,
Nashville, TN, USA,3Dallas Surgical Group, Dallas, TX, USA,4Invitae
Corp., Chicago, IL, USA.
Background: Clinical management options have expanded for
patients harboring pathogenic variants (PVs) in cancer predisposi-
tion genes. Historically, testing costs and clinical implementationchallenges led to restrictive testing guidelines in many countries.Increasing evidence demonstrates that broader testing is a cost-
effective way to identify patients with PVs. We assessed the
efﬁcacy of multiple international testing guidelines in identifying
breast cancer (BC) patients with clinically actionable PVs.
Methods: We reanalyzed a prospective cohort of U.S.-based,
primarily Northern European, BC patients, referred for germlinegenetic testing (PMID: 30526229). We applied testing guidelinesfrom Australia, U.K. and 2 Canadian provinces (Ontario, British
Columbia) to determine their sensitivity for selecting patients with
PVs in high risk (>4x risk compared to general population) breast/ovarian cancer genes. These populations were chosen because ofsimilar healthcare systems and ancestral distribution.
Results: Table 1 displays the distribution of in criteria (IC) vs. out
of criteria (OOC) patients by testing criteria. Over 75% of patientsanalyzed were OOC. Rates of PVs were similar between IC and
OOC patients. Existing criteria missed up to 30% of patients with
high risk PVs. The majority (>80%) of PVs in OOC patients were ingenes with published management guidelines.
Conclusions: In our cohort, select international testing criteria
identi ﬁed <30% of patients with PVs. These data suggest
expanding certain international guidelines would allow betteridenti ﬁcation and improved management for BC patients across
the globe.
Findings in IC vs. OOC patients US, United States; B.C., British Columbia; UK, United Kingdom NCCN,
Overall In criteria Out of
criteria
Country/
providenceGuideline Total
no f
cohortIC (% of
total
cohort)OOC (%
of total
cohort)Total PV
IC (% of
IC
cohort)Total PV
OOC (% of
OOC
cohort)High risk^
PVs (% of
total PVs)High risk^
PVs (% of
total PVs)
U.S. NCCN 953 473 (49.6) 480 (50.4) 43 (9.1) 40 (8.3) 22 (26.5) 8 (9.6)
Ontario MOHLTC 953 210 (22.0) 743 (78.0) 18 (8.6) 65 (8.7) 5 (6.0) 25 (30.1)B.C. BCHCP 953 203 (21.3) 750 (78.7) 24 (11.8) 59 (7.9) 9 (10.8) 19 (22.9)Australia eviQ 953 180 (18.9) 773 (81.1) 19 (10.6) 64 (8.3) 12 (14.5) 18 (21.7)U.K. NICE* 826** 127 (14.7) 736 (85.3) 11 (8.7) 64 (8.7) 6 (7.2) 22 (26.5)Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
377
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608S.M. Nielsen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Invitae corp. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae corp. E. Decker: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp. N. Rickers: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp. A. Narravula:
None. P.W. Whitworth: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Modest; Invitae Corp., Intact Medical. D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and
expert witness); Modest; Medtronic. E. Ownership Interest (stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;Reverse Medical, Rebound Medical, Lazarus, Cerebrotech. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Targeted Medical Education. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Medtronic, Lumicell, Impe-
diMed. P.D. Beitsch: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Modest; Invitae Corp. E. Ownership Interest(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Targeted Medical Education. E.D. Esplin: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp. R.L. Nussbaum: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-ness); Modest; Genome Medical, Maze Therapeutics, P ﬁzer. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Genome Medical, Maze Therapeu-
tics, Personalis. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patentor other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genome Medical, Maze
Therapeutics, P ﬁzer.
P12.025.A Impact of functional polymorphisms in oxidative
stress-related genes on early-stage breast cancer prognosis
Erika Korobeinikova , Rasa Ugenskiene, Ruta Insodaite, Elona
Juozaityte
Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction: Oxidative stress-related proteins NFE2L2, HMOX1
and TXNRD2 play a role in breast cancer (BC) pathogenesis.Functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in their codinggenes may alter protein levels and impact the course of BC. We
aimed to evaluate possible associations of NFE2L2 rs10183914,
rs35652124, HMOX1 rs2071746, TXNRD2 rs1139793 SNPs with the
early-stage BC clinicopathological characteristics and survival.
Materials and methods: study involved 202 Eastern European
(Lithuanian) women with primary I-II stage BC. DNA was extracted
from peripheral blood leukocytes. Alleles were genotyped usingTaqMan genotyping assays. Association of clinicopathologicalcharacteristics (age at diagnosis: ≤50/>50 years; tumour size:
≤2cm/>2-5 cm; lymph node, oestrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor and HER2 status: positive/ negative; tumour differentia-tion grade: G1 +G2/G3) and SNPs was evaluated using χ2 test.
Univariate differences between disease-free survival (DFS),
metastasis-free survival (MFS) and overall survival (OS) rates weretested for signi ﬁcance using the log-rank test; while multivariate
analysis for survival was tested using Cox proportional hazards
models. Multivariate analysis included above mentionedpathomorphological characteristics. p < 0.05 was considered
statistically signi ﬁcant.
Results: No associations between clinicopathological variables
and SNPs were observed. In both, univariate and multivariate Coxsurvival analysis, TXNRD2 rs1139793 GG genotype vs. GA +AA was
a negative prognostic factor for DFS (multivariate HR 2.248, p =
0.025) and OS (multivariate HR 2.248, p =0.029).
Conclusions: TXNRD2 rs1139793 polymorphism may contribute
to the identi ﬁcation of early-stage BC patients at a higher risk for
disease recurrence and death. Further investigations with larger
sample sizes are needed to con ﬁrm the results of the current
study.
E. Korobeinikova: None. R. Ugenskiene: None. R. Insodaite:
None. E. Juozaityte: None.
P12.026.C Clinical utility of the 313-variant based polygenic
risk score and multigene panel testing for breast cancer risk
prediction
Inge M. M. Lakeman
1, Mar Rodriguez-Girondo1, Andrew Lee2,
Antoinette Hollestelle3, Marjanka K. Schmidt4,1, Christi J. van
Asperen1, Peter Devilee1, on behalf of the HEBON study
1Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,2University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,3Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands,4Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: We explored the BOADICEA model ’s clinical utility,
which currently incorporates the effects of truncating variants in 5
breast cancer genes, family history, and a polygenic risk score(PRS) based on 313 common variants, in non- BRCA1/2 Dutch
breast cancer families.
Materials and Methods: We applied logistic regression to
estimate the association of PRS-313 with breast cancer risk using3,925 breast cancer cases from 3,528 non- BRCA1/2 breast cancer
families and 3,479 population controls. Lifetime risks of cases were
retrospectively calculated using BOADICEA, simulating an indivi-dual to be at the age of one year and unaffected.
Results: We found a signi ﬁcant association between PRS-313
and breast cancer with and without adjustment for family history
based on pedigrees, per SD OR =1.54, 95%CI[1.31-1.80] and OR =
1.96, 95%CI[1.84-2.09] respectively. Similar results were found forknown ER-positive and ER-negative tumours separately. Applying
risk classi ﬁcation thresholds from guidelines in the USA, United
Kingdom and the Netherlands (NCCN, NICE, and IKNL), riskassessment by including the PRS-313 to BOADICEA would have
changed screening recommendations in CHEK2 and ATM patho-
genic variant carriers to a similar degree as non-carriers, but not inPALB2 pathogenic variant carriers (Table).
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that use of the PRS-313
in the BOADICEA model in genetically unexplained breast cancer
families and carriers of moderate breast cancer risk variants canpotentially in ﬂuence clinical management in substantial propor-
tions of counselees.
Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
378
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608I.M.M. Lakeman: None. M. Rodriguez-Girondo: None. A. Lee:
None. A. Hollestelle: None. M.K. Schmidt: None. C.J. van
Asperen: None. P. Devilee: None.
P12.027.C Mendelian randomization and colocalization study
revealing splicing-type speci ﬁc effects on cancers
Huiling Zhao , Philip.C. Haycock, Tom R. Gaunt, Jie Zheng
MRC Intergrative Epidemiology Unit, Bristol University, Bristol, United
Kingdom.
Changes in alternative splicing patterns can lead to partial or total
loss of protein functional domains, thereby affecting tumorigen-
esis, progress and prognosis. However, the contribution of
alternative splicing to cancer development is unclear.
We applied two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) and
colocalization to detect splicing events with putative causal roles
on breast, lung, ovarian and prostate cancer, with 9,230 sQTLs
representing 9,585 splicing events across 49 tissues from healthyGTEX samples as genetic instruments. The splicing-type speci ﬁc
effects of our top MR ﬁndings were further validated using sQTLs
from CancersplicingQTL database, with samples from cancerpatients.
Among 618,932 splicing event-cancer MR analyses using GTEX
data, 2,412 associations showed robust MR and colocalization
evidence (MR_P < 5e-8, colocalization probability>0.8), which wereset as reliable ﬁndings. In a tissue speci ﬁc manner, 746 MR
associations (31%) were observed in the same tissue types of the
corresponding cancers. For example, a splicing event of MAN2C1
has a causal effect on breast cancer risk only in breast tissue. Wevalidated the top splicing event-cancer associations across six
splicing types in CancersplicingQTL and found that the top MR
associations showed different splicing-type enrichment patternsacross different cancers. Alternative donor sites accounted for 6%of all potential effects on lung cancer, and 82% for top lung cancer
MRﬁndings. Similarly, Exon Skip showed splicing-type enrichment
on top prostate cancer MR associations.
Our study suggests that different splicing types may have
different enrichment patterns of causal effects on different
cancers. This provides information for mechanism exploration
and drug target prioritization.
H. Zhao: None. P. Haycock: None. T. Gaunt: None. J. Zheng:
None.
P12.029.A Association of VEGF Haplotypes with Breast cancer
risk in North-West Indians
Kamlesh Guleria
1, Vasudha Sambyal1, Ruhi Kapahi1, Mridu
Manjari2, Meena Sudan3, Manjit Singh Uppal4, Neeti Rajan Singh41Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar, Punjab India, Amritsar, India,2Department of Pathology,
Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research,
Amritsar, Punjab, India, Amritsar, India,3Department of Radio-
therapy, Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences andResearch, Amritsar, Punjab, India, Amritsar, India,4Department of
Surgery, Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research, Amritsar, Punjab, India, Amritsar, India.
The objective of this study was to investigate the potential
association of haplotypes of six VEGF polymorphisms with breast
cancer risk in North-West Indians. Samples of 250 breast cancerpatients and 250 age and gender matched controls weregenotyped for VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D, -460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T
and+936C/T polymorphisms. Haplotypes were generated to
determine the better contribution of VEGF polymorphisms to
breast cancer risk. Haplotypes CDTCCC (OR =0.56, 95%CI, 0.38-
0.81; p =0.003) and CDTGCC (OR =0.63, 95%CI, 0.44-0.92; p =
0.018) of VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D, -460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T and
+936C/T polymorphisms were signi ﬁcantly associated with
decreased risk of breast cancer. CDTCCC haplotype was also
signi ﬁcantly associated with reduced risk of breast cancer in pre
and post menopausal as well as both obese and non obesepatients. Haplotype CDTGCC was marginally associated (p =0.07)
with reduced risk of breast cancer in non-obese patients as
compared with non-obese controls where as haplotype AICGTC
was marginally associated (p =0.09) with reduced risk of breast
cancer in obese patients when compared with non-obese
patients. The CDTGCC haplotype was signi ﬁcantly associated with
increased risk of breast cancer in premenopausal obese patients(OR=1.98, 95%CI, 1.10-3.56; p =0.02). Our data indicated that
CDTCCC and CDTGCC haplotypes of VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D,
-460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T and +936C/T polymorphisms were
signi ﬁcantly associated with breast cancer risk in North-West
Indians. Further studies on multiethnic groups with larger samplesize are required to con ﬁrm our results.
K. Guleria: None. V. Sambyal: None. R. Kapahi: None. M.
Manjari: None. M. Sudan: None. M.S. Uppal: None. N.R. Singh:
None.
P12.032.D High rate of pathogenic germline variants in young
patients with neuroendocrine tumors
Rachel P. Riechelmann, Mauro D. Donadio, Milton Barros, Karina M.
Santiago, Nathalia A. Carvalho, Laura Lopez, Dirce M. Carraro,Giovana T. Torrezan
A.C.Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Introduction: Advances in genomics have enabled the recogni-
tion of about a hundred cancer predisposing genes (CPG). The
contribution of most of these genes to the development ofneuroendocrine tumors (NET) is largely unknown. Here, we aim todeﬁne the frequency of pathogenic (P) and likely pathogenic (LP)
germline variants in known CPGs in young adults with NET.
Methods: We screened germline variants in 100 patients
(without known clinical/molecular diagnosis of hereditary cancer
syndromes) with lung or digestive NET diagnosed under 45 years.
Next generation sequencing was performed using a custom 113
gene panel in an Illumina NextSeq 500. For P/LP variants, ampliconsequencing was performed in tumor DNA to identify loss of
heterozygosis (LOH).
Results: Sixteen (16%) patients presented P/LP variants,
including genes with established or emerging association to TNEpredisposition ( SDHB, MUTYH, CHEK2 ) and genes with unknowAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
379
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608relation to TNE risk ( LZTR1, XPC, ERCC2, ERCC3, SLX4 , others ).
MUTYH was the most frequently mutated gene (4 patients:
pancreas, midgut, appendix, gastric). The median age and positive
family history of cancer were 34 years and 88% for patients with P/LP variants and 35 years and 60% for patients without. LOH wasevaluated in 3 tumors so far: two presented absence of LOH for
variants in XPC and ERCC2 and one presented LOH for a variant in
SLX4 .
Conclusions: Young adults with NET present a high rate of P/LP
variants in CPG, including several DNA repair genes. Tumor
analysis can contribute to understanding the role of these variants
in TNE development. FAPESP:20018/06269-5
R.P. Riechelmann: None. M.D. Donadio: None. M. Barros:
None. K.M. Santiago: None. N.A. Carvalho: None. L. Lopez:
None. D.M. Carraro: None. G.T. Torrezan: None.
P12.033.A Cancer Predisposition Syndromes as secondary
ﬁndings in patients undergoing somatic tumor testing
Alexandra Liebmann
1,2, Sorin Armenau-Ebinger1,2, Cristiana Rog-
gia1,2, Stephan Ossowski1,2, Andrea Forschner3, Andreas Hartkopf4,
Michael Bitzer5, Yvonne Moeller6, Olaf Riess1,2, Christopher
Schroeder1,2
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,2Centre for Rare Diseases,
University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,3Department of
Dermatology, Center for Dermatooncology, University Hospital
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,4Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
5Department of Internal Medicine 1, University Hospital Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany,6Center for Personalised Medicine, University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Introduction: Genetic testing for Cancer Predisposition Syn-
dromes (CPS) is currently offered to patients meeting speci ﬁc
clinical criteria such as age of cancer diagnosis or family history. Atour Center for Personalised Medicine parallel sequencing of tumorand normal tissue is performed in late-stage cancer patients to
identify therapeutic targets. Using blood as normal control allows
detecting pathogenic germline variants (PGVs) in CPS-relatedgenes as secondary ﬁndings.
Material and Methods: Tumor-normal sequencing was per-
formed in 578 gynecological, skin and gastrointestinal cancer
patients without previous genetic diagnosis between 01/2019-01/2021. Next-Generation-Sequencing of a custom cancer panel with
more than 700 genes including 41 CPS-related genes (SureSelect
XT; Agilent, Germany) was analyzed using an in-house bioinfor-matics pipeline (megSAP).
Results: In 578 patients 9.7% (n =56) PGVs in CPS-related
genes were identi ﬁed. PGVs were mainly detected in ATM (n=13),
MUTYH (n=10), CHEK2 (n=5),BRCA2 (n=5). Two patients
harbored two different PGVs. Two other cases showed mosaicstatus in TP53 and MSH6 , respectively. One case was suspicious for
clonal hematopoiesis in ATM . In 36 of the 56 PGVs cases the
patient ’s tumor type matched the associated tumor spectrum. For
10 of the 36 PGVs a second hit in tumor tissue was identi ﬁed.
Conclusion: This study highlights the utility of parallel tumor-
normal sequencing in identifying PGVs causal for CPS in cancer
patients who are not necessarily eligible for genetic germlinetesting. In addition to having impact on clinical management, this
approach enables patients and their relatives to optimize
individual prevention strategies.
A. Liebmann: None. S. Armenau-Ebinger: None. C. Roggia:
None. S. Ossowski: None. A. Forschner: None. A. Hartkopf:None. M. Bitzer: None. Y. Moeller: None. O. Riess: None. C.
Schroeder: None.
P12.034.B Subpopulation of cancer stem cells are endowed
with distinctive behavior
Letícia A. M. Ferreira, Carlos H. V. Nascimento-Filho, Vilson Sera ﬁm-
Junior, Márcia M. U. Castanhole-Nunes, Glaucia M. M. Fernandes,Ana L. S. Galbiatti-Dias, Rosa S. Kawasaki-Oyama, Marlon F. Mattos,
Maria A. M. S. Bezerra, Érika C. Pavarino, José V. Maniglia, Eny M.
Goloni-Bertollo
Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto (FAMERP), São José
do Rio Preto, Brazil.
Introduction: Cancer stem cells (CSC) are capable of self-
renewing and recapitulate the tumor heterogeneity. Due to its
resistance to conventional chemotherapy, and association with
relapses, this population has been widely investigated. Besides, itsassociation with epithelial to mesenchymal transition requiresbetter comprehension.
Material and methods: Using the Fluorescent Activated Cell
Sorting by which we isolated from head and neck cancer
subpopulations endowed with stemness properties: CD44+/
CD117+/133+(CDs+), and ALDH+enriched cells, besides their
negative control group. Cells sorted were cultivated under DMEMmedium, supplemented with 10% FBS, 2% AB/AM, 1% glutamine,and maintained in a 5% CO2-humidi ﬁed incubator. Total RNA was
extracted using a Direct-zol RNA Miniprep Plus isolation kit,
following the manufacturer ’s protocol. Real-time PCR was
performed to quantify genes and miRNAs expressions using PCRMaster Mix (Life Technologies), with speci ﬁc probes, and TaqMan
miRNA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc).
Results: Our ﬁndings revealed that downregulation of ALDH
mRNA in the CDs
+population compared with the ALDH enriched
population (*p < 0.05). We also observed a fold increase of mRNA
expression for VEGFA and ZEB1 in the ALDH enriched population(*p < 0.05 and ****p < 0.0001). Moreover, the CDs+population
presents miRNA 200-3p overexpressed, and ZEB 1 inhibited upon
transfection what suggests impairing its capacity on undergoing
EMT phenotype.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings point toward the crucial role of the
epigenetic mechanisms, such as microRNAs, in regulating the
tumor microenvironment complexity including the levels of
stemness and EMT phenotype. Altogether, our study brings newpieces for better understanding the regulation of epigenetic
mechanisms and tumor plasticity.
L.A.M. Ferreira: None. C.H.V. Nascimento-Filho: None. V.
Seraﬁm-Junior: None. M.M.U. Castanhole-Nunes: None. G.M.M.
Fernandes: None. A.L.S. Galbiatti-Dias: None. R.S. Kawasaki-
Oyama: None. M.F. Mattos: None. M.A.M.S. Bezerra: None. É.C.
Pavarino: None. J.V. Maniglia: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Modest; São Paulo Research Founda-
tion. E.M. Goloni-Bertollo: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Modest; São Paulo Research Foundation.
P12.036.D Introducing Progenetix Beacon- a comprehensive
cancer cell line variant knowledge resource
Rahel Paloots , Michael Baudis
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
380
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Cancer cell lines are good models for studying the disease
mechanisms and testing for possible drugs. For the cell lines to
be accurate representations of the disease, they would need to be
genetically highly similar to their primary neoplasias. Moreover,another issue when working with cell lines is the possiblecontamination or misidenti ﬁcation of the cell lines. To address
both of these concerns, the genetics of both cancer cell lines and
their origins will need to be evaluated. Furthermore, cancers as wellas cancer cell lines exhibit copy number variation (CNV) pro ﬁles that
show regions in the chromosomes that have been deleted or
ampli ﬁed. Similarity assessment of these CNV pro ﬁles along with
examining single nucleotide variants as well, enable the detectionof cell lines that are the most accurate representations of thedisease. Therefore, we have been building an extensive knowledge
resource for cell line copy number and single nucleotide variants
(SNVs). The database (Progenetix) contains information about bothCNVs and SNVs as well as NCIt and ICDO codes for the disease
origin. Additionally, more metadata and other information about
cancer cell lines and variants will be available publicly on Progenetixwebsite. The collection of these data enables and facilitatesresearch with cancer cell lines as well as the authentication of the
cancer cell lines.
R. Paloots: None. M. Baudis: None.
P12.037.A The effect of germline POLG gene variants on
cervical cancer pathomorphological characteristics and dis-ease outcome
Ieva Golubickaite
1, Rasa Ugenskiene1,2, Egle Ziliene3, Jurgita
Beniusyte2, Arturas Inciura2,3, Elona Juozaityte2,3
1Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania,2Institute of
Oncology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas,Lithuania,3Department of Oncology and Hematology, Hospital of
Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Introduction: Cervical cancer ranks as the fourth most common
cancer in women worldwide. Despite huge efforts and ongoing
research in the ﬁeld, the effect of germline variants on tumor
phenotype and the course of the disease remain unclear. Thevariations in POLG gene, coding for gamma polymerase, involved
in mitochondria DNA replication and repair, might be important
for carcinogenesis. This study aimed to analyze germline single-
nucleotide variants in POLG gene and to assess their possible
effect on tumor phenotype and disease outcome.
Materials and Methods: A group of 172 cervical cancer
patients was analyzed. Tumor pathomorphological parametersand patient data, related to disease outcome, were collected frommedical records. Four SNPs (rs3087374, rs2307441, rs2072267,
rs976072) in POLG gene were selected for the study. Real-time PCR
with TaqMan probes was used for the analysis.
Results: POLG variant rs3087374 was signi ﬁcantly associated
with tumor pathomorphological parameters. Patients with CA
genotype and the carriers of A allele had an increased probability
of adenocarcinoma histological tumor type, IIIA tumor stage, andpT3 tumors. Additionally, patients with AA genotype in rs2072267had longer metastasis-free survival than those with GG genotype.
Conclusions: Our data suggest that variations in POLG gene
might be important in cervical cancer carcinogenesis.
I. Golubickaite: None. R. Ugenskiene: None. E. Ziliene: None.
J. Beniusyte: None. A. Inciura: None. E. Juozaityte: None.
P12.038.B Targeted analysis of cell-free DNA fragmentation
proﬁles in lung cancerAnastasia Koval
1, Daria Rodionova1, Alexey Kazakov2, Konstantin
Laktionov2,Dmitry Shcherbo1
1Institute of Translational Medicine, Pirogov Russian National
Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation,2N.N.
Blokhin Cancer Research Medical Center of Oncology, Moscow,Russian Federation.
Introduction : Accumulating evidence suggests that aberrant
genome-wide cell-free DNA (cfDNA) fragmentation patterns re ﬂect
the altered epigenetic state of tumor cells in cancer patients and can
be applied for cancer diagnostics. Given that cfDNA fragmentation isnon-random and fragment lengths tend to be overall shorter incancer, the cfDNA fragmentation state may differ uneven across the
genome in healthy and cancer individuals. We suppose that a
measure of cfDNA fragmentation in differentially fragmentedregions could serve as a cancer biomarker.
Materials and Methods : We have developed an approach based
on a modi ﬁcation of anchored multiplex PCR followed by NGS for
deep multiplex fragment lengths pro ﬁling that simultaneously targets
25 tumor-speci ﬁc open-chromatin regions in cfDNA. We tested our
approach on 5 samples from patients with lung adenocarcinoma
(stages III and IV) and 5 samples from healthy donors.
Results : We have identi ﬁed 3 regions with the most prominent
difference in fragmentation pro ﬁles between lung cancer patients
and healthy donors that can further be evaluated as novel lung
adenocarcinoma markers in cfDNA.
Conclusions : In this proof-of-concept study we demonstrate
that cfDNA fragmetnomics may yield a novel class of cancer
biomarkers not only at a whole-genome scale but also in a
targeted manner. The identi ﬁcation of cancer-speci ﬁc differentially
fragmented regions in larger screening studies may result in anadditional dimension of biomarkers complementing liquid biopsy
analyses.
Funding: This study was supported by a grant from the Russian
Science Foundation (project #20-75-10008)
A. Koval: None. D. Rodionova: None. A. Kazakov: None. K.
Laktionov: None. D. Shcherbo: None.
P12.039.C Functional analysis of rare CHEK2 variants identi-
ﬁed in breast cancer patients
Olivia Fuentes Rios
1,2,3, Marta Santamariña2,3,4, Ángel Vizoso5,6,
Belinda Rodríguez1,3,4, Ana Crujeiras1,3, Ana Paula Vega Gliemmo1,3,4
1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain,2Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,3Fundación Pública
Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
4Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras, Madrid,
Spain,5Universidad de A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain,6Centro de
Investigaciones Cientí ﬁcas Avanzadas, A Coruña, Spain.
Introduction: CHEK2 (checkpoint kinase 2) germline mutations
have been associated with a moderate breast cancer risk.
However, for rare missense variants the clinical signi ﬁcance is
unknown. CHEK2 protein regulates the cell cycle and is activatedin response to DNA damage. Activated CHEK2 phosphorylates
proteins and inhibits CDC25C phosphatase, leading to cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. The aim of this study was to analyse, througha kinase activity assay, the functional impact of fourteen CHEK2
variants identi ﬁed in female breast cancer patients during the
genetic diagnosis.
Materials and Methods: CHEK2 variants p.Trp114Cys, p.
Arg117Gly, p.Ser187Phe, p.Glu239Lys, p.Glu302Lys, p.Met304Val,p.Thr323Pro, p.Ser356Leu, p.Ile364Thr p.Met381Val, p.Ser412Arg,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
381
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608p.Arg474His, p.Thr476Met and p.Asp488Glu were analysed. Also,
CHEK2 wild-type and CHEK2 : c.1100delC were used as controls.
BL21 E. coli were transformed with the wild-type or mutant pDest-
566- CHEK2 vector. The proteins were expressed, puri ﬁed, and
quanti ﬁed. The kinase activity levels were detected by Immuno-
blot using an anti-phopho-Cdc25C (Ser216).
Results: We found out that p.Met381Val, p.Ser412Arg and p.
Arg474His presented a complete loss of function. Additionally,variants p.Arg117Gly, p.Glu239Lys and p.Ile364Thr showed apartial loss of function, whereas p.Trp114Cys, p.Ser187Phe, p.
Glu302Lys, p.Met304Val, p.Thr323Pro, p.Ser356Leu, p.Thr476Met
and p.Asp488Glu showed no functional impact. The same resulthas been previously detected for variants p.Glu239Lys and p.Arg117Gly in a cell-based assay (Wu et al., 2006). In the case of p.
Thr476Met variant, contradictory results were previously found,
from complete loss to no functional impact.
Conclusions: The information of the functional impact of the
analysed fourteen CHEK2 variants will help to establish their
clinical signi ﬁcance in cancer patients.
O. Fuentes Rios: None. M. Santamariña: None. Á. Vizoso:
None. B. Rodríguez: None. A. Crujeiras: None. A.P. Vega
Gliemmo: None.
P12.040.D Complex karyotype in the course of CLL
Dorota Koczkodaj
1,M a łgorzata Luterek1,Zuzanna Do łzycka1, Ewa
Wąsik-Szczepanek2, Agata Filip1
1Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University, Lublin, Poland,
2Department of Hematooncology and Bone Marrow Transplanta-
tion, Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphopro-
liferative disease characterized by a heterogeneous clinical course.Clonal chromosome aberrations belong to the most important
prognostic and predictive factors in CLL. Complex karyotype (CK) is
deﬁned by the presence of ≥3 chromosomal aberrations in cancer
cells. The aim of the study was to observe chromosomalabnormalities in CLL with particular attention to CK and their
clinical signi ﬁcance in relation to selected prognostic factors.
Methods: The study group comprised 101 consecutive, untreated
CLL patients. Cytogenetic banding analysis (CBA) and FISH(ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization) were performed. Expression of
CD38 and ZAP70 was assessed by ﬂow cytometry, and the mutation
status of IGVH and NOTCH1 was determined by direct sequencing.
Results: CK was detected in 23,8 % of patients by means of
CBA. The most frequently detected recurrent changes were
deletions of 13q (39,13%), 6q (26,08%), 17p (26,08%) and trisomy12 (21,74%). Numerical changes and translocations were alsoobserved. A statistically signi ﬁcant relationship was found
between overall survival and the occurrence of 17p (del TP53 )
(p < 0.0056). CK was found to be a risk factor for the occurrence ofdisease progression. Neither CD38 and ZAP70 expression nor IGVH
and NOTCH1 mutation status were related to CK.
Conclusions: Chromosomal and genomic aberrations are
important prognostic factors in CLL. Comparing to FISH, the CBAmethod captured a broader spectrum of alterations in a largerpercentage of patients with CK. These results indicate that CK
should be taken into account when making a decision to initiate
treatment promptly.
D. Koczkodaj: None. M. Luterek: None. Z. Do łzycka: None. E.
Wąsik-Szczepanek: None. A. Filip: None.
P12.041.A Exploring clonal evolution and genetic causes of
therapy failure in chronic lymphocytic leukemiaKristýna Závacká
1,2, Petr Tau š2, Karol Pál2, Kamila Stránská1,2,
Šárka Pavlová1,2, Anna Panovská1,Šárka Pospí šilová1,2,3, Karla
Plevová1,2,3
1Department of Internal Medicine –Hematology and Oncology,
University Hospital Brno & Medical Faculty, Masaryk University, Brno,Czech Republic,2Center of Molecular Medicine, Central European
Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic,
3Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, University Hospital Brno
& Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), tumor clones
with the mutant TP53 gene frequently expand in disease relapse of
patients treated with chemoimmunotherapy. Such an event often
leads to disease course deterior ation and therapy resistance.
However, there is a small number of patients harboring stable minorTP53- mutated clones which do not exp and even after several therapy
lines. We aimed to identify molecular genetic factors affecting CLL
clonal evolution in relation to TP53 mutation expansions. Revealing
the clonal architecture and a mutational pro ﬁle of leukemic cells may
contribute to optimal therapy tailoring.
Materials and Methods: Using whole exome sequencing, we
investigated samples from 52 CLL patients with a known clinical
course and different scenarios of TP53 mutation expansions. Our
cohort included patients treated with standard chemoimmu-
notherapy, but also with cell signalling inhibitors.
Results: We identi ﬁed mutations in genes associated with CLL,
such as SF3B1 ,ATM ,RPS15 ,MED12 ,NOTCH1 ,o rNFKBIE , but also a
large number of non-recurrent mutations, which expanded or
diminished differently after speci ﬁc types of therapy and in
relation to TP53 mutation pro ﬁles. We calculated pathway
mutation scores and using advanced statistical methods, wedeﬁned groups of patients with similar pathway mutation pro ﬁles
and examined how the groups differed in a clinical course.
Conclusion: Our results aid the understanding of molecular
grounds of the clonal evolution in CLL, which is necessary for the
rational use of available treatment options and for designing of
suitable diagnostic panels. Supported by MUNI/A/1595/2020,MUNI/IGA/1640/2020, AZV NU21-08-00237, and MH-CZ RVO65269705.
K. Závacká: None. P. Tau š:None. K. Pál: None. K. Stránská:
None. Š. Pavlová: None. A. Panovská: None. Š. Pospí šilová:
None. K. Plevová: None.
P12.042.B Search for markers and mechanisms of resistance to
TKI therapy
Elmira P. Adilgereeva
1, Alex G. Nikitin2, Diana G. Zheglo1, Oleg A.
Shukhov3, Svetlana A. Smirnikhina1, Alexander V. Lavrov1, Ekaterina
Y. Chelysheva3, Anna G. Turkina3, Sergey I. Kutsev1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical
Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation,2Pulmonology Research
Institute, Federal Medical-Biological Agancy of Russia, Moscow,
Russian Federation,3National Research Center for Hematology,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is m yeloproliferative disease, which
is successfully treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), however,
20-40% of patients remain resistant to existing therapy. To identifythe prognostic markers of the e ffectiveness of TKI therapy and
mechanisms for the development of resistance, we performed
exome and transcriptome sequencing. Blood was sampled from 60
CML patients before starting the TKI therapy. Sequencing wasperformed on the Illumina NextSeq 550 Sequencing System.Bioinformatic analysis included SnpEff (analysis of all transcripts),Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
382
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608ANNOVAR (analysis of allele fr equencies in gnomAD, 1000G,
ESP6500, algorithms in silico pred iction of pathogenicity of SIFT,
PolyPhen2, MutationTaster ⋯), Alamut Batch (in ﬂuence on splicing,
dbsnp, ClinVar, COSMIC, and HGMD). HTSeq (to count the number ofreads transcripts), edgeR (count d ata were analyzed). Pheatmap (R
package) was used for the heatmap diagram; only log
2-fold changes
with an adjusted p-value of 0.10 were considered signi ﬁcant. 33% of
patients who are resistant to therapy TKI have loss-of-function variantin the ASXL1 and DNMT3A genes, with 25% only in the ASXL1 gene,
and 8% in ASXL1 and DNMT3A . We have not yet managed to ﬁnd
pathogenetic pathways of resistance, today another 36 samples are
at the stage of bioinformatic analysis of the transcriptome. Theidenti ﬁed variants in ASXL1 and DNMT3A may be associated with
resistance to TKI therapy and serve as prognostic markers of the TKI
therapy effectiveness at the stage of CML diagnosis. Possibly, upon
completion of the analysis of all transcriptomes, we will be able toﬁnd the mechanisms of development of resistance.
E.P. Adilgereeva: None. A.G. Nikitin: None. D.G. Zheglo:
None. O.A. Shukhov: None. S.A. Smirnikhina: None. A.V. Lavrov:
None. E.Y. Chelysheva: None. A.G. Turkina: None. S.I. Kutsev:
None.
P12.044.D Testing of molecular methods for highlighting
rearrangements on BCR-ABL fusion gene
Andra Maria Duca
1, Andrada Alexiu1, Silvia Aposteanu2, Mihaela
Dragomir2, Danut Cimponeriu1, Ileana Stoica1
1Department of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest,
Romania,2Department of Hematology - Molecular Biology, Clinical
Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: Testing of translocation between chromosome 9
(Abelson murine V gene leukemia viral oncogene homolog1-ABL1)and 22 (Breakpoint Cluster Region-BCR) and mutations in the ABL
kinase domain are useful for diagnostic of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) and guide the treatment. Wet tested the ability ofmolecular methods to identify E255K/V and T315I mutations inBCR-ABL gene.
Materials and methods: Blood samples from twenty CML
patients with Ph
+chromosome (55 ± 17 years old) was used for
messenger RNA extraction. The cDNA was ampli ﬁed by nested
PCR and the amplicons were digested with MnlI and DdeI
endonucleases. Restriction fragments were resolved by polyacry-
lamide gel electrophoresis to highlight the presence of the E255K/V and the T315I mutations in BCR-ABL fusion gene.
Results: This method revealed the E255K/V and T315I muta-
tions in the BCR-ABL gene in two samples. The male with T315Imutation has 79 years old and had been under the therapy for 11years. The patient responded to treatment after the identi ﬁcation
of mutation. The E255K/V mutation was detected in a male who
died shortly after inclusion in this study. It was observed thatpatients with CML who had acquired mutations did not respondto imatinib therapy and required customization. The frequency of
mutation is estimated to be in accordance with the values
reported for other populations.
Conclusions: This method based on reverse transcription and
nested PCR ampli ﬁcation of the fusion gene BCR-ABL is easy to
implement, is relatively rapid and inexpensive as compared with
other techniques to identify the mutations.
A.M. Duca: None. A. Alexiu: None. S. Aposteanu: None. M.
Dragomir: None. D. Cimponeriu: None. I. Stoica: None.
P12.047.C Detection of T315I in patients with Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia by ddPCR preliminary resultsHristo Y. Ivanov
1, Aleksandar Linev1, Ivan Zheliazkov1, Veselina
Goranova-Marinova2, Zhanet Grudeva-Popova3, Vili Stoyanova1
1Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Pediatrics and Medical
Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,2Medical University Plovdiv, First Depart-
ment of Internal Medicine, Clinic of Hematology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria,
3Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Clinical Oncology,
Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia is oncohematological
disease, characterized by a BCR- ABL1 fusion protein. Through
treatment patients may acquire m utations in the kinase domain of
ABL1 . The T315I mutation is key mutation with relevant clinical
implications - can only be overco me by third generation tyrosine
kinase inhibitors. The aim of our st udy is to detect T315I mutation in
patients with CML by ddPCR and evaluate if detection of small clonescould support an early clinical decision to change of treatment.
Materials and methods: The study included 17 patients with
CML. gDNA was extracted from whole blood and the samples
were tested for T315I by ddPCR.
Results: T315I was detected in 2 patients, in one of them the
variant allele frequency was 29% in the other it was a small clone
mutation - 0.1%.
Discussion: The use of ddPCR to screen for speci ﬁc, highly
relevant mutations as T315I that confer resistance to treatment
holds great promise. Our study suggests that ddPCR can also be
an effective and sensitive method for the detection of the T315Imutation in the setting of CML. The aim of mutation testing is toidentify those who need a change in therapy rather than a “watch
and wait ”approach, since detection of a TKI-resistant mutation is
an indication for therapeutic switch. The continuation of this studywill be directed toward exploring the clinical advantage of thegreater sensitivity offered by ddPCR, and the assessment how to
best place ddPCR in the management of patients without an
optimal response.
H.Y. Ivanov: None. A. Linev: None. I. Zheliazkov: None. V.
Goranova-Marinova: None. Z. Grudeva-Popova: None. V.
Stoyanova: None.
P12.048.D Low mitochondrial DNA copy number correlates
with longer progression free survival in clear cell renal cellcarcinomas
Sarah BELLAL , Cyrielle Rolley, Jeremy Richard, Léo Bove, Vincent
Lecorre, Marie - Christine Rousselet, Odile Blanchet, Pierre Bigot,Vincent Procaccio, Céline Bris
CHU Angers, Angers, France.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) is the most common renal
cancer whose prognosis is currently assessed by imperfect clinical
scores. It is characterized by a metabolic reprogramming
suggesting a major role of mitochondria in tumor development.Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), present in thousands of copies/cell,
encodes essential polypeptides required for oxidative phosphor-
ylation. MtDNA copy number (mtDNAcn) variations and mtDNAmutations have been associated with various clinical outcomes incancer. This retrospective study evaluates the in ﬂuence of mtDNA
genetics on the prognosis in patients with CCRCC.Twenty-one
patients following for CCRCC, including four metastatic, wereincluded after informed consent. Clinical and survival data werecollected for each patient. DNA extraction, mtDNA sequencing
and mtDNAcn were performed on tumors and matched adjacent-
normal tissues. Patient ’s mtDNAcn variation between tumor and
adjacent-normal tissue was expressed as ratio, and cohortsubdivided into two groups according to the median. ProgressionAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
383
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608free survival (PFS) was signi ﬁcantly longer in the low than in the
high mtDNAcn ratio group: 1137 days vs 252 days (p < 0,001*). On
the other hand, no correlation between PFS and somatic variants,
age at diagnosis, CCRCC grading, or lymphovascular invasion wasfound. NGS of the whole mtDNA did not reveal deletions orcommon variants in tumor samples. Interestingly, few patients
accumulated somatic mtDNA variants with different heteroplasmy
levels between the tumor and metastasis potentially important fortumor aggressiveness. Hence, mtDNAcn appears to be a promis-ing independent prognostic factor in CCRCC.This work received
grants from the University and Hospital of Angers and Ligue
contre le cancer.
S. Bellal: None. C. Rolley: None. J. Richard: None. L. Bove:
None. V. Lecorre: None. M. Rousselet: None. O. Blanchet: None.
P. Bigot: None. V. Procaccio: None. C. Bris: None.
P12.049.A Analysis of genomic complexity in patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using optical genomemapping
Anna Puiggros
1,2, Silvia Ramos-Campoy1,2, Tuomo Mantere3, Marta
Salido1,2, Carme Melero1,2, María Rodríguez-Rivera1,2, Sandrine
Bougeon4, Rosa Collado5, Mireia de la Rosa1,2, Eva Gimeno6,7, Rocío
García-Serra5,8, Sara Alonso9, Marco Moro9, María Dolores García-
Malo10, Jacqueline Schoumans4, Alexander Hoischen3,11, Blanca
Espinet1,2
1Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratory, Pathology Department, Hospital
del Mar, Barcelona, Spain,2Translational Research on Hematological
Neoplasms Group, Cancer Research Program, Institut Hospital delMar d ’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain,3Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Oncogenomic laboratory, Hematology
service, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland,
5Department of Hematology, Consorcio Hospital General Universi-
tario, Valencia, Spain,6Department of Hematology, Hospital del Mar,
Barcelona, Spain,7Applied Clinical Research in Hematological
Malignances, Cancer Research Program, Institut Hospital del Mard’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain,8Research
Foundation from Hospital General Universitario, Valencia, Spain,
9Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario Central de
Asturias, Oviedo, Spain,1010 Department of Hematology, Hospital
Universitario Morales Meseguer, Murcia, Spain,11Radboud University
Medical Center Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Department of
Internal Medicine and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background: Complex karyotype (CK) predicts poor prognosis in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Although CK detection isroutinely assessed by chromosome banding analysis (CBA) or
chromosomal microarrays (CMA), the obtained results are not
equivalent. Optical genome mapping (OGM) is a novel technol-ogy that overcomes most of the limitations of CBA/CMA, andwould potentially replace them in the near future. We aimed to
analyze the utility of OGM in the cytogenetic assessment of CLL
patients.
Methods: Tumor DNA from 22 CLL patients were analyzed by
OGM (Bionano Genomics), 12 of them carried a CK and 10 were
non-CK. OGM results were compared with available CBA, FISH and
CMA (ThermoFisher) data.
Results: OGM detection rate of known abnormalities was 93.8%
(15/16) and 87.2% (109/125) in non-CK and CK group, respectively.
Size and coordinates of copy number alterations detected by OGMand CMA were highly concordant. OGM allowed the interpretationof complex rearrangements or provided additional structural
information to CMA in 11/22 (50%) patients. All cases showedseveral additional abnormalities of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance
by OGM. Globally, more complex genomic pro ﬁles were identi ﬁed
in the CK group.
Conclusions: 1. OGM is a valuable tool to assess genomic
complexity in CLL that effectively detects the vast majority of theabnormalities usually de ﬁned by a combination of standard
methods in a single assay; 2. Several additional abnormalities of
unknown clinical signi ﬁcance are identi ﬁed by OGM; 3. Further
studies are required to de ﬁne criteria for OGM genomic complex-
ity with clinical signi ﬁcance in CLL.
Acknowledgements . 17SGR437, GLD17/00282, FPU17/00361.
A. Puiggros: None. S. Ramos-Campoy: None. T. Mantere:
None. M. Salido: None. C. Melero: None. M. Rodríguez-Rivera:
None. S. Bougeon: None. R. Collado: None. M. de la Rosa: None.
E. Gimeno: None. R. García-Serra: None. S. Alonso: None. M.
Moro: None. M.D. García-Malo: None. J. Schoumans: None. A.
Hoischen: None. B. Espinet: None.
P12.050.B Highly-sensitive approach for characterizing micro-
satellite instability in normal tissue and tumors from biallelic
germline mismatch repair mutation carriers
Fátima Marín*
1, Júlia Canet*1, Vanesa Pérez-Alonso2, Sandra Tapial3,
Iciar Rey3, Nuria Carrizo-Mijarra4, Yolanda Rodriguez-Gil4, Gabriel
Capellá1, Luis Ignacio González-Granado*5,Marta Pineda *1, Daniel
Rueda*3
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut
d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), ONCOBELL Program,
CIBERONC, L ’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain,2Pediatrics Department,
Doce de Octubre University Hospital, i +12 Research Institute, Madrid,
Spain,3Hereditary Cancer Laboratory, Doce de Octubre University
Hospital, i +12 Research Institute, Madrid, Spain,4Department of
Pathology, Doce de Octubre University Hospital, i +12 Research
Institute, Madrid, Spain,5Primary Immunode ﬁciencies Unit, Pedia-
trics, University Hospital 12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
Constitutional MisMatch Repair De ﬁciency (CMMRD) is a rare
and devastating childhood-onset cancer predisposition syn-
drome caused by biallelic mutations in MisMatch Repair (MMR)
genes. Microsatellite instabili ty (MSI), a molecular hallmark of
MMR-de ﬁciency, is not always detected in tumors from CMMRD
carriers by conventional MSI ana lysis methods. Recently, novel
highly-sensitive NGS approache s have allowed the detection of
low-level MSI in blood samples from CMMRD individuals (PMID31494577 and 30740824). Our aim was to better characterize
MSI metrics in normal-tumor samples from CMMRD patients
using a highly sensitive approach. Blood, normal and tumortissue DNA samples from three CMMRD patients were analyzedusing a recently developed high- sensitivity MSI approach. Two
metrics, MSI score (percentag e of unstable markers) and mean
frequency of unstable markers (s um of frequencies of all allele
lengths different from the wildtype), were calculated andcompared with blood control samples and sporadic MSI tumors.
All tumors (Wilms tumors, glioblastoma and lymphomas, n =8)
and non-neoplastic samples (n =19) from the three CMMRD
patients showed a positive hs-MSI score (>4.576). CMMRDtumors showed signi ﬁcantly higher mean instability frequency
than non-neoplastic tissues, with no overlapping (p =1.849e-
06). A high correlation between unstable markers was observedin blood samples and lymphomas.. Of note, MSI score and mean
frequency of unstable markers was signi ﬁcantly lower in CMMRD
tumors when compared to sporadic MSI tumors (p =0.002). The
hs-MSI tool detected MSI in non-n eoplastic tissues from CMMRD
individuals regardless the tiss ue origin. Our approach may also
be useful in the characterization of CMMRD-associated tumors.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
384
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Grant support: SAF2015-68016-R, AY12-2018 2019/0042, CB16/
12/00234
F. Marín*: None. J. Canet*: None. V. Pérez-Alonso: None. S.
Tapial: None. I. Rey: None. N. Carrizo-Mijarra: None. Y.
Rodriguez-Gil: None. G. Capellá: None. L. González-Granado*:
None. M. Pineda*: None. D. Rueda*: None.
P12.051.C Multiplexed high-throughput MSREqPCR quali ﬁca-
tion of Colon Cancer DNA-methylation biomarkers in plasma
cfDNA
Andreas Weinhaeusel1, Walter Pulverer1, Silvia Schönthaler1,
Jasmin Huber1, Kristi Kruusmaa2, Bhangu Jagdeep Singh3, Klemens
Vierlinger1
1AIT, Vienna, Austria,2Universal Diagnostics S.L., Sevilla, Spain,
3Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Background: There is great need to improve colorectal cancer
(CRC) early diagnosis, treatment strati ﬁcation and therapy
monitoring. Methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme coupled
qPCR (MSREqPCR) has been setup to test the diagnostic
performance in plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of candidatemarkers deduced from CRC tissue.
Methods: We setup MSREqPCR assays for DNA methylation
analysis using cfDNA isolated from plasma. 48 candidatemethylation markers were evaluated in 88 cfDNAs (44 CRC, 44controls). The work ﬂow was then used to perform 500plex analysis
on 770 plasma cfDNA samples, selecting markers to de ﬁne robust
classi ﬁers.
Results: A panel of 48 candidate DNA-methylation-markers
selected from tissue DNA testing by targeted microarray-analysis,
was used to for bisul ﬁte-qMSP con ﬁrmation giving 96-100%
correct classi ﬁcation. Testing the 48 markers in plasma cfDNA by
MSREqPCR (44 CRC, 44 controls) provided in ROC analysis an
AUC>0.85 for WT1, PENK, SPARC, GDNF, TMEFF2, and DCC.
Applying the 48-plex-panel to liquid biopsies from progressed CRCa 3-gene-signature (BOLL, DCC, SFRP2) was de ﬁned supporting
patient strati ﬁcation and therapy monitoring. Applying our
work ﬂow for testing 180 markers on 1000 cfDNA samples enabled
deﬁnition of a robust and highly reliable diagnostic methylation
12-plex classi ﬁer of AUC 0.88.
Conclusions: MSREqPCR allows the targeted investigation of 96
DNA methylation sites using the cfDNA content of only 2 ml of
plasma. Performance of methylation markers in tissue and inliquid biopsy as well as in different clinical settings differ largely.
MSREqPCR is best suited for ef ﬁcient selection of markers and
directly applicable for PCR based non-invasive testing.
A. Weinhaeusel: None. W. Pulverer: None. S. Schönthaler:
None. J. Huber: None. K. Kruusmaa: None. B. Singh: None. K.
Vierlinger: None.
P12.052.D Concordant molecular pro ﬁles between metachro-
nous colorectal cancers: a colonic or rectal metastasis?
Jose Perea
1,2, Luis Corchete3,4,5, Andreana N. Holowatyj6,7, Juan L.
Garcia3,4, Sandra Tapial8, Yasuyuki Okada9, Ajay Goel10, Damian
García-Olmo1,2, Miguel Urioste11, Rogelio González-Sarmiento3
1Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain,
2Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research
Institute, Madrid, Spain,3Institute of Biomedical Research of
Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain,4Hematology Department,
University Hospital of Salamanca. Cancer Research Center (CiC-IBMCC, CSIC/USAL), Salamanca, Spain,5Center for BiomedicalResearch in Network of Cancer (CIBERONC), Salamanca, Spain,
6Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA,7Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN,
USA,812 de Octubre Research Institute., MADRID, Spain,9Depart-
ment of Gastroenterology and Oncology. Tokushima UniversityGraduate School of Biomedical Sciences., Tokushima, Japan,
10Department of Molecular Diagnostics and Experimental Therapeu-
tics, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope. City of HopeComprehensive Cancer Center, Monrovia, CA, USA,11Clinical Cancer
Unit. Human Genetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Program,
Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Some multiple primary colorectal cancers (CRCs)
(synchronous or metachronous) may derive from a similar clonal
origin. The most frequent etiology is a CRC predisposition, but
other causes could lead to the question of whether multipleprimary CRCs arise from one primary tumor and a metastatic
lesion in the colorectum.
Material and Methods: Using a cohort of 48 cases diagnosed
with Metachronous CRCs (excluding hereditary cases), we character-ized microsatellite instability (MS I) and performed Next Generation
Sequencing, with a 50-gene panel, to de ﬁne the concordant cases
(same MSI pro ﬁle and identical pathogenic mutations between both
paired-tumors). We also carried out genome-wide DNA methylationanalysis. To con ﬁrm concordance of CRC paired samples, we
achieved unsupervised multidim ensional scaling (MDS) of the
methylation pro ﬁles, with both concordant and discordant cases.
Results: A total of 4% of cases (2 of 48) had concordant
microsatellite stability and pathogenic mutations in both tumors
(one with identical TP53 mutation in both; the second with TP53
and BRAF mutations). Both cases of concordant CRCs had the ﬁrst
tumor in the right colon and the metachronous malignancy in the
rectum. One case was initially diagnosed with stage IV CRC; the
second developed metastatic disease 2 years post-metachronousCRC. MDS analysis revealed that concordant cases were groupedtogether via similar methylation pro ﬁles.
Conclusions: The potential that a proportion of multiple
primary CRSs may be composed of a primary CRC and ametastatic lesion with concordant molecular pro ﬁles opens a
clinically relevant avenue in diagnostic and therapeutic manage-
ment of this CRC subtype.
J. Perea: None. L. Corchete: None. A.N. Holowatyj: None. J.L.
Garcia: None. S. Tapial: None. Y. Okada: None. A. Goel: None. D.
García-Olmo: None. M. Urioste: None. R. González-Sarmiento:
None.
P12.053.A Omic data integration in the search of novel
candidate genes of susceptibility to colorectal cancer
Anael Lopez-Novo
1, Juan Fernandez-Tajes1, Jorge Amigo1, Andres
Dacal2, David Remedios3, Joaquin Cubiella3, Victoria Alvarez-
Sanchez4, Maria Jesus Ladra-Gonzalez5, Fernando Fernandez-
Lopez5, Ana Alvarez-Castro5, Jose Manuel Cameselle-Teijeiro6, Miriam
Cuatrecasas7, Francesc Balaguer8, Sergi Castellvi-Bel8, Ceres
Fernandez-Rozadilla1, Clara Ruiz-Ponte1,9
1Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica, Instituto de
Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Grupo de Medicina
Xenomica-Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain,2Servicio de Digestivo, Hospital Universitario
Lucus Augusti, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago de
Compostela (IDIS), Lugo, Spain,3Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Ourense, Centro de InvestigacionBiomedica en Red de Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas(CIBERehd), Ourense, Spain,
4Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo
Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain,5Servicio deAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
385
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Digestivo, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,6Servicio de Anatomia
Patologica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,7Servicio de Anatomia
Patologica, Institut D ’Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer,
Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepaticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd) and Tumor Bank-Biobank,
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain,8Gastroenterology Department,
Institut d ’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Hospital Clínic, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,9Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en
Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de Compostela,Spain.
Introduction: In recent years the main strategy to explain the
missing heritability in colorectal cancer (CRC) relied on whole-
exome sequencing (WES) analysis. However, this strategy was not
as successful as expected, possibly due to the genetic hetero-geneity underlying CRC. Our aim is to molecularly characterizeearly-onset MMR-pro ﬁcient CRC at somatic level to further identify
novel candidate susceptibility genes by integrating germline and
tumor omic data.
Materials and Methods: WES, RNA-seq and methylation array
were performed on paired normal-tumor tissue from a phenoty-
pically homogeneous cohort of 20 early-onset (<50y) MMR-
proﬁcient CRC patients. Germline and somatic variant calling
(HaplotypeCaller and Mutect2, respectively), signature pro ﬁle
(SigPro ﬁler), consensus molecular subtyping (CMSCaller), differ-
ential expression analysis (DESeq2) and methylation pro ﬁle were
carried out.
Results: Colorectal tumors were molecularly subtyping as:
CMS1 (10%), CMS2 (35%), CMS3 (25%), CMS4 (10%) and unknown
(20%). Filtering germline exome data according to the over-represented pathways, found in each subgroup, and also tumorsignatures did not identify recurrent rare variation within the
different groups. Currently, we are conducting a joint analysis
using data from WES, RNA-seq and methylation array, to achieve amore accurate molecular classi ﬁcation and a more reliable
germline ﬁltering strategy.
Conclusions: These data show the molecular heterogeneity
underling CRC in a phenotypically homogeneous cohort. Theintegration of somatic and germline omics will allow a more
comprehensive prioritization of germline variants, increasing the
probabilities to identify new CRC predisposition genes. As a result,a more personalized genetic diagnostic could be achieved.Grantsupport: ISCIII and FEDER funds PI17/00509; Predoctoral Fellow-
ship (Xunta de Galicia)
A. Lopez-Novo: None. J. Fernandez-Tajes: None. J. Amigo:
None. A. Dacal: None. D. Remedios: None. J. Cubiella: None. V.
Alvarez-Sanchez: None. M.J. Ladra-Gonzalez: None. F. Fernan-
dez-Lopez: None. A. Alvarez-Castro: None. J.M. Cameselle-
Teijeiro: None. M. Cuatrecasas: None. F. Balaguer: None. S.
Castellvi-Bel: None. C. Fernandez-Rozadilla: None. C. Ruiz-
Ponte: None.
P12.054.B Contribution of Pathogenic Variants in Genes
Predisposing to Colorectal Cancer by Pan-Cancer Panel
Testing
Frida Eiengård
1,2, Anna Rohlin1,2, Torbjörn Olausson1,2, Ulf Lund-
stam3, Margareta Nordling1,2
1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,Sweden,2Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Sahl-
grenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden,3Department ofSurgery, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Introduction: The number of pathogenic variants in colorectal
cancer (CRC) predisposing genes is continuously increasing.Interpretation of variants involves classi ﬁcations and association
to CRC phenotypes. We are gradually improving the genotype to
phenotype correlation between the genes and the CRC syn-dromes with the aim to improve recommendations for surveil-lance. However, we do not know much about the contribution of
pathogenic variants in CRC genes to other hereditary cancer
syndromes. We present results from analysing variants in 328genes including CRC predisposing genes in patients referred forsuspicion of other rare hereditary cancers (not CRC or breast/
ovarian cancer).
Materials and methods: The study included 68 patients with
suspected hereditary cancer (renal cancer, neuroendocrine cancer,
melanoma and neuro ﬁbromatosis) referred to the Cancer Genetics
Counselling Clinic at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,Sweden. Variant screening was performed using a whole-genomesequencing (WGS) approach. Variants were evaluated regarding
pathogenicity using bioinformatic ﬁltration and manual variant
classi ﬁcation.
Results: Pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain clinical
signi ﬁcance were identi ﬁed in a number of the CRC associated
genes in the patients.
Conclusions: Extended panels might be of value to catch
variants in patients with suspicion of hereditary cancer in general.
Surveillance guidelines in CRC might in some cases need to be
adjusted to also include screening for tumours related to otherrare cancer syndromes. The study was supported by grants fromthe Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish
government and the county councils, the ALF-agreement (ALF-
725011) and the Swedish Cancer Society (Grant no. 19 0351).
F. Eiengård: None. A. Rohlin: None. T. Olausson: None. U.
Lundstam: None. M. Nordling: None.
P12.055.C Validation of liquid biopsy hotspot assays for
assessing recurrence and progression in colorectal cancer
patients
Ariane Hallermayr
1,2,3, Verena Steinke-Lange1,4, Anna Benet-Pagès1,
Markus Rentsch5,6, Holger Vogelsang7, Maike De Wit8,9, Christopher
Haberl10, Elke Holinski-Feder1,4, Julia M. A. Pickl1,4
1MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany,
2Pettenkofer School of Public Health, Munich, Germany,3Institute
for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology–IBE, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany,4Medizinische Klinik und
Poliklinik IV, Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München,
Munich, Germany,5Department of General, Visceral and Thorax
Surgery, Klinikum Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany,6Department of
General, Visceral, Vascular and Transplant Surgery, UniversityHospital Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Campus
Großhadern, Munich, Germany,7Department of General, Visceral,
Thoracic and Endocrine Surgery, Klinikum Garmisch-Partenkirchen,Teaching Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany,
8Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Vivantes Klinikum Neukoelln, Berlin, Germany,9Department of
Oncology, Vivantes Auguste-Viktoria-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany,
10Department of Oncology and Hematology, Barmherzige Brüder,
Klinikum St. Elisabeth, Straubing, Germany.
Introduction: The BloodPac Consortium recently released guide-
lines for analytical validation of NGS-based liquid biopsy assays for
diagnostic testing. We extend these protocols to more sensitiveAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
386
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) assays, and provide clinical validation
for determination of disease recurrence and progression.
Material and Methods: Mutant variant allele frequencies (VAFs)
in plasma were measured by BRAF p.V600E and KRAS p.G12/p.G13
ddPCR assays in 22 colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, from whomclinical data were available.
Results: Analytical validation of BRAF p.V600E and KRAS p.G12/
p.G13 assays revealed a cutoff for residual disease detection of0.02% and 0.11% VAF and accurate quanti ﬁcation for ≥0.52% and
≥0.41% VAF in plasma, respectively. Clinical validity of ddPCR
assays for residual disease detection was con ﬁrmed in 19 samples
of R0 resected CRC patients, as ctDNA detection was in line withclinical evidence: In 5/19 patients, residual disease was detected.In 4 of these 5 patients, metastases were con ﬁrmed. In 14/19
patients no residual disease was detected. Only 1 of these 14
patients developed metastases. Further, association of ctDNAdetection rates with tumor stages was shown, as 0/4 stage-I, 4/8
stage-II, 3/4 stage-III and 6/6 stage-IV patients were found ctDNA-
positive. Only newly diagnosed patients were tested to preventctDNA perturbation due to surgery or treatment interventions.Clinical validity of ddPCR assays for treatment monitoring was
shown, as ctDNA quantities were associated with response or
resistance to chemotherapy in 7/7 patients.
Conclusions: We proof analytical and clinical validity of our
liquid biopsy assays to determine recurrence and progression in
CRC.
A. Hallermayr: None. V. Steinke-Lange: None. A. Benet-
Pagès: None. M. Rentsch: None. H. Vogelsang: None. M. De Wit:
None. C. Haberl: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. J.M.A. Pickl:
None.
P12.056.D Assessing the effectiveness of current UK guide-
lines on familial colorectal cancer (CRC) risk
Kyriaki Christou
1, Jonathan N. Berg2, Jacqueline Dunlop2
1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Ninewells hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Family history (FH) of CRC is a frequent reason for
referral to Clinical Genetics in the UK. The British Society ofGastroenterologists (BSG) guideline strati ﬁes patients to risk
categories (low/population, low-moderate, high-moderate and
high) according to FH and known penetrant mutations. We
investigated how effectively BSG guidelines categorise people atincreased risk of CRC.
Methods: FH data was obtained for all unaffected people with a
family history of CRC, referred to Tayside clinical genetics from2000-2009. Risk category according to BSG guidance was assignedde novo . Individuals who went on to develop adenomatous polyps
or CRC were identi ﬁed by record linkage.
Results: 1120 patients were identi ﬁed and after exclusion
criteria, there were 728 non-polyposis patients (288 low-risk, 316moderate-risk and 121 high-risk, including 31 mutation carriers). 8
invasive CRC developed, 2 in low, 3 in moderate and 3 in high-risk
groups. There was a signi ﬁcant increased risk of CRC development
in mutation carriers. There was no signi ﬁcant difference in the rate
of CRC development between the risk-groups. There was a
signi ﬁcantly higher risk of polyp detection in all categories
compared to the low-risk group.
Conclusions: The mutation group have a signi ﬁcantly higher
risk of CRC development, but regular screening appears to reduce
this risk. Colonoscopic surveillance appears effective in reducingthe cancer incidence in moderate and high-risk groups, pre-sumably through polyp removal, thereby supporting continueduse of the current guidance. In this context, BSG guidelines appear
to effectively stratify risk for familial CRC.
K. Christou: None. J.N. Berg: None. J. Dunlop: None.
P12.057.A Application of targeted next-generation sequen-
cing in primary and metastatic colorectal cancer using hot-
spot panel for detection of potentially therapeuticallyrelevant rare variants
Zora Lasabová
1, Peter Mikolajcik2, Dusan Loderer3, Marian
Grendar3, Eva Gabonova2, Ivana Kasubova4, Tatiana Burjanivova1,
Michal Kalman5, Lukas Plank6, Ludovit Laca2
1Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in
Martin, Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genomics, Martin, Slovakia,
2Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in
Martin, Clinic of Surgery and Transplant Center, Martin, Slovakia,
3Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in
Martin, Biomedical Center Martin, Martin, Slovakia,4Comenius
University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin,Biomedical Center Martin, Martin, Slovakia,5Comenius University in
Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Dept. of
Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia,6Comenius University in
Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Dept. of
Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia.
Introduction: In the practice, for the treatment of metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients usually ﬁrst generation methods
can be applied to detect therapeutically relevant variants. The
implementation of NGS allows to test that patient´s biopsy also forvariants for which drugs are yet under development, or for rarevariants still allowing the patients to bene ﬁt from personalized
therapy.
Methods: We used the Ampliseq Cancer HotSpot multigene
panel with 2800 hot spots in 50 genes, and analyzed 87 tissue
samples from 55 patients with primary CRC (pCRC) and 31 mCRC.
Results: In total, we identi ﬁed 164 somatic variants, which were
classi ﬁed as pathogenic. We identi ﬁed mutations in TP53 (47%),
and the RAS family (46%) genes, of which KRAS and NRAS
represented 39% and 7%, respectively, followed by APC (37%), and
PIK3CA in 12% of samples. In 30 samples, two driver mutations
were present in one sample, and we did not ﬁnd any of mutations
present in our panel in 9 patients. In one patient, we identi ﬁed a
potentially therapeutically signi ﬁcant combination of the KRAS
G12A and BRAF D594E. Another patient had a potentially sensitive
mutation to anti-EGFR therapy KRAS A59T along with the PIK3CA
mutation E545K. In two liver metastases from one patient, we
identi ﬁed two different mutations KRAS G12C and NRAS Q61K
together with the PIK3CA mutation E545K in both metastases.
Conclusion: Our results may have potential signi ﬁcance for
molecular tumor boards in personalized tumor therapy decisions.
Supported by the APVV-16-0066 and ITMS 313011V446 projects,funded by the EU resources.
Z. Lasabová: None. P. Mikolajcik: None. D. Loderer: None. M.
Grendar: None. E. Gabonova: None. I. Kasubova: None. T.
Burjanivova: None. M. Kalman: None. L. Plank: None. L. Laca:
None.
P12.058.B The interplay between regulatory variants, trans-
posable elements and gene expression in the context of
colorectal cancer
Nikolaos M. R. Lykoskou ﬁs
1, Halit Ongen1, Evarist Planet2, Didier
Trono2, Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
387
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Department of Genetic Medecine and Development, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,2School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzer-
land.
There is increasing evidence of transposable element (TEs)
activation during tumorigenesis. However, it still remains
unknown whether TE expression is under genetic control andwhat is the causal relationship between eQTLs, TEs and genes. Toaddress that, we performed cis-eQTL analysis using genotypes and
mRNA-seq data for 275 normal and 276 tumor samples from the
SYSCOL colorectal cancer (CRC) cohort. At 5% FDR, we discovered10’111 and 5 ’152 TE-eQTLs as well as 6 ’856 and 1 ’539 gene-eQTLs
in normal and tumor samples, respectively. We observed more
independent eQTLs per gene than per TEs in either state and a
smaller distance of eQTLs to the TSS of TEs compared to genes (P< 0.001 in normal and tumor). Of the identi ﬁed TE-eQTLs, 376 are
tumor-speci ﬁc and display differences in methylation patterns
(Wilcoxon P =0.017) and enrichment for binding of transcription
factors (LoVo cell line ChIP-seq data) compared to the 524discovered shared TE-eQTLs. To assess the causal relationship
between eQTLs, TEs and genes, we used Bayesian networks on
12’379 normal and 9 ’714 tumor eQTL-TE-gene triplets identi ﬁed
by association testing. We observed an increase of TEs beingcausal for gene expression changes in tumor compared to normal
(Fisher P =6.34e-11) and identi ﬁed 79 triplets where TEs become
causal for changes in gene expression for 51 cancer driver genes(5 CRC-speci ﬁc) in tumor making these TEs potential drivers of
cancer driver genes. This study highlights a substantial role for TEs
as drivers of gene expression and sets a framework to betterunderstand TE effects in cancer.
N.M.R. Lykoskou ﬁs:None. H. Ongen: None. E. Planet: None.
D. Trono: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Hybridtstat LTD.
P12.059.C The combination of ruxolitinib and MK2206 inhibits
cell growth via activating P53 and PTEN expression anddecreasing PI3K expression in triple negative breast cancercell line
Esin Guvenir Celik
1, Onur EROGLU1,2
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilecik Seyh Edebali
University, Bilecik, Turkey,2Biotechnology Research and Application
Center, Bilecik Seyh Edebali University, Bilecik, Turkey.
Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer(TNBC) is the most
aggressive and carries the poorest prognosis, larg est recurrence
and lowest survival rate. A tumor-speci ﬁc receptor or pathway-
related target for TNBCs has not yet been developed. Ruxolitinib is an
orally available receptor tyrosine k inase inhibitor that targets JAK1
and JAK2. The aim of this study; ﬁrstly to decrease the side effects of
ruxolitinib by combined treatment with selective Akt inhibitor MK-
2206 and secondly to investigate the effect of combined treatment
on PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in MDA-MB-231.
Materials and Methods: Cells were cultured. Drug doses were
determined by MTT assay. A colony formation assay wasperformed to determine the metastatic effect of drugs on cells.
Protein was isolated from treated-untreated cells. Expression
levels of P53, PTEN, PI3K and AKT genes were determined bywestern blotting. Western blot results were analyzed to get band
intensities by Image J program.
Results: The cell viability is 50.1% for 22.5μM Ruxolitinib,
55.91% for 7.5μM MK-2206, 54.99% for 18μM Ruxolitinib +5μM
MK-2206. The combination of Ruxolitinib and MK-2206 signi ﬁ-
cantly reduced colony formation compared with the controlgroup. We observed that combined treatment activates PTEN and
P53, decreases PI3K expression in MDA-MB-231 cells.
Conclusions: Our study indicates for the ﬁrst time that inhibition
of PI3K/AKT signaling with combined treatment of the selective AKTinhibitor MK-2206 and JAK1/2 inhibitor Ruxolitinib and reducescolony formation with combined treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells.
This study was ﬁnancially supported by Bilecik Seyh Edebali
University Research Projects (Project No. 2018-02.BSEÜ.01-01).
E. Guvenir Celik: None. O. Eroglu: None.
P12.060.D A comprehensive genomic pro ﬁling (CGP)
approach for somatic and germline mutation detectionpurpose in FFPE cancer samples
Francesco Orsini
1,Anna Dellai1, Matteo Giacomin2, Lara Walczer
Baldinazzo1, Fabiana Crò1, Cristina Lapucci1, Marcello Gambacorta1
1Synlab Italia, Castenedolo, Italy,2University of Perugia, Perugia,
Italy.
Introduction: CGP is one of the most recent approach in tumor
mutation analysis. Many laboratories are focused in mutational
screening by classical molecular techniques; CGP detects genomicaberrations and is increasingly being utilized to match patients to
targeted therapies against oncogenic drivers. CGP also detects
germline variants and might be useful for patient ’s management.
Materials and Methods: we applied a CGP approach for
mutational screening, Tumor Mutation Burden calculation, Micro-
satellite Instability and to identify RNA rearrangments, RNA
rearrangements detection. DNA and RNA from 42 FFPE tumorsamples (melanoma, colorectal cancer, breast cancer and prostaticcancer) were processed using TSO500 and sequencing was
performed on NextSeq 550Dx. We applied two bioinformatic
pipelines for variants ﬁltering. Germline variants were con ﬁrmed
analyzing non tumor tissue when available.
Results: Somatic variants were classi ﬁed in 4 TIERS following
AMP/ASCO/CAP guidelines. 14 TIER-IA variants were con ﬁrmed by
gold standard method. TMB and MSI were determined and MSI-Hstatus was con ﬁrmed by an IVD kit. Germline variants were
classi ﬁed according to ACMG guidelines. We detected C5
mutations in colorectal cancer (3 samples carried APC and TP53mutations), 2 C5 and a C4 mutation in melanoma. Breast andprostate cancer samples showed respectively 12 and 9 C3 variants,
while no C5 mutations were found. Deeper analysis is ongoing
and more data will be available soon.
Conclusions: TSO500 con ﬁrmed its ef ﬁcacy for the identi ﬁca-
tion of somatic, germline variants, TMB and MSI determination in
tumorigenic samples and can be relevant for an improvedpatient ’s management and strati ﬁcation for target therapies.
F. Orsini: None. A. Dellai: None. M. Giacomin: None. L.
Walczer Baldinazzo: None. F. Crò: None. C. Lapucci: None. M.
Gambacorta: None.
P12.061.A Development of a miRNA-based classi ﬁer for
molecular colorectal cancer subtypes
Ronja S. Adam
1,2, Dennis Poel3, Leandro Ferreira Moreno1,2, Joey
Spronck1, Tim R. de Back1,2, Florian Markowetz4, Xin Wang5,6, Henk
M. W. Verheul3, Tineke E. Buffart7, Louis Vermeulen1,2
1Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM) and
Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdaum UMC, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands,2Oncode Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Department of
Medical Oncology, Radboud University medical center, Nijmegen,Netherlands,4Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
388
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,5Department of Biomedical
Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
6Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China,7Netherlands Cancer Institute, Department of
Gastrointestinal Oncology, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been classi ﬁed into Consensus
Molecular Subtypes (CMSs) with implications for our under-standing of tumour heterogeneity and the prognosis of patients.This classi ﬁcation is based on the expression of protein coding
genes, messenger RNAs (mRNAs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have also
been shown to play a role in tumour heterogeneity and CMS-speci ﬁc biology. In contrast to mRNAs, they have a smaller size
and increased stability, making miRNA expression quanti ﬁcation
more easily accessible. Therefore, we built a miRNA-based CMS-
classi ﬁer by translating the existing mRNA-based CMS-classi ﬁer
using machine learning. The performance of this miRNA-assigned
CMS-classi ﬁer (CMS-miRaCl) was validated in two independent
data sets. To gain insight into the biological relevance, weevaluated its most important features. We found that miRNAspreviously reported to be relevant in microsatellite instable CRCs
or in Wnt-signalling were important features for CMS-miRaCl. With
further validations proving its robustness, this miRNA-basedalternative might allow to implement CMS-classi ﬁcation in clinical
work ﬂows more easily.
R.S. Adam: None. D. Poel: None. L. Ferreira Moreno: None. J.
Spronck: None. T.R. de Back: None. F. Markowetz: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Modest; Tailor Bio. X. Wang: None. H.M.W. Verheul:
None. T.E. Buffart: None. L. Vermeulen: None.
P12.062.B Germline copy number variants: an underreported
genetic diagnosis in gastrointestinal tumour risk syndromesuspected individuals
J. Garcia-Pelaez*
1,2,3, S. Laurie*4, G. Demidov*5, I. Paramonov6,A .K .
Sommer7, I. B. A. W. te Paske8, D. Huntsman9, ERN-GENTURIS group,
SOLVE-RD consortium, E. Holinski-Feder10, M. Tischkowitz11,S .
Aretz7,12, N. Hoogerbrugge8, R. M. de Voer8, C. Oliveira1,2,3,*
contributed equally
1Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal,2Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunol-
ogy of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal,3Faculty of
Medicine, University of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal,4Centre Nacional
d’Anàlisi Genòmica-Centre de Regu lació Genòmica (CNAG-CRG), Parc
Cientí ﬁc de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,5Institute of Medical Genetics
and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,
6Department of Clinical and Molecul ar Genetics and Rare Disease,
Hospital Universitari Vall D ’hebron, Barcelona, Spain,7Institute of
Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, U niversity of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
8Department of Human Genetics, Radbo ud university medical center,
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life S ciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
9Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,10MGZ - Medizinisch
Genetisches Zentrum , Munich, Germany,11Academic Laboratory of
Medical Genetics and National Instit ute for Health Research Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Unive rsity of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,12National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Germline pathogenic variants, including rare copy number variants
(CNVs) in cancer predisposing gene s( C P G ) ,c a u s eg e n e t i ct u m o u rr i s k
syndromes (TRS). TRS-causative var iants can be clinically actionable
and lead to intensive surveillance a nd/or risk reducing surgery that
improve morbidity and mortality. Regrettably, causative andactionable variants cannot be found fo r all TRS-suspected individuals.
While for SNV-calling speci ﬁcity/sensitivity is almost 100%, CNV
detection in exome-data remains challenging. We hypothesized that
pathogenic CNVs in CPG may solve some of the yet unexplained, butclinically suspected g astrointestinal TRS-cases. The ERN-GENTURIS/
SOLVE-RD project, re-analyzed exo mes from 293 unsolved TRS-cases:
adenomatous polyposis (AP; n =105), hyperplastic polyposis (HP; n
=98), hereditary gastric cancer (HGC; n =83) and hereditary
colorectal cancer (hCRC; n =7). CNVs were called with four different
variant callers (ClinCNV, ExomeDep t h ,C o n i f e r ,V a r G e n i u s ) .3 4 1C N V s
ﬁltered from 229 CPGs were prioritized for their involvement in GI
tumours, quality and calling by >1 caller. High-quality and/or‘multiple-called ’CNVs were evaluated using IGV and focused
paired-end mapping/split-read analy sis. Eight CNVs (6-del; 2-dup), 3
‘multiple-called ’, were found in 11/293 TRS-cases, sometimes in cases
with an atypical phenotype. CNVs found in CDH1 (n=1),P A L B 2 (n=
1),APC (n=2),MSH6 (n=1) are under validation with qPCR and
MLPA. The CDH1 deletion found in 4 HGC-relatives, supported by
split-reads/paired-end mapping, was considered an actionablediagnosis (4.8% among HGC cases). A deletion affected PALB2 in 1/
83 (1.2%) HGC cases. Two deletions affected APC in 2/105 (2%) AP
cases. Altogether, this approach de livered a potential diagnosis in
3.8% unsolved GI TRS-cases, that may become actionable after lab/clinical validation.
J. Garcia-Pelaez*: None. S. Laurie*: None. G. Demidov*: None.
I. Paramonov: None. A. Sommer: None. I. te Paske: None. D.
Huntsman: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. M. Tischkowitz:
None. S. Aretz: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. R. de Voer: None.
C. Oliveira: None.
P12.063.C Harnessing segment breakpoint statistics to inter-
pret copy number variation in cancer
Qingyao Huang , Michael Baudis
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Genomic variations are direct cause of tumor formation and
accomplice in its continuous evolution. While point mutations can
be pinpointed to a targeted genetic element, copy number
variations (CNVs) involve copy number gain or loss of a large DNAsegment which often covers hundreds of genetic elements in oneevent. Although futile variations commonly exist in cancer and
serve as an incubator for its subtype evolution, we observe
consistency in CNV landscape within the same cancer types andcorresponding increase in heterogeneity along with increased
distinction in physiology and morphology. This implies that
particular CNV may promote cancer type-speci ﬁc progression. A
focal CNV (of length shorter than 3Mb) has indicated strongerbiological relevance. In addition, we observe highly frequent
overlap of breakpoints in samples of the same cancer type. Taken
together, we designed a statistic that harness information of CNVsegment breakpoint, to delineate the importance of geneticelements covered by CNV segments. Using the TCGA ovarian, lung
and breast adenocarcinoma data, we have identi ﬁed their cancer
type-speci ﬁc oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes on the top
of the ranking. The comparison with GISTIC2.0 using the samedata showed similar regional peaks, but our method can provide
signi ﬁcance measure on the ﬁner gene level. With the con ﬁrma-
tory results on the known tumor promoting genes, this work has apotential to identify novel functional pathways that are exerted
through CNV. We expect to expand this method to the non-
coding area to provide a better overview of the CNV functionallandscape.
Q. Huang: None. M. Baudis: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
389
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P12.064.D Expression Pro ﬁling of Jak-STAT Pathway Under
Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma Early Stages UVB and PUVA
Treatment
Irina V. Kozlova , Dmitry A. Verbenko, Anastasiya A. Vorontsova,
Arfenya E. Karamova, Marian B. Zhilova, Alexey A. Kubanov
State Research Center for Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology of
Russian Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common
subtype of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Activation of the signaltransducers and activators of transcription (STAT) protein familyhave been found to involved in the pathogenesis of leukemias,
Hodgkin lymphomas and CTCL.
Materials and Methods: The expression levels of JAK-STAT
pathway genes in affected vs nonaffected skin were studied, aswell gene expression pro ﬁling at affected skin during UVB-311 and
PUVA therapy of MF. F OXP3, GATA3, IRF4 and NFKB1 gene
transcript levels were also evaluated. The study included 20 MFpatients diagnosed using clinical examination and histopatholo-gical and immunohistochemical skin biopsies tests. RNA expres-
sion was evaluated in skin biopsies by qPCR using taqman probes
with StepOne5 equipment.
Results: The J AK3, STAT1 and FOXP3 expression levels in
affected vs visually normal skin were elevated in 75% patients,
whereas lowered expression of GATA3 shown for 90% of patients.
The expression fold change heatmap revealed three clusters withdistinct expression patterns in patients. PUVA treatment elevated
transcription level of GATA3, STAT5B , and JAK1 on 62-75% of
patients; J AK3, STAT1, STAT4 and FOXP3 expression is decreased in
75-85% of patients. Almost the same shaping shown after UVBtreatment, but STAT4 elevated in 57% of patients.
Conclusions: JAK-STAT genes reveals different pattern of
expression in affected vs non-affected skin of MF patients. Thelevel of genes expression is changed during UV therapy towards
the visually normal skin values; however the expression of JAK1
and JAK3 genes is arose for one third of patients, indicating
possible disease stage advance.
I.V. Kozlova: None. D.A. Verbenko: None. A.A. Vorontsova:
None. A.E. Karamova: None. M.B. Zhilova: None. A.A. Kubanov:
None.
P12.065.A Exploring a mutation agnostic ctDNA-based work-
ﬂow for early response monitoring in HR positive, HER2
negative Metastatic Breast Cancer
Alessandra Franzoni
1, Lucia Bortot2, Carla Corvaja2, Lorenzo
Allegri3, Roberta Mazzeo2, Lorenza Palmero2, Debora Basile2, Elisa
Bertoli2, Silvia Buriolla2, Martina Alberti2, Giada Targato2, Elisa De
Crignis2, Lucia Da Ros4, Stefania Russo5, Paola Di Nardo4, Marta
Bonotto5, Barbara Belletti4, Gustavo Baldassarre4, Lorenzo Gerra-
tana2,4, Fabio Puglisi2,4, Giuseppe Damante1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics-ASU FC, Udine, Italy,2University of
Udine, Udine, Italy,3Institute of Human Genetics, Udine, Italy,4IRCCS
CRO National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy,5ASU FC, Udine, Italy.
Background: Endocrine therapy (ET) is the mainstay treatment for
HR positive, HER2 negative Metastatic Breast Cancer (LuminalMBC) but early disease dynamics is still an unmet need. The aim ofthe study was to proof the concept of a mutation-agnostic early
disease monitoring based on circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA).
Methods: The study enrolled and characterized through ctDNA
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) 49 women with Luminal MBC. ctDNA%was de ﬁned as the proportion of the different lengths of ACTBDNA fragments (short/medium/long). Blood samples were col-
lected before treatment start (BL) and after 3 months (E1).
Matched pairs variations were tested through Wilcoxon test, the
prognostic impact of ctDNA% and DNA yield was tested throughCox regression.
Results : The main treatment was ET +CDK4/6 inhibitors (92%).
P t sw i t hac t D N A %>7 5 t hp e r c e n t i l ew e r eb u r d e n e db ya
signi ﬁcantly worse outcome (Median PFS: 7.8 months, P =
0.0290). When compared with E1, a signi ﬁcant decrease in
ACTB_short (71% P =0.0162), ACTB_medium (66% P =0.0011)
and ACTB_long (78% P =0.0001) was observed. The prognostic
impact of a drop higher than 10% was then investigated for thedifferent fragments of ACTB in terms of PFS. While a signi ﬁcant
impact was observed for ACTB_short (HR: 5.98, 95%CI 1.61 -
22.24, P =0.008), no signi ﬁcance was observed for ACTB_me-
dium and ACTB_long. The progno stic impact of ACTB_short was
also retained after multivariable analysis (HR: 4.88, 95%CI 1.07
-22.17, P =0.040).
Conclusions : The study proofed the concept of a feasible
mutation-agnostic work ﬂow for a more granular disease monitor-
ing and prognostication in MBC.
A. Franzoni: None. L. Bortot: None. C. Corvaja: None. L.
Allegri: None. R. Mazzeo: None. L. Palmero: None. D. Basile:
None. E. Bertoli: None. S. Buriolla: None. M. Alberti: None. G.
Targato: None. E. De Crignis: None. L. Da Ros: None. S. Russo:
None. P. Di Nardo: None. M. Bonotto: None. B. Belletti: None. G.
Baldassarre: None. L. Gerratana: None. F. Puglisi: None. G.
Damante: None.
P12.067.C DGCR8-E518K con ﬁrms a susceptibility allele for
multinodular goiter in conjunction with peripheral
schwannomatosis
Clara Nogué1, Èlia Grau2,3, Joan Brunet2,4,5, Anne-Sophie Chong6,
HyeRim Han1, Eduard Dorca7, Barbara Rivera1,6,8
1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain,2Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan
Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL-IGTP-IDIBGI, L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Badalona, Girona, Spain,3Program in Molecular Mechanisms and
Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet deLlobregat, Spain,4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Cáncer (CIBERONC), -, Spain,5Medical Sciences Department, School
of Medicine, University of Girona, Girona, Spain,6Gerald Bronfman
Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,
7Bellvitge ’s Hospital, Department of Pathological Anatomy, L ’Hospi-
talet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain,8Lady Davis Institute, The Jewish
General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Introduction: Familial forms of multinodular goiter (MNG) are
rare. Nowadays the only bona- ﬁde susceptibility gene for fMNG is
DICER1. Last year, we identi ﬁed a single germline pathogenic
variant in the nuclear microprocessor DGCR8 (c.1552G>A;p.E518K)that was responsible for a family featuring fMNG in conjunction
with peripheral schwannomatosis (Rivera et al,. 2020). Later, a 35-
year-old man with a history of multiple schwannomas (n =7)
since the age of 12, thyroid nodules, papillary thyroid cancer(dx.23y), and renal cyst (dx.33y) was being followed at the institute
català d ’oncologia. No family history of thyroid nodules or
schwannomatosis was reported.
Methods: Blood from the affected proband and his non-
affected sister and parents was collected jointly with patient ’s
tissue of 5 schwannomas and 3 thyroid samples. Sanger-seq wasperformed in blood and tumor samples. Whole exome sequencing(WES) was performed in the germline DNA from the family
members and in the DNA from the tumors.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
390
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: WES of the proband ’s blood DNA identi ﬁed the
c.1552G>A;p.E518K variant, whereas no other likely pathogenic
variant was identi ﬁed in any other cancer susceptibility genes.
Sanger-seq showed loss of heterozygosity at the variant level in allanalyzed tumors. Segregation analysis in the germline DNA ofparents and sister revealed no other carriers and pointed to a de
novo character of the variant. WES analysis of ﬁve schwannomas is
currently ongoing.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁcation of this new case further
conﬁrms the role of DGCR8 as a novel tumor susceptibility gene
adding papillary thyroid carcinoma to the syndrome associated
phenotypes.
C. Nogué: None. È. Grau: None. J. Brunet: None. A. Chong:
None. H. Han: None. E. Dorca: None. B. Rivera: None.
P12.068.D Highly sensitive detection method of DICER1 tumor
hotspot mutations by drop-off droplet digital PCR
Roseline Vibert
1,2, Marion Gauthier-Villars1,2, Christelle Carrière1,2,
Catherine Dubois d ’Enghien1,2, Anne Vincent-Salomon2,3, Dominique
Stoppa-Lyonnet1,4, Ivan Bièche1,4, Emmanuelle Jeannot1,2,3, Lisa
Golmard1,2
1Service de Génétique, Institut Curie, Paris, France,2Université PSL,
Paris, France,3Service d ’Anatomo-Pathologie, Institut Curie, Paris,
France,4Université de Paris, Paris, France.
Introduction: DICER1 syndrome is an autosomal dominant
inherited syndrome predisposing to various benign and malignant
tumors, mainly occurring in children and young adults, requiring abroad surveillance starting at birth with repeated irradiatingimaging exams and sedations for young patients. It is caused by
germline pathogenic variants in the DICER1 gene. More than 90%
of tumors bear a DICER1 missense hotspot mutation, as a second
hit, involving one of six codons clustered in exons 24 and 25. We
designed and validated in vitro a drop-off ddPCR system to scan
allDICER1 hotspot codons.
Materials and Methods: Three drop-off ddPCR assays were
designed (one for exon 24, two for exon 25), with two TaqMan
probes per assay, one complementary to the wild type sequence
of the region containing hotspot mutations, another used as areference. Eight tumor-derived DNAs and ﬁve synthetic oligonu-
cleotides bearing DICER1 hotspot mutations were tested.
Results: The 13 tested mutations were detected, with a limit of
detection ranging from 0.07% to 0.31% for codons p.E1705, p.D1709 and p.D1713 in exon 24, and from 0.06% to 0.15% for
codons p.G1809, p.D1810 and p.E1813 in exon 25.
Conclusions: The high sensitivity of this method is compatible
with its use for plasma circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis forearly tumor detection in DICER1 syndrome patients. It may reduce
the need for radiation exposure and sedation in surveillance
protocols. It may also improve patient prognosis. Clinical trials areneeded to evaluate ctDNA analysis in DICER1 syndrome patients.Grants: Ligue contre le cancer
R. Vibert: None. M. Gauthier-Villars: None. C. Carrière: None.
C. Dubois d ’Enghien: None. A. Vincent-Salomon: None. D.
Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. I. Bièche: None. E. Jeannot: None. L.
Golmard: None.
P12.070.B DNA methylation status of circulating tumor DNA
enables therapy response monitoring and assessment of
tumor burden
Walter Pulverer
1, Jagdeep Singh Bhangu2, Silvia Schönthaler1,
Rudolf Öhler2, Thomas Bachleitner-Hofmann2, Andreas Weinhäusel11AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Vienna, Austria,
2Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Introduction: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (neoCTx) followed by
hepatic resection is the treatment of choice of patients withcolorectal cancer liver metastasis (CLM). Only about 70% of
patients respond to neoCTx. Recent evidence suggests that cfDNA
methylation is a highly sensitive biomarker and may moreaccurately re ﬂect tumour burden and treatment response than
conventional markers for CRC.
Methods: Thirty-four patients with CLM who received neoCTx
prior to intended hepatic resection were included in this study.Peripheral blood plasma was colle cted at baseline and before each
cycle of neoCTx. cfDNA was digested with 4 different methylation
sensitive restriction enzymes and a nalysed for aberrant methylation
of 48 CRC-associated genes. Methylation marker levels werecorrelated with baseline tumour volume and treatment response
and compared with the standard tumour markers CEA and CA 19-9.
Results: The methylation markers SEPT9, DCC, BOLL and SFRP2
were present in all patients at baseline and displayed a strongercorrelation with tumour volume than CEA and CA 19-9. Serial
measurement of these methylation markers allowed for discrimi-
nation between operated and non-operated patients after 1 cycleof neoCTx. The early dynamic changes of SEPT9 and DCC alsoseemed to correlate with pathohistological response. Methylation
values of eleven out of the 48 tested CRC-associated markers
showed a strong correlation (>0.80) with SEPT9.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that serial measurements of CRC-
associated methylation markers is a valuable tool for early response
assessment. We also identi ﬁed a set of eleven markers, who have the
potential to strengthen the value of the CRC-marker SEPT9.
W. Pulverer: None. J.S. Bhangu: None. S. Schönthaler: None.
R. Öhler: None. T. Bachleitner-Hofmann: None. A. Weinhäusel:
None.
P12.072.D Identi ﬁcation of the R882H mutation in DNMT3A
by a restriction test in patients with hematologic neoplasms
Elizaveta Kulaeva
1, Pavel Lipilkin2, Tatyana Lipilkina3, Elena
Mashkina1
1Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,
2Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,
3Don State Technical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federa-
tion.
DNMT3A is one of the most frequently mutated genes in adult
hematological neoplasms, including myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS), acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic myeloidleukemia (CML). The most frequent somatic mutation in DNMT3A
is R882H (c.2645G>A); this amino acid substitution reduces the
enzymatic activity of the protein and destabilizes its functionaltetrameric form in vitro and in vivo. Our work is focused oncreating a method to identify the R882H somatic mutation in the
DNMT3A gene for use in the diagnosis of MDS. We developed a
speci ﬁc restriction test using Fsp4HI restrictase and original
primers and tested it on a sample of 81 patients with varioushematological neoplasms: MDS (n =, AML (n =and CML (n =)t o
determine the frequency of the mutation in the MDS speci ﬁcally.
The sources indicated a frequency of 12,2% for R882H in MDS,frequency in all our sample was 2,47 ± 1,72%, but patients with
this mutation had diagnosed CML, not MDS. We also identi ﬁed a
mutation in the second restriction site Fsp4HI, which was in theinvestigated DNA fragment at positions 113118-113122(NG_029465.2) in three patients with AML, MDS, and CML
accordingly. Therefore, we found that the R882H mutation is notAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
391
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608characteristic of MDS but is more likely characteristic of CML,
which is important for clarifying the role of this mutation in the
pathogenesis of myeloid neoplasms. We also found a new
mutation that requires further study of its effect on enzymefunction and the pathogenesis of MDS, AML and CML.
E. Kulaeva: None. P. Lipilkin: None. T. Lipilkina: None. E.
Mashkina: None.
P12.073.A Transcriptional pro ﬁle of NOMO1 deleted cells, a
common alteration in early-onset colorectal cancer
Abel Jesús Martel-Martel1,2, Paula García-Vallés1,2, Jésica Pérez-
García1,2,3, Luis Ángel Corchete1, Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1,2, Diego
Iglesias-Corral1,2, Juan Luis García1,3, Ana Belén Herrero1,2,3, José
Perea4, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1,2,3
1Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain,2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Sala-manca, Spain,4Health Research Institute, Fundación Jiménez Díaz
University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC) incidence has
been increasing in the last few years. About 10% of all colorectal
cancer (CRC) tumors are diagnosed in this cohort of patients(under 45 years). In a recent study performed by our group, we
have detected a homozygous deletion of the NOMO1 gene in
more than 70% of EOCRC patients, suggesting that NOMO1 could
be a molecular marker associated with EOCRC. Our aim was toidentify, using whole genome microarray, differential gene
expression between NOMO1 Knockout and NOMO1 wild type cell
lines that could explain its role in colorectal carcinogenesis.
Material and methods: CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to
generate NOMO1 -KO HT29 (CRC), HCT116 (CRC) and HS-5
(mesenchymal) cell lines. Total RNA from two NOMO1 -KO and
NOMO1 -WT clones was labeled and hybridized according to
Affymetrix protocols. Samples were hybridized to Clarium-Shuman array and scanned using GeneChip System of Affymetrix.
WebGestalt tool was used for microarray data analysis.
Results: A total of 2 overexpressed genes (FC>1,5; HSP90B1 and
PCNT ) and 8 infra-expressed genes (FC<-1,5; NOMO1, PLPP3, RFT1,
STEAP1B, FBXO32, SLC6A8, ZNF503 and ATP8B1 ) showed up in
common between the three cell lines. Notably, PLPP3 is associated
with the activation of the Wnt/ β-catenin pathway, which plays an
important role in the development of CRC.
Conclusions: The inactivation of NOMO1 leads to the
differential expression of some genes that could explain itsimplication in the development of CRC. Validation of these mRNAexpression changes and new functional experiments are being
performed. Study funded by PI20/01569.
A. Martel-Martel: None. P. García-Vallés: None. J. Pérez-
García: None. L.Á. Corchete: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. D.
Iglesias-Corral: None. J.L. García: None. A.B. Herrero: None. J.
Perea: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.074.B Simultaneous detection of EGFR mutation and PD-
L1 overexpression in a case of advanced lung adenocarcinoma
POMPILIA APOSTOL , Alex Sebastian Pinzariu
SC CLINICA SANTE SRL, BUCHAREST, Romania.
Worldwide, lung cancer represents the leading cause of cancer-
related mortality, in spite of personalized therapy success. TestingforEGFR/ALK status and PD-L1 expression will help for guidance of
treatment strategy. Simultaneous testing of EGFR/ALK driver
mutations and PD-L1 expression, in order to gain valuable time
for the treatment decision of advanced adenocarcinoma (ADC).Our study has included 26 unrelated Caucasians patients (20-84years-old) with NSCLC (23 ADC and 3 squamous cell carcinoma).
Genomic DNA was isolated from primary or secondary FFPE
tumors samples, with 20-80% tumor cells content. EGFR status was
analyzed by Real-Time PCR using a commercial kit, while ALK
status and PD-L1 expression by IHC (clone D5F3, respectively SP
263). All investigated samples were ALK negative. By tumor
proportion level (TPS), PD-L1 expression was classi ﬁ
ed as negative
(TPS < 1%, n =10), weak (TPS 1-49%, n =11) and strong (TPS
≥50%, n =5). Five patients presented driver mutations in exon 19
or 21 (3 ex19del and 2 Leu858Arg). It has to be mentioned that
along with EGFR-Ex19del a patient has also a high PD-L1overexpression (>80%). This is a 65-year-old female, which
underwent last year a right upper lobectomy being diagnosed
with micropapillary and acinary adenocarcinoma. Though thestudied lot comprises only 26 patients, it can be seen thatsimultaneous testing of these biomarkers has bene ﬁcial effects
both on the patient ’s turnaround time and on amount of
biological material used. However, the most important bene ﬁti s
the rapidity of treatment strategy guidance, a very importantaspect for advanced/inoperable ADC patients.
P. Apostol: None. A. Pinzariu: None.
P12.075.C High sensitivity detection of endometrial cancer-
associated genetic variants in minimally-invasive gynecologi-cal samples
Fátima Marín*
1, Beatriz Pelegrina*2, Sònia Paytubi*2, Ferran
Briansó3,4, Paula Peremiquel2, Jon Frias2, Yolanda Benavente2, José
Manuel Martínez5, Marc Barahona5, Sergi Fernández5, Alba Zanca6,
Nuria Baixeras6, August Vidal6, Axel Rodríguez6, Júlia Canet1, Álvaro
Carmona2, Javier de Francisco7, Victor Caño7, Francesc Xavier
Bosch2, Silvia de Sanjosé8, Jordi Ponce5, Gabriel Capellá1, Xavier
Matias-Guiu6, Joan Brunet1,9, Laia Alemany2, Marta Pineda*1, Laura
Costas*2
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut
d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), ONCOBELL Pro-
gram, CIBERONC, L ’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain,2Cancer
Epidemiology Research Programme, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellv itge (IDIBELL ), CIBERESP,
L’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain,3Department of Genetics,
Microbiology and Statistics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain,4Roche Diagnostics, Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain,5Depart-
ment of Gynecology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Institutd’Investigació Biomèdica d e Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de
LLobregat, Spain,6Pathology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge,
Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet
de LLobregat, Spain,7Department of Anesthesiology. Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain,8National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA,9Hereditary Cancer Program,
Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de
Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain.
Diagnosis of endometrial cancer (EC) is based on the histo-
pathological assessment of end ometrial biopsies among symp-
tomatic women. Genetic analyses of minimally invasive samples
using highly sensitive techniqu es offer a promising perspective
for screening and early detection of EC. Our aim was to identifysomatic mutations associated to EC that could be detected in
cervical Pap Brush and cervico- vaginal self-samples. Sixty-oneAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
392
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608DNA samples from nine EC cases and four from controls were
extracted from endometrial biopsi es, clinician-collected cervical
samples, cervico-vaginal self-samples, and blood; plus surgical
specimens for cases. A custom panel targeting exons of 49genes, which incorporates dupl ex unique molecular identi ﬁers,
was used to sequence samples at a high depth. The deduplica-
tion process was performed using a combination of Picard, fgbio
and bwa tools. VarDictJava and Mutect2, in tumor-only mode,were used for variant calling. Variants detected by both callersand with variant allele frequency (VAF)>0.5% were considered
andﬁltered by quality and functional impact. A minimum VAF of
5% was set in aspirates to ﬁlter out low frequency variants of
normal tissue. Genetic variants at VAF>5% in tumors (67 variantsacross the 9 tumors) were detected in paired endometrial
aspirates, clinician-collected cervical samples, and vaginal self-
samples with a sensitivity of 96% (60/67), 76% (53/67), 69% (49/67), respectively. No somatic variants were identi ﬁed in
gynecological samples from co ntrols or blood from any women.
This approach is useful to detect tumor somatic mutations ingynecological minimally-invasive samples at high sensitivity. Alarger sample size is requir ed to validate these results.
Funding: PIE16/00049,PI19/01835,Roche,CM19/00216,FI20/
00031,CB16/12/00234,CB06/02/0073.
F. Marín*: None. B. Pelegrina*: None. S. Paytubi*: None. F.
Briansó: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. P.
Peremiquel: None. J. Frias: None. Y. Benavente: None. J.
Martínez: None. M. Barahona: None. S. Fernández: None. A.
Zanca: None. N. Baixeras: None. A. Vidal: None. A. Rodríguez:
None. J. Canet: None. Á. Carmona: None. J. de Francisco: None.
V. Caño: None. F. Bosch: None. S. de Sanjosé: None. J. Ponce:
None. G. Capellá: None. X. Matias-Guiu: None. J. Brunet: None.
L. Alemany: None. M. Pineda*: None. L. Costas*: C. Other
Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other
in-kind support); Modest; Roche, IDT.
P12.076.D Somatic testing in unsolved familial adenomatous
polyposis cases increases diagnostic yield and discloses a highprevalence of APC mosaicism
Paula Rofes
1,2, Jesús del Valle1,2, Sara González1,2, Lídia Feliuba-
daló1,2, Marta Pineda1,2, Eva Tornero1,2, Mireia Menéndez1,2, Xavier
Muñoz1,2, Eva Montes1, Raquel Cuesta1, Matilde Navarro1, Ares
Solanes1, Núria Dueñas1, Sílvia Iglesias1, Mónica Salinas1, Judith
Balmaña3, Joan Brunet1,2, Gabriel Capellá1,2, Conxi Lázaro1,2
1Hereditary Cancer, Catalan Instit ute of Oncology, ONCOBELL program,
IDIBELL, L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,2Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain,3High Risk and
Cancer Prevention Unit, Medical O ncology Department, University
Hospital Vall d ’Hebron, Universitat Autò noma de Barcelona and Vall
d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a highly
penetrant dominant condition accounting for 1% of CRC cases. It is
characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of
colorectal adenomas. Up to 90% of FAP cases are caused byinactivating mutations in APC, and mosaicism has been previously
reported in 20% of sporadic cases. Aim: To explore the prevalence of
mosaicism in 11 unexplained cases of FAP and to evaluate the
impact of somatic testing on the diagnostic yield.
Methods: Paired samples of colorectal polyps, tumors and/or
mucosa were analyzed using a custom NGS hereditary-cancer
panel. Whenever possible, the extension of mosaicism within thedifferent embryonic layers was examined.
Results: 14 polyposis-associated genes were analyzed in 26
colorectal samples by high-coverage sequencing. A mosaicpathogenic variant was identi ﬁed in 7/11 patients (63.6%), in all
cases in APC. In 2/7 (28.57%) mosaicism was restricted to colonic
tissues, while in 5/7 (71.43%) it was extended to the blood.
Mosaicism affected the germline in one patient, being hisdaughter a heterozygous carrier of the same variant.
Conclusions: The implementation of somatic testing in FAP
patients identi ﬁesAPC mutations previously missed, improving
the diagnostic yield in our cohort of patients, attributable
to the identi ﬁcation of low-frequency germline variants as well
as mosaic variants con ﬁned to the colon. Grant support: Carlos III
Institute funded by FEDER –a way to build Europe –[PI19/00553;
PI16/00563 and CIBERONC]; Government of Catalonia[2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496].
P. Rofes: None. J. del Valle: None. S. González: None. L.
Feliubadaló: None. M. Pineda: None. E. Tornero: None. M.
Menéndez: None. X. Muñoz: None. E. Montes: None. R. Cuesta:
None. M. Navarro: None. A. Solanes: None. N. Dueñas: None. S.
Iglesias: None. M. Salinas: None. J. Balmaña: None. J. Brunet:
None. G. Capellá: None. C. Lázaro: None.
P12.077.A Development of
APC- speci ﬁc ACMG/AMP variant
classi ﬁcation guidelines
Isabel Spier1,2, Xiaoyu Sherry Yin3,4, John-Paul Plazzer3, Andreas
Laner5, Ian M. Frayling6, Deborah Ritter7,8, Sharon Plon7,8, Marc
Greenblatt9, Johan T. den Dunnen10, Finlay A. Macrae3,11, Stefan
Aretz1,2, on behalf of the InSiGHT - ClinGen Hereditary Colon Cancer /
Polyposis Variant Curation Expert Panel
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Department of Colorectal
Medicine and Genetics, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia,
4Melbourne Medical School, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Australia,5Department of Genomics, Medical Genetics Center
Munich, Munich, Germany,6Institute of Medical Genetics, University
Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom,7Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,8Texas Children ’s Cancer Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,9Vermont Cancer Center,
University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, USA,
10Department of Human Genetics and Clinical Genetics, Leiden
University, Leiden, Netherlands,11Department of Medicine, University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
Introduction: The proper characterisation of the clinical signi ﬁ-
cance of germline variants is of high relevance to reduce the
amount of variants with uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS).
Pathogenic APC variants are causative for Familial adenomatous
polyposis, a colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome. Thisproject aims to improve variant classi ﬁcation by the development
ofAPC-speci ﬁc classi ﬁcation criteria within the approval process of
a Hereditary Colon Cancer / Polyposis Variant Curation ExpertPanel (VCEP) from the International Society for GastrointestinalHereditary Tumours (InSiGHT) and ClinGen.
Methods: APC-speci ﬁc adaptations of the interpretation guide-
lines published by the American College of Medical Genetics andthe Association of Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) weresuggested based on expert opinions, database analyses, and
literature search conducted by the VCEP.
Results: Four of the 28 original criteria were left unchanged,
whilst six were not used for different reasons. For the remaining
18 criteria, gene- or disease-based speci ﬁcations and/or evidence
strength modi ﬁcations were made. The main changes concern the
“pathogenic very strong ”(PVS1) criterion (speci ﬁcations at the 5 ’
and 3 ’end of the gene), and modi ﬁcations of the minor allele
frequency thresholds (criteria BA1, BS1 and PM2). The validation ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
393
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608theAPC-speci ﬁc modi ﬁcations by systematic evaluation of known
variants is currently underway.
Conclusions: It is expected that using the APC-speci ﬁc guide-
lines will improve variant interpretation and facilitates resolutionof variants with con ﬂicted assertions in ClinVar. Based on the
adapted allele frequency thresholds, it is likely that in particular a
considerable portion of VUS can be reclassi ﬁed as (likely) benign.
I. Spier: None. X.S. Yin: None. J. Plazzer: None. A. Laner: None.
I.M. Frayling: None. D. Ritter: None. S. Plon: None. M. Green-
blatt: None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. F.A. Macrae: None. S. Aretz:
None.
P12.078.B Variant classi ﬁcation and expert curation: APC as a
pilot project and model of the collaborative InSiGHT-ClinGen
Hereditary Colon Cancer / Polyposis (ICCP) Variant CurationExpert Panel (VCEP)
Stefan Aretz
1,2, Isabel Spier1,2, Xiaoyu Sherry Yin3, John-Paul
Plazzer3, Elke Holinski-Feder4,5, Johan T. den Dunnen6, Deborah
Ritter7,8, Sharon Plon7,8, Marc Greenblatt9, Ian Frayling10, Finlay A.
Macrae3,11, on behalf of the InSiGHT - ClinGen Hereditary Colon
Cancer / Polyposis Variant Curation Expert Panel
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,3Department of Colorectal
Medicine and Genetics, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia,
4MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany,5Arbeitsgruppe
erbliche gastrointestinale Tumore, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik
IV–Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany,6Department of Human Genetics and Clinical Genetics,
Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands,7Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA,8Texas Children ’s Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,9Vermont Cancer Center, University of
Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, USA,10Institute of
Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United
Kingdom,11Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia.
Characterising the clinical signi ﬁcance of germline variants
becomes imminent for the translation of genetic testing intomedical practice. The realisation of this goal is a complex processthat includes curation of locus-speci ﬁc databases (LSDB), the
implementation of Variant Curation Expert Panels (VCEP), and the
development of standardized rules for variant classi ﬁcation such
as gene-speci ﬁc modi ﬁcations of the ACMG/AMP guidelines. We
describe this process for the curation and classi ﬁcation of APC
variants which is part of a long-term endeavour of theInternational Society for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours(InSiGHT) in collaboration with the Clinical Genome Resource
(ClinGen). To improve data centralisation and standardisation, we
identi ﬁedAPC-related LSDBs with thousands of rare or private
variants and initiated the removal or merging of outdated ororphan ones. A novel version of the reference InSiGHT APC LSDB
was established. Subsequently, variants were reclassi ﬁed and
annotation inconsistencies within and between the APC and
ClinVar databases were scrutinised and partly solved. As acollaborative effort, an InSiGHT-ClinGen Hereditary Colon Can-
cer/Polyposis VCEP is constituted in the ClinGen Hereditary Cancer
Clinical Domain. This includes the development and validation ofAPC-speci ﬁc adaptations of the generic ACMG/AMP interpretation
guidelines (separate abstract), which will improve in particular the
classi ﬁcation of the high amount of sequence variants with
unknown clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS) in public uncurated resourcessuch as ClinVar. Prioritised VUS will be classi ﬁed by the VCEP
regularly, whose consensus will represent the most authoritative
classi ﬁcation of pathogenicity. The InSiGHT-ClinGen effort might
serve as a model for other variant interpretation initiatives.
S. Aretz: None. I. Spier: None. X.S. Yin: None. J. Plazzer: None.
E. Holinski-Feder: None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. D. Ritter: None.
S. Plon: None. M. Greenblatt: None. I. Frayling: None. F.A.
Macrae: None.
P12.079.C Frequency of pathogenic variants in Fanconi
anemia genes in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer families
Vida Stegel
1,G a šper Klan čar1, Nina An žič1, Petra Škerl1, Vita
Šetraj čičDrago š1, Alenka Bomba č1, Anja Zago žen Klasinc1, Vesna
Vogri č1, Mateja Krajc2, Ana Blatnik2, Ksenja Strojnik2, Marta Banjac2,
Srdjan Novakovi ć1
1Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Cancer Genetics Clinic, Institute of
Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: It is estimated that 5-10% of breast and ovarian
cancers (BC/OC) have hereditary origin. Higher BC/OC risk ismostly attributed to pathogenic variants (PV) in BRCA1/2 genes, as
well as to PV in other high to moderate BC/OC risk genes as listed
by NCCN guidelines for hereditary breast and ovarian cancersyndrome HBOC (NCCN-HBOC genes). Several of NCCN-HBOCgenes belong to Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway. There are reports
on PVs in other FA genes (nonNCCN-HBOC FA genes) found in
cancer patients, but their association with cancer risk is not yetfully established. The aim of this study was to analyze a cohort ofHBOC families to determine the frequencies of PVs in nonNCCN-
HBOC FA genes in NCCN-HBOC PV positive and NCCN-HBOC PV
negative HBOC cases.
Methods: Since 2015 at our institute, the individuals ful ﬁlling
the HBOC testing criteria were counseled and screened for
germline PVs in NCCN-HBOC genes by Illumina ’s NGS multigene
panel. Retrospective reanalysis of nonNCCN-HBOC FA genes(FANCA ,FANCB ,FANCC ,FANCD2 ,FANCE ,FANCF ,FANCG ,FANCI ,
FANCL ,FANCM ,SLX4 ,ERCC4 ) was performed on 2023 individuals
from different HBOC families. Statistical analysis was performedusing Fisher ’s exact test.
Results: In NCCN-HBOC genes 466 PVs and in nonNCCN-HBOC
FA genes 37 PVs were identi ﬁed. Of all nonNCCN-HBOC FA genes
FANCM ,FANCD2 and FANCA were most frequently mutated.
Conclusions: The percentage of subjects with PVs in nonNCCN-
HBOC FA genes is statistically signi ﬁcantly higher among the
NCCN-HBOC PV negative individuals compared to the NCCN-HBOC PV positive individuals (2.16 vs 0.65%, p =0,0294).
V. Stegel: None. G. Klan čar:None. N. An žič:None. P.Škerl:
None. V.Šetraj čičDrago š:None. A. Bomba č:None. A. Zago žen
Klasinc: None. V. Vogri č:None. M. Krajc: None. A. Blatnik: None.
K. Strojnik: None. M. Banjac: None. S. Novakovi ć:None.
P12.080.D Familial Colorectal Cancer Type X syndrome: new
insights
Felipe A. O. Garcia1, Edilene S. de Andrade1, Henrique C. R. Galvão2,
Cristina S. Sabato3, Natalia Campacci1, Matias E. Melendez4, Rui M.
Reis1,Edenir I. Palmero4,1
1Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital,
Barretos, Brazil,2Oncogenetics Department, Barretos CancerAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
394
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Hospital, Barretos, Brazil,3Center of Molecular Diagnosis, Barretos
Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Brazil,4Pele Little Prince Research Institute,
Curitiba, Brazil.
Abstract: Familial colorectal cancer type X (FCCTX) is a hetero-
geneous colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome that differs from
Lynch syndrome in that it does not pre sent microsatellite instability
and exhibits the four main genes of mismatch repair, MLH1, MSH2,MSH6, and PMS2 function. Besides, its genetic etiology remains to beelucidated. We performed whole-ex ome sequencing of constitutive
material from 38 cancer-affected patients from 33 families at risk for
FCCTX (following Amsterdam I clinic al criteria). The variant classi ﬁca-
tion followed the American College of Medical Genetics andGenomics (ACMG) guidelines. A to tal of seven pathogenic/likely
pathogenic variants in six unrelated families (18.2% of the families)
were identi ﬁed. Most of the genes were involved in DNA damage
repair. One of them is the known CRC predisposing gene CHEK2 .I n
addition, pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were found in genes
previously associated with FCCTX/hereditary CRC as OGG1 and FAN1 .
Furthermore, potentially pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in the
TREX1, ASXL1, PRKN and SLX4 genes. Although the association of
these variants needs to be further studied, we were able to present
new potential genes that might be involved in the carcinogenesis ofFCCTX, thus providing important clues that can contribute to theunderstanding of hereditary colorectal cancer genetic basis.
Funding This project was funded through grants from the
National Oncology Care Support Program (PRONON(25000.056766/2015-64)) from the Ministry of Health and from
donations from Cotemig group. EIP, MEM, and RMR are recipients
of National Council for Scienti ﬁc and Technological Development
(CNPq) productivity fellowships.
F.A.O. Garcia: None. E.S. de Andrade: None. H.C.R. Galvão:
None. C.S. Sabato: None. N. Campacci: None. M.E. Melendez:
None. R.M. Reis: None. E.I. Palmero: None.
P12.081.A Interactome of FGFR1 mutations found in low-
grade gliomas (LGGs)
HyeRim Han
1, Cassandra Jin-Wong2, Tenzin Gayden3, Geoffrey
Hesketh2, Michael Slattery4, Nada Jabado3, William D. Foulkes5,6,
Anne-Claude Gingras2, Barbara Rivera1,6
1Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain,2Department of Molecular Genetics, Gingras Lab,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Department of
Pediatrics, The Research Institute of the McGill University Health
Center, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,5Cancer
Research Program, Research Institute, McGill University HealthCentre, Montreal, QC, Canada,6Gerald Bronfman Department of
Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Introduction: Aberrant FGFR signaling is involved in the
development of many different types of pathologies, including
those of the brain. In particular, oncogenic hotspot FGFR1
mutations p.N546K and p.K656E have been demonstrated to playa critical role in the etiology of low-grade gliomas (WHO Grade I/II).
Material and methods: We performed a comprehensive
genotype-phenotype correlation of 739 cases of different FGFR1-
mutated pathologies published in public databases and literature.Furthermore, we investigated the MAPK/ERK pathway activation
of FGFR1 single and double mutants found in low-grade brain
tumors, and identi ﬁed potential interactors through co-
immunoprecipitation assays and Bio-ID.
Results: Targeted analysis of CNS-related pathologies in the
comprehensive genotype-phenotype correlation revealed that amajority of the brain tumors (200/290, 69%) concentrate on p.
N546K and p.K656E mutations. While appearing predominantly as
single mutants, FGFR1 double mutants appear signi ﬁcantly higher
in combination with p.K656E (31/39, 79%, p =0.0001). Molecular
biology experiments indicate that while both the single anddouble FGFR1 mutants activate the MAPK/ERK pathway, double
mutants modulate the signaling levels. Furthermore, BioID results
demonstrate that the germline p.R661P mutant retains similarinteractors as that of wild-type FGFR1, while the double mutantsshare many with p.N546K, recapitulating the interactome of this
activating mutant.
Conclusions: Genotype-phenotype correlation demonstrates
the prevalence of p.N546K and p.K656E mutations in brain tumors,in particular with p.K656E in cis for double mutants. Interrogation
of the proximity interactome of FGFR1 mutants revealed potential
treatment targets against low-grade gliomas with impaired FGFRsignaling components.
Grants : Alex Lemonade Stand Foundation, MiaNeri Foundation,
La Caixa Foundation.
H. Han: None. C. Jin-Wong: None. T. Gayden: None. G.
Hesketh: None. M. Slattery: None. N. Jabado: None. W.D.
Foulkes: None. A. Gingras: None. B. Rivera: None.
P12.082.B Analyzing clinical behavior of two germline variant
in FH gene in a young female patient with renal cancer
hereditary syndrome (HLRCC)
Jesica M. Ramirez , Elizabeth Fader Kaiser, Hernán Rodríguez Zanini,
Miriam Rogel
Mendoza Central Hospital, Mendoza, Argentina.
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC) is an
autosomal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome. It is character-ized by the development of uterine and cutaneous leiomyomas,
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and rarely uterine leiomyosarcomas.
The RCC occurrence is low and it affects young adults whomgenerally present metastases at diagnosis. This tumor is usuallyunilateral, aggressive and the main histological subtype being
type 2 papillary RCC. HLRCC is due to mutations of the fumarate
hydratase ( FH, fumarase) gene that encodes for FH enzyme which
acts as a tumor suppressor. At date about 100 mutations havebeen reported in a few families. The aim of this work is to report
the presence of two variants, in a germline testing, in a 34 years
female patient who consulted with diagnosis of RCC in advancedstage and cutaneous leiomyomas. Her mother and sister
presented cutaneous leiomyomas con ﬁrmed by biopsy. The FH
gene was analyzed by exome sequencing (NGS) using Illuminaplatform. Genetic testing reported two variants in exon 8 of FHgene. First variant, c.1157A>C, p.Gl386Pro was classi ﬁed as
probably pathogenic according functional assays. This mutation
is very rare in the general population and was predicted by insilico software to be deleterious. The second variant, c.1157A>G, p.Gl386Arg was classi ﬁed as probably pathogenic according to
LOV.3 and CLINVAR. Considering to low prevalence, no clear
correlation between mutations (genotype) and phenotype hasbeen found. This report could contribute to increase de knowl-edge. Cosegregation studies will be considering to certi ﬁcate
variable expressivity and penetrance in relatives.
J.M. Ramirez: None. E. Fader Kaiser: None. H. Rodríguez
Zanini: None.
M. Rogel: None.
P12.083.C The transcription factors TFEB and TFE3 promote
tumor growth in Birt-Hogg-Dube ’syndromeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
395
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608CHIARA DI MALTA1,2, Angela Zampelli1, Letizia Granieri3, Luisa
Lanfrancone3, Andrea Ballabio1,2,4
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli (NA),
Italy,2Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical and Transla-
tional Science, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,3European Institute
of Oncology (IEO), Milan, Italy,4Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine., Houston, TX, USA.
The Birt-Hogg-Dube ’(BHD) syndrome is an autosomal dominant
inherited disorder due to loss of function germline mutations in
the folliculin (FLCN) gene. Symptoms include benign cutaneousﬁbrofolliculoma, pulmonary and kidney cysts and spontaneous
pneumothoraces. The most severe manifestation of the disease
are kidney tumors, which develop in about one out of three
affected individuals due to a somatic second-hit mutation leadingto the inactivation of the remaining FLCN allele. However howFLCN suppresses tumor establishment has remained elusive for
decades. The MiT/TFE family members TFEB and TFE3 are
constitutively nuclear in cells depleted of FLCN and we recentlydemonstrated that genetic depletion of TFEB completely rescuedrenal cyst formation, restored normal kidney function and lifespan
of kidney-speci ﬁc FLCN KO mice, thus pointing at TFEB as a key
driver of renal pathology in BHD. However, the contribution ofTFEB, or the one of its paralogue TFE3, to the development of
kidney cancer associated with this disorder has never been
addressed. We now show that depletion of TFEB, or the one ofTFE3, remarkably reduced the growth of a BHD-patient-derivedtumor cell line in vivo. Moreover, gene expression studies allowed
us to identify key TFEB/TFE3 downstream pathways which could
be responsible for tumorigenesis in BHD. Our ﬁndings demon-
strate the relevance of constitutive activation of TFEB and TFE3 inthe growth of kidney tumors associated with BHD syndrome and
encourage future studies exploiting TFEB/TFE3 inhibitors as a
therapy for these tumors.
C. Di malta: None. A. Zampelli: None. L. Granieri: None. L.
Lanfrancone: None. A. Ballabio: None.
P12.084.D Searching for novel fusion genes by RNA-Seq in
follicular lymphoma
Maria Pospelova
1, Konstantin Danilov1, Ekaterina Bozhokina2,3, Yuriy
Krivolapov2, Anna Gorbunova2,Igor Evsyukov1
1ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,2Mechnikov
North-West State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, RussianFederation,3Institute of Cytology RAS, Saint Petersburg, Russian
Federation.
Follicular lymphoma is the second most common non-Hodgkin ’s
lymphoma. In most cases, tumor cells contain a t(14;18)
translocation that activates BCL2 , a key gene for apoptosis.
However, there are a number of minor genetic alterations.Identifying such events in a particular patient can affect the
diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of cancer. Therefore, the
search for new fusion genes is very important for a personalizedapproach in medicine.
Currently, the search for new fusion genes can be performed in
RNA-Seq data using special programs, such as STAR-Fusion. Found
by this approach and subsequently validated hybrid genes can beused for diagnostic purposes using FISH, Southern blotting andRT-PCR.
In this study whole transcriptome RNA-sequencing pro ﬁling
was performed on biopsy specimens obtained from patientswith untreated follicular lymphoma and non-tumor lymphnodes. Altogether only 3 fusio n genes were found in 18 control
samples, while in 19 tumor samples 32 fusion events were
detected. Among identi ﬁed fusion genes we found known
follicular lymphomas fusions such as BCL2/IGH and BCL6/IGH
with high level of evi dence. There are also fusions typical for
o t h e rc a n c e rt y p e s ,e . g . KDM5A/NINJ2 (breast adenocarcinoma).
Most of the fusions are not covered in databases (ChimerKB,
FusionGDB), but participating genes are well known incarcinogenesis. Found fusion genes will be validated by Sangersequencing.
The work was carried out with the support of the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research, project No.17-54-33051.
M. Pospelova: None. K. Danilov: None. E. Bozhokina: None. Y.
Krivolapov: None. A. Gorbunova: None. I. Evsyukov: None.
P12.087.C Identi ﬁcation of new genes involved in germline
predisposition to early-onset gastric cancer
Cristina Herrera-Pariente
1, Roser Capó-García1, Marcos Díaz-
Gay1,2, Sabela Carballal1, Jenifer Muñoz1, Joan Llach1, Ariadna
Sánchez1, Laia Bonjoch1, Coral Arnau-Collell1, Yasmin Soares de
Lima1, Mariano Golubicki3,4, Gerhard Jung1, Juan José Lozano5,
Antoni Castells1, Francesc Balaguer1, Luis Bujanda6, Sergi Castellví-
Bel1, Leticia Moreira1
1Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Gastroenterology Department,Institut d ’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,2Department of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA,
3Oncology Section, Hospital of Gastroenterology “Dr. C. B. Udaondo ”,
Buenos Aires, Argentina,4Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hospital of
Gastroenterology “Dr. C. B. Udaondo ”, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
5Bioinformatics Platform, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Hepáticas yDigestivas (CIBEREHD), University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Gastro-enterology Department, Biodonostia Health Research Institute,Basque Country University (UPV/EHU), San Sebastián, Spain.
Introduction: The genetic cause for several families with gastric
cancer (GC) aggregation is unclear, with marked relevance inearly-onset patients. We aimed to identify new candidate genes
involved in GC germline predisposition.
Material and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) of
germline samples was performed in 20 early-onset GC patients
without previous germline mutation identi ﬁed. WES was also
performed in nine tumor samples to analyze the somatic pro ﬁle.
Sequencing germline data were ﬁltered to select variants with
plausible pathogenicity, rare fre quency and previously involved in
cancer. Then, a manual ﬁltering was performed to prioritize genes
according to current knowledge and function. These genetic variantswere prevalidated with Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV). A selectionstep was carried out and Sanger sequencing was performed.
Results: 274 genetic variants located on 205 genes were
prioritized. After IGV and selection step, 58 genetic variants in 52different candidate genes were validated by Sanger sequencing(Table 1).
Conclusion: Among them, APC,FAT4 ,CTNND1 and TLR2 seem
to be the most promising genes because of their role in hereditarycancer syndromes, tumor suppression, cell adhesion and Helico-
bacter pylori recognition, respectively. These results will be helpful
to increase the knowledge of predisposition to early-onset gastriccancer. Grant Support: CIBEREHD Beca de investigador novel2017-2019, Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria/FEDER (17/00878, 20/Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
396
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 60800113), CERCA Program and Agència de Gestiód ’Ajuts Universitaris
i de Recerca (GRPRE 2017SGR21, GRC 2017SGR653).
Table 1. Final candidate genes to gastric cancer predisposition.
Function Genes
Germline cancer
predispositionAPC,ATM,SDHC ,COL7A1 ,GPC3 ,RNF43 ,EXT2 ,
POLD1 ,EXT1 ,POT1 ,PTCH1 ,POLH ,GATA2 ,BAP1 ,
ERCC2 and FANCA
Cell adhesion FAT1 ,FAT2 ,FAT4 and CTNND1
Tumor suppression
genesPHF2 ,LARP7 ,LRP1B ,WWOX ,ADAMTS9 ,LATS1 ,
BCL6B ,ITIH5 ,NEO1 ,MAD1L1 ,GPX7 ,IQGAP2 ,DACT2 ,
SIRT3 ,RCC1 and EPHB2
Helicobacter pylori
recognitionIL12A ,TLR1 ,TLR2 ,TLR5 ,TLR10 ,A4GNT and MUC1
DNA repair UNG,KAT5 ,RAD23A ,HBP1 and LIG3
Other related
functionsARID4A ,ARID1B ,ATP4A and ROBO1
C. Herrera-Pariente: None. R. Capó-García: None. M. Díaz-
Gay: None. S. Carballal: None. J. Muñoz: None. J. Llach: None. A.
Sánchez: None. L. Bonjoch: None. C. Arnau-Collell: None. Y.
Soares de Lima: None. M. Golubicki: None. G. Jung: None. J.
Lozano: None. A. Castells: None. F. Balaguer: None. L. Bujanda:
None. S. Castellví-Bel: None. L. Moreira: None.
P12.088.D Somatic mutations of epigenetic regulation genes
in gastric cancer
Alexey Kalinkin1, Ekaterina Kuznetsova2, Ekaterina Alekseeva1,
Tatyana Deryagina1, Irina Bure2, Dmitry Mikhaylenko2, Alexander
Tanas1, Vladimir Strelnikov1, Marina Nemtsova2
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow,
Russian Federation.Background: Epigenetic processes play a signi ﬁcant role in
carcinogenesis, cancer recurrence and metastasis, and may serve
as useful clinical biomarkers. Analysis of epigenetic regulatorgenes mutation landscape in gastric cancer (GC) samples mayreveal novel clinical biomarkers and therapeutic targets.
Methods: We investigated somatic mutations of 25 epigenetic
regulation genes, using the NGS panel in 95 GC samples. Allidenti ﬁed somatic variants wereveri ﬁed in tumor and non-tumor
tissue by Sanger sequencing. Prediction ofsomatic variants
pathogenicity and impact on structure were carried out using
PolyPhen2, SIFT, PROVEAN, MutPred2, I-Mutant 3 and HOPE3Dtools. Westudied the survival of patients using the Kaplan-Meiermethod.
Results: For further analysis, we selected frameshift, nonsense
or missensevariants with MAF < 0.0005 and not annotated in theClinVar or dbSNP databases. Based on these criteria, we identi ﬁed
60 somatic mutations in 45/95(48%) GC samples. 23/60 (38%) of
the identi ﬁed variants are new, not described in the databases. 28/
60 mutations we identi ﬁed as pathogenic, 9/28(32%) were veri ﬁed
in non-neoplastic tissue, and were not described germline
variants. We showed that survival was signi ﬁcantly reduced in
patients with T3-4 tumor size to have mutations, compared withthe T3-4 group without mutations (p =0.043) and patients with
distant metastases (M1) to have mutations, compared with M1
group without mutations (p < 0.0001). It was also revealed that
mutations in ARID1A prevail in patients with distant metastases(p=0.03). Although clinical associations are somewhat premature,
since the group of patients is not very large yet. This work was
supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project
No.18-29-09020).
A. Kalinkin: None. E. Kuznetsova: None. E. Alekseeva: None.
T. Deryagina: None. I. Bure: None. D. Mikhaylenko: None. A.
Tanas: None. V. Strelnikov: None. M. Nemtsova: None.
P12.089.A Functional characterisation of PLK2 polymorphism
Pia Pu žar Dominku š, Petra Hudler
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: The majority of gastric cancer (GC) tumours is
characterized by chromosomal instability and extreme molecularheterogeneity, which can be driven by low-penetrating changes,
including single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in cell cycle genes. The
aim of our study was to functionally investigate SNVs in candidategenes CDC20 ,PLK2 ,PLK3 and ATM .
Methods: 542 GC patients and healthy controls were included
in the genotyping study. Survival analysis was performed using
the Kaplan-Meier method. The binding of candidate miRNAs onpolymorphic allele was evaluated with Luciferase reporter assay.
Results: Analyses of genetic models revealed signi ﬁcant
associations with GC risk: male patients with PLK2 -rs963615 CT
genotype had lower risk, whereas female patients had higher risk
(OR=0.59, 95%CI =0.37-0.93, P=0.023; OR =2.03, 95%CI =1.09-
3.80, P=0.026, respectively). PLK3 -rs12404160 AA genotype was
associated with higher risk in male population (OR =3.55, 95% CI
=1.26-10.04, P=0.015). Patients with the CDC20- rs710251 CC had
shorter overall survival (53.7 months) in comparison to patients
with AC or AA genotypes (131.7 and 133.5 months). For patients
with the PLK2- rs15009 GG genotype the 10-year survival rate was
63.5% in comparison to patients with CG or CC genotypes (15.7%
and 20%). Relative luciferase activity of the pmirGLO-PLK2-3 ’UTR-
Var (G allele) was decreased for 35% when cells were co-transfected with miR-23b-5p mimic in comparison to thepmirGLO-PLK2-3 ’UTR-Wt (C allele).
Conclusion: The CDC20- rs710251 and PLK2- rs15009 could
potentially be useful for survival prediction. MiR-23b-5p directlytargets PLK2 -rs15009 G allele. Supported by YR and P1-390 grants
from the Slovenian Research Agency (ARRS).
P. Pu žar Dominku š:None. P. Hudler: None.
P12.090.B Solving the genetic aetiology of hereditary gastro-
intestinal cancer - a collaborative multicentre endeavourwithin the project Solve-RD
Anna K. Sommer
1, Iris B. A. W. te Paske2, José García-Peláez3,4,5,
Andreas Laner6, Elke Holinski-Feder6,7, Verena Steinke-Lange6,7,
Sophia Peters1, Laura Valle8, Isabel Spier1,9, Solve-RD consortium,
Carla Oliveira3,4,5, Richarda M. de Voer2, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge*2,
Stefan Aretz*1,9, * contributed equally
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
university medical center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
4Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University
of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal,5Faculty of Medicine, University
of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal,6MGZ - Medizinisch GenetischesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
397
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Zentrum, Munich, Germany Arbeitsgruppe erbliche gastrointestinale
Tumore, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Munich, Germany,
7Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany,8Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol-
ogy, IDIBELL and CIBERONC, Barcelona, Spain,9National Center for
Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
Background: Patients and families with suspected, but genetically
unexplained (unsolved) genetic tumour risk syndromes lack
appropriate treatment and prevention, leading to preventable
morbidity and mortality. To tackle this problem, patients from theEuropean Reference Network on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes(ERN GENTURIS) are analysed in the European Commission´s
research project “Solving the unsolved rare diseases ”(Solve-RD).
The aim is to uncover known and novel cancer predisposinggenes by reanalysing available whole-exome sequencing (WES)
data of large cohorts in a combined manner, and applying a
multidimensional omics approach.
Approach: Nearly 500 genetically unsolved cases with sus-
pected hereditary gastrointestinal tumour syndromes (polyposis,
early-onset/familial colorectal cancer and gastric cancer) from
multiple European centres were included. Currently, clinical andgermline WES data from 294 cases are analysed. Furthermore, anextensive molecular pro ﬁling of gastrointestinal tumours is
planned and deep learning techniques will be applied. The
ambitious, multidisciplinary project is accompanied by a numberof methodical, technical, and logistic challenges, which require the
development and implementation of new analysis tools, standar-
disation of bioinformatics pipelines, and strategies to exchangedata and knowledge.
Results and Outlook: The re-analysis of 229 known cancer
predisposition genes allowed solving 2-3% of GENTURIS cases.
Further variants in 7% of the cases are under revision. Theintegration of expert knowledge and new technologies will helpto identify the genetic basis of a substantial number of additional
cases within the ongoing project. The ERN GENTURIS approach
might serve as a model for other genomic initiatives. Solve-RDreceived funding from EU Horizon 2020 (No.779257).
A.K. Sommer: None. I.B.A.W. te Paske: None. J. García-Peláez:
None. A. Laner: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. V. Steinke-
Lange: None. S. Peters: None. L. Valle: None. I. Spier: None. C.
Oliveira: None. R.M. de Voer: None. N. Hoogerbrugge*: None. S.
Aretz*: None.
P12.091.C Genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer biochem-
ical recurrence after radical prostatectomy
Anca Pavel
1,2, Danai Stambouli1, Adrian Preda3, Ismail Gener3,
Gabriela Anton2
1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania,2Stefan S.
Nicolau Institute of Virology, The Romanian Academy, Bucharest,Romania,3Center of Internal Medicine-Nephrology, Fundeni Clinical
Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: Radical prostatectomy is an effective treatment for
localized prostate carcinoma. Although the majority experience
long term disease control, a signi ﬁcant percentage of patients will
develop biochemical recurrence after surgery. The aim of thisstudy was to determine if biochemical recurrent disease can be
related to a particular risk genotype. Therefore, a single genetic
variant was selected in order to determine if genotyping couldprovide information regarding the outcome of prostate cancer.Materials and Methods: A total of 50 Romanian men
diagnosed with prostate cancer that underwent radical prosta-
tectomy were included in the study. DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood from all 50 patients. We divided the prostatecancer patients in two groups according to biochemical recur-rence (biochemical recurrent disease and no biochemical recur-
rence). Genotyping of the rs4054823 C/T polymorphism, located
on the chromosome 17p12, was performed by allelic discrimina-tion with Taqman 5 ’-nuclease assays.
Results: Statistical analysis revealed a signi ﬁcant correlation of
TT genotype with an increased risk for biochemical recurrence.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves of recurrence-free survival afterradical prostatectomy showed a signi ﬁcant difference between
the TT genotype compared to CC/CT genotypes ( P=0.0362).
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings propose the TT genotype as a
potential susceptibility factor for biochemical recurrence ofprostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. Therefore, detection
of hereditary genetic variations associated with prostate cancer
progression and outcome has a signi ﬁcant impact on the accurate
classi ﬁcation of the disease, providing insight into possible
preventive and therapeutic targets.
A. Pavel: None. D. Stambouli: None. A. Preda: None. I. Gener:
None. G. Anton: None.
P12.092.D High frequency of clinically actionable pathogenic
variants detected with an On-Demand 35-gene panel inHereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome in Castilla y
León (Spain)
Mar Infante
1, Enrique Lastra2, Luis E. Abella3, Noemy Martínez1, Lara
Hernández1, Mercedes Durán1
1Cancer Genetics Group. Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular
(UVa-CSIC), VALLADOLID, Spain,2Unit of Genetic Counseling in
Cancer. Complejo Hospitalario de Burgos, Burgos, Spain,3Unit of
Genetic Counseling in Cancer. Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega,
VALLADOLID, Spain.
Introduction: BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the high-risk genes that are
traditionally screened for germline mutations in the context of
Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC). WithNext Generation Sequencing, detection of mutations in otherpredisposing genes using multigene panels is rapid and cost-
effective. Thus, we have designed an On-Demand gene panel,
including 35 genes associated with HBOC to improve our clinicaldiagnostic routine, especially in those families that gathers several
cancer types, which do not ﬁt into a speci ﬁc inherited cancer
syndrome.
Patients and Methods: 48 HBOC cancer Patients were
screened for mutations using the On-Demand Research Assay.
Library and template preparations were performed using the
automated Ion Chef System, then sequenced in Ion S5 with Ion520 Chip according to the manufacturer ’s instructions.
Results: After variant ﬁltering, 37 variants were described: 12
Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 6
different genes (5 in ATM ,2i n BRCA2 ,2i n TP53 and one for BRCA1 ,
FANCM and PALB2 , each). All but one, are actionable genes
according with Clinical guidelines. 25 Unclassi ﬁed Variants were
identi ﬁed. Two variants in ATM and FANCM are novel.
Conclusions: Our 35- genes Panel allowed us to detect clinically
actionable variants in a third of the families studied. They would
have gone overlooked if we only have screened BRCAs genes.
Moreover, the work ﬂow used increased the number of UV, but in
an affordable way to further research.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
398
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Funding: Regional Government of Castilla-and-Leon to the
University of Valladolid (Spain). Regional Health Management of
Castilla-and-Leon: GRS1547/A/17 and GRS175/A/18
M. Infante: None. E. Lastra: None. L.E. Abella: None. N.
Martínez: None. L. Hernández: None. M. Durán: None.
P12.093.A Molecular characterization of two new cell lines
derived from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, Juan Luis García2,3, Javier Fernández-
Mateos1,2,Sonia Carretero-Domínguez1,2,3, María Ovejero-Sán-
chez1,2,3, Pedro Blanco Pérez2,4, Luis Angel Corchete2,3, Ana Belén
Herrero1,2,3, Juan Jesús Cruz-Hernández1,2,5, Rogelio González-
Sarmiento1,2,3
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Biomedical Research Institute of
Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca-USAL-CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,
4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Hospital of Sala-
manca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain,5Medical Oncology Service, Uni-
versity Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain.
Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
includes epithelial malignancies of the oral cavity, pharynx andlarynx. Most of the HNSCC cell lines reported do not come from theprimary tumour site and its molecular characterization is not
available. The aim of this work was to characterize new cell lines that
c a nb eu s e da sm o d e l st os t u d yH N S C Cf r o md i f f e r e n tl o c a t i o n s .
Patients and methods: Two cell lines were newly established
from oropharyngeal (32816) and laryngeal (32860) squamous cell
carcinomas. Their characterization was done by karyotyping, FISH
analysis, array-based comparative genomic hybridization andmicroarray expression pro ﬁling.
Results: Karyotyping of the cells lines by G banding revealed a
moderate hyperploidy for both cell lines. Also, we identi ﬁed an
unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 3 and 12 in32816, con ﬁrmed by FISH. Loss of heterozygosity and copy
number variations were detected. Both cell lines share certain
alterations associated with HNSCC, but we also found smallregions speci ﬁcally altered for each line. The study of the
transcriptome showed 1313 genes with differential expression
between 32816 and 32860. According to p-value we selected the
most signi ﬁcantly dysregulated genes as candidates for study:
NEDD4L ,KLK6 ,GALNT14 and SPARC .
Conclusions: We established two new cell lines derived from
different HNSCC locations that are good models to study this typeof cancer. The characterization of the lines showed some commonalterations already described in HNSCC, as well as differences that
can be due to the location of the primary tumours.
This project was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI18/01476.N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J.L. García: None. J. Fernández-
Mateos: None. S. Carretero-Domínguez: None. M. Ovejero-
Sánchez: None. P. Blanco Pérez: None. L.A. Corchete: None. A.B.
Herrero: None. J.J. Cruz-Hernández: None. R. González-
Sarmiento: None.
P12.094.B Characterization of recurrent breakpoints in head
and neck cancer
Nerea Gestoso-Uzal
1,2,3, Juan Luis García2,3, Javier Fernández-
Mateos1,2, Luis Angel Corchete2,3, Sonia Carretero-Domínguez1,2,3,
Paula García-Vallés1,2,3, Abel Martel-Martel1,2, Edel Del Barco2,4, Ana
Belen Herrero1,2,3, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1,2,3, Juan Jesús Cruz-
Hernández1,2,41Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Biomedical Research Institute of
Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca-USAL-CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,
4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL,
Salamanca, Spain.
Background: Genome-wide somatic DNA copy number aberration
(CNA) pro ﬁling is a widely established a pproach to characterize
chromosomal aberrations in canc er genomes. Evidence is emerging
that structural chromosomal aberra tions represent a biologically and
clinically relevant class of alterat ions in many cancer types including
solid tumours. The aim of this work was to identify the CNA-
associated breakpoints in a larg e series of head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and corr elate them with clinical data.
Patients and methods : Tumour samples from 177 patients included
in the clinical trial TTCC-2007-01 w ere used. Tumours were analysed
by OncoScan ®assay and the computational method “GeneBreak ”
that identi ﬁes chromosomal breakpoint locations using DNA copy
number pro ﬁles. Statistical analysis was performed to associate the
genes showing recurrent breakpoints with clinical and molecular
data, considering statistically signi ﬁcant p < 0,05.
Results: We detected 10688 breakpoints associated with genes.
We selected 14 genes that were recurrently affected by breaks
(FDR < 0.1) and showed break points in at least 25% of cases.
Breakpoint in SHANK2 gene was associated with TP53 mutations.
Tumours located in hypopharynx and larynx were linked with
break in CSMD1 gene. Histologically non-keratinizing tumours
were associated with breaks in RGS7 and EMCN genes. Number of
focal changes was associated with SHANK2 break. Overall survival
(OS) was inversely correlated with the break in LRP1B gene.
Conclusion: We conclude that CNA-associated chromosomal
breaks within genes represent a highly prevalent and clinicallyrelevant subset of somatic variants (SVs) in HNSCC.
This project was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI18/01476.
N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J.L. García: None. J. Fernández-
Mateos: None. L.A. Corchete: None. S. Carretero-Domínguez:
None. P. García-Vallés: None. A. Martel-Martel: None. E. Del
Barco: None. A.B. Herrero: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
J.J. Cruz-Hernández: None.
P12.095.C Combinatorial effect of sorafenib, valproic acid and
metformin in a hepatic cancer cells model
Edgar X. Franco-Juárez1, Alain Jesús Aguirre-Vázquez1, Vianey
Gonzalez-Villasana2, Mario Bermúdez-de León1
1Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, Mexico,2Universi-
dad Autonoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico.
Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma is the main type of
hepatic cancer, which has the sixth and fourth place in incidenceand mortality worldwide, respectively. Chemotherapeutic scheme
of treatment extends the overall survival in three months.
Moreover, latest research with drugs used in diseases other thancancer, like the histone deacetylases inhibitors or rapalogues, havebeen described with in vitro anticancer properties. These drugs
have shown synergistic effects towards apoptosis induction and
inhibition of angiogenesis, migration and proliferation in combi-nation with the approved chemotherapeutic drug, sorafenib. In
this study we evaluated the viability, migration and angiogenic
potential using different combinations of sorafenib, valproic acid(VPA) and metformina in hepatic cancer model.
Materials and Methods: HepG2 cells were treated with
different concentrations and combinations of sorafenib, VPA andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
399
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608metformin for 48 h to evaluate viability with alamar blue assay,
migration with a wound healing assays, and angiogenic potential
by RT-qPCR assays with Taqman probes spanning on VEGF-A and
GAPDH genes.
Results: Treatment with sorafenib, VPA or metformin shown
viability reduction in a dose-dependent fashion and the combina-
tion of 2 μM sorafenib, 4 mM VPA and 10 mM metformin showed
strongest synergistic effect in the viability reduction. Thisconcentration also reduced migration but not VEGF-A gene
expression compared to control.
Conclusion: Combination of sorafenib, VPA and metformin has
synergistic effects towards reduction of viability and migrationpotential, in contrast with angiogenic potential, where levels ofVEGF-A transcript remain with no changes.
E.X. Franco-Juárez: None. A.J. Aguirre-Vázquez: None. V.
Gonzalez-Villasana: None. M. Bermúdez-de León: None.
P12.096.D Multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer syndrome: experience from a tertiary referralhospital
Miriam Potrony
1,2, Blai Morales-Romero1, Lorena Moreno3, Belen
Pastor4, Jose L. Villanueva-Cañas5, Celia Badenas1,2, Isabel Aragón
Manrique6, Pilar Carrasco Salas7, Paula Aguilera8,2, Laura Ferrer-
Mileo4, Lydia Gaba4, Barbara Adamo4, Josep Oriola1, Aurora
Sánchez1, Joan A. Puig-Butillé5,2
1Biochemical and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain,2Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud CarlosIII, Barcelona, Spain,3Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Clínic
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,4Medical Oncology Department,
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,5Molecular Biology
CORE, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6Genetic
Counseling Unit, Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Juan
Ramón Jiménez, Huelva, Spain,7Genetic Unit, Clinical Analysis
Department, Hospital Juan Ramón Jiménez, Huelva, Spain,8Derma-
tology Department, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona,Spain.
Introduction : The implementation of next-generation sequencing
in the clinical setting has increased the diagnostic yield ofHereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC). We
aimed to assess the spectrum of germline pathogenic variants in
cancer susceptibility genes among Spanish patients selected forpersonal and/or family history of breast, ovarian, prostate,
melanoma, and other BRCA -associated cancers.
Materials and Methods : The study cohort comprised 1381
Spanish patients referred to Hospital Clinic of Barcelona forgenetic testing. The HBOC genes BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, ATM,
CHEK2, BRIP1, RAD51C, RAD51D, TP53 , and PTEN , and the Lynch
Syndrome genes MLH1, MSH2 , and MSH6 were analyzed by
commercial Hereditary Cancer Panels (Illumina) and an in-house
bioinformatics pipeline.
Results : We detected that 9% and 3% of patients carried
pathogenic variants in high-risk and moderate-risk genes,respectively. Three patients carried pathogenic variants in LynchSyndrome genes and four patients carried pathogenic variants in
two genes. Pathogenic variants prevalence was 12% in breast/
ovarian cancer patients, 15% in prostate cancer, 10% inmelanoma, and 6.6% in healthy individuals with a family history
ofBRCA -associated cancers. Individuals with two different HBOC
tumors (OR =6.29, p < 0.001) or family history of ovarian cancer
(OR=2.08, p =0.009) were more likely to carry deleterious
variants in high-risk genes.Conclusions : In our clinical setting, the diagnostic yield of
HBOC by multigene panel testing was 12%. This multigene testing
strategy allows the identi ﬁcation of individuals carrying multiple
pathogenic variants and the diagnosis of multiple hereditarycancer syndromes, resulting in a direct bene ﬁt for the families.
M. Potrony: None. B. Morales-Romero: None. L. Moreno:
None. B. Pastor: None. J.L. Villanueva-Cañas: None. C. Badenas:
None. I. Aragón Manrique: None. P. Carrasco Salas: None. P.
Aguilera: None. L. Ferrer-Mileo: None. L. Gaba: None. B. Adamo:
None. J. Oriola: None. A. Sánchez: None. J.A. Puig-Butillé: None.
P12.097.A Unravelling genetic predisposition to familial
breast and ovarian cancer: identi ﬁcation of new susceptibility
genes by case-control study
Alejandro Moles-Fernández
1, Ester Aguado-Flor1, Cristina Zamar-
reño1, María Antolín2, Sandra Bonache1, Adrià López-Fernández1,
Lídia Feliubadaló3,4, José Fernández-Navarro1, Conxi Lázaro3,4, Judith
Balmaña1, Orland Díez1,2, Sara Gutiérrez-Enríquez1
1Vall d ’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain,2Vall
d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain,3Catalan Institute of
Oncology (ICO), Institut d ’Investigació Biomédica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL),
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain,4Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain.
Multiple high- and moderate-risk g enes for breast and ovarian cancer
have been identi ﬁed. However, a high percentage of affected patients
and families still remain genetically undiagnosed. Although different
candidate genes have been identi ﬁed, the evidence for association
with the disease is still insuf ﬁcient and the missing heritability remains
unexplained. Our goal was to identify and validate candidate genes
for hereditary breast and ovarian c ancer (HBOC) using a case-control
study approach. The exomes of 25 patients from 13 high-risk HBOCfamilies as well as 63 candidate genes of 192 HBOC patients without
pathogenic variants identi ﬁed were sequenced. After variant annota-
tion, we selected genes in which deleterious variants were identi ﬁed
according to their function and the segregation of the variant inaffected relatives. RRBP8 ,TPMT ,MACROD1 ,DMC1 ,RALGDS ,a n d TDP2
were identi ﬁed as candidate genes for analysis in a case-control study.
EDC4 and RECQL5 genes were included from collaborators ’publica-
tions. DNA samples were collected from 500 healthy women and1500 patients with HBOC without det ected pathogenic variants in risk
genes. To date, after massively amplicon sequencing, annotation and
interpretation, a higher frequency o f deleterious variants is observed
inRECQL5 i n2 5 0p a t i e n t sc o m p a r e dt o5 0c o n t r o l sa n dg n o m A d
database. These ﬁrst results suggest RECQL5 as a potential risk gene
associated with HBOC, and the need to increase case-controls cohorts
to verify this association. Funding: Carlos III Institute funded by FEDER-
a way to build Europe- [PI16/01218-PI19/01303;PI19/00553;PI16/
00563 and CIBERONC]; AECC; ERAPERMED2019-215 support and
Government of Catalonia [2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496].
A. Moles-Fernández: None. E. Aguado-Flor: None. C. Zamar-
reño: None. M. Antolín: None. S. Bonache: None. A. López-
Fernández: None. L. Feliubadaló: None. J. Fernández-Navarro:
None. C. Lázaro: None. J. Balmaña: None. O. Díez: None. S.
Gutiérrez-Enríquez: None.
P12.098.B Massively parallel functional analysis of missense
variants in the breast/ovarian cancer gene RAD51C
Gemma Montalban , Larissa Milano, Amélie Rodrigue, Yan Cou-
lombe, Sylvie Desjardins, Martine Dumont, Charles Joly-Beauparlant,Penny Soucy, Jean-Yves Masson, Jacques SimardAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
400
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608CHU de Québec - Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
Introduction : A notable proportion of hereditary breast/ovarian
cancer cases are due to inherited pathogenic mutations in DNArepair genes. The application of multi-gene panels for genetictesting has led to an increased detection of variants of unknown
clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS). Our work aims to implement a
massively parallel functional approach to study the molecularimpact of all possible missense substitutions in the RAD51C gene.
Materials and Methods :ARAD51C mutagenesis library was
designed and cloned into an inducible, recombinase-site contain-
ing vector. In parallel, HeLa “landing pad ”cells were generated,
ensuring the recombination of one variant per cell. A subset of thelibrary was integrated and cells were treated with PARP inhibitors.
Genomic DNA from pre-treated and post-treated samples was
collected and sequenced in a MiSeq instrument.
Results : To date, ~160 RAD51C missense variants have been
screened. All variants were detected in the pre-treated pool at a
similar abundance, con ﬁrming their optimal integration and expres-
sion. Variant read counts were redu ced for the positive controls after
treatment, con ﬁrming the synthetic lethal effect of olaparib when
RAD51C is not functional. Experimental replicates and calculation of
loss-of-function scores using other DNA damaging agents is ongoing.
Conclusions : We have developed a large-scale functional
approach to measure the impact of all missense variants in the
RAD51C gene using PARP inhibitors sensitivity as a readout. Future
work will focus on validating our data with published works,clinical databases and complementary assays. The ﬁnal goal is to
improve the interpretation of RAD51C VUS and accelerate their
clinical translation.
G. Montalban: None. L. Milano: None. A. Rodrigue: None. Y.
Coulombe: None. S. Desjardins: None. M. Dumont: None. C.
Joly-Beauparlant: None. P. Soucy: None. J. Masson: None. J.
Simard: None.
P12.099.C Hereditary Cancer Predisposition Testing in
Luxembourg
Karin Segers
1,2, Marizela Kulisic1, Ben Flies1, Christian Müller1,
Philippe Theis1, Karin Dahan1, Barbara Klink1, Daniel Stieber1
1National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire National de Santé
(LNS), Dudelange, Luxembourg,2Human Genetics Department CHU
Sart Tilman, Liège, Belgium.
At our center, we provide oncogenetic consultations and
molecular genetic testing for hereditary tumor diseases for whole
Luxembourg. Here we report on the outcome of one year
hereditary cancer predisposition testing using the HereditaryCancer Solution developed by So ﬁa Genetics, an NGS-based
capture panel optimized for the detection of SNVs, InDels, and
CNVs in 26 genes. In 2020, we analyzed blood samples of
altogether 276 patients. We identi ﬁed pathogenic germline
variants in 32 of 276 samples (positivity rate of 11.6%). Of those,74.5% were identi ﬁed in patients with a referral for suspicion of
Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer syndrome (HBOC). Fifty
percent of pathogenic variants affected the BRCA1 and BRCA2genes. The majority of non-BRCA variants were found in ATM andin MMR genes. The following cancer types had the highest
positivity rates: triple negative breast cancer (23.3%), ovarian
cancer (26.5%), and prostate cancer (40%). As expected, patientswith triple negative breast cancer and ovarian cancer had
pathogenic variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and RAD51. Interest-
ingly, we identi ﬁed a pathogenic germline variant in four of eleven
patients with a personal history of prostate cancer. The affectedgenes -- PALB2, ATM, MSH2 and PMS2 -- are not known to be high
prostate cancer risk genes. Distribution of affected genes and thepositivity rate of 11.6% that we found in our cohort are in line with
observations from the literature.
K. Segers: None. M. Kulisic: None. B. Flies: None. C. Müller:
None. P. Theis: None. K. Dahan: None. B. Klink: None. D. Stieber:
None.
P12.100.D Variant and gene prioritization strategy to identify
new hereditary colorectal cancer genes by NGS
Mariona Terradas , Isabel Quintana, Noemí González-Abuín, Pilar
Mur, Matilde Navarro, Joan Brunet, Gabriel Capellá, Laura Valle
Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell
Program, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
Introduction: In the past two decades, multiple studies have been
undertaken to elucidate the genetic cause of the predisposition to
mismatch repair (MMR)-pro ﬁcient nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
(CRC); ﬁrst by genome-wide linkage analysis and, nowadays, using
next-generation sequencing techniques. Nevertheless, a relevantproportion of familial CRC cases remain unexplained. Here we
propose a fast and focused variant selection strategy to facilitate
the identi ﬁcation of MMR-pro ﬁcient nonpolyposis CRC predispos-
ing genes.
Material and methods: Peripheral blood DNA from 25
individuals belonging to 16 families affected with MMR-proﬁcient nonpolyposis CRC was used to perform WES. After
variant calling with GATK, rare (population MAF < 0.1%), predicted
pathogenic variants in genes involved in pathways or processes
relevant in colorectal carcinogenesis and hereditary cancer,including DNA Repair, Wnt and TGF-beta pathways (n =2957
genes), were selected. Gene prioritization was then performed
considering data from CanVar (data from ̴1000 familial/early-onset
CRC patients), IntOGen (information on cancer driver genes), GTEx(gene expression), OMIM and Pubmed.
Results: Based on the ﬁltering and variant prioritization
strategies mentioned above, 24 candidate CRC-predisposinggenes were selected. Validation in further >1000 unrelatedfamilial/early-onset and sporadic CRC patients is currently being
performed and ﬁnal results will be presented at the meeting.
Conclusions: The variant prioritization strategy followed facilitated
the identi ﬁcation of variants in relevant genes, being particularly
useful in cases where only one (or two) affected member(s) is (are)
sequenced; thus showing a higher performance than processes
applied in the past to similar studies.
Grants: SAF2016-80888-R; CB16/12/00234; Sara Borrell; PERIS
SLT002/16/0037; SLT002/16/00164; Fundación Olga Torres;
INVES19022TERR; MSCA.
M. Terradas: None. I. Quintana: None. N. González-Abuín:
None. P. Mur: None. M. Navarro: None. J. Brunet: None. G.
Capellá: None. L. Valle: None.
P12.101.A Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carci-
noma:identi ﬁcation and characterization of a new Spanish
founder mutation in the FHgene
Estela Dámaso1, Ana Beatriz Sánchez Heras1, Yoel Esteve1, Virginia Díez
Obrero2, María-Isabel Castillejo1, Adela Castillejo1,J o s e - L u i sS o t o1
1Hospital General Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain,2Institut d`Inves-
tigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.
Hereditary-leiomyomatosis-renal-cell-carcinoma (HLRCC) syn-
drome is a rare autosomal dominant disease caused by germlineAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
401
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608mutations in the fumarate hydratase (FH) gene. A highly recurrent
HLRCC-associated missense variant [ FH:c.1118A>G; p.(Asn373Ser)]
was observed in apparently unrelated families from the southeast
of Spain. Our goal was to establish the founder effect of thisalteration and characterized its associated clinical phenotype.
Materials-Methods: Haplotype construction was performed
using 37 ﬂanking FHpolymorphic markers covering ≈14 Mb.
Twenty unrelated carriers were selected for genotyping. Clinicaldata from a recently published large Spanish cohort of HLRCC(PMID_33167498) was used to assess the clinical phenotype of this
founder mutation and to look for genotype-phenotype associa-
tions, including 104 individuals with this mutation and 93individuals carrying other FHpathogenic variants.
Results: Haplotype analysis con ﬁrmed that families shared a
common haplotype (25/37 markers) between 0.61-0.82 Mb ( ≈1.40-
1.89 cM). These results stro ngly suggest that recurrent FH:c.1118A>G
variant observed in apparently unrelated individuals was indeed
inherited from a founder ancesto r. Patients carrying the founder
mutation were diagnosed of cutaneous leiomyomas (CLM) 65%,uterine leiomyomas (ULM) 98%, renal cysts (RCy) 42% and renalcancer (RC) 10%. In addition, we found higher frequencies of CLMs,
ULMs and RCys, than those with loss-of-function variants ( p<0 . 0 0 5 ) .
Conclusions: Identi ﬁcation and characterization of founder
mutations provide accurate and speci ﬁc information regarding their
penetrance and expressivity. Individuals carrying FH: c.1118A>G
variant had lower frequency of RC than previously published in
HLRCC, and higher frequencies of CLMs, ULMs and RCys whencompared to HLRCC-individuals with loss-of-function variants.
Funding: UGP-19-428 (SEOM).
E. Dámaso: None. A. Sánchez Heras: None. Y. Esteve: None. V.
Díez Obrero: None. M. Castillejo: None. A. Castillejo: None. J.
Soto: None.
P12.102.B Gene panel tumor testing in ovarian cancer
patients signi ﬁcantly increases the yield of clinically action-
able germline variants beyond BRCA1/BRCA2
Ana Barbosa
1, Pedro Pinto1, Ana Peixoto1, Joana Guerra1, Carla
Pinto1, Catarina Santos1, Manuela Pinheiro1, Carla Escudeiro1, Carla
Bartosch1, João Silva1, Manuel R. Teixeira1,2
1Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-Porto), Porto, Portugal,
2Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of
Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: Since the approval of PARP inhibitors for the
treatment of high-grade serous ovarian cancer that BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genetic testing have therapeutic implications (germline
and somatic variants) in addition to cancer risk assessment andshould be offered to these patients at diagnosis irrespective offamily history. However, variants in other genes besides BRCA1
and BRCA2 are associated with ovarian cancer predisposition,
which would be missed by a genetic testing aimed only atindication for PARP inhibitor treatment. In this study, we aimed toevaluate the yield of clinically actionable germline variants using
next-generation sequencing customized panel.
Material and methods: Next generation sequencing was
performed in formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn-embedded tumor samples
obtained from 96 patients diagnosed with ovarian cancer using a
customized panel containing ten genes ( BRCA1 ,BRCA2 ,BRIP1 ,
MLH1 ,MSH2 ,MSH6 ,PMS2, RAD51C ,RAD51D and TP53 ).
Results: In addition to 13.7% of deleterious germline BRCA1 /
BRCA2 carriers, we identi ﬁed 7.4% additional patients with
pathogenic germline variants in other genes predisposing forovarian cancer, namely RAD51C ,RAD51D and MSH6 , representing
35% of all pathogenic germline variants.Conclusions: The strategy of re ﬂex gene-panel tumor testing
enables the identi ﬁcation of clinically actionable germline variants
in a signi ﬁcantly higher proportion of ovarian cancer patients,
which may be a valuable information in patients with advanceddisease that have run out of approved therapeutic options.Furthermore, this approach increases the chance to make
available genetic counseling, presymptomatic genetic testing,
and gynecological cancer prophylaxis to female relatives who turnout to be healthy carriers of deleterious germline variants.
A. Barbosa: None. P. Pinto: None. A. Peixoto: None. J. Guerra:
None. C. Pinto: None. C. Santos: None. M. Pinheiro: None. C.
Escudeiro: None. C. Bartosch: None. J. Silva: None. M. R.
Teixeira: None.
P12.103.C Genetic causes of sarcomas development in young
patients
Nathalia de Angelis de Carvalho , Karina Miranda Santiago, Joyce
Maria Lisboa Maia, Maria Nirvana da Cruz Formiga, Diogo Cordeiro
de Queiroz Soares, Daniele Paixão Pereira, Felipe D ’Almeida Costa,
Dirce Maria Carraro, Giovana Tardin Torrezan
AC Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Introduction: Although genetic screening of cancer predisposing
genes (CPGs) is currently well established for the most commonhereditary tumors, there are a number of rare tumors, includingsarcomas, which may be associated with hereditary cancer
syndromes but whose pathogenic variants frequencies in these
genes are still unknown. Aims: De ﬁne the frequency of pathogenic
rare germline variants in known CPGs in young patients (<40years) with sarcomas; evaluate the molecular characteristics of
these tumors and search for new associated genes.
Methods: We evaluated 156 young patients diagnosed with
sarcoma for the presence of germline variants using a custom 113
gene panel and Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). Analyzes of
protein expression and evaluation of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)in tumor tissue are being performed in cases with pathogenicvariants.
Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants were
detected in 31/156 patients (19.8%). These P/LP variants werefound in genes previously associated with the risk of developingsarcomas ( CHEK2, EXT1, EXT2, RB1 and TP53 ), but also in genes
where that risk is still unknown ( ERCC2/3, TSC2, RAD50, FANCM and
others) or is emerging ( PALB2, BRCA2 ). LOH was evaluated in 8
tumors so far: two presented LOH for variants in EXT1 and MITF
and 6 showed no evidence of LOH for variants in ERCC4, RB1, NF1,
PALB2, CHEK2 and MUTYH .
Conclusion: Our results highlight a high rate of P/LP variants in
CPGs in young Brazilian patients with sarcomas (19.8%) and we
expect to collaborate with the de ﬁnition of effective and adequate
screening strategies for these patients.
FAPESP:2018/06269-5N.A. de Carvalho: None. K.M. Santiago: None. J.M.L. Maia:
None. M.N.C. Formiga: None. D.C.Q. Soares: None. D.P. Pereira:
None. F.D. Costa: None. D.M. Carraro: None. G.T. Torrezan:
None.
P12.104.D Global-screening array for the assessment of
homologous recombination de ﬁciency (HRD) in epithelial
ovarian cancer
Simon Schnaiter
1, Esther Schamschula1, Heidelinde Fiegl2, Daniel
Reimer2, Alain Zeimet2, Johannes Zschocke1, Katharina Wimmer1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
402
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Institut für Humangenetik, Med. Univ. Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,
2Department für Gynäkologie und Geburtshilfe, Med. Univ. Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.
Introduction: Homologous recombination de ﬁciency (HRD),
caused in 40-50% of cases by BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants
(PVs), is a predictive biomarker for the response of different
tumors to PARP-inhibitor therapy and, in epithelial ovarian cancer(EOC), also considered predictive for sensitivity of platinum-basedtherapies. Currently, HRD-positivity is mainly assessed by a
commercial diagnostic tests with limited transparency of the
underlying algorithms.
Methods: To determine HRD positivity we examined genome-
wide copy number variation and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) by
genotyping 62 ovarian cancers, 22 of which contained a BRCA1/2
PV, using the Global Screening Array (GSA-24 v3.0 +Multi-Disease
Content; Illumina). Data analysis was performed with Illumina
GenomeStudio 1.6.3 (Genotyping Analysis Module) and NxClinical
(Biodiscovery, SNP-FASST2-Segmentation Algorithmus) software.For quanti ﬁcation of HRD a LOH-score based on Swisher et al
(2017; PMID: 27908594) and an Aneuploidy Normalized Telomeric
Imbalance-Score (ANTI-Score, unpublished) were de ﬁned.
Results/Conclusion: The group of BRCA1/2-PV samples had
signi ﬁcantly higher median scores than BRCA1/2-wildtype samples
(LOH-score: 28 vs. 3.6; ANTI-score: 11 vs. 1.5). LOH-score and ANTI-
scores were concordant (R2 =0.89). Based on the lowest scores
determined in the BRCA1/2-PV samples, we de ﬁned the threshold
for HRD-positivity as LOH-score ≥14 and/or ANTI-score ≥6. 8/40
BRCA1/2-wildtype samples had scores above the thresholds and
32 below. To determine whether the formers are true HRDpositives we are currently testing these samples for other (epi-)genetic aberrations explaining their potential HRD-positivity.
Rapid and reliable HRD analysis is possible with a standard
genotyping array on DNA from native tumor tissue. We currentlyevaluate DNA extracted from FFPE-tissue.
S. Schnaiter: None. E. Schamschula: None. H. Fiegl: None. D.
Reimer: None. A. Zeimet: None. J. Zschocke: None. K. Wimmer:
None.
P12.105.A Sequential somatic HRAS mutation and gene
duplication in a patient with epidermal nevus and rhabdo-myosarcoma: further evidence of a two-hit pathogenetic
mechanism contributing to oncogenic transformation
Roberta Zuntini
1, Lucia Pedace2, Evelina Miele2, Stefano Giuseppe
Caraf ﬁ1, Stefano Gardini3, Elena Ficarelli3, Riccardo Pampena3,
Simone Pizzi4, Francesca Clementina Radio4, Angelica Barone5,
Simonetta Piana6, Patrizia Bertolini5, Domenico Corradi7, Maria
Marinelli1, Alberico Motolese3, Marco Tartaglia4,8, Livia Garavelli1,8
1Medical Genetics Unit, AUSL IRCCS Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova,
Reggio Emilia, Italy,2Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
and Cellular and Gene Therapy, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,IRCCS, Roma, Italy,3Dermatology Unit, Azienda USL, IRCCS, Arcispe-
dale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy,4Genetics and Rare
Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,IRCCS, Roma, Italy,5Pediatric Hematology Oncology Unit, University
Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy,6Pathology Unit, Deptartment of
Oncology and Advanced Technologies, Arcispedale S Maria Nuova-
IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy,7Unit of Pathology, Department of
Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy,8, These
authors jointly coordinated this work, Italy.
We report a 7 year-old child with diffuse epidermal nevi on the face
and head, right upper limb, thorax, left lower limb, arrangedaccording to Blascko ’s lines, who developed a left paratesticular
embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma at 18 months of age. We used NGS
custom panel approach to scan th e lesions-associated genomic
events using blood, buccal brush, ﬁbroblast and rhabdomyosarcoma
tissue samples. Parallel sequencing analysis identi ﬁed a somatic
pathogenic gain-of-function vari ant (c.37G>C, p.Gly13Arg) in the
HRAS gene in both epidermal nevus an d tumor tissues. Variant reads
accounted for 33% and 92% of total reads in the nevus and tumor,respectively, supporting the occurrence of a second event involvingthe gene speci ﬁcally arising in the latter. The variant was absent in
the DNA extracted from the proband ’s peripheral blood and buccal
brush, indicating its postzygot ic origin. DNA methylation pro ﬁling
microarray analysis was performed on the proband ’s tumor sample,
providing a pro ﬁle that was consistent with the signature
characterizing embryonic rhabdomyosarcomas. The analysis also
documented a copy number gain of Chromosome 11, pointing out astructural genomic rearrangement re sulting in the duplication of the
mutated HRAS allele as a second hit in the tumor. Somatic activating
mutations of the HRAS gene are associated with various neoplasms.
Ourﬁndings are in line with previously collected data documenting
the occurrence of gene dosage events involving activating HRAS
alleles in cancers occurring in patients with Costello syndrome. This
diagnosis will permit adoption of screening measures in the patientto detect malignant transformation at early stages.
R. Zuntini: None. L. Pedace: None. E. Miele: None. S.G. Caraf ﬁ:
None. S. Gardini: None. E. Ficarelli: None. R. Pampena: None. S.
Pizzi: None. F. Radio: None. A. Barone: None. S. Piana: None. P.
Bertolini: None. D. Corradi: None. M. Marinelli: None. A.
Motolese: None. M. Tartaglia: None. L. Garavelli: None.
P12.106.C Germline Wnt pathway alterations predispose to
colorectal hyperplastic polyposis
Isabel Quintana
1, Mariona Terradas1, Pilar Mur1,2, Gemma Aiza1,
Matilde Navarro1,2, Virginia Piñol3, Joan Brunet1,2,4, Gabriel
Capellá1,2, Laura Valle1,2
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell
Program, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,2Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid,
Spain,3Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital Universitario de Girona Dr
Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain,4Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGi,
Girona, Spain.
Extensive efforts have been made to elucidate the inherited
factors that predispose to serrated/hyperplastic polyposis (SP), a
heterogeneous disease associated with a signi ﬁcant personal and
familial CRC risk. Germline RNF43 pathogenic variants have been
causally linked to the disease, explaining <2% of SP cases. Weaimed to identify additional inherited risk factors by performing
exome sequencing in 44 non-related SP cases followed by a
pathway-centered analysis. We selected rare, predicted damagingvariants affecting genes involved in pathways or processesrelevant in colorectal carcinogenesis and hereditary cancer,
including DNA repair, TGF- βand Wnt pathways. Mutational
burden analysis comparing the frequency of predicted pathogenicvariants in cases vs. controls (gnomAD, non-Finnish Europeans)identi ﬁed signi ﬁcant differences in Wnt pathway components:
allele frequency in cases was 50% (44/88), compared to 36%
(42,649/118,190) in controls (p =0.007). Differences were not
observed when analyzing DNA repair and TGF- βpathway
components. Focused on the genes involved in Wnt signaling,
we identi ﬁed 44 rare, predicted damaging variants in 34 Wnt-
related genes. Of the 34 genes, 11 harbored signi ﬁcantly more
predicted damaging variants in SP cases than in controls:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
403
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608CCDC88C, DKK1, DKK4, HECW1, ITPR3, PSMB3, PSMC3, PSME4,
RNF43, TLE4 and WNT9B . Analysis of the 11 candidate SP genes is
currently being performed in further ̴100 SP patients, ̴100
adenomatous polyposis patients and ̴1000 familial/early-onset
CRC patients, with the aim of validating our ﬁndings in an
independent SP series and con ﬁrming that the enrichment of
Wnt-related variants is exclusive of SP or, at most, of polyposis
phenotypes.
I. Quintana: None. M. Terradas: None. P. Mur: None. G. Aiza:
None. M. Navarro: None. V. Piñol: None. J. Brunet: None. G.
Capellá: None. L. Valle: None.
P12.109.A microRNA pro ﬁle in Bulgarian laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma
Gergana Stancheva1, Silva Kyurkchiyan1, Veronika Petkova1, Julian
Rangachev2, Vanyo Mitev1, Diana Popova2, Radka Kaneva1, Todor
Popov2
1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Chemistry and Biochem-
istry, MU-So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2Department of Ear- Nose and Throat,
MU-So ﬁa; Clinic of Ear- Nose and Throat, UMHAT "Tsarica Yoanna-
ISUL", So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is an
aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis, which despitemodern treatment protocols, novel molecular markers arerequired to improve survival. The aim of our study was to reveal
the speci ﬁc miRNAs signature in advanced LSCC as well as to
investigate some of discovered hypoxic miRNAs in a validationgroup of samples. Material and method: Expression of 2549 miRNA
in fresh-frozen tumour materials and adjacent normal tissue was
performed in 12 patients, diagnosed with advanced LSCC during
primary laryngectomy, by SurePrint G3 Human MiRNA r21Microarray Kit, 8 × 60K(Agilent Technologies). The normalization
of the data was performed by GeneSpringGX software. The
expression of miR-21-3p and miR-210-3p was evaluated in a groupof 38 fresh frozen laryngeal tumor samples and adjacent normaltissue by qRT-PCR analysis. Statistical analysis was performed
using SPSS 17.0.
Results and discussion: Expression levels of 2549 miRNA were
assessed, 242 of those were signi ﬁcantly dysregulated (cut-off>2.0
(FC);BH-FDR < 0.05). After the analysis, a subset of 14 miRNAs was
selected -8 upregulated (miR-18a-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-181b-5p,
miR-21-3p, miR-24-3p, miR-93-5p, miR-210-3p, miR-1246) and 6downregulated (miR-140a-3p, miR-145-5p, miR-148a-5p, miR-204-
5p, miR-497, miR-874-3p). miR-21-3p and miR-210-3p revealed to
be an important and related to pathways of tumour angiogenesisand hypoxia so they were investigated in a validation group ofpatients. It was con ﬁrmed increased expression levels of miR-21-
3p and miR-210-3p, respectively 78.94% and 39.47%. The ROC
curve analysis showed that miR-21-3p can distinguish laryngealtumor from normal tissue (AUC =0.816; 95% CI:0.720-0.917;p =
1.76.10
-6) with sensitivity of 84.2% and speci ﬁcity of 73.7%
whereas miR-210-3p did not. Acknowledgements: Grants:13/12/
20.12.2017/NSF;D01-285/17.12.2019/MES/Bulgaria.
G. Stancheva: None. S. Kyurkchiyan: None. V. Petkova: None.
J. Rangachev: None. V. Mitev: None. D. Popova: None. R.
Kaneva: None. T. Popov: None.
P12.110.B Prognostic evidence of LEF1 isoforms in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemiaYucel Erbilgin1, Ozden Hatirnaz Ng2, Sinem Firtina3, Fulya
Kucukcankurt1, Zeynep Karaka ş4, Tiraje Celkan5, Sema Aylan Gelen6,
Khusan Khodzhaev1, Müge Sayitoglu1
1Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey,2Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, Istanbul,
Turkey,3Istinye University, Faculty of Art and Science, Istanbul,
Turkey,4Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey,5Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul,
Turkey,6Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
Introduction: The lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF1) is a DNA-
binding transcription factor that functions in the Wnt signalingpathway. Increased LEF1 activity is associated with progression of
several types of cancer including leukemia. Here, we investigated
LEF1 isoforms expression and genomic variations in acutelymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Methods: LEF1 isoforms expression was evaluated by quanti-
tative real-time PCR in 87 newly diagnosed childhood ALL patients
and controls. Moreover, Western blot analysis was performed fordetection of LEF1 expression and the hotspot region of LEF1 wasscreened by deep sequencing.
Results: The LEF1 mRNA expression of B-cell ALL patients was
higher than the controls (LEF1-totalp =0.011, LEF1-long p =
0.026). Moreover, B-ALL samples showing higher total LEF1
expression had signi ﬁcantly shorter relapse-free survival (p =
0.008) and overall survival (p =0.011). Although, full length LEF1
expression was similar to the controls in T-ALL, 50% (n =15) of the
ALL patients had increased full-length LEF1 protein expression.
Imbalance between short and full-length LEF1 isoforms may lead
to cell survival in ALL. Beside the LEF1 activation, LEF1 genevariations were rarely observed in our cohort.
Conclusion: The results indicate that the Wnt pathway may
have a pathogenic function in a group of ALL patients and high
LEF1-total expression might be a marker for shorter relapse freesurvival time in B-cell ALL.
Y. Erbilgin: None. O. Hatirnaz Ng: None. S. Firtina: None. F.
Kucukcankurt: None. Z. Karaka ş:None. T. Celkan: None. S.
Aylan Gelen: None. K. Khodzhaev: None. M. Sayitoglu: None.
P12.111.C Implementation of an integral strategy for perso-
nalized medicine based on Duplex Sequencing and cell-freeDNA
Pau Rodriguez-Sodupe
1, Karolina Henryka Czarnecka1, Luis Alberto
Pérez-Jurado2, Lluis Armengol Dulcet1, Jairo Rodriguez Lumbiarres1
1qGenomics, Esplugues del Llobregat, Spain,2Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Ultrasensitive and speci ﬁc methods for rare allele detection are
essential in order to fully exploit the potential of identifying a
single genetic variant that might be poorly represented in abiological mixture (liquid biopsy, for instance). In this context,
several methods have been described that use unique molecular
identi ﬁers (UMIs) to analytically remove NGS errors. Among them,
Duplex Sequencing (DS) has been shown to be highly-effective byleveraging the sequence complementarity of the two DNA
strands. Nevertheless, the described DS adaptors ’production
methodology leads to a low ligation ef ﬁciency, which hinders their
capability to work with limited amounts of input DNA such as cell-free DNA (cfDNA) samples. Moreover, DS needs a much higher
sequencing depth and is a costly approach together with large
panels.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
404
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Here, we have devised an ef ﬁcient and cost-effective approach
to produce DS adapters with a double-stranded 12 bp UMI that
can be used with cfDNA inputs as low as 2 ng. This, together with
the capacity to ef ﬁciently produce mixtures of enrichment probes
that are able to deliver very high on-target metrics, are key to anypersonalized medicine strategy. Within the pediatric oncology
context, promising preliminary results demonstrate that we can
detect circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) at frequencies down to onein one thousand with extreme accuracy.
In summary, we are laying the foundations for a robust
personalized medicine solution that will allow an extremely
accurate detection of ultra rare mutations by using small custompanels that may be strictly personalized in different clinicalsettings.
P. Rodriguez-Sodupe: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. K. Czarnecka: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. L. Pérez-Jurado: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; qGenomics. L. Armengol Dulcet:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. J.
Rodriguez Lumbiarres: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics.
P12.112.B combinatorial interactions of curcumin and sily-
marin against proliferation of human liver and colon cancer
cells (in-silico and in-vitro study)
Ahmed Mamdouh Osman
1, Samah Aly Loutfy1,2, Habeba S. Hosny3,
Lina SM Fouda3, Mahmoud ER AbdelRaouf3, Amr M. Ageez4, Sophia
Kchouk5, Lamees Hegazy5
1National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt,2Nano-
technology Research Center (NTRC), British University in Egypt (BUE),
Cairo, Egypt,3Faculty of Biotechnology, Modern Science and Arts
(MSA) University, 6th of October city., Cairo, Egypt,4Faculty of
Biotechnology, Modern Science and Arts (MSA) University, 6th of
October city, Cairo, Egypt,5Center for Clinical Pharmacology,
Washington University School of Medicine and St. Louis College ofPharmacy, St. Louis, MO, MO, USA.
Background/Aim: Newer approaches are required to control
human cancers, natural materials derived from plants offertremendous advantages. Curcumin puri ﬁed form of turmeric herb
and silymarin which derived from Silybum marianum demon-
strated anticancer activities. The synergistic effect of both
phytochemicals has been reported against proliferation of somehuman cancers, therefore, we aimed at evaluating the cytotoxic
effect of both materials separately and when mixed to obtain the
maximum synergistic effect.
Methods: IC50s for curcumin, silymarin were determined on
human liver cancer (huh7) and on human colon cancer cells
(HCT116) compared to normal cells (Vero), and when mixed
together using MTT. Nature of the relationship was determined byCompuSyn software. Sensitization of cells was performed todetermine which one exerted its cytotoxic effect. Molecular
docking for materials in BCL2 and EGFR was performed using
the Glide package within Schrodinger ’s Maestro interface to
elucidate their anticancer activities.
Results: IC50 of curcumin and silymarin separately were 12μg/
ml, 5.4μg/ml, and 7.4μg/ml, 12.9 μg/ml on huh7 and HCT116
respectively, whereas were 30.5 μg/ml and 335 μg/ml, respectivelyon Vero cells. Such IC50s were markedly reduced upon combina-
tion at 0.8, 2.2 and 5 μg/ml on huh7, HCT116 and Vero,
respectively. Pre-exposure studies indicated sensitization ofcurcumin to silymarin on both cancer cells. In silico studydemonstrated favourable docking into the binding sites of BCL2
and EGFR proteins.Conclusion: Combination of curcumin and silymarin at low
concentrations reduced the proliferation of human liver and colon
cancer cells compared to normal, their apoptotic effect was
conﬁrmed by In-silico analysis.
A.M. Osman: None. S.A. Loutfy: None. H.S. Hosny: None. L.S.
Fouda: None. M.E. AbdelRaouf: None. A.M. Ageez: None. S.
Kchouk: None. L. Hegazy: None.
P12.113.A Extended gene panel testing in lobular breast
cancer
Elke M. van Veen
1,2, D Gareth Evans1,2,3,4, Elaine F. Harkness3,5,
Helen J. Byers1,2, Jamie M. Ellingford1,2, Emma R. Woodward1,2,
Naomi L. Bowers2, Andrew J. Wallace2, Sacha J. Howell3,4,6, Anthony
Howell3,4, Fiona Lalloo2, William G. Newman1,2, Miriam J. Smith1,2
1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of
Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester,United Kingdom,2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manche-
ster University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom,3Prevent Breast Cancer Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital
Manchester Universities Foundation Trust, Manchester, United King-dom,4Manchester Breast Centre, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, United Kingdom,5Division of Informatics, Imaging and
Data Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University ofManchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester,United Kingdom,
6Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Purpose : Lobular breast cancer (LBC) accounts for ~15% of breast
cancer. Here, we studied the frequency of pathogenic germline
variants (PGVs) in an extended panel of genes in women affectedwith LBC.
Methods : 302 women with LBC and 1567 without breast cancer
were tested for BRCA1/2 PGVs. A subset of 134 LBC affected
women who tested negative for BRCA1/2 PGVs underwent
extended screening, including: ATM, CDH1, CHEK2, NBN, PALB2,
PTEN, RAD50, RAD51D and TP53 .
Results : 35 PGVs were identi ﬁed in the group with LBC, of
which 22 were in BRCA1/2 . Ten actionable PGVs were identi ﬁed in
additional genes (4x ATM ,1 xCDH1 ,1 xCHEK2 ,2 xPALB2 and 2x TP53 ).
Overall, PGVs in four genes conferred a signi ﬁcant increased risk
for LBC. Odds ratios (ORs) were: BRCA1 :O R=13.17 (95%CI: 2.83-
66.38; P =0.0017), BRCA2 :O R=10.33 (95%CI: 4.58-23.95; P <
0.0001), TP53 :O R=75.74 (95%CI: 8.72-1098; P =0.0020) and ATM:
OR=8.01 (95%CI: 2.52-29.92; P =0.0053). We did not detect an
increased risk of LBC for PALB2, CDH1 orCHEK2 .
Conclusion : The overall PGV detection rate was 11.59%, with
similar rates of BRCA1/2 (7.28%) PGVs as for other actionable PGVs
(7.46%), indicating a bene ﬁt for extended panel genetic testing in
LBC. We also report a previously unrecognised association ofpathogenic variants in ATM with LBC.
Funding: The genotyping work was supported by the
Biomedical Research Centre (IS-BRC-1215-20007) and PreventBreast Cancer (GA19-002).
E.M. van Veen: None. D.G. Evans: None. E.F. Harkness: None.
H.J. Byers: None. J.M. Ellingford: None. E.R. Woodward: None.
N.L. Bowers:
None. A.J. Wallace: None. S.J. Howell: None. A.
Howell: None. F. Lalloo: None. W.G. Newman: None. M.J. Smith:
None.
P12.114.B Liquid biopsy in lung cancer patients shows
advantages compared to FFPE tissue mutational analysisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
405
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Madli Tamm1, Tarmo Annilo1, Kersti Oselin2, Mart Kals1,3, Katrin
Keerma1,4, Paula Ann Kivistik1, Miriam Nurm1,5, Margot Saare1,6,
Jana Jaal7,8, Neeme Tõnisson1,9
1Estonian Genome Centre, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,2Department of Chemotherapy, Clinic of Oncology
and Haematology, North Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia,
3Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, HiLIFE, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,4Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,
5Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,6Central
laboratory, Diagnostic Clinic, East Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn,
Estonia,7Haematology and Oncology Clinic, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,8Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,9Department of Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
Introduction: Cancer burden is still a globally growing problem.
Early diagnosis and targeted treatment decrease patients ’death
rate, pain, and treatment expenses. Liquid biopsy can be used for
early detection, treatment selection, cancer progression andtreatment response monitoring.
Materials and Methods: 106 treatment-naïve advanced stage
lung adenocarcinoma patients donated blood samples at baseline
and at progression (N =22). Matched FFPE biopsy samples were
available for 75 patients. We set up a 21-amplicon targeted
sequencing work ﬂow for analyzing mutations in the EGFR
pathway. Genetic ﬁndings were compared to patients ’clinical
proﬁles.
Results: Higher cfDNA concentration was associated with
poorer overall survival (OS). Detectable mutations (variant allele
frequency, VAF>0.8%) were in 63 (59%) patients ’baseline samples
with median VAF 1.13%. Gene-based analyses on the cfDNArevealed that mutations in ALK and EGFR were positively
associated with OS. Considering all analyzed 9 genes, OS was
signi ﬁcantly longer for patients with detected mutations in cfDNA.
We found that patients with slowly progressing disease carried
signi ﬁcantly more mutations in their cfDNA.
Conclusions: Compared to FFPE biopsy material that didn ’t
show any statistically signi ﬁcant correlation, cfDNA has better
prognostic properties for predicting patients ’OS and disease
progression rate. It can be done either by simply measuring the
cfDNA concentration or looking deep into somatic mutations.Based on our results we believe that liquid biopsy can mark thenew era in cancer treatment. This research was supported by the
EU project 2014-2020.4.01.15-0012, and Estonian Research Council
PUT736, PUT PRG555 grants.
M. Tamm: None. T. Annilo: None. K. Oselin: None. M. Kals:
None. K. Keerma: None. P. Kivistik: None. M. Nurm: None. M.
Saare: None. J. Jaal: None. N. Tõnisson: None.
P12.115.C Targeted gene panel sequencing in patients with
lung cancer
Natalia Brodaczewska , Hongxiang Liu
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
In recent years, treatment of lung cancer has been revolutionised
by development of agents that target speci ﬁc variants within the
cancer genome, such as the tyrosine kinase inhibitors designed totarget mutant EGFR, ALK or ROS1. New therapies targeting
variants in other genes are currently under investigation and it is
hoped that, as we deepen our understanding of genetic changesunderlying lung cancer, more effective treatment strategies canbe developed. In many cases, reliable detection of variants can behindered by low number of tumour cells available for testing in
small biopsy and cytology specimens. This study aimed to
evaluate the performance of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
in a routine healthcare setting and examine the pro ﬁle of
mutations detected in 577 lung cancer patients referred for
molecular testing over a two-year period. Targeted NGS testing
using the Ion AmpliSeqTMCancer Hotspot panel was performed
on DNA extracted from dissected formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn
embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens. In total, 909 variants weredetected in 40 genes, the most commonly mutated genes being
TP53 (51.2%), KRAS (39.2%) and EGFR (17.2%). Variants in EGFR
were predominantly in-frame deletions in exon 19 (37%) andL858R (32%). T790M resistance mutation was detected in 6patients. Other potentially actionable variants were detected in
BRAF and ERBB2 . Different mutational pro ﬁles were observed for
patients with previous tobacco exposure compared to never-smokers. NGS performance on all specimens was high, with 2.5%
overall failure rate and reliable detection of EGFR variants at
variant allele frequency as low as 2%.
N. Brodaczewska: None. H. Liu: None.
P12.117.A Co-occurrence of hereditary breast-ovarian cancer
and Lynch syndromes:case series and clinical implications
Ido Laish
1, Eitan Friedman2, Gili Levi-Reznick3, Inbal Kedar4, Lior
Katz5, Zohar Levi6, Naama Halpern7, Shani Parnasa8, Aasem Abu-
Shatya9, Elizabeth Half10,Yael Goldberg4
11Gastroenterology Institute, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel,2Susanne Levy Gertner Oncogenetics Unit, The
Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Chaim Sheba MedicalCenter, Tel Hashomer, Israel,3Genetic Institute, Rambam Health Care
Campus, Haifa, Israel,4Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin
Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,55Department of Gastroenterol-
ogy and Hepatology, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,
6Gastroenterology Institute, Rabin Medical Center –Beilinson
Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel,77Department of Oncology, Chaim
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel,88Faculty of Medicine,
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,99Department
of Internal Medicine, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel,1010Gas-
troenterology Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa,Israel.
Purpose: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC)
and Lynch syndrome (LS), the most common inherited cancersyndromes, are attributed to a single heterozygous pathogenic
variant (PV) in BRCA1/2 or in a DNA MMR gene, respectively. Little
is known about the phenotype in double heterozygotes who carryPVs in both genes.
Methods: Carriers of double PVs in any DNA MMR gene and
BRCA1/2 attending one of three tertiary oncogenetic clinics
between 1/2005 and 1/2020 were identi ﬁed by database search,
and their relevant data were retrieved and analyzed.
Results: Eleven double carriers from four seemingly unrelated
Ashkenazi Jewish families were evaluated. All carried an Ashkenazi
Jewish founder BRCA PV,BRCA2 c.5946delT/c.6174delT (n =10) or
BRCA1 c.185delAG (n =1). Four carried the MSH2 c.1906G>C
founder PV, and 3, the MSH6 c.3984_3987dupGTCA founder PV; 3
patients had the MSH6 c.3956_3957dup PV. Eight double carriers
(73%) had cancer: breast cancer (5 cases, 2 bilateral), melanoma (2cases), urothelial cancer (2 cases), and colon, endometrial,
prostate, squamous cell cancer, glioblastoma, gastric stromal
tumor, and lymphoma (1 case each). Six carriers had 1-2 tumors,one had 3 tumors, and one had 5 primary tumors. Age atdiagnosis of ﬁrst tumor was 36-76 years. All carriers met BRCA1/2
testing criteria, and 3 met the revised Bethesda guidelines.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
406
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: This case series, supported by the literature,
suggests that the phenotype of double MSH2/6 and BRCA1/2
carriers is not associated with early disease onset or a more severe
phenotype. The ﬁndings have implications for improved genetic
testing guidelines and treatment strategies.
I. Laish: None. E. Friedman: None. G. Levi-Reznick: None. I.
Kedar: None. L. Katz: None. Z. Levi: None. N. Halpern: None. S.
Parnasa: None. A. Abu-Shatya: None. E. Half: None. Y. Goldberg:
None.
P12.118.B Universal immunohistochemistry for Lynch Syn-
drome: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 58,580colorectal carcinomas
Ellis L. Eikenboom1, Anne-Sophie S. van der Werf- ’t Lam2, Mar
Rodríguez-Girondo2, Christi J. van Asperen2, Winand N. M. Dinjens1,
Robert M. W. Hofstra1, Monique E. van Leerdam2,3, Hans Morreau2,
Manon C. W. Spaander1, Anja Wagner1, Maartje Nielsen2
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amster-
dam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Lynch Syndrome (LS) is a form of hereditary
colorectal cancer (CRC), caused by germline variants in DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Currently, many Western countriesperform universal immunohistochemistry (IHC) testing on CRC toincrease identi ﬁcation of LS patients and their relatives. For a clear
understanding of health bene ﬁts and costs, data on its outcomes
are required: proportions of LS, sporadic MMR-de ﬁcient (MMRd)
cases, and unexplained MMRd cases.
Materials and methods: Ovid Medline, Embase, and Cochrane
CENTRAL were searched for studies reporting on universal MMR
IHC, followed by MMR germline analysis, until March 20, 2020.Proportions were calculated, subgroup analyses were performed
based on age and diagnostics used, and random effects meta-
analyses were conducted. Quality was assessed using theQUADAS-2 tool.
Results: Of 2723 identi ﬁed articles, 56 studies covering
58,580 CRCs were included. In 6% (95% CI 5%-8%; I
2=96%)
MMR de ﬁcient protein staining was identi ﬁed. MMR germline
variants were present in 2.0% (95% CI 2%-2%, I2=92%), ranging
from 1.8% to 7.3% based on completeness of diagnostics and
age restriction. IHC outcomes were missing in 13%, germline
testing was performed in 76% of eligible patients. In sevenstudies, including 6848 CRCs completing all diagnostic stages,
germline variants and biallelic somatic MMR inactivation were
found in 3.0% and 1.7%, respectively; 0.6% remained unex-plained MMRd.
Conclusions: Complete diagnostics explained MMRd in almost all
CRCs and therefore a small number of patients are candidate for
multi gene panel testing. These ﬁndings are relevant in application of
guidelines for testing and surveillance in MMRd CRCs.
E.L. Eikenboom: None. A.S. van der Werf- ‘t Lam: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Dutch Digestive disease foundation. M. Rodríguez-Girondo:
None. C.J. van Asperen: None. W.N.M. Dinjens: None. R.M.W.
Hofstra: None. M.E. van Leerdam: None. H. Morreau: None. M.C.
W. Spaander: None. A. Wagner: None. M. Nielsen: None.
P12.119.C Preliminary evaluation of highly sensitive assess-
ment of microsatellite instability as a tool for cancer riskindividualization in Lynch syndromeJúlia Canet-Hermida *
1, Fátima Marín*1, Núria Dueñas*1, Laura
Costas2, Víctor Moreno3, Mònica Salinas1, Àngela Velasco4, Paula
Peremiquel-Trillas2, Eduard Dorca5, Jordi Ponce6, Laura Cárdenas7,
Francisco Rodríguez-Moranta8, Virginia Piñol9, Gemma Mateu10,
Maria José Paüles5, August Vidal5, Eugeni López-Bonet10, Xavier
Matias-Guiu5, Joan Brunet1,4, Gabriel Capellá1, Marta Pineda1
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut
d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvit ge (IDIBELL), ONCOBELL Program
(CIBERONC), L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,2Cancer
Epidemiology Research Programme, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,3Cancer Prevention and Control Program,
Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge (IDIBELL), CIBERESP, L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,
4Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut
d’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain,5Pathology
Department, Hospital Universi tari de Bellvitge, Institut d ’Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona),
Spain,6Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Hospital Universitari
de Bellvitge, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL),
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,7Department of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta, Institut d ’Investigació
Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain,8Department of Gastro-
enterology, Hospital Univers itari de Bellvitge, Institut d ’Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona),
Spain,9Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Universitari Josep
Trueta, Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona,
Spain,10Pathology Department, Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta,
Institut d ’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain.
Lynch syndrome (LS) is associated with increased risk of colorectal
(CRC) and endometrial (EC) cancers. Despite intensive surveillance,
many LS patients will develop tumors at follow ‐up. There is a need for
a more personalized risk assessment. We aim at evaluating the clinicalutility of highly sensitive assessment of microsatellite instability (hs-
MSI) in target tissues and non-inva sive surrogates for the individua-
lization of surveillance in LS carriers.
Endometrial aspirates, clinician-collected cervical Pap brush
samples and cervico-vaginal self-samples were obtained from 97
female controls and 78 LS carriers. Colonic mucosa biopsies were
collected from 47 control individuals and 80 LS patients.Histological characterization, MMR protein immunohistochemistry(IHC) were performed in target tissues and hs-MSI metrics were
calculated in a subset of cases.
High levels of hs-MSI were detected in aspirates from 2 LS
patients with EC, in 2/2 with complex hyperplasia and in 6/25
aspirates with histologically normal endometrium, being negative
in aspirates from 9 female controls. The presence of MMR-deﬁcient glands correlated with the hs-MSI levels. In non-invasive
samples, hs-MSI scores were positive in 2/2 cervical samples and in
1/2 cervico-vaginal self-samples from LS women with EC. Finally,
high hs-MSI levels were found in 1/7 colonic polyps, while thepresence of MMRd-crypts were identi ﬁed in colon mucosa from 2/
17 LS patients, persisting in a subsequent colonoscopy biopsy of
one of them.
Our hs-MSI approach can help in the detection of endometrial
and colorectal malignant and premalignant lesions in LS patients.Further analyses are needed to validate its putative clinical
usefulness.
Grant support:SAF2015-68016-R;PID2019-111254RB-I00;PIE16/
00049
J. Canet-Hermida*: None. F. Marín*: None. N. Dueñas*: None.
L. Costas: None. V. Moreno: None. M. Salinas: None. À. Velasco:
None. P. Peremiquel-Trillas: None. E. Dorca: None. J. Ponce:
None. L. Cárdenas: None. F. Rodríguez-Moranta: None. V. Piñol:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
407
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608None. G. Mateu: None. M.J. Paüles: None. A. Vidal: None. E.
López-Bonet: None. X. Matias-Guiu: None. J. Brunet: None. G.
Capellá: None. M. Pineda: None.
P12.120.D Determination of Lynch syndrome related color-
ectal cancer based on tumor testing for microsatellite
instability, BRAF V600E and MLH1 promoter hypermethyla-tion among Slovene patients
Petra Skerl1, Gasper Klancar1, Vida Stegel1, Vita Setrajcic Dragos1,
Vesna Vogric1, Alenka Bombac1, Anja Zagozen Klasinc1, Ira Kokovic1,
Ana Blatnik2, Ksenija Strojnik2, Marta Banjac2, Mateja Krajc2, Srdjan
Novakovic1
1Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Cancer Genetics Clinic, Institute of
Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Besides family history data and clinicopathological
features there are several laboratory-based strategies that helpestablish diagnosis of Lynch syndrome (LS), including tumor
testing for presence of microsatellite instability (MSI), BRAF V600E
mutation and MLH1 -promoter-hypermethylation. Our aim was to
select LS related colorectal cancer (CRC) patients based on tumor
testing. The ﬁnal con ﬁrmation of LS was performed using germline
testing.
Materials and Methods: Between 2018 and 2020, 198 CRC
patients were included in the study. All together 237 tumors from
these patients were tested. For tumor testing, DNA was extracted
from FFPE and in-house MSI multiplex PCR method (adopted byPagin A et al ., 2013) and/or SALSA MS-MLPA ME011 (including
BRAF V600E mutation) was performed. For germline testing, DNA
was extracted from blood and NGS sequencing was performed
using Nextera_DNA_Library_Preparation_Kit in combination withIllumina ’s TruSight_Hereditary_Panel. Variants were classi ﬁed
according to ACMG guidelines.
Results: Among 238 CRC tumors a high microsatellite instability
(MSI-H) was detected in 29 (12.2%) tumors from 25 patients.Hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter was detected in 2 MSI-H
patients, and BRAF V600E mutation was detected in 2 MSI-H
patients. Five patients with MSI-H tumor (2.5%) had a germlinepathogenic variant in one of the MMR genes.
Conclusions: Tumor testing for MSI, BRAF V600E mutation and
MLH1 promotor hypermethylation is relevant approach for
detecting molecular abnormalities related to LS and thereforeuseful to distinguish suspected LS related CRC from sporadic MMR
deﬁcient CRC.
P. Skerl: None. G. Klancar: None. V. Stegel: None. V. Setrajcic
Dragos: None. V. Vogric: None. A. Bombac: None. A. Zagozen
Klasinc: None. I. Kokovic: None. A. Blatnik: None. K. Strojnik:
None. M. Banjac: None. M. Krajc: None. S. Novakovic: None.
P12.121.A Long-read RNA-seq identi ﬁes allelic loss and
aberrant splicing in cancer genes
Vincent Schwenk
1, Florentine Scharf1, Rafaela M. Leal Silva1,
Monika Morak1,2, Verena Steinke-Lange1,2, Elke Holinski-Feder1,2,
Julia M. A. Pickl1,2, Dieter A. Wolf1
1MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum München, Munich,
Germany,2Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Campus Innenstadt,
Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany.
Introduction: DNA sequence variants can result in allelic imbalances
and aberrant splicing leading to cancer predisposition. Identi ﬁcationand interpretation of these variants is challenging, leaving many
patients without molecular diag nosis. Five patients with known
variants in DNA mismatch repair genes were re-assessed to gauge
the diagnostic potential of Oxf ord Nanopore (ONT) RNA-seq.
Material and Methods: RNA pro ﬁles of 123 cancer genes were
obtained from patient lymphocyte cultures using Agilent ’sS u r e S e -
lectXT capture and ONT cDNA sequencing. Puromycin treatment of
lymphocyte cultures was used to block the degradation of aberranttranscripts by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD).
Results: An average sequencing depth of up to 5,000x was
achieved, allowing detailed evaluation of cancer-related tran-
scripts. The heterozygous MSH2 variant c.1147C>T p.Arg383* led
to allelic imbalance with a ratio of 82:17 which was restored to67:32 by puromycin, indicating an allelic reduction in mRNA
expression due to NMD. Monoallelic MLH1 germline promoter
methylation was found to completely abolish mRNA expressionfrom the methylated allele. The MLH1 variant c.1558 +1G>A
showed a splicing defect apparent as partial retention of intron 13
in 20% of the transcripts. This fraction increased to 40% afterpuromycin treatment, suggesting that aberrantly spliced mRNA issubjected to NMD. In-frame skipping of exon 7 in ~50% of
transcripts was found for MSH2 variant c.942 +3A>T. Finally, we
identi ﬁed a fusion transcript linking MLH1 exon 1 to DCLK3 exons
4-5 caused by a genomic inversion.
Conclusions: Through assessment of allelic mRNA expression
and splicing, long-read RNA-seq facilitates variant interpretation
and may ultimately increase diagnostic yield.
V. Schwenk: None. F. Scharf: None. R.M. Leal Silva: None. M.
Morak: None. V. Steinke-Lange: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None.
J.M.A. Pickl: None. D.A. Wolf: None.
P12.122.B Identi ﬁcation of two Lynch syndrome families
harboring inherited MLH1 epimutations
Covadonga Vara
1, Aida Bujosa2, Júlia Canet1, Consol López3,
Mónica Salinas1, Estela Dámaso1, Adriana Lasa4, Conxi Lázaro1,
Megan Hitchins5, Joan Brunet1,6, Teresa Ramón y Cajal2,3, Gabriel
Capellá1, Marta Pineda1
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Institut Català d ’Oncologia –IDIBELL,
L’Hospitalet del Llobregat, Spain,2Servicio de Oncología Médica,
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,3Unidad de
Cáncer Familiar, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona,
Spain,4Servicio de Genética, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain,5Cedars-Sinai Center for Bioinformatics and
Functional Genomics, Los Angeles, CA, USA,6Institut Català
d’Oncoloiga- IDIBGI, Girona, Spain.
Lynch Syndrome is the most common cause of hereditary colorectal
and endometrial cancers. Although rare, it can be caused by
constitutional MLH1 epimutations, leading to allele-speci ﬁcl o s so f
expression due to promoter hypermethylation. MLH1 epimutations
can appear secondary to a genetic alteration in cisand following an
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance (secondary epimuta-
tions), or as a de novo event associated with null or non-mendelian
inheritance (primary epimutations). Here, we present two Lynchsyndrome families harboring inherited MLH1 epimutations. Case A is
a woman diagnosed with a colorectal adenocarcinoma at age 46,
followed by a colorectal adenoma at 48 and multiple myeloma at
50. Case B is a woman with colorectal cancer at 42 years of age (case7, PMID: 32635641). In both cases, analyses of the colorectal lesions
revealed MLH1/PMS2 expression loss , microsatellite instability and
MLH1 methylation. Further MS-MCA and pyrosequencing analyses
detected MLH1 promoter methylation in blood in both cases (~50%).
Interestingly, case A ’s mother, affected by ovarian cancer at age 50,
was also an MLH1 epimutation carrier. Recent analyses of case B ’sAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
408
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608maternal aunt, diagnosed with multiple CRC at 43 and 85 years of
age, showed that she also harbored hemiallelic MLH1 promoter
methylation in blood. The screening of additional relatives of case B
is currently being performed. The characterization of inheritancepatterns and the identi ﬁcation of causal genetic mechanisms in cis
in these families will be highly relevant for genetic counseling of
epimutation carriers and their relatives.
Grant support: National Institute of Health (1R01CA218342-
01A1)
C. Vara: None. A. Bujosa: None. J. Canet: None. C. López:
None. M. Salinas: None. E. Dámaso: None. A. Lasa: None. C.
Lázaro: None. M. Hitchins: None. J. Brunet: None. T. Ramón y
Cajal: None. G. Capellá: None. M. Pineda: None.
P12.123.C Determination of binary protein-protein interaction
between PMS2 and a novel germline variant of MLH1 using
yeast two-hybrid assay analysis
Eva Jakljevi č1,2, Tina Zavodnik1,3, Kristina Marton1, Ana Blatnik4,
UrošPetrovi č1,2
1Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Biotechnical Faculty,
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Faculty of Chemistry and
Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
4Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is associated with DNA
mismatch repair system de ﬁciency, caused by germline pathogenic
variants in MLH1, PMS2, MSH6 ,o rMSH2 ,o ra n EPCAM deletion. MLH1
and PMS2 proteins form a functional dimer MutL α, the stability of
which can be tested using the yeast two-hybrid system (Y2H). In thisstudy, our goal was to determine the pathogenicity of a novel MLH1
in-frame deletion variant MLH1_del746-749: LRG_216t1:
c.2236_2247delCTGCCTGATCTA p.(Leu746_Leu749del). This varianthas previously been identi ﬁed in a Slovenian family with con ﬁrmed
LS and reported as likely pathogenic.
Methods: Protein structure prediction of MLH1 variants were
constructed using Phyre and I-TASSER protein modelling tools.Binary protein-protein interactions between PMS2 and variants of
MLH1 were investigated using Y2H and 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (3-
AT) gradient. 3-AT increases the stringency of protein-proteininteraction Y2H assay by raising the minimum amount of reportergene expression necessary to enable growth of yeast cells.
Results: The analysis of protein structure models suggested
that MLH1_del746-749 cannot interact with PMS2. In the Y2Hassay, MLH1_del746-749 interacted with PMS2 in the absence of
3-AT, whereas 30 mM 3-AT prevented its interaction with PMS2,
but not the interaction of a non-pathogenic (reference) variant ofMLH1.
Conclusion: Based on Y2H results we propose MLH1_del746-
749 is pathogenic since its dimer with PMS2 is not stable enough
under physiological conditions in human cells. We propose Y2Hwith 3-AT gradient as an effective and simple semi-quantitatvetest for binding af ﬁnity between different variants of MLH1 and
PMS2, which can aid in establishing the molecular cause of LS.
E. Jakljevi č:None. T. Zavodnik: None. K. Marton: None. A.
Blatnik: None. U. Petrovi č:None.
P12.124.D Lynch Syndrome - An atypical case of co-occurring
MLH1 promotor hypermethylation and MLH1 germline likely-
pathogenic variant
Fiona Chan Pak Choon
1,2, Anne-Sophie Chong1,2, Leora Witkowski2,
Mona Alameldin3, Gabriela Ghitulescu4, George Chong1, William
Foulkes1,2,51Lady Davis Institute and Segal Cancer Centre, Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Department of Human Genetics,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,3Department of Pathology,
Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Department of
Surgery, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada,5Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics and Cancer Research Program, Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC,
Canada.
Lynch Syndrome (LS) is a hereditary disorder caused by germline
pathogenic variants in mismatch repair genes (MMR - MLH1 ,
MSH2 ,MSH6 and PMS2 ) that predispose carriers to colorectal
cancer. Screening for LS is recommended for all newly-diagnosedcolorectal cancer patients. If somatic testing reveals microsatellite
instability (MSI) and/or loss of MMR expression via immunohis-
tochemistry (IHC), the tumour samples are further tested for aBRAF V600E mutation and MLH1 promotor hypermethylation -
strong indicators of non-inherited colorectal cancer. Only in the
absence of those indicators is the germline tested to con ﬁrm a LS
diagnosis. We report a 45-year-old woman with an ileocecaladenocarcinoma showing MSI and loss of MLH1 and PMS2 by IHC.
Sequencing of the tumour and germline revealed a novel MLH1
germline mutation (c.788A>T), a somatic MSH6 mutation and a
BRAF V600E mutation. Interestingly, MLH1 promotor hypermethy-
lation was also detected in the tumour, but not in the germline.
cDNA analysis of the patient ’s blood showed that the MLH1 variant
causes exons 9 and 10 skipping, which supported our assessmentof the variant as likely pathogenic according to the ACMG
guidelines. Thus, we diagnosed the patient with LS despite the
presence of MLH1 promotor hypermethylation and BRAF V600E
mutation in the cecal tumour. Co-occurring MLH1 promotor
hypermethylation and MMR germline mutation cases are rare but
do exist. This suggests that decisions on when to test the germline
in persons with MLH1 promotor hypermethylation and a BRAF
V600E mutation need to be carefully considered. Funded by CIHRgrant (FDN-148390) to WF.
F. Chan Pak Choon: None. A. Chong: None. L. Witkowski:
None. M. Alameldin: None. G. Ghitulescu: None. G. Chong:
None. W. Foulkes: None.
P12.126.B Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation reveals
distinct epigenetically de ﬁned subgroups of cutaneous
melanoma
Simon Schwendinger
1, Wolfram Jaschke1, Theresa Walder1, Van
Anh Nguyen1, Jürgen Hench2, Stephan Frank2, Johannes Zschocke1,
Matthias Schmuth1, Emina Jukic1
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,2University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Introduction: DNA methylation analysis is an emerging method in
the diagnosis and prognostication of neoplastic diseases. AberrantDNA methylation is described as an important contributor in
tumorigenesis of cutaneous melanoma. The presented work
focuses on the characterization of genetically distinct melanomasamples using microarray-based methylome analysis followed byuniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) for
dimension reduction.
Materials and Methods: Macrodissected FFPE samples of
cutaneous melanoma samples, benign nevi and skin controls were
analyzed using a genome-wide DNA methylation array. UMAP was
computed on a publicly available computer infrastructure.Melanoma samples were analyzed by NGS with a customhybridization-capture based sequencing approach investigatingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
409
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608approximately 150 genes recurrently altered in various malignant
neoplasms.
Results: DNA methylome analysis by UMAP reveals a segrega-
tion of melanoma samples from control epidermis and benignnevi. Cutaneous melanomas can be further divided into twosubgroups: One methylation group comprises neoplasms harbor-
ing genetic alterations in the MAPK/ERK pathway, i.e. variants of
BRAF ,RAS-family genes or NF1. The other subgroup includes
samples with triple-wildtype genotype, lack of UV-signature andSOCS1 variants. A third abnormal methylation cluster is suspected
to comprise samples with a low tumor cell content due to lower
variant allele frequencies of genetic variants and the lack of copynumber variants.
Conclusions: The presented work reveals that UMAP dimension
reduction of whole-genome methylation analysis data can be
utilized to distinguish cutaneous melanoma from benign nevi.Triple-wildtype melanomas seem to present a unique methylation
pattern and can be clearly differentiated from MAPK/ERK pathway
altered melanoma cases.
S. Schwendinger: None. W. Jaschke: None. T. Walder: None.
V.A. Nguyen: None. J. Hench: None. S. Frank: None. J. Zschocke:
None. M. Schmuth: None. E. Jukic: None.
P12.127.C Germline pathogenic variants in DNA repair genes
predispose to MPM in asbestos exposed patients
Marta La Vecchia
1, Marika Sculco1, Anna Aspesi1, Michela G.
Clavenna1, Elisabetta Casalone2, Alessandra Allione2, Federica
Grosso3, Roberta Libener4, Alberto Muzio5, Ottavio Rena6, Guido
Baietto6, Sara Parini6, Renzo Boldorini7, Enrica Migliore8, Dario
Mirabelli8,9, Corrado Magnani10, Daniela Ferrante10, Giuseppe
Matullo2,9,11, Irma Dianzani1,9
1Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale,
Novara, Italy,2Department of Medical Sciences, Università di Torino,
Torino, Italy,3Mesothelioma Unit, AO SS. Antonio e Biagio e Cesare
Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy,4Pathology Unit, AO SS. Antonio e Biagio e
Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy,5Division of Medical Oncology,
Ospedale Santo Spirito, Casale Monferrato, Alessandria, Italy,
6Thoracic Surgery Unit, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy,
7Department of Health Sciences, Section of Pathological Anatomy,
Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy,8Unit of Cancer
Epidemiology, CPO-Piemonte and Università di Torino, Torino, Italy,
9Interdepartmental Center for Studies on Asbestos and other Toxic
Particulates “G. Scansetti ”, Università di Torino, Torino, Italy,
10Department of Translational Medicine, Unit of Medical Statistics,
Università del Piemonte Orientale and Cancer Epidemiology, CPO
Piemonte, Novara, Italy,11Medical Genetics Unit, AOU Città della
Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy.
Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a tumor
associated to asbestos exposure. We and others found thatapproximately 10% of MPM patients carry a germline pathogenicvariant (PV) in DNA repair genes.
Materials and Methods: To further extend these data, a total of
206 MPM patients (93 from a previous study, 113 new) werescreened by targeted-NGS for germline PVs in cancer-predisposing genes. Six further patients with family history of
mesothelioma were analyzed by Sanger sequencing of BAP1 and
CDKN2A . Life-long cumulative asbestos exposure was available for
203/212 patients.
Results: We identi ﬁed 18 PVs in 17/206 patients (8.25%), most
of them (14 PVs in 13 patients) were found in genes involved inthe DNA repair pathway (i.e. ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CHEK2,
FANCC, FANCF, FANCI, PALB2, PMS1, SLX4, XPC ). PVs in BAP1 and
CDKN2A were identi ﬁed in ﬁve and one patients with familyhistory of mesothelioma, respectively. Carriers of PVs in DNA repair
genes (18/212 patients) showed a statistically signi ﬁcant lower
asbestos exposure than non-mutated patients (p =0.0001).
Conclusions: These data suggest that patients with germline
mutations in DNA repair genes are less pro ﬁcient at repairing the
DNA damage induced by asbestos and show increased suscept-
ibility to asbestos-induced MPM. The identi ﬁcation of a subset of
patients carrying PVs in DNA repair genes may distinguish patientswho can bene ﬁt from drugs that induce synthetic lethality.
Grants: HeRMes project (compensation to MPM patients of Casale
Monferrato) (ID, CM); AIRC2018-IG21390 (GM)
M. La Vecchia: None. M. Sculco: None. A. Aspesi: None. M.G.
Clavenna: None. E. Casalone: None. A. Allione: None. F. Grosso:
None. R. Libener: None. A. Muzio: None. O. Rena: None. G.
Baietto: None. S. Parini: None. R. Boldorini: None. E. Migliore:
None. D. Mirabelli: None. C. Magnani: None. D. Ferrante: None.
G. Matullo: None. I. Dianzani: None.
P12.128.D A novel germline pathogenic variant MET
c.3389T>C p.(Leu1130Ser) identi ﬁed in french population
Molka SEBAI
1,M a r i eF E R N A N D E S2, Sandrine M. CAPUTO3,V i r g i n i e
VERKARRE4,5, Fanny REINHART4, Séverine ADAMS1, Christine MAU-
GARD6, Olivier CARON7, Marine GUILLAUD-BATAILLE1,P a s c a l i n e
BERTHET8,5,Y v e s - J e a nJ .B I G N O N9,5,J e a nC H I E S A10,T h i e r r yF R E -
BOURG11,5,S o p h i eG I R A U D12,5, Sophie LEJEUNE13, Jean-Marc M.
LIMACHER14, Antoine DE PAUW3,15, Dominique STOPPA-LYONNET3,16,
Hélène ZATTARA-CANNONI17, Sophie DEVEAUX5, Rosette LIDEREAU3,
Stéphane RICHARD5,18,D a v i dT U L A S N E2,Etienne ROULEAU1
1Department of Medical Biology and Pathology, Cancer Genetics
Laboratory, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,2University of Lille,
CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, UMR9020 - U 1277 -
CANTHER - Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and Resistance toTherapies, Lille, France,3Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris,
France,4Department of Pathology, Georges Pompidou European
Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France,
5French National Network for Rare Cancers in Adults PREDIR labelled
by INCa, AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France,6Department
of molecular oncogenetics, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France,7Department of Medical Oncogenetics, Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France,8Oncologenetics Department, Centre Fran-
çois Baclesse, Caen, France,9Oncologenetics Department, Centre
Jean-Perrin, BP 392, Clermont-Ferrand, France,10Department of
Cytogenetics, Nimes University Hospital, Nîmes, France,11Depart-
ment of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France,
12Genetics Department, Hospices Civils de LYON, Lyon, France,
13Department of genetics, CHRU Lille, Lille, France,14Genetics
Department, Hôpitaux civils de Colmar, COLMAR, France,15Paris
Sciences Lettres Research University, Paris, France,16INSERM U830,
Institut Curie Paris, Paris, France ; Paris-University, Paris, France,
17Department of Genetics, Hôpital de la Timone Enfants, Marseille,
France,18EPHE, PSL University, UMR 9019 CNRS, Paris-Saclay
University, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Introduction: MET germline oncogenic variants were described in
families with bilateral and multifocal papillary type 1 carcinoma(PRCC1). To date, only ten germline MET pathogenic variants were
reported in the literature. All of them were missense variants of
the tyrosine kinase domain. A somatic non-random duplication ofchromosome 7 harboring MET pathogenic variant was described
as a cytogenetic condition for tumorigenesis. Herein, we provide
arguments for the classi ﬁcation of MET c.3389T>C p.(Leu1130Ser)
as a new germline pathogenic variant.
Methods: MET p.(Leu1130Ser) (NM_001127500.2) was identi ﬁed in
four index-cases among a French c ohort of 158 patients with PRCC1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
410
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608tumors and accessible MET molecular screening. MET p.(Leu1130Ser)
wasﬁrst described as a likely pathogenic variant. Familial and clinical
informations were collected fro m medical records. For two index-
cases, tumor pro ﬁles were documented using array CGH. ERK
phosphorylation of MET p.(Leu1130Ser) was studied after a transient
transfection of 24 hours. Focus formations assays were performed on
NIH3T3 cell lines transfected with MET p.(Leu1130Ser).
Results: Tumoral features were suggestive of a MET genetic
predisposition: PRCC1 tumors were b ilateral (4/4) and multifocal (3/4).
A duplication of chromosome 7 harboring MET p.(Leu1130Ser) was
found in array CGH. MET c.3389T>C p.(Leu1130Ser) was not reported
in databases. The Leucine in codon 1130 was highly conservedbetween species and between tyrosine kinases. MET p.(Leu1130Ser)
caused a constitutive phosphorylation of ERK protein and induced an
abnormal focus formation when transfected into NIH3T3 cell.
Conclusion: Based on the above arguments, MET p.(Leu1130-
Ser) was classi ﬁed as a pathogenic variant according to the ACMG
recommendations.
M. Sebai: None. M. Fernandes: None. S.M. Caputo: None. V.
Verkarre: None. F. Reinhart: None. S. Adams: None. C. Maugard:
None. O. Caron: None. M. Guillaud-bataille: None. P. Berthet:
None. Y.J. Bignon: None. J. Chiesa: None. T. Frebourg: None. S.
Giraud: None. S. Lejeune: None. J.M. Limacher: None. A. De
pauw: None. D. Stoppa-lyonnet: None. H. Zattara-cannoni:
None. S. Deveaux: None. R. Lidereau: None. S. Richard: None. D.
Tulasne: None. E. Rouleau: None.
P12.129.A Speci ﬁc phenotype of germline MET
mutations in
papillary renal cell carcinoma type 1: about a large french
series of 158 patientsMolka SEBAI1, David TULASNE2, Sandrine M. CAPUTO3, Virginie
VERKARRE4,5, Marie FERNANDES2, Fanny REINHART4, Séverine
ADAMS1, Christine MAUGARD6, Olivier CARON7, Marine GUILLAUD-
BATAILLE1, Pascaline BERTHET8,5, Yves-Jean J. BIGNON9,5, Jean
CHIESA10, Thierry FREBOURG11,5, Sophie GIRAUD12,5, Sophie
LEJEUNE13, Jean-Marc M. LIMACHER14, Antoine DE PAUW3,15,
Dominique STOPPA-LYONNET3,16, Hélène ZATTARA-CANNONI17,
Sophie DEVEAUX5, Rosette LIDEREAU3, Stéphane RICHARD5,18,
Etienne ROULEAU1
1Department of Medical Biology and Pathology, Cancer Genetics
Laboratory, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,2University of Lille,
CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, UMR9020 - U 1277 -CANTHER - Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and Resistance to
Therapies, Lille, France,3Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris,
France,4Department of Pathology, Georges Pompidou European
Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France,
5French National Network for Rare Cancers in Adults PREDIR labelled
by INCa, AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France,6Department
of molecular oncogenetics, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,Strasbourg, France,7Department of Medical Oncogenetics, Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France,8Oncologenetics Department, Centre Fran-
çois Baclesse, Caen, France,9Oncologenetics Department, Centre
Jean-Perrin, BP 392, Clermont-Ferrand, France,10Department of
Cytogenetics, Nimes University Hospital, Nîmes, France,11Depart-
ment of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France,
12Genetics Department, Hospices Civils de LYON, Lyon, France,
13Department of genetics, CHRU Lille, Lille, France,14Genetics
Department, Hôpitaux civils de Colmar, COLMAR, France,15Paris
Sciences Lettres Research University, Paris, France,16INSERM U830,
Institut Curie Paris, Paris, France,17Department of Genetics, Hôpital
de la Timone Enfants, Marseille, France,18EPHE, PSL University, UMR
9019 CNRS, Paris-Saclay University, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France.
Introduction: Activating pathogenic variants of MET gene were
identi ﬁed in papillary renal cell carcinoma type 1 (PRCC1) withcharacteristic bilateral and multifocal PRCC1 tumors. Due to the
rarity of MET deleterious alterations, we decided to study the
incidence of MET germline mutations in the French population
and to describe the speci ﬁc phenotype of mutation carriers.
Methods: We reviewed the medical and molecular records of
158 patients with PRCC1 tumors and screened for MET germline
variants (153 index-cases and ﬁve relatives).
Results: MET pathogenic variant rate among index-cases was
10.4% (16/153) with 37,5% of familial PRCC1 and 3.3% of sporadicPRCC1. Genetic screening showed a variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance
in 7.9% of index-cases (12/153) and did not identify a deleterious
variant in 81.7% of index-cases (125/153). Four different germlineMET pathogenic variants were highlighted and three of them were
already reported ( MET p.(His1112Arg); MET p.(Val1238Ile); MET p.
(Tyr1248Cys)). MET c.3389T>C (p.(Leu1130Ser)) was a novel missense
variant within the tyrosine kinase domain, identi ﬁed in four families.
A strong genotype-phenotype correlation was found among MET
mutated cases characterized by PRCC1 tumors with mainly bilateral
(82.3%) and multifocal (85.8%) onset. No signi ﬁcant difference was
observed in the age of diagnosis and in gender between MET
mutation carriers and cases with wild-type MET.
Conclusion: Our results will help to better identify families with
genetic predisposition to PRCC1 tumors and support the fact thatthe clinical presentation is a strong argument to be considered toclassify novel MET gene missense variants especially when
functional assays aren ’t accessible.
M. Sebai: None. D. Tulasne: None. S.M. Caputo: None. V.
Verkarre: None. M. Fernandes: None. F. Reinhart: None. S.
Adams: None. C. Maugard: None. O. Caron: None. M. Guillaud-
bataille: None. P. Berthet: None. Y.J. Bignon: None. J. Chiesa:
None. T. Frebourg: None. S. Giraud:
None. S. Lejeune: None. J.M.
Limacher: None. A. De pauw: None. D. Stoppa-lyonnet: None. H.
Zattara-cannoni: None. S. Deveaux: None. R. Lidereau: None. S.
Richard: None. E. Rouleau: None.
P12.132.D Comprehensive analysis of correlations in expres-
sion of miRNA genes and immune checkpoint genes in
bladder cancer cells
Przemyslaw A. Stempor1, Paula Dobosz2
1SmartImmune Ltd, Accelerate Cambridge, University of Cambridge
Judge Business School, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Department of
Hematology, Oncology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
Personalised medicine is the future and hope for many patients,
including those with cancers. Developing personalised therapeutics
and associated diagnostics requires interdisciplinary teams, includ-ing oncologists, geneticists, immunologists, pathologists etc. Bladdercancer (BC) is a frequent neoplasm, with high lethality and lacking
modern, advanced therapeutic modalities, such as immunotherapy.
Early detection, as well as rapid, well selected treatment, are keyfactors leading to good prognosis. MicroRNA mediated generegulation is a promising area of development for new diagnostic
and therapeutic methods, crucial for better prospects for patients
with bladder cancer. MicroRNAs are involved in bladder cancerpathogenesis, proliferation, control and response to treatment.
We performed a correlation based analysis of miRNA and gene
expression data in bladder cancer (BLCA) TCGA dataset. We
identi ﬁed 27 miRNAs hits with opposite expression pro ﬁle to
genes involved in immune response in bladder cancer, and 24
miRNAs hits with similar expression pro ﬁle. Previous studies
linking these microRNAs to function in bladder cancer, and asses ifthey are good candidates for personalised medicine therapeuticsand diagnostics. These functions include regulation of gene
expression, interplay with transcription factors, response toAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
411
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608treatment, apoptosis, cell proliferation and angiogenesis, initiation
and development of cancer, genome instability, and tumour-
associated in ﬂammatory reaction.
P.A. Stempor: None. P. Dobosz: None.
P12.133.A Somatic non-epigenetic mismatch repair gene
aberrations underly most mismatch repair-de ﬁcient Lynch-
like tumors
Lisa Elze1, Arjen R. Mensenkamp1, Iris D. Nagtegaal1, Wendy A. G.
van Zelst-Stams1, Brigit Wapstra1, Charlotte J. Dommering2, Mirjam
M. de Jong3, Fonnet E. Bleeker4, Edward M. Leter5, Tom G. W.
Letteboer6, Maartje Nielsen7, Rachel S. van der Post1, Nicoline
Hoogerbrugge1, Richarda M. de Voer1, Marjolijn J. L. Ligtenberg1
1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Amster-
dam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,4The Nether-
lands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands,5Maastricht Uni-
versity Medical Center +, Maastricht, Netherlands,6University Medical
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,7Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Introduction: Individuals with Lynch syndrome have a pathogenic
germline variant affecting one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 orPMS2 ) and are often recognized by MMR-
deﬁcient (dMMR) colorectal or endometrial cancers. The main cause
of dMMR is somatic MLH1 -promoter hypermethylation. dMMR
tumors without a germline variant or MLH1 -promoter hypermethyla-
tion (Lynch-like) may have two somatic non-epigenetic MMRaberrations (somatic dMMR). We investigated the cause of dMMRin patients that were referred for diagnostic testing for Lynch
syndrome with excluded MLH1 -promoter hypermethylation.
Materials and Methods: The prevalence of germline and
somatic dMMR was analyzed in a cohort of 304 consecutive
patients diagnosed below age 70 with dMMR colorectal or
endometrium cancer without MLH1 -promoter methylation. The
prevalence of somatic dMMR was also measured in a cohort testednegative for a pathogenic germline variant and MLH1 -promoter
methylation (n =125).
Results: The incidence of germline pathogenic variants and
somatic dMMR was 35 versus 51% for MLH1- , 43% versus 42% for
MSH2 -, 76% versus 11% for MSH6 - and 74% versus 9% for PMS2-
deﬁcient tumors without MLH1- promoter methylation. Somatic
dMMR was associated with an higher age at diagnosis than Lynchsyndrome (52 versus 48 years, P < 0.01). Overall somatic dMMR
was detected in 87.3% of dMMR tumors without germline MMR
gene variants or MLH1 -promoter methylation.
Conclusion: Especially MLH1- and MSH2-de ﬁcient tumors
without MLH1 -promoter methylation are often not due to Lynch
syndrome, but have two somatic MMR aberrations. Somatic MMR
testing signi ﬁcantly reduces the amount of patients that remain
uncertain about their genetic susceptibility to Lynch syndrome.
L. Elze: None. A.R. Mensenkamp: None. I.D. Nagtegaal: None.
W.A.G. van Zelst-Stams: None. B. Wapstra: None. C.J. Dommer-
ing: None. M.M. de Jong: None. F.E. Bleeker: None. E.M. Leter:
None. T.G.W. Letteboer: None. M. Nielsen: None. R.S. van der
Post: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. R.M. de Voer: None. M.J.L.
Ligtenberg: None.
P12.134.B Frequency of de novo and mosaic STK11 variants in
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
Albain Chansavang1,2, Marion Dhooge2,3, Aurélie Toussaint1,
Véronique Duchossoy1, Virginie Benoit1, Joëlle Cohen1, ChrystelleColas4, Hélène Delhomelle4, Pierre Laurent-Puig5, Aziz Zaanan6,
Solenne Farelly3, Camille Tlemsani2, Romain Coriat3, Audrey Briand-
Suleau1,2, Béatrice Parfait1,2, Eric Pasmant1,2, Nadim Hamzaoui1,2
1Service de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, APHP.
Centre Université de Paris, Paris, France,2Institut Cochin, Inserm
U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Université de Paris, CARPEM, Paris, France,
3Service de Gastroentérologie et Endoscopie, Hôpital Cochin, APHP.
Centre Université de Paris, Paris, France,4Département de génétique,
Institut Curie, Université de Recherche Paris Sciences et Lettres, Paris,
France,5Service de Biochimie, Pharmacologie et Biologie Moléculaire,
Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, Université Paris Des-cartes, Paris, France,6Service de Gastroentérologie et Oncologie
Digestive, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, Université
Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) (MIM 175200) is an autosomal
dominant disease caused by p athogenic variants in the STK11 gene
(alias LKB1 ). PJS is characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation
and hamartomatous polyps, predominantly affecting the smallintestine. In adulthood, PJS patients face an increased risk ofdifferent cancers. Previous studies showed that more than half of
cases are sporadic but the exact proportion of de novo c a s e si ss t i l l
unknown. Among the de novo cases, mosaicism could explain the
typical PJS cases for which no pathogenic variant is identi ﬁed in the
STK11 gene. The aim of this work was to evaluate the proportion of
de novo and mosaic cases in a PJS patient cohort. We analyzed the
STK11 gene using deep targeted sequencing in 84 index cases. A
STK11 pathogenic variant was identi ﬁed in 87% (73/84) of patients.
Sporadic cases were observed in 5 8% (49/84) of cases, of whom the
analysis of 21 trios proved the cases to be de novo ; 11/84 of cases
(13%) were mosaicism with a [14%;37%] variant allele frequencyrange, suggesting an early post-zygotic event. This study performed
on a large series of PJS cases allowed estimating the de novo
mutations to at least 30%. Considering the medical impact of STK11
mutation identi ﬁcation, we underlined the importance of appropriate
and sensitive techniques to allow the detection of low frequency
mosaicism in PJS.
A. Chansavang: None. M. Dhooge: None. A. Toussaint: None.
V. Duchossoy: None. V. Benoit: None. J. Cohen: None. C. Colas:
None. H. Delhomelle: None. P. Laurent-Puig: None. A. Zaanan:
None. S. Farelly: None. C. Tlemsani: None. R. Coriat: None. A.
Briand-Suleau: None. B. Parfait: None. E. Pasmant: None. N.
Hamzaoui: None.
P12.135.C Mosaic TP53 mutation in a patient with familial and
personal history of breast, gastric and bowel cancers
Emanuele Micaglio
1, Federico Romani1, Michelle Monasky1, Paola
Carrera2, Monica Zanussi2, Giorgio Nevio Casari2, Filippo Martinelli
Boneschi3, Silvia Presi2, Carlo Pappone1
1IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy,2IRCCS
San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy,3IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
Li Fraumeni syndrome is a cancer predisposition phenotype with a
high risk of either early onset or adult onset malignances. Li Fraumeni
syndrome is often caused by heter ozygous germline mutations in
TP53 gene although some cases of mos aicism have been published
to date. We describe a three - generation family characterized byhistory of breast, gastric and bowel cancer, all histologically
conﬁrmed. The proband is a 79 years old woman affected by a
triple negative ductal breast ca rcinoma with onset at 44 years old
followed by gastric adenocarcin oma at 73 years old and by colon
cancer at 75 years old. The proband came to our attention becauseAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
412
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608her 51 years old daughter required pre-symptomatic genetic
counselling. The genetic testing p erformed in the proband after a
careful genetic counselling through analysis of genomic DNA
extracted from peripheral bloo d, demonstrated the c.743G>C
heterozygous mutation in TP53 gene. The sequencing data were
consistent with a mosaicism level of about 20%, con ﬁrmed by both
the absence of aforementioned mutation in proband ’s saliva
extracted DNA and the presence of the same mutation in twodifferent histological samples (gastric and colon cancers) which areconserved elsewhere. The segregation analysis excluded the
possibility of germline mosaicism as proband ’s three sons are
negative for the maternal TP53 mutation. This case highlights the
relevance of mosaicism even for late onset cancers and theimportance of the teamwork between oncology, anatomopathology
and clinical genetics specialists in a modern facility.
E. Micaglio: None. F. Romani: None. M. Monasky: None. P.
Carrera: None. M. Zanussi: None. G.N. Casari: None. F. Martinelli
Boneschi: None. S. Presi: None. C. Pappone: None.
P12.137.A A preliminary analysis of two mitochondrial poly-C
tracts in sporadic breast cancer of Sri Lankan ethnicities
Joanne T. Kotelawala
1, Kamani H. Tennekoon1, Ruwandi Rana-
singhe1, H. A. C. I. K. Rodrigo1, G K. S. De Silva2, W A. H. A. Perera3,N .
Yoganathan3, M. R. S. Manatunga3, D. M. A. S. Dissanayake4,N .
Joseph4,5, C. Rajasooriyar4,5, K Indranath4,5
1Institute of Biochemistry, Molec ular Biology and Biotechnology,
Colombo 03, Sri Lanka,2National Cancer Institute, Maharagama, Sri
Lanka,3Kandy Teaching Hospital, Kandy, Sri Lanka,4Jaffna Teaching
Hospital, Jaffna, Sri Lanka,5Tellippalai Base Hospital, Jaffna, Sri
Lanka.
Introduction: Breast cancer remains the most common cancer
among women accounting for nea rly 25% of cancers diagnosed.
Prior studies have shown two mtDNA poly-C tracts located in the
non-coding region (16184-16189 and 303-315) are associated withdiseases such as cancer.
Methods: mtDNA non-coding region was studied in newly
diagnosed sporadic breast cancer patients and healthy controls
among Sri Lankan Tamil and Muslim ethnicities (N =30 pairs each)
of the Sri Lankan population. The non-coding region wasampli ﬁed using two primer sets and the DNA sequence was
obtained using Sanger sequencing.
Results: Here we report variations in mtDNA regions 305-310
bp and 16184-16189 bp observed in the present study with our
previously published data for Sinhalese ethnicity (N =63 pairs of
patient and controls; https://doi.org/10.3892/br.2020.1292 ) used
for comparison.
Variation Sri Lankan
TamilMuslim *Sinhalese
Patients %
(n=30)Controls %
(n=30)Patients %
(n=30)Controls %
(n=30)Patients %
(n=63)Controls %
(n=63)
305-310
310T>C 3.3 0 0 0 4.8 9.5
309 C ins 46.7 46.7 46.7 33.3 33.3 41.3
315 C ins 86.7 90.0 100 83.3 81.0 85.7
16184-16189
16184C>T 5.7 0 3.3 3.3 1.6 3.17
16187C>T 3.3 3.3 0 0 3.2 1.59
16188C>T 3.3 0 0 0 0 1.59
16189T>C 23.3 3.3 10.0 3.3 17.5 27.0
*Kotelawala et al, March 2020 Conclusion This data shows that
variations such as 310T>C identi ﬁed as a risk factor in otherpopulations is not associated with breast cancer in Sri Lankan
ethnic groups. However, variations in the 16184-16189 region
were seen to be more inclined towards the formation of a poly-C
tract suggesting possible metabolic alterations, which couldconstitute a risk factor of breast cancer. Further studies need tobe carried out to identify if these variations are associated with
mitochondrial copy number variations and/or other metabolic
factors. This study is funded by the National Science Foundation ofSri Lanka (NSF/SCH/2016/04)
J.T. Kotelawala: None. K.H. Tennekoon: None. R. Ranasinghe:
None. H.A.C.I. K. Rodrigo: None. G.K.S. De Silva: None. W.A.H.A.
Perera: None. N. Yoganathan: None. M.R.S. Manatunga: None.
D.M.A.S. Dissanayake: None. N. Joseph: None. C. Rajasooriyar:
None. K. Indranath: None.
P12.138.B Evaluation of Plasma Cell Molecular Cytogenetic
Findings of Myeloma Patients: One-Year Single-Center
Experience
Ibrahim Kaplan, Hande Nur Cesur Baltaci , Sule Altiner, Sadiye
Ekinci, Nedime Arzu Vicdan, Halil Gürhan Karabulut, Timur Tuncali,
Hatice Ilgin Ruhi, Nüket Yürür Kutlay
Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Ankara
University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a type of plasma cell
dyscrasia and the second most common hematological malig-
nancy of adulthood. Malignant plasma cells accumulate in bone
marrow leading to bone marrow failure, also in extramedullarysites. During the evaluation of myeloma patients, besides otherlaboratory examinations, cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic
(FISH) studies of plasma cells and/or bone marrow are especially
important for diagnosis, follow-up and providing exact treatment.Here, we present our cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic
results of 93 plasma cell samples from 86 patients, during 2020.
Materials and Methods: We evaluated our FISH results of CD138
(+) plasma cells separated from b one marrow aspirates. In daily
practice, we perform FISH analysis for monosomy 7, trisomy 8, 13q
deletion, 17p deletion, t(4;1 4), t(11;14) and if possible, IGHand CCND1
gene rearrangements. In our targeted examinations, atypical resultsare widely detected that could be seen by routine FISH probes.
Results and Conclusions: According to our results, in 8 of 93
samples (8,6%) trisomy 8; in 43 of 93 samples (46%) (38 of them
large deletion or monosomy 13) deletion of 13q; in 13 of 93samples (13%) loss of TP53 were detected, whereas monosomy 7
in none. t(11;14) and t(4;14) were detected in 6% and 5% of
samples whereas IGH gene rearrangements without these
translocations were common: in FISH analysis, any type ofabnormal pattern was detected with a rate of 53,7% for both
fusion probes. All abnormal patterns related to all probes were
exclusively discussed.
I. Kaplan: None. H.N. Cesur Baltaci: None. S. Altiner: None. S.
Ekinci: None. N.A. Vicdan: None. H.G. Karabulut: None. T.
Tuncali: None. H. Ilgin Ruhi: None. N. Yürür Kutlay: None.
P12.139.C Mitochondrial mutational spectrum in human
cancers is sensitive to cellular hypoxia
Alina G. Mikhailova1,2, Polina Lisitsa1, Alina A. Mikhailova1,3,
Kristina Ushakova1, Evgeny Tretiakov1,4, Andrey Yurchenko5, Vsevo-
lod Makeev2, Dmitrii Knorre6,7, Sergey Nikolaev5, Ilia Mazunin8,9,
Jacques Fellay10, Konstantin Khrapko11, Konstantin Gunbin1, Kon-
stantin Popadin1,10Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
413
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russian
Federation,2Vavilov Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow,
Russian Federation,3University of Münster, Münster, Germany,
4Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria,5Université Paris
Saclay, Villejuif, France,6Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian
Federation,7Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University,
Moscow, Russian Federation,8Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology, Moscow, Russian Federation,9Fomin Women ’s Health
Clinic, Moscow, Russian Federation,10Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,11Northeastern University,
Boston, MA, USA.
The mutational spectrum of the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA)
may be sensitive to the oxidative damage since mitochondria
maintain the oxidative metabolism. Recently we have shown that
the frequency of A H>GH(heavy strand notation) substitutions in
mtDNA is positively correlated with cellular and organismal
longevity ( https://doi.org/10.1101/589168 ). We have shown that
somatic A H>GHsubstitutions are more frequent at earlier stages of
tumorigenesis and in cancers derived from slow-replicatingtissues. The logic behind this ﬁnding was that long lived and
slow-dividing cells have a rich aerobic environment, permitting a
high oxidative metabolism, while short-lived fastly-dividing cellscan run out of oxygen ending up in hypoxic conditions. Tovalidate our hypothesis that mtDNA mutational spectrum is
sensitive to hypoxia we tested mtDNA mutation rate and spectra
in cancer samples with different levels of aerobic metabolism,ranging from normoxia to hypoxia. Using a collection of somatic
mtDNA mutations and hypoxia scores derived for thousands
individual cancer samples in the framework of the ICGC/TCGAPan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) consortium weobserved that indeed mtDNA mutations depend on the level of
hypoxia. Firstly, the fraction of A
H>GHis decreased in highly
hypoxic cancers. Secondly, the total mtDNA mutation rate is lowerin hypoxic cancers (mainly due to drop in A
H>GH). Altogether, we
suggest that A H>GHsubstitutions are sensitive to oxidative
damage and thus can be a new marker of the redox stress in
mtDNA. This work is supported by Russian Science Foundation №
21-75-20143.
A.G. Mikhailova: None. P. Lisitsa: None. A.A. Mikhailova:
None. K. Ushakova: None. E. Tretiakov: None. A. Yurchenko:
None. V. Makeev: None. D. Knorre: None. S. Nikolaev: None. I.
Mazunin: None. J. Fellay: None. K. Khrapko: None. K. Gunbin:
None. K. Popadin: None.
P12.140.D MUTYH -associated polyposis in a cohort of Slove-
nian patients with adenomatous polyposis
Ksenija Strojnik1, Iva Opalic2, Mateja Krajc1, Marta Banjac1, Vida
Stegel3, Petra Skerl3, Vita Setrajcic Dragos3, Gasper Klancar3, Srdjan
Novakovic3, Ana Blatnik1
1Cancer Genetic Clinic, Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
2University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,3Department
of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slove-
nia.
Introduction: MUTYH -associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal
recessive polyposis syndrome caused by biallelic pathogenic
variants (PVs) in MUTYH gene. It is characterised by multiple
colorectal adenomas and high risk of colorectal cancer. Data on
extracolonic manifestations of MAP is limited.
Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of 72 polyposis
patients with ≥10 colorectal adenomas referred to our institution for
germline genetic testing with NGS panels since 2015.Results: In 4/72 (5.6%) polyposis patients, all female, biallelic PV
inMUTYH gene were identi ﬁed; clinical characteristics are detailed
in the table bellow.
Conclusions: We observed 5 different PV in MUTYH gene in our
cohort of MAP patients, all of them previously reported inCaucasians. All of our patients had extracolonic tumours.
No. PV in MUTYH
(LRG_220t1)Colorectal
polyps (age)Colorectal
cancer
(age)Personal history of
other tumours (age)Family history of
cancer (age)Family
history
of
polyposis
1. c.536A>G p.
(Tyr179Cys)
c.734G>A p.
(Arg245His)˃10 adenomas
(44)right-sided
(43)bifocal breast cancer
(44)MGF:rectal (65) /
2. c.933 +3A>C p?
c.933+3A>C p?˃50 adenomas
+sessile
serrated
polyps (63)/ endometrial cancer
(55)S:ovarian (36) M:
breast (82)/
3. c.734G>A p.
(Arg245His)c.1147delC p.
(Ala385Profs*23)10 adenomas
(43)right-sided
(43)ovarian mucinous
cystadenoma (43)PU:larynx (61) /
4. c.933 +3A>C p?
c.1187G>A p.
(Gly396Asp)˃50 adenomas
(39)/ breast cancer (49)*,
thyroid nodules,
hyperplastic gastric
polypsF:larynx (77) PA:
breast (42) PA:
lung (53) PGF:
gastric (68)/
*also carrier of heterozygous PV CHEK2:c.444 +1G>A p?
MGF: maternal grandfather; S: sister; M: mother; PU: paternal
uncle; F: father; PA: paternal aunt; PGF: paternal grandfather.
K. Strojnik: None. I. Opalic: None. M. Krajc: None. M. Banjac:
None. V. Stegel: None. P. Skerl: None. V. Setrajcic Dragos: None.
G. Klancar: None. S. Novakovic: None. A. Blatnik: None.
P12.141.A MYH associated polyposis with a germline homo-
zygous biallelic duplication in a Libyan pedigree
Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA , Balkiss Abdelmoula, Samir Aloulou,
Walid Smaoui, Kays Chaker, UR17ES36 Team
Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17ES36,
Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia.
Objective: Colorectal adenomatous polyposis inherited in a
recessive manner is associated to biallelic mutations in the MYH.Described in 2002, the recessively inherited MYH-associated
polyposis (MAP) is a less severe variant of polyposis compared with
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Here, we describe a MAPLibyan family in who multiple cases were identi ﬁed as having
digestive cancers. Clinical observation: A 38-year-old Libyan patient
was referred to our genetic counseling because of a colorectal
cancer. Sanger sequencing was used for screening of APC and MYHmutations. The patient was born from a faraway consanguineouscouple and reported the death of his sister, his maternal aunt and
uncle at 45 year-old from digestive cancers. He was admitted with
an acute digestive obstruction and during laparoscopy, a righthemicolectomy was conducted. A moderately differentiated Lieber-
kühnian adenocarcinoma arising in the ileocecal Bauhin ’sv a l v ew a s
removed. The tumor was associated to two other adenocarcinomasof the right colon. One of them arised from precursor adenomatouspolyp. There was in fact multiple sessile polyposis. There was an
inﬁltration of all the tunics of the colonic wall and part of the
mesocolon with a vascular invasion and ﬁve lymph node metastasis
with capsular rupture in two ganglions. At the molecular level, thepatient has a homozygous biallelic MYH mutation at the exon 13 of
the gene: the MUTYH c.1185_1186dupGG variant resulting in a
premature termination of the protein.
Conclusion: The germline homozygous duplication
c.1185_1186dup is one of the most frequent genetic alteration
in North African families with MAP.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
414
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608N.B. Abdelmoula: None. B. Abdelmoula: None. S. Aloulou:
None. W. Smaoui: None. K. Chaker: None.
P12.142.B Next generation sequencing for germline mutation
analysis in patients with neuro ﬁbromatosis
Daniela Pencheva , Kunka Kamenarova, Kalina Mihova, Ivanka
Dimova, Vanio Mitev, Radka Kaneva
Molecular medicine center, MU- So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis of types 1 and 2 (NF1, NF2) and
schwannomatosis form part of rare tumor-suppressor syndromes
called neuro ﬁbromatosis. The neuro ﬁbromatosis give rise to a
greater tumor burden for the nervous system than any otherneoplastic disease.
Materials and Methods: In the current study we included three
Bulgarian patients diagnosed with NF1 and two patients
diagnosed with NF2. DNA was isolated from blood. Next-generation sequencing was performed on MiSeq/Illumina plat-form with a panel of 94 cancer related genes.
Results: We found three heterozygous pathogenic variants in
NF1 gene, encoding the tumor suppressor protein neuro ﬁbromin,
and one heterozygous pathogenic variant in NF2 gene encoding
the tumor suppressor protein merlin.
Conclusions: The missense variant c.2819C>G (p.Thr940Ser) in
exon 21 of NF1 gene has a very low population frequency
(1.655x10
-5) in ExAC database. The other NF1 mutation c.5839C>T
(p.Arg1947Ter) in exon 39 is a pathogenic loss-of-function
mutation. We found also a pathogenic deep intronic variant inNF1 gene c.4110 +945A>G. These type of mutations form new or
enhance the effect of acceptor or donor splice sites, leading to the
inclusion of non-coding exons in the template RNA and affecting
protein function. The frequency of these variants is about 2% of allgenerating mutations in the NF1 gene. In addition we found one
mutation c.1737G>T (p.Lys579Asn) in exon 15 of NF2 gene. This
variant is new for data bases and affects the last base of exon 15,which according to the dbscSNV Splice Altering Predictionsprogram is pathogenic. Funding: NSP “Young Scientists and
Postdoctoral Fellows ”
D. Pencheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova: None. I.
Dimova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P12.143.C Usefulness of a targeted NGS approach to prostate
cancer: two case reports of homologous recombination repair
genes involvement
Elisa De Paolis , Paola Concolino, Andrea Urbani, Angelo Minucci
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168, Italy.
Introduction: The ﬁndings about the role of Homologous
Recombination Repair (HRR) genes in Prostate Cancer (PC) risk,
lead to the inclusion of a target genetic testing into the last clinical
practice guidelines. Moreover, an approved molecular targetedtherapy is now available. Here we described two cases of PCharboring HRR mutations detected through a Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) multi-genes panel.
Materials and Methods: Case 1 is a young man with localized
PC and family history of PC. Case 2 is a man with aggressive PCand a family history of Breast Cancer. The molecular evaluation
was ﬁrstly performed on tissue samples using the 14-genes NGS
panel HBOC (Devyser). Successively, a germline test was assessed.
Results: From tissue sample evaluation of case 1, we observed
the co-occurrence of two different pathogenic variants (one ofgermline origin) and a somatic Copy Number Variants in BRCA2
gene. The evaluation of case 2 described a germline CNV involving
ATM gene.
Conclusions: We reported two PC affected subjects tested as
positive for BRCA2 and ATM genes alterations. Among the genes
with a role in HRR, BRCA2 and ATM are the most commonly
reported. Information regarding HRR genes status in patients with
PC is useful to target treatments (PARPi) or to the eligibility forclinical trials. However, comparing to other malignancies, only aminority of PC patients underwent a molecular analysis. Given its
novelty, we want to support the relevance of HRR molecular
proﬁling in PC affected subject.
E. De Paolis: None. P. Concolino: None. A. Urbani: None. A.
Minucci: None.
P12.144.D Medulloblastoma in a patient with a balanced t
(5;22)(q35.1;q11.2) affecting the NF2 gene
Lucia Roque
1, Claudia Faria2,S oﬁa Nunes3, José Pimentel4
1Molecular and Pathology Investigation Unit (UIPM), Portuguese
Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal,2Neurosurgery Department, Centro
Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal,3Pediatric Neurology
Department, Portuguese Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal,4Neuro-
pathology Department, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisbon,
Portugal.
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal
dominant syndrome caused by inactivating alterations in the NF2
gene on chromosome 22q11.2. NF2 characteristically predisposesto the development of vestibular schwannomas, meningiomas,ependymomas and gliomas.
Material and Methods: We report the case of a 10-year-old girl
with a clinical history of NF2 that was submitted to surgicalresection of a posterior fossa tumor in the cerebellum, and
diagnosed as a medulloblastoma NOS with leptomeningial
dissemination. Genetic analysis of the tumor biopsy wasperformed by conventional cytogenetic analysis, HR-CGH andFISH. The constitutional karyotype of the patient and parents was
also evaluated.
Results: Cytogenetic analysis of the tumor cells revealed the
following karyotype: 46,XX, t(5;22)(q35.1; q11.2), der(22) t(5;22)(q35.1;q11.2)[21]. CGH showed an unbalanced genome with
multiple gains and losses namely, loss of 22q11.2-q13. The patient
constitutional karyotype was: 46, XX; t(5;22)(q35.1;q11.2). Theparent ’s karyotypes were normal. FISH analysis with a NF2 probe
revealed that this gene was rearranged. In tumor cells, loss of the
two copies of NF2-3 ’green probe occurred. No losses were
observed in the patient blood lymphocytes.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the second report of a
medulloblastoma in a patient with NF2 and the ﬁrst where genetic
analysis was performed. Due to the rarity of the associationbetween NF2 and medulloblastoma we hypothesize that, therearrangement of a gene at chromosome 5q35.1, in the context of
other abnormalities present in cerebellar cells,promoted the
development of medulloblastoma.Grant: UIC1230-IPOFG
L. Roque: None. C. Faria: None. S. Nunes: None. J. Pimentel:
None.
P12.145.A The in ﬂuence of non-coding RNAs on the genes of
epigenetic regulation in gastric cancer
Irina V. Bure
1, Ekaterina A. Vetchinkina1, Alexey I. Kalinkin2,
Ekaterina B. Kuznetsova1, Marina V. Nemtsova1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
415
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov Uni-
versity), Moscow, Russian Federation,2Research Center for Medical
Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms and non-
coding RNA (ncRNA) expression play a signi ﬁcant role in tumorigen-
esis. That make them prominent clinical markers to predict a
prognosis and choose the appropriate therapy. Interactions betweenncRNAs and methylation were demonstrated. The aim of our study
was to investigate correlations of expression of ncRNAs and genes of
epigenetic regulation in gastric cancer.
Materials and methods: Total RNA was extracted from normal
and tumor tissue of gastric cancer patients using Trizol. FollowingcDNA synthesis, the expression of mRNA, miRNA, and lncRNAs in
samples was analysed by using MiScript SYBR Green PCR Kit and
QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen). The housekeeping genesLMNB1, RNU6B and HPRT1 were used as controls.
Results: The investigation of 25 genes of epigenetic regulation
using the custom targeted NGS-panel and genomic databasesrevealed functional transcripts in their introns, including bothknown (linc00847 (EZH2), SIRLNT (SIRT1), TERT (SMARCA4), PROX1-
AS1 (PROX1)) and previously undescribed lncRNAs (HDAC2-AS2
and LOC101929089). The analysis of previous results by mirDIPalgorithm determined miRNAs related to epigenetic regulation,and the most prominent candidate were also included in the
study, namely miR-1301-3p, miR-106a-5p, miR-129-5p, miR-3613-
3p, miR-548c-3p, miR-647. The expression of the transcripts ingastric cancer samples was determined and further analysis of
their correlations currently in process.
Conclusions: Comparison of aberrant expression of ncRNAs
participating in epigenetic regulation with clinical characteristicswill allow to evaluate their diagnostic and prognostic potential in
gastric cancer. The authors received funding from the Russian
Science Foundation, Ref. No. 20-75-10117, for this work.
I.V. Bure: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Sechenov
First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University). B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
funding from the Russian Science Foundation, Ref. No. 20-75-10117. E.A. Vetchinkina: None. A.I. Kalinkin: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Research Center for Medical Genetic. E.B.
Kuznetsova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Sechenov
First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University). M.V.
Nemtsova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Sechenov
First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University).
P12.146.B Familial non-medullary thyroid cancer: clinical
features and molecular analysis
Claire Forde
1, John Fussey2, Claire Hartley1, George Burghel1, John
Hoffman3, Julian Adlard4, Fiona Lalloo1, Lucy Side5, Patrick J.
Morrison6, Joel Smith7, Sara Dyer3, Inigo Ortiz de Mendibil Ayuso3,
Derek Lim3, Dafydd G. R. Evans1, Eamonn R. Maher8, Emma R.
Woodward1
1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester Universities
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,2Department of
Otolaryngology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,3West Midlands Regional
Genetics Service, Birmingham Women ’s NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom,4Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service,
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom,5Wessex
Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHSFoundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom,6Northern Ireland
Regional Genetics Service, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust,
Belfast, United Kingdom,7Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, RoyalDevon and Exeter Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom,8East
Anglia Regional Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Familial non-syndromic medullary thyroid cancer
(FNMTC) accounts for up to 5% of NMTC. Although germline
alterations in candidate genes e.g. SRGAP1, SRRM2, FOXE1; have
been identi ﬁed in FNMTC, these have been in isolated individuals
or single/paired families.
Materials and Methods: A clinical investigation was under-
taken in 16 kindreds containing two or more cases of NMTC.
Syndromic cases were excluded. To identify possible predisposinggenetic factors, germline exome sequencing was completed in 4kindreds (8 individuals), along with somatic copy number variant
(CNV) and loss of heterozygosity (LoH) analyses in Formalin-Fixed
Paraf ﬁn-Embedded tissue.
Results: Thirty- ﬁve affected individuals (9 male, 26 female) were
included. There was a 2.9-fold excess of females [26/35(74%)],
similar to the ratio in published cohorts of sporadic cases ( P=
0.8514). Mean age of diagnosis was 41.6 years, signi ﬁcantly
younger than sporadic cases (mean =46.9y, P=0.0389). Fourteen
patients had multifocal and 13 had unifocal disease (8 unknown)
and 7/25 (28%) had extra-thyroid extension disease. Exomesequencing did not detect any (likely) pathogenic variants in theknown NMTC predisposition genes. Novel candidates discrete to
individual kindreds included a frameshift variant in CNTNAP3
(tumour CNV loss in both affected family members), a missensevariant in LMNB2 (tumour CNV loss concordant in 1/3 siblings),
and a missense variant in GAPVD1 (CNV loss and LoH in both
affected family members).
Conclusions: Epidemiological evidence suggests an inherited
predisposition to FNMTC (young age at diagnosis, multifocal
disease). A number of candidate genes have been identi ﬁed;
however further susceptibility loci are likely to contribute tofamilial cases.
C. Forde: None. J. Fussey: None. C. Hartley: None. G. Burghel:
None. J. Hoffman: None. J. Adlard: None. F. Lalloo: None. L.
Side: None. P.J. Morrison: None. J. Smith: None. S. Dyer: None. I.
Ortiz de Mendibil Ayuso: None. D. Lim: None. D.G.R. Evans:
None. E.R. Maher: None. E.R. Woodward: None.
P12.147.C Frequency of heterozygous carriage of mutations in
the NOTCH signaling pathway genes in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma patients & in populations of the Volga-Ural region
Elizaveta Ivanova
1, Irina Gilyazova1, Galiya Gimalova1, Adel
Izmailov2, Ilnur Sultanov2, Gulshat Gilyazova2, Valentin Pavlov2, Elza
Khusnutdinova1
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics - Subdivision of the Ufa
Federal Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa,
Russian Federation,2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Transmembrane receptors of the Notch family carry
out regulatory actions, affecting proliferation, apoptosis, differ-entiation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and other cellular processesthat induce the onset and development of malignant tumors
including renal cell carcinoma. We aimed to determine the
frequency of mutations in the Notch signaling pathway ( DLL4
(rs35748882), HEY2 (rs61737181), JAG1 (rs1801140, rs1801139,
rs45575136), NOTCH1 (rs61751542), NOTCH2 (rs3795666), NOTCH4
(rs8192576, rs8192579, rs8192585) identi ﬁed earlier as a result of
exome sequencing in an expanded group of patients with clearcell renal cell carcinoma.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
416
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: The study included 238 paired
samples of tumor and normal kidney tissue from patients with
clear cell renal cell carcinoma and 150 samples of population
controls. Detection of nucleotide sequence alterations of geneswas performed using PCR followed by RFLP analysis. Restrictionenzymes were selected using the NEBcutter V2.0 Internet
resource.
Results: On average, the frequency of detected changes in the
group of clear cell renal cell carcinoma patients was higher thanthe general population values. The highest frequency was found
for rs8192579 and rs8192585 NOTCH4 gene. Clinical and
pathological characteristics of the tumors in which mutationswere identi ﬁed, were heterogeneous and included patients with
both early and late stages.
Conclusions: The results obtained in this study may indicate
the contribution Notch signaling pathway gene alterations to thepathogenesis of clear cell renal cell carcinoma, as well as the
possibility of their use in creating a molecular markers panel for
the diagnosis and prognosis of the course of the disease.
E. Ivanova: None. I. Gilyazova: None. G. Gimalova: None. A.
Izmailov: None. I. Sultanov: None. G. Gilyazova: None. V.
Pavlov: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None.
P12.148.D Association of novel germline MLH1 in-frame
deletion with uncommon isolated PMS2 loss in tumor tissue
Gasper Klancar
1, Ana Blatnik2, Vita Setrajcic Dragos1, Vesna Vogric1,
Vida Stegel1, Olga Blatnik3, Primo žDrev3, Barbara Gazic3, Mateja
Krajc2, Srdjan Novakovic1
1Institute of Oncology, Division of Diagnostics, Department of
Molecular Diagnostics, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Institute of
Oncology Ljubljana, Cancer Genetics Clinic, Ljubljana, Slovenia, SI-
1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Depart-
ment of Pathology, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, SI-1000
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) diagnostics is based on the
detection of DNA-mismatch-repair (MMR) system de ﬁciency.
MMR-de ﬁciency can be detected in tumor tissue by microsatellite
instability (MSI) using molecular test or by loss of expression ofMMR proteins using immunohistochemistry (IHC). According toNCCN guidelines, de ﬁnitive LS diagnosis requires identi ﬁcation of
germline pathogenic variant (PV) in one of the MMR genes.
Materials and Methods: According to the sample availability,
we performed testing of the tumor-FFPE and blood/non-tumor-
FFPE samples in one LS suspected family. All FFPE samples were
IHC stained for MMR proteins and subsequently tested for MSIusing in-house-method. Selected tumor and blood samples weretested for genetic alterations with NGS sequencing using
TruSight_Cancer_Panel-(blood) or TruSight_Tumor_170-(tumor).
Segregation analysis and con ﬁrmation of NGS data was performed
with Sanger sequencing. Variants were classi ﬁed according to
ACMG_guidelines.
Results: We discovered novel MLH1 in-frame-deletion
LRG_216t1:c.2236_2247delCTGCCTGATCTA p.(Leu746_Leu749del)associated with LS. Variant appears to be associated withuncommon isolated loss of PMS2-protein in tumor tissue instead
of MLH1 and PMS2 protein loss, which is commonly seen with PVs
in MLH1. The variant was classi ﬁed as likely pathogenic, based on
segregation analysis and molecular characterization of tumor and
blood samples.
Conclusions: Proven variant co-segregation with affected
family members emphasizes the importance of linking clinicaland molecular data. A functional study will be needed to
conclusively determine effect of variant on the interaction ofMLH1 and PMS2. This report contributes to characterization of PV
spectra in MLH1 leading to LS.
G. Klancar: None. A. Blatnik: None. V. Setrajcic Dragos: None.
V. Vogric: None. V. Stegel: None. O. Blatnik: None. P. Drev:
None. B. Gazic: None. M. Krajc: None. S. Novakovic: None.
P12.149.A NTHL1 -tumor syndrome in Slovenian patients with
adenomatous polyposis
Iva Opalic
1, Ksenija Strojnik2, Mateja Krajc2, Marta Banjac2, Vida
Stegel3, Petra Skerl3, Vita Setrajcic Dragos3, Gasper Klancar3, Srdjan
Novakovic3, Ana Blatnik2
1University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia,2Cancer
Genetics Clinic, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
3Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: NTHL1 -associated polyposis or NTHL1 -tumour syn-
drome is an autosomal recessive cancer predisposition. NTHL1
deﬁciency predisposes to adenomatous polyposis and colorectal
cancer, but appears to be associated with moderate to high risk of
breast cancer and other tumour types as well.
Materials and methods: We performed a retrospective analysis
of our adenomatous polyposis patient cohort to identify those
with biallelic NTHL1 pathogenic variants (PVs). We only included
patients who had ≥10 histologically con ﬁrmed tubular adenomas
and were tested with NGS panels for germline variants in the years
2015-2020.
Results: Out of 72 patients with adenomatous polyposis, 2
(2.8%) had biallelic PVs in NTHL1 . Patient 1 was a female, aged 62,
who had >10 adenomatous polyps removed on each yearly
colonoscopy. She also had endometrial cancer at age 45, colon
cancer at age 48, breast cancer at age 55, and diffuse gastriccancer at age 62. Three of her siblings also had breast, colon and
gastric cancer respectively. She was a carrier of a homozygous PV
inNTHL1 , c.268C>T p.(Gln90*). Patient 2 was also a female, aged
79, who had more than 50 colorectal adenomas removed on threecolonoscopies in less than 2 years. She was also diagnosed with
breast cancer at age 47 and with non-Hodgkin lymphoma at age
74. Her family history was positive for colon cancer in two ﬁrst-
degree relatives. She carried two NTHL1 PVs, c.268C>T p.(Gln90*)
and c.235dupG p.(Ala79Glyfs*2).
Conclusion: Both of our patients with NTHL1 deﬁciency and
adenomatous polyposis had various extracolonic disease mani-festations, including breast cancer.
I. Opalic: None. K. Strojnik: None. M. Krajc: None. M. Banjac:
None. V. Stegel: None. P. Skerl: None. V. Setrajcic Dragos: None.
G. Klancar: None. S. Novakovic: None. A. Blatnik: None.
P12.151.C Germline mutations in TP53 and BRCA1 genes in
pediatric patients with osteosarcoma revealed by multigenepanel testing
Vera V. Semenova
1,2,3, Valentina M. Kozlova2, Elena V. Zhukovs-
kaya3, Svetlana N. Mikhailova2, Alexandr F. Karelin3, Tatiana V.
Nasedkina1,3
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,2N.N. Blokhin National
Medical Research Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation,
3Dmitry Rogachev National Medical and Research Center of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federa-tion.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
417
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Osteosarcoma is the most common bone tumor in
children and young adults. A signi ﬁcant proportion of osteosarco-
mas is associated with germline mutations in cancer predisposi-
tion genes.
Patients and Methods: A total of 18 patients with osteosarcoma
were enrolled in the study. There were 9 girls and 9 boys aged 3-17
years (mean age 12,1). Six patients had multiple primary tumors. In
addition to osteosarcoma they had nephroblastoma (n =2), soft
tissue sarcoma (n =3), retinoblastoma (n =1). Genomic DNA was
isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes and next-generation
sequencing (NGS) on the NextSeq500 Illumina platform was
performed. A multigene panel included coding sequences of 882cancer-associated genes. The library was prepared using enrich-ment by hybridizationwith NimbleGen probes (Roche).
Results: Mutations in TP53 gene were revealed in four patients (4/
18). Among them, two siblings wi th osteosarcoma carried patho-
genic mutation.524G>A (rs28934578), their mother had breast cancer
at age 35. A girl with osteosarcoma and nephroblastoma had variant
with uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance c.631A>C (rs1060501198). Her
father with renal cell carcinoma also was the mutation carrier. Apatient with osteosarcoma and embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma
without family history had pathogenic mutation c.725G>A
(rs121912655). Another affected gene found in our patients wasBRCA1 . A girl with osteosarcoma carried BRCA1 2080delA mutation,
her mother and grandfather with Hodgkin ’s lymphoma and gastric
cancer were heterozygous carriers.
Conclusions: Germline mutations in cancer associated genes
were found in 27% of our patients. Most frequent were mutations
inTP53 genes (4/5), that means that in 22% patients osteosarcoma
was a part of Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
V.V. Semenova: None. V.M. Kozlova: None. E.V. Zhukovs-
kaya: None. S.N. Mikhailova: None. A.F. Karelin: None. T.V.
Nasedkina: None.
P12.152.D Analysis of BARD1, PRDM9, RCC1, and RECQL in
patients with ovarian cancer by targeted next-generation
sequencing of DNA pools
Malwina Suszynska
1, Magdalena Ratajska2,3, Aleksandra Rysz-
kowska1, Jaroslaw Debniak4, Dariusz Wydra4, Cezary Cybulski5,
Bartosz Wasag2,6, Piotr Kozlowski1
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Bioorganic Chem-
istry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland,2Department of
Biology and Medical Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk,Poland,3Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand,4Department of
Gynaecology, Oncologic Gynaecology and Gynaecological Endocri-nology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland,5Department
of Genetics and Pathology, International Hereditary Cancer Center,
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland,6Laboratory of
Clinical Genetics, University Clinical Centre, Gdansk, Poland.
Introduction: Several ovarian cancer susceptibility genes have
been discovered, but more are likely to exist. In this study, we
aimed to analyze knowledge-based selected candidate suscept-ibility genes, i.e., BARD1 ,PRDM9 ,RCC1 , and RECQL , in which loss-
of-function germline mutations have been reported in patients
with breast and/or ovarian cancer.
Materials and Methods: We analyzed the exons of BARD1 ,
PRDM9 ,RCC1 , and RECQL (plus 3 ’- and 5 ’-2 5 ﬂanking bases) of
~400 patients with ovarian cancer by targeted next-generation
sequencing of 25 pooled DNA samples (16 individuals/pool,including several positive-control and duplicated samples). Sure-Call application (Agilent) was used for end-to-end data analysis.The identi ﬁed rare genetics variants were validated by Sanger
sequencing in all individual samples of the pool carrying the
variant.
Results: No pathogenic mutation was found in the targeted
candidate susceptibility genes. Validation genotyping of ﬁltered
rare silent and missense variants revealed that the majority of
them were true variants. In addition, the high concordance
(R
2=0.95) of population allele frequency for 43 common SNPs in
the control European population (gnomAD) and our experimentconﬁrmed the reliability of pooled sequencing.
Conclusions: Mutations in BARD1 ,PRDM9 ,RCC1 , and RECQL do
not contribute substantially to the risk of ovarian cancer. PooledDNA sequencing is a cost-effective and reliable method for theinitial screening of candidate genes.
Acknowledgments: The Polish National Science Centre (NCN
2015/17/B/NZ2/01182).
M. Suszynska: None. M. Ratajska: None. A. Ryszkowska:
None. J. Debniak: None. D. Wydra: None. C. Cybulski: None. B.
Wasag: None. P. Kozlowski: None.
P12.153.A Use of ovarian cancer tumour pathology character-
istics to aid classi ﬁcation of Variants of Uncertain Signi ﬁcance
(VUS) in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes
Denise O ’Mahony
1,2,3, Susan J. Ramus4,5, Melissa Southey6,7,8,
Andreas Hadjisavvas2,3, Nicola S. Meagher4,5, Antonis C. Antoniou9,
Consortium of Investigators of Modi ﬁers of BRCA1/2 (CIMBA),
Ovarian Tumor Tissue Analysis Consortium (OTTA), David Goldgar10,
Amanda Spurdle11, Kyriaki Michailidou1,3
1Biostatistics Unit, the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus,2Department of Electron Microscopy and Molecular
Pathology, the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia,
Cyprus,3Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,
4School of Women ’s and Children ’s Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia,5Adult Cancer
Program, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New SouthWales, Sydney, Australia,6Monash University, Precision Medicine,
School of Clinical Sciences at Monash Health, Clayton, Australia,
7Department of Clinical Pathology, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia,8Cancer Epidemiology Division, Cancer Council
Victoria, Melbourne, Australia,9Centre for Cancer Genetic Epide-
miology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,10Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Salt Lake City, UT,USA,11Division of Genetics and Population Health, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
Introduction: Individuals carrying pathogenic/likely pathogenic
variants in the BRCA1 /2genes have a high lifetime risk of
developing breast and ovarian cancer. Diagnostic DNA testing
identi ﬁes carriers who could bene ﬁt from specialized care. The
increase in the use of genetic testing and particularly multi-genepanel testing, has increased the number of variants of uncertain
clinical signi ﬁcance (VUS) being detected, carriers of which do not
bene ﬁt from life-saving interventions. The Multifactorial Like-
lihood Model evaluates VUS association with disease risk inhereditary cancer genes by integrating multiple lines of evidence.
This model currently does not consider ovarian cancer character-
istics. We aim to assess ovarian cancer characteristics aspredictors of BRCA1/2 variant pathogenicity, for inclusion in the
Multifactorial model and as clinical data points using the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics andAssociation for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) quantitativeevidence system.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
418
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Methods : Histopathology/morphology tumour information was
obtained from ovarian cancers, in BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant
carriers (n =1,942) and BRCA1/2 non-carriers (n =2,616). Like-
lihood Ratios (LR) were calculated for each histopathologicalfeature, and were aligned to ACMG/AMP strengths.
Results: ‘High-grade serous ’tumours are positive predictors of
pathogenicity for the BRCA1 /2genes (LRs =1.15-1.16), while
‘Other ’tumours are positive predictors for BRCA1 pathogenicity
(LR=1.46). ‘Mucinous ’(LR=0.17-0.30) and ‘Clear-cell ’(LR=0.22-
0.16) tumours negatively predict BRCA1/2 pathogenicity and reach
‘Supporting ’to‘Moderate ’benign evidence under ACMG/AMP
rules. The above histopathological features reach signi ﬁcance and
can be incorporated in future multifactorial models.
Conclusions: We provide re ﬁned estimates for predicting
BRCA1/2 variant pathogenicity using ovarian tumour character-
istics that will signi ﬁcantly improve variant interpretation.
D. O ’Mahony: None. S. J. Ramus: None. M. Southey: None. A.
Hadjisavvas: None. N. S. Meagher: None. A. C. Antoniou: None.
D. Goldgar: None. A. Spurdle: None. K. Michailidou: None.
P12.154.B Using FFPE tissue from non-mucinous epithelial
ovarian cancer patients to detect germline variants
José Luis Villanueva-Cañas1, Míriam Potrony2,3, Adela Saco4,
Ricard Isanta1, Vanesa Lopez1, Victor Pastor1, Elena Gonzalvo
Mallón4, Mireia García Gerona4, Lorena Moreno5, Belén Pastor6,
Eduardo González7, Bárbara Adamo5, Lydia Gaba8, Aurora Sánchez2,
Pedro Jares1,4, Joan Antón Puig-Butillé1,2
1Molecular Biology CORE Laboratory, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain,2Biochemical and Molecular Genetics Department,
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de Investiga-
ción Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain,4Pathology Department, Hospital Clínic
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,5Gastroenterology Department,
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,6Medical Oncology,
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,7Obstetrics and
Gynecology Department, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona,Spain,8Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Genetic testing of homologous recombination DNA
repair pathway related genes is relevant in ovarian cancer
patients. This genetic testing allows for cancer risk identi ﬁcation
and guides ﬁrst-line treatment selection since PARP1 inhibitors are
approved for germline and/or somatic BRCA-mutated advanced
ovarian cancer. This study assess the feasibility of DNA analysis
from FFPE tissue as a resource for initial genetic testing in ovariancancer patients.
Materials and Methods: We selected twenty- ﬁve non-muci-
nous epithelial ovarian cancer patients based on their germline
genetic background, corresponding to six patients with germlineBRCA1/2 mutations, six patients with germline mutations in ATM,
BRIP1, CHEK2 orPALB2 genes, and thirteen wild-type patients. In all
patients, somatic DNA from the FFPE ovarian tumour was analyzed
by the Oncomine BRCA Expanded NGS panel (ThermoFisher) anda commercial bioinformatic pipeline. The analysis was focused onBRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, BRIP1, BARD1, PALB2, ATM , and TP53
genes.
Results: The sensitivity of detecting a germline mutation in
FFPE DNA tissue was 92%. Among wild-type germline patients, a
somatic mutation in ATM and BRCA1/2 and was observed in two
and three patients, respectively. All somatic mutant BRCA1/2
tumours were classi ﬁed as high-grade serous carcinomas. In
addition, somatic TP53 mutations were observed in 73% of
tumours.Conclusions : An initial genetic testing using routine FFPE tissue
is efﬁcient for the detection of germline and somatic mutations in
BRCA1/2 and other genes involved in homologous recombination
DNA repair pathway, including several INDELs.
J.L. Villanueva-Cañas: None. M. Potrony: None. A. Saco: None.
R. Isanta: None. V. Lopez: None. V. Pastor: None. E. Gonzalvo
Mallón: None. M. García Gerona: None. L. Moreno: None. B.
Pastor: None. E. González: None. B. Adamo: None. L. Gaba:
None. A. Sánchez: None. P. Jares: None. J.A. Puig-Butillé: None.
P12.155.C Weighted gene co-expression network analysis of
ovarian cancer transcriptional pro ﬁle and its relations to
stemness
Anna Erol
1, Magdalena Niemira1, Karolina Chwia łkowska2, Anna
Szałkowska1, Agnieszka Bielska1, Justyna Raczkowska1, Gabriela
Soko łowska1, Iwona Sidorkiewicz1, Katarzyna Doroszko1, Katarzyna
Doroszko1, Patrycja Modzelewska3, Miros ław Kwa śniewski2, Joanna
Resze ć3, Jacek Szamatowicz4, Pawe łKnapp5, Marcin Moniuszko6,
Adam Kr ętowski1,7
1Clinical Research Centre, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok,
Poland,2Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,3Departament of Medical
Pathomorphology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,
4Department of Gynecology and Gynecological Oncology, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,5University Oncology
Centre, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,6Depart-
ment of Regenerative Medicine and Immune Regulation, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,77Department of Endocri-
nology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Medical University ofBialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction: Unsupervised approaches like Weighted Gene Co-
expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), allow data reduction of
high dimensional sequencing data, by creating modules, based on
pairwise correlation. These modules can be further related toadditional sample information. Cancer stem-like cells (CSC)hypothesis, gains researchers ’interest as evidence are rising. The
hypothesis states, that cells subpopulation showing stemness
characteristics or are at stemness state are promoting tumourdevelopment, relapse and metastasis. The goal of this study is toﬁnd modules of genes related to CSC.
Methods: The WGCNA has been performed on paired-end total
RNA sequencing of 33 Non-Tumour and 33 High-Grade SerousOvarian Cancer on-site generated data. Modules have been
correlated with mRNAsi and other clinical information available
for patients. Downstream analysis of chosen modules followed.
Results/Conclusions: Two modules have been signi ﬁcantly
correlated with mRNAsi: module yellow and turquoise Gene
ontology (GO) enriched in the yellow module include nuclear
division and top enriched KEGG pathway is cell cycle. GO formodule turquoise top enriched biological processes are mostlyrelated to development and KEGG enrichment top results include
Wnt, Hippo, TGF-beta signalling pathways. These results will be
further validated by sequencing of CSC-enriched subpopulation ofovarian cancer cells. This research was conducted within theproject which has received funding from the European Union ’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sk łodowska-Curie grant agreement No 754432 and the
Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education, from ﬁnancial
resources for science in 2018-2023 granted for the implementa-
tion of an international co- ﬁnanced project.
A. Erol: None. M. Niemira: None. K. Chwia łkowska: None. A.
Szałkowska: None. A. Bielska: None. J. Raczkowska: None. G.
Soko łowska: None. I. Sidorkiewicz: None. K. Doroszko: None. K.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
419
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Doroszko: None. P. Modzelewska: None. M. Kwa śniewski: None.
J. Resze ć:None. J. Szamatowicz: None. P. Knapp: None. M.
Moniuszko: None. A. Kr ętowski: None.
P12.156.D Identi ﬁcation of novel ovarian cancer susceptibility
genes through investigation of exceptional responders to
platinum-based therapy
Anna Sokolenko1,2, Valeria Ni1, Tatiana Sokolova1, Robert Broyde3,
Thilo Dörk4, Evgeny Imyanitov1,2
1N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation,
2St. Petersburg Pediatric Medical University, St.-Petersburg, Russian
Federation,3City Cancer Center, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation,
4Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
Introduction: A signi ﬁcant share of ovarian cancer (OC) incidence
is attributed to inherited germline mutations. Virtually all known
genes for hereditary OC, e.g., BRCA1 ,BRCA2 ,RAD51C ,RAD51D ,
render pronounced tumor sensitivity to both platinum com-pounds and PARP inhibitors. Here, we present an approach toidentifying new genetic determinants of OC predisposition by
analyzing exceptional responders to platinum-based therapy.
Material and method: 117 patients diagnosed with advanced
high-grade serous ovarian cancer were selected for the study
based on the criteria of the exceptional response to treatment, i.e.
the complete clinical or pathological response to chemotherapycoupled with the disease-free interval of at least 12 months.Genomic DNA was sequentially subjected to BRCA1/BRCA2
analysis, followed by 25-gene panel targeted sequencing of
BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation-negative cases and whole-exome
sequencing.
Results: A signi ﬁcant enrichment for BRCA1/BRCA2 germline
mutations was observed: 37/117 (32%) analyzed patients carried
pathogenic BRCA1 orBRCA2 alleles. Upon targeted sequencing, we
identi ﬁed 6 carriers of pathogenic alleles in NBN (n=3),ATM (n=
1),PALB2 (n=1), and RAD51D (n=1) genes. The analysis of 40
BRCA1/BRCA2 -negative cases by whole-exome sequencing
revealed several protein-truncating variants in genes involved inDNA repair or bearing tumor suppressor function: BRIP1 ,FANCM ,
RAD50 ,RAD54B ,STK36 ,POLA2 ,PTCH2 ,AEN,MSH4 .
Conclusion: Irrespective of family history, exceptional respon-
ders to platinum-based therapy represent a genetically-enrichedcohort of patients eligible for identifying novel genes for
hereditary OC. This work is supported by the Russian Foundation
for Basic Research [grant number 20-515-12009].
A. Sokolenko: None. V. Ni: None. T. Sokolova: None. R.
Broyde: None. T. Dörk: None. E. Imyanitov: None.
P12.157.A Proposal of new candidate genes of predisposition
to serous ovarian cancer using whole-exome-sequencing of 16
patients with a familial form
Mathias Cavaillé
1,Maud Privat1, Lorenzo Menicucci1, Flora Ponelle-
Chachuat1, Nicolas Sonnier1, Sandrine Viala1, Mathis Lepage1,
Mathilde Gay-Bellile1, Nancy Uhrhammer1, Yannick Bidet2, Yves-
Jean Bignon1
1Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, France,2Université Clermont
Auvergne, Clermont Ferrand, France.
High-grade serous ovarian cancer is associated with a hereditary
predisposition to cancer identi ﬁed in almost 1/4 of cases.
However, no causal pathogenic variant is found in more than50% of familial forms, suggesting the existence of other riskfactors, including other high risk genetic factors. Exploration of 16patients presenting a familial form of high grade serous ovarian
carcinoma using whole-exome sequencing was performed in our
study. The rare variants shared by at least 2 unrelated patients
were selected, including truncating, splicing and missense variantsfrom a list of known or suspected genes involved in oncogenesis.Their interpretation using different databases found twelve
candidate genes and three candidate pathways, including
Hippo-YAP/TAZ pathways. The missense variants were thenstudied in tumor samples, looking for loss of heterozygoty and/or loss of expression. Functional in vitro studies are also currently
being carried out to clarify the involvement of these new genes in
ovarian carcinogenesis. In conclusion, our study design usingexome analysis of patients with a familial form of ovarian canceridenti ﬁed candidate genes for hereditary predisposition to high-
grade serous ovarian cancer. Further investigations, including a
large case - control study, are required to con ﬁrm their implication
in predisposition to ovarian carcinoma.
M. Cavaillé: None. M. Privat: None. L. Menicucci: None. F.
Ponelle-Chachuat: None. N. Sonnier: None. S. Viala: None. M.
Lepage: None. M. Gay-Bellile: None. N. Uhrhammer: None. Y.
Bidet: None. Y. Bignon: None.
P12.160.D Investigation of Wnt signaling pathway compo-
nents in VPA induced PANC 1 cells
Yeliz Ekici
1,2, Abdullah Yilmaz3, Umut Kucuksezer3, Sema Bilgic
Gazioglu3, Zeynep Dogusan Yamalioglu4,5, Ali Osman Gurol3,6,
Thomas Linn7,Feyza N. Tuncer1,6
1Istanbul University, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine
Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,2Istanbul University,
Graduate School of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey,3Istanbul
University, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Depart-
ment of Immunology, Istanbul, Turkey,4Yeni Yuzyil University
Gaziosmanpasa Hospital Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Cell
Processing Unit, Istanbul, Turkey,5Yeni Yuzyil University, Medical
Faculty, Department of Medical Microbiology, Istanbul, Turkey,
6Istanbul University, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Diabetes Application and Research Center, Istanbul, Turkey,77Justus-
Liebig-University, Clinical Research Unit, Center of Internal Medicine,
Giessen, Germany.
Introduction: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among
the most aggressive cancers with a 5-year survival rate of less than
8%. Using PANC-1 cell line as a PDAC model, we aimed to examinethe effect of valproic acid (VPA) on the expression of the canonical
Wnt signaling pathway components and to determine IC
50of VPA
with a novel approach.
Materials and Methods: PANC-1 cells were cultured for 24, 48,
72, or 96 h in the presence of VPA at 0.5, 1, 2.5, 5 and 10 mM/mL
concentrations. Flow cytometry was utilized in assessing prolif-
erative and apoptotic responses in cells by CFSE and Annexin V/PIstaining, respectively. CFSE staining aided to calculate thedifference between cell doublings via 2n =F
control /FVPAthrough
which graphs of VPA concentrations against durations were drawn
to calculate the IC 50value. Taqman hydrolysis probes and SYBR
Green PCR Mastermix were assessed in expression analyses of Wntcomponents utilizing 2−ΔΔCtmethod.
Results: IC50was calculated as 2.5 mM, at which cells were
detected to undergo early apoptosis. At this concentration, asigni ﬁcant 4-fold upregulation in LEF1 expression was detected.
Conclusions: We present a novel and speci ﬁc calculation of IC
50
value through combined analyses of CFSE and Annexin V/PI
staining. Our approach enabled accurate and reproducible IC 50
calculation at single cell level with no signi ﬁcant effect on the
canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Further studies are needed toAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
420
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608clarify the role of LEF1 in this model. This work was supported by
Scienti ﬁc Research Projects Coordination Unit of Istanbul Uni-
versity (TDP-2019-32763).
Y. Ekici: None. A. Yilmaz: None. U. Kucuksezer: None. S. Bilgic
Gazioglu: None. Z. Dogusan Yamalioglu: None. A. Gurol: None.
T. Linn: None. F.N. Tuncer: None.
P12.161.A The novel fusion transcripts in pediatric AML with
complex 11q23 rearrangement
Lilit Ghukasyan1, Georgii Krasnov1, Arina Bessonova1, Liudmila
Baidun2, Tatiana Nasedkina1
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Russian Children ’s Clinical
Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with 11q23 rearrangement causing
fusion of the KMT2A gene with various speci ﬁc partner genes
(AML-KMT2A-r), is one of the most common subtypes of pediatricAML (~18%). The clinical outcome depends mainly on partner
gene and varies from intermediate to poor. About 100 gene-
partners of KMT2A have been discovered so far, but many are still
unknown. Thus, the detection of novel KMT2A chimeras in
pediatric AML is important to improve the treatment strati ﬁcation
and disease monitoring. We performed RNA-seq of 9 samplesobtained from 7 children with AML-KMT2A-r, a triplet of samplescollected at diagnosis, remission and relapse was available for one
patient. Only those AML-KMT2A-r cases were enrolled in the study
in which FISH revealed atypical t(10;11) (n =4) and in which FISH
positive 11q23 rearrangement was not con ﬁrmed by reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) (n =3). All 4 patients with atypical t
(10;11) showed complex rearrangements, carrying more than one
fusion: patients 1, 2 and 7 harbored MLLT10-DNAJC1 ,DNAJC1-
KMT2A ;FTH1-KMT2A ,MLLT10-ANGPT1 and KMT2A-MLLT10 ,MLLT10-
AP001107.9 fusions, respectively. Patient 4 with a triplet of
samples carried MLLT10-MKX, KMT2A-MLLT10 at diagnosis and
relapse, no fusion in remission; also in relapse additionallyemerged TBL1XR1-EAF2 chimeric trancript was detected. In
patients 5 and 6 with uncon ﬁrmed KMT2A fusions, RNA-seq
revealed well known transcripts KMT2A-SEPTIN5 and KMT2A-
MLLT11 , respectively. In patient 3 no rearrangement was found.
Hence, we identi ﬁed 5 novel fusions in pediatric leukemia
patients: DNAJC1-KMT2A, FTH1-KMT2A, MLLT10-ANGPT1, MLLT10-
AP001107.9, MLLT10-MKX and TBL1XR1-EAF2 . The work was
supported by Russian Science Foundation (grant # 18 −15-00398).
L. Ghukasyan: None. G. Krasnov: None. A. Bessonova: None.
L. Baidun: None. T. Nasedkina: None.
P12.162.B The management of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome:
European Hereditary Tumour Group (EHTG) Guideline
Anja Wagner
1,2, Stefan Aretz3,4, Annika Auranen5, Marco J. Bruno1,2,
Giulia M. Cavestro6, Emma J. Crosbie7,8, Anne Goverde1,2, Anne Marie
Jelsig9, Andrew R. Latchford10,11, Monique E. van Leerdam12,13, Anna
H. Lepisto14, Marta Puzzono6, Ingrid Winship15, Veronica Zuber6,
Gabriela Möslein16
1University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
2Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands,3University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,4University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
5Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland,6University IRCCS
San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,7Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom,8, St Mary ’s
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom,9University Hospital ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,10Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom,11St. Marks Hospital, London, United
Kingdom,12Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
13Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,14University
Hospital of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,15University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia,16, Academic Hospital University of Düsseldorf,
Duisburg, Germany.
Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal
dominant condition characterized by mucocutaneous pigmenta-
tion and PJS hamartomatous polyps. In adulthood, PJS patients
face an increased risk of different cancers. The scienti ﬁc data to
guide management of PJS are sparse. The European HereditaryTumour Group (EHTG) commissioned an update of the previous
guideline from 2010 (Beggs et al. Gut 2010).
Methods: Key clinical questions were identi ﬁed and literature
searches were performed using MEDLINE, Embase and Cochrane.
The available evidence was reviewed and discussed. Evidence
levels and recommendation strengths were assessed using theGrading of Recommendations Assessment, Development andEvaluation (GRADE). A Delphi process was followed, with
consensus being reached when ≥80% of the voting guideline
committee members had voted either “Very strongly agree ”,
“Strongly agree ”,o r “Agree ”.
Results: On gastrointestinal and pancreatic management recent
adequate guidelines were available. These were reviewed and
endorsed after con ﬁrming no more recent relevant papers had
been published. Literature searches were performed for additional
questions and yielded a variable number of relevant papers
depending on the addressed subject: 21/244 papers on genetictesting; 3/179 on gastrointestinal management; 6/177 on surgicalmanagement; 57/770 on pancreatic management; 16/302 on
breast management and 6/188 on gynecological management
were included. Additional recommendations and statements wereformulated (Wagner et al. JCM 2021).
Conclusions: A decade later, the evidence base for recommen-
dations remains poor and collaborative studies are required to
provide better data in this rare condition. Within these restrictions,multisystem, clinical management recommendations for PJS havebeen formulated.
A. Wagner: None. S. Aretz: None. A. Auranen: None. M.J.
Bruno: None. G.M. Cavestro: None. E.J. Crosbie: None. A.
Goverde: None. A. Jelsig: None. A.R. Latchford: None. M.E. van
Leerdam: None. A.H. Lepisto: None. M. Puzzono: None. I.
Winship: None. V. Zuber: None. G. Möslein: None.
P12.163.C Genetic study of a Tunisian family with Peutz-
Jeghers syndrome
Marwa Mahdouani
1,2, Mahdi Ksiaa3,4, Badreddin Sriha5,4, Rihen
Brahem1, Mohamed Denguezli6,4, Moncef Mokni5,4, Ali Saad1,4, Moez
Gribaa1,4
1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and
Reproductive Biology. Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia,2Higher Institute of Biotechnology of Monastir, Monastir,
Tunisia,3Department of Gastroenterology. Sahloul University Hospi-
tal, Sousse, Tunisia,4Faculty of Medicine Ibn El Jazzar. University of
Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia,5Department of Pathological Anatomy and
Cytology. Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia,
6Department of Dermatology and Venerology. Farhat Hached
University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia.
Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare inherited
autosomal dominant disease, characterized by mucocutaneous
perioral pigmentation, gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
421
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608and an increased risk of malignancies such as colon, small
intestine, stomach, breast, pancreas, lung, reproductive organs,
and thyroid cancers. This disorder is caused by germline mutations
in the tumor suppressor gene STK11 , located on 19p13.3, encodes
for the LKB1 protein comprising 433 amino acids and belonging tothe serine/threonine kinase family. LKB1 regulates cellular
responses involved in cell polarity, energy metabolism, cell
growth, chromatin remodeling, angiogenesis, p53-dependentapoptosis, cell cycle arrest, fatty acid biosynthesis, and Wnt-signaling. Despite the high probability of a malignant transforma-
tion, molecular studies of PJS are rare in the world and particularly
in Tunisia.
Materials and methods: Two PJS patients belonging to the
same family (father and daughter) were sequenced for the open
reading frame of STK11 gene using the Sanger technique.
Results: We identi ﬁed a novel frameshift variant; c.605-606insA
(p.H202Qfs*265) at a heterozygous state in exon 5 of the STK11
gene for the 2 patients.
Discussion: Most of the mutations associated with PJS are
located in the kinase domain of the STK11 gene, extending from
exon 2 to exon 7, involved in substrate recognition. Several studies
showed that an important proportion of mutations, including our
variant, lead to a truncated protein and increases the risk ofdeveloping cancers.
Conclusion: Our results con ﬁrm that PJS is often associated
with truncating mutations in the kinase domain of the STK11 gene,
which should be identi ﬁed for an adequate genetic counseling.
M. Mahdouani: None. M. Ksiaa: None. B. Sriha: None. R.
Brahem: None. M. Denguezli: None. M. Mokni: None. A. Saad:
None. M. Gribaa: None.
P12.164.D Yield of thyroid cancer surveillance in patients with
PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome
Meggie M. C. M. Drissen
1, Janet R. Vos1, Martin Gotthardt2, Nicoline
Hoogerbrugge1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Radiology and Nuclear
Medicine, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands.
Introduction: Expert opinion-based guidelines recommend
annual thyroid ultrasound surveillance (TUS) for patients with
PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome (PHTS) due to elevated risk of
thyroid carcinoma (TC). We aimed to evaluate the yield of TUS.
Materials and Methods: Adult PHTS patients who visited our
expertise centre between 1997-2020 were included (N =87). Data
on TUS and clinical history were collected from medical records.Nodular progression was de ﬁned as an increase in the number
and/or size of nodules or size of the thyroid gland.
Results: Within 75 patients, 310 yearly ultrasounds were
performed with a total of 279 surveillance follow-up years. Themedian age at ﬁrst TUS was 37 years (interquartile range (IQR): 24-
43) with a median follow-up of 3 years (IQR: 1-5). At ﬁrst TUS, 60/
75 (80%) patients presented with multiple nodules. During follow-up, nodular progression was observed in 26/64 (41%) patients.Suspicious lymph nodes were found in 7/60 (12%) patients.
Thyroiditis was diagnosed in 8/61 (13%) patients. Thyroidectomy
was performed in 11/75 (15%) patients of which 7/11 occurredbefore initial TUS (all partial thyroidectomies). Reasons for surgery
were suspicion of TC (N =3) or multinodular goitre (N =6). Four
patients (median age of 24 years (IQR: 21-27)) presented with TCof which 3/87 had a medical history of TC and 1/75 developed TCduring TUS. Histology showed 2 papillary and 2 follicular TCs.Conclusions: Multinodular thyroid disease and thyroiditis are
common ﬁndings in PHTS patients. The number of TCs is lower
than what we had expected based on current TC risk estimates.
M.M.C.M. Drissen: None. J.R. Vos: None. M. Gotthardt: None.
N. Hoogerbrugge: None.
P12.165.A A mosaic PIK3CA variant in a young adult with
diffuse gastric cancer
Iris B. A. W. te Paske
1, José Garcia-Pelaez2, Anna K. Sommer3, Leslie
Matalonga4, Teresa Starzynska5, Anna Jakubowska6,7, Solve-RD-
GENTURIS group, Rachel S. van der Post8, Jan Lubinski6, Carla
Oliveira2, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge1, Richarda M. de Voer1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center,
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2I3S, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal; Ipatimup, Institute of Molecular Pathology
and Immunology of the University of Porto; Faculty of Medicine,University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,4CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barce-
lona, Spain,5Department of Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland,6Department of Genetics and Pathology,
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland,7Independent
Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Genetic Diagnostics, Pomer-anian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland,8Department of Pathol-
ogy, Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background: Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is asso-
ciated with germline pathogenic variants in CDH1 and CTNNA1 .
However, a large proportion of clinically and pathologically HDGC-
like families and individuals developing DGC at very young ageremain genetically unresolved, raising the need for research on
novel inherited predisposing factors. Under the collaborative
environment of the SOLVE-RD consortium, we aimed to geneti-cally diagnose these unresolved patients by re-analysis of theirwhole-exome sequencing data.
Methods: Whole-exome sequencing data from unresolved
gastric cancer cases ( n=83) was processed by the RD-Connect
Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform and annotated using theEnsembl Variant Effect Predictor algorithm. Variants present in
genes associated with genetic tumor risk syndromes ( n=229)
that were predicted by ClinVar as (likely) pathogenic werefollowed up for interpretation and validation.
Results: A mosaic pathogenic missense variant in PIK3CA was
identi ﬁed in a 25-year-old female with DGC without familial
history for cancer. The variant, c.3140A>G (p.His1047Arg), waspresent at a low variant allele frequency (18%) in leukocyte-
derived DNA. The variant was not found in our inhouse database
nor in individuals from non-cancer SOLVE-RD cohorts. Somaticvariants in PIK3CA are usually associated with overgrowth, a
phenotype that was not observed in this patient.
Conclusions: This study highlights mosaicism as a potential
-and understudied- mechanism in the etiology of DGC. Moreover,this case emphasizes the complexity of molecular diagnosis ingenetic tumor risk syndrome suspected patients, as in many of
these genetically unresolved patients an obvious genotype-
phenotype correlation often cannot be found. SOLVE-RD received
funding from EU Horizon 2020 (No.779257)
I.B.A.W. te Paske: None. J. Garcia-Pelaez: None. A.K. Sommer:
None. L. Matalonga: None. T. Starzynska: None. A. Jakubowska:
None. R.S. van der Post: None. J. Lubinski: None. C. Oliveira:
None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. R.M. de Voer: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
422
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P12.166.B Detection of PIK3CA mutations in breast cancer:
comparison of next-generation sequencing and Sanger
sequencing
Maria Michelli , Eirini Roupou, Ilenia Chatziandreou, Alexandros
Zougros, Angelica A. Saetta
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical school,
Athens, Greece.
Introduction: The PI3K pathway is well known for its role in
cellular proliferation and survival. Mutations in PI3K p110 α
catalytic subunit ( PIK3CA gene) are among the most common
aberrations for breast cancer. PIK3CA mutations are currently a
biomarker for personalized cancer therapy. Our aim was to
evaluate the concordance between Next-generation sequencing(NGS) and Sanger Sequencing for mutation detection in exon 9and 20 of PIK3CA gene.
Materials and Methods: We examined 115 breast carcinomas
and 15 cfDNA samples. 85 of the samples were analyzed by bothmethods whereas 28 samples were analyzed only by Sanger dueto inadequate DNA quality for NGS and 17 samples were analyzed
only by NGS.
Results: PIK3CA mutations were found in 26% of the samples
using NGS, and in 30% of the samples, using Sanger. The most
frequent mutations were: p.H1047R in 42% of the cases and p.
E545K in 22%. 21 samples gave non informative results (<100.00reads) by NGS and in 6 of them mutations were detected usingSanger sequencing. In 3 mutant cases by NGS the mutations could
not be detected by Sanger due to low variant frequencies. The
concordance of the two methods was 95%.
Conclusions: A good concordance was found between the two
methods; NGS shows a greater analytical sensitivity and Sanger
sequencing is an alternative method for samples showing low
DNA quality and quantity for NGS.
M. Michelli: None. E. Roupou: None. I. Chatziandreou: None.
A. Zougros: None. A.A. Saetta: None.
P12.167.C Droplet digital PCR and RT-qPCR as tools for
detections of PIK3CA mutations in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma
Edyta M. Borkowska
1, Magda Baranska2, Magdalena Kowalczyk2,
Wioletta Pietruszewska2
1Medical University of Lodz; Chair of Laboratory and Clinical
Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Lodz, Poland,2Medical
University of Lodz; Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Oncology, Lodz, Poland.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are the 7th
cause of human malignancy with low survival rate due to late
diagnosis and treatment. Its etiology is diverse, however, geneticfactors are signi ﬁcant. The most common mutations in HNSCC
were found in genes: PIK3CA (10-12%), BRCA1 (6%), and BRCA2 (7-
9%). In some cases, these biomarkers correlate with recurrences orsurvival showing a potential of prognostic and predictive value.113 formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn embedded (FFPE) tumor samples were
collected from patients with HNSCC (oropharynx: 65 (57.89%);
larynx: 48 (42.11%)). We examined PIK3CA H1047R mutation by
Real Time PCR (RT-qPCR) and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutations were analyzed by RT-qPCR whereas p16
protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry.
Finally, we identi ﬁed HPV infection by RT-qPCR. The relationships
between genomic alterations and clinical parameters wereassessed using the Yates ’corrected Chi2 test or Fisher ’s exact
test for nominal variables. Kaplan Meier plots were applied for
survival analysis. Our results revealed 9 PIK3CA H1047R mutations
detected by ddPCR: 8 of them were negative in RT-qPCR. NoBRCA1 orBRCA2 mutations were detected in the examined group.
Only clinical features (nodal involvement, tumor stage; p < 0.001),
but not genetic markers were related to overall and recurrence-
free survival. We con ﬁrmed usefulness of ddPCR in the PIK3CA
mutation assessment in FFPE samples.
E.M. Borkowska: None. M. Baranska: None. M. Kowalczyk:
None. W. Pietruszewska: None.
P12.169.A Speci ﬁcations of the ACMG/AMP variant interpreta-
tion guidelines for germline POLE and POLD1 variants
Pilar Mur
1,2, Elsa Ezquerro1, Sandra García-Mulero3,4, Lorena
Magraner-Pardo5, Marta Pineda1,2, Lidia Feliubadaló1,2, Gabriel
Capellá1,2, Rebeca Sanz3,4, Conxi Lázaro1, Tirso Pons6, Laura Valle1,2
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell
Program, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,2Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de C áncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain,
3Unit of Biomarkers and Susceptibility, Cancer Prevention and Control
Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell Program, IDIBELL,
Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,4Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Epidemiologia y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid,Spain,5Prostate Cancer Clinical Research Unit. Spanish National Cancer
Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain,6Department of Immunology
and Oncology, National Center for Bi otechnology (CNB-CSIC), Spanish
National Research Council, Madrid, Spain.
Intro: Germline pathogenic variants in the exonuclease domain of
polymerases POLE and POLD1 -affecting their proofreading activity-,
predispose to adenomatous polyps, colorectal cancer (CRC), andendometrial and ovarian cancers, among other extracolonic
malignancies. Challenges in their variant interpretation has been
shown across clinical and research laboratories (>90% of exonucleasedomain variants are of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) or have
conﬂicting results; ClinVar 2020). Here, we aim to establish gene-
speci ﬁc guidelines for the classi ﬁcation of germline POLE and POLD1
variants, following the American College of Medical Genetics andGenomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP)
recommendations.
Material and methods: Speci ﬁc pieces of evidence considering
contact with DNA binding cleft, activity assays, in silico predic-tions, tumor mutational signatures, clinical phenotypes, frequency
in controls, and cosegregation data, were evaluated for their
inclusion in the ACMG/AMP guidelines. Critical review of theliterature and analysis of 20 POLE and POLD1 benign and
pathogenic variants were performed, ﬁnally considering 30
variants with uncertain signi ﬁcance to assess the applicability of
different rule codes.
Results: Speci ﬁcations were developed for nineteen ACMG/
AMP criteria while ten were not applicable. From a total of 50
variants considered, 10 were reclassi ﬁed (2 (likely) pathogenic as
VUS, 6 VUS as (likely) benign, and 2 VUS as (likely) pathogenic).
Conclusion: Use of POLE and POLD1 -speci ﬁc ACMG/AMP
guidelines for germline variant classi ﬁcation led to a decrease in
VUS and will improve the clinical and therapeutical management
of variant carriers.
P. Mur: None. E. Ezquerro: None. S. García-Mulero: None. L.
Magraner-Pardo: None. M. Pineda: None. L. Feliubadaló: None.
G. Capellá: None. R. Sanz: None. C. Lázaro: None. T. Pons: None.
L. Valle: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
423
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P12.170.B Combination of an 18-SNP polygenic risk score and
classical risk factors for the prediction of breast cancer risk in
Cypriot women
Kristia Yiangou1,2, Maria A. Loizidou1,2, Eleni Kakouri3, Yiola
Marcou3, Kyriacos Kyriacou1,2, Andreas Hadjisavvas1,2, Kyriaki
Michailidou2,4
1Department of Electron Microscopy/Molecular Pathology, The
Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,2The
Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus,3Bank of Cyprus Oncology
Center, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Biostatistics Unit, The Cyprus Institute of
Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Introduction: A polygenic risk score (PRS) summarizes the
combined effect of multiple common low-penetrant singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), mainly identi ﬁed through
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), and has the potential
to be used for the prediction of breast cancer risk. Thecombination of PRS with classical breast cancer risk factors canimprove risk strati ﬁcation and personalized preventative
strategies.
Materials and Methods: We assessed the predictive ability of a
multivariable model consisting of an 18-SNP PRS and classical
breast cancer risk factors in Cypriot women using 1,109 cases and
1,177 controls from the MASTOS study. Logistic regression analysiswas performed to evaluate the association between each riskfactor and breast cancer risk and to assess for interactions.
Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of- ﬁt test and AUC were calculated
to evaluate the accuracy and the predictive power of the models.
Results: The 18-SNP PRS was signi ﬁcantly associated with an
increased breast cancer risk in Cypriot women. The multivariable
model, which combines the effects of the classical breast cancer
risk factors and the 18-SNP PRS achieved the highest riskdiscrimination score.
Conclusions: These results suggest that the multivariable
model may be used in Cypriot women for breast cancer riskstrati ﬁcation and support its potential clinical utility for persona-
lized breast cancer risk prediction.
K. Yiangou: None. M.A. Loizidou: None. E. Kakouri: None. Y.
Marcou: None. K. Kyriacou: None. A. Hadjisavvas: None. K.
Michailidou: None.
P12.171.C Differences between inherited and acquired poly-
merase proofreading de ﬁciencies in cancer
Elsa Ezquerro
1, Pilar Mur1,2, Sandra García-Mulero3, Lorena
Magraner-Pardo4, Rebeca Sanz-Pamplona3, Tirso Pons5, Gabriel
Capellá1,2,Laura Valle1,2
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell
Program, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain,2Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain,3Unit of
Biomarkers and Susceptibility, Cancer Prevention and Control
Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology; Oncobell Program, IDIBELL,Barcelona, Spain,4Prostate Cancer Clinical Research Unit, Spanish
National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain,5Department
of Immunology and Oncology, National Center for Biotechnology
(CNB-CSIC), Spanish National Research Council, Madrid, Spain.
Intro: Pathogenic variants in the exonuclease domain of POLE and
POLD1 affect their proofreading activity and promote tumorigen-
esis. Inherited polymerase proofreading de ﬁciency cause an
autosomal dominant cancer- and polyposis-predisposing syn-drome. On the other hand, somatic POLE exonuclease domainmutations are identi ﬁed in 7-15% of endometrial cancers, 0.5-8%
of colorectal cancers, and more rarely in other tumors. We aimed
to establish the differences between germline and somatic
variants.
Material and methods: Analysis of POLE/D1 exonuclease-
domain pathogenic variants reported in the literature (15
germline variants in 59 independent families) and in publicly
available databases (18 somatic variants in 77 proofreading-deﬁcient tumors; source: TCGA), w as performed. The variants
were analyzed according to their nature (contact with DNA
binding cleft, location within highly conserved motifs and
pathogenicity predictions), tumor mutational characteristics andclinical phenotypes.
Results: POLD1 somatic variants are extremely rare and,
whenever present, appear in combination with mismatch repair
deﬁciency. The spectrum of germline POLE proofreading muta-
tions differs from the somatic mutation hotspots identi ﬁed in
tumors, suggesting a different behavior. Interestingly, when POLE
p.V411L and p.A456P, two of the highly recurrent somatic variants,occur in the germline, the clinical phenotypes are extremelyaggressive and precocious. Depending on the inherited or somatic
nature of the variant, one residue may be mutated to generate
one or other amino acid. When this occurs, the germline changeshows lower pathogenicity prediction values that the somaticchange.
Conclusion: Inherited pathogenic variants affecting the proof-
reading activity of polymerases are less aggressive that thoseidenti ﬁed in sporadic tumors.
E. Ezquerro: None. P. Mur: None. S. García-Mulero: None. L.
Magraner-Pardo: None. R. Sanz-Pamplona: None. T. Pons:
None. G. Capellá: None. L. Valle: None.
P12.172.D Searching for germinal mutations of TET2, KMT2D,
KDM6B, IDH1 and SETD2 epigenetic genes in Polish prostatecancer patients - preliminary results
Marta Karolina Heise
1, Piotr Jarzemski2, Aneta B ąk1, Anna Junkiert-
Czarnecka1, Maria Pilarska-Deltow1, Maciej Borysiak2, Beata
Pilarska2, Olga Haus1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Collegium
Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Toru ń,
Poland,2Department of Urology, Jan Biziel University Hospital,
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
Introduction: The epigenetic changes are present in all human
cancers and associated with genetic alterations to drive a cancer
phenotype. Thus, we searched for germinal alterations in ﬁve
epigenetic genes in Polish prostate cancer patients.
Material: The material of investigation was DNA from 27 men
with prostate cancer (PC) from all over Poland. The median age of
patients at PC diagnosis was 58 years (45-70).
Methods: NGS and Sanger sequencing.
Results: In 8/27 (29,6%) PC patients 9 variants of analyzed
genes were detected. These were 8 missense mutations of KMT2D ,
SETD2 ,KDM6B and IDH1 and one silent variant of TET2 .
Bioinformatic analysis of all changes was performed usingVarSome database. The KMT2D c.13629C>A (p.Asp4543Gln),
c.11375C>T (p.Pro3792Leu) and c.8788C>T (p.Pro2930Ser), the
IDH1 c.565A>G (p.Ile189Val) and the KDM6B c.2282C>G (p.
Thr761Ser) missense variants were predicted as VUS (variants of
uncertain signi ﬁcance). The KMT2D c.6264C>T (p. =) was predicted
as benign and probably not involved in RNA splicing, TET2
c.972A>G (p. =) as likely benign and probably involved in it. The
SETD2 c.3229A>G (p.Thr1077Ala) was predicted as benign and
c.3383C>G (p.Thr1128Ser) as likely benign.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
424
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: The results of the preliminary investigation point
at the need to study germinal changes of epigenetic genes to help
fully understand the pathogenesis of prostate cancer, identify men
at PC high risk and predict the disease recurrence risk after radicalprostatectomy. This study was supported by the fund of theCollegium Medicum Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz,
Poland.
M.K. Heise: None. P. Jarzemski: None. A. B ąk:None. A.
Junkiert-Czarnecka: None. M. Pilarska-Deltow: None. M. Bor-
ysiak: None. B. Pilarska: None. O. Haus: None.
P12.173.A "Next-Generation Sequencing to characterize
tumor genomics in Prostate Cancer"
Pamela Vázquez-Cárdenas
1,2,3,Nuria Arroyo-Garrapucho1,2,3, Juan
Luis García2,3, Luis Angel Corchete2,3, Pablo Berrocal-Navarro1, Álvaro
Jesus Virseda-Rodríguez4, Sara Marcos-Asensio4, Patricia Antunez5,
Ana Belen Herrero1,2,3, Francisco Gómez-Veiga4, Juan Jesus Cruz-
Hernández6,2, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1,2,3
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,2Biomedical Research Institute of
Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca,Spain,3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC),
University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain,4Translational
Research Group of Urology GITUR-IBSAL, University Hospital ofSalamanca, Salamanca, Spain,5Pathological Anatomy Service,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain,6Oncology
Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
Introduction : Prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) mainly affects older
men and its incidence rapidly increases after the age of 50.
However, the molecular and clinical behavior of PCa in younger
adults is poorly de ﬁned. This study aims to identify variants
associated with PCa and correlate them with clinical data in
younger and older patients. Patients and Methods : A NGS target
enrichment panel (CELEMICS) was used to analyze 4 genes(SRD5A1 ,SRD5A2 ,NR3C1 ,AR) associated with PCa. We included 8
paraf ﬁn-embedded samples derived from: 5 older patients
diagnosed with castration resistant PCa and de novo metastatic
PCa, and 3 younger patients with low-grade PCa. All samples weresequenced on the Illumina Miseq and the variants were analyzedusing the VariantStudio Software.
Results : We have identi ﬁed 5 missense, 1 nonsense, 1 frame-
shift mutation and 1 in-frame deletion. Two of these mutationswere pathogenic and located in the ARgene in 2 patients:
c.2257C>T/p.(Arg753Ter) in one de novo metastatic older patient
and c.2323C>T/p.(Arg775Cys) in one younger patient. Two
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance were found in the ARgene.
Conclusion : Our results highlight that NGS panels allow for the
identi ﬁcation of variants. This approach is an appropriate tool for
understanding the difference between molecular pro ﬁles in
younger and older patients with PCa.This study funded by SpanishAssociation Against Cancer (AECC).
Sample ID
Gene Variant 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Clasi ﬁcation Clinical
Signi ﬁcance
SRD5A1 c.90C>G/p.(Ala39Gly) +++++ -++ Missense Benign
SRD5A2 c.265C>G/ p.
(Leu89Val)----- +-- Missense Benign
SRD5A2 c.226T>A/ p.
(Ser76Thr)----- +-- Missense Not reported
SRD5A2 c.89dupC/ p.
(Pro31Ser31fsTer225)++++++++ Frameshift Benign
AR c.2257C>T/p.
(Arg753Ter)-- +----- Nonsense Pathogenic
AR c.2323C>T/p.
(Arg775Cys)----- +-- Missense PathogenicSample ID
Gene Variant 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Clasi ﬁcation Clinical
Signi ﬁcance
AR c.404C>T/ p.
(Pro135Leu)----- +-- Missense Uncertain
Signi ﬁcance
AR c.170T>A/ p.
(Leu57Gln)---- +--- Missense Likely
benign
AR c.1368_1379del/p.
(Gly470_Gly473del)-- +----- In-frame
DeletionUncertain
Signi ﬁcance
+: Presence, -: Absence
P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None. N. Arroyo-Garrapucho: None. J.
L. García: None. L.A. Corchete: None. P. Berrocal-Navarro: None.
Á.J. Virseda-Rodríguez: None. S. Marcos-Asensio: None. P.
Antunez: None. A.B. Herrero: None. F. Gómez-Veiga: None. J.J.
Cruz-Hernández: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None.
P12.174.B Comparison of single nucleotide polymorphisms in
early and advanced prostate cancer
Justina Gaizevska1,2, Mantautas Simkus2, Rasa Sabaliauskaite1,
Paulius Bosas1, Arnas Bakavicius1,3,4, Albertas Ulys1, Feliksas
Jankevicius3,4, Sonata Jarmalaite1,2
1National Cancer Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of Biosciences,
Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,3Urology
Centre, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros klinikos, Vilnius, Lithua-nia,4Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the most common
types of cancer. Despite the recent progress of diagnosis and
research, it remains a signi ﬁcant medical problem. The attention is
paid to the identi ﬁcation of genetic variation, which increases
susceptibility because it could help to develop screeningstrategies and clinical management. Numerous single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that might play an aggregate role in PC
susceptibility have recently been identi ﬁed.
Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from the
leucocytes of patients whose cancer is in the early stages (n =
128) and castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) (n =149).
qPCR with TaqMan assays were used to identify SNPs found inHOXB13 ,KLK3 ,CDKN1B ,RFX6 and ANO7 genes. Associations
between the form of cancer and clinical characteristics, genotypes
and clinical characteristics were analysed.
Results: The genotypes of early-stage and CRPC patients in
reference to the SNPs of ﬁve genes were identi ﬁed. Signi ﬁcant
associations between the form of cancer and patients ’Gleason
score, PSA level and the existence of metastasis were identi ﬁed (p
< 0.001). Association between the genotypes in terms of KLK3
gene ’s SNPs and PSA level were statistically signi ﬁcant among
early-stage cancer patients (p =0.036, p =0.042). A signi ﬁcant
association between the genotypes regarding ANO7 gene ’s SNP
and metastasis to the axial skeleton was detected (p =0.024).
Conclusions: Our study identi ﬁed frequency of SNP in prostate
cancer patients. We determined the associations between
identi ﬁed genotypes and analysed clinical characteristics.
J. Gaizevska: None. M. Simkus: None. R. Sabaliauskaite: None.
P. Bosas: None. A. Bakavicius: None. A. Ulys: None. F.
Jankevicius: None. S. Jarmalaite: None.
P12.175.C A case of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome; a
family studyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
425
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Hatice Ilgin-Ruhi1, Ezgi Gokpinar-Ili2, Naz Guleray Lafci3, Elifcan
Tasdelen4, Sule Altiner1
1Ankara University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey,2Başakşehir Pine
and Sakura City Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,3Dr. Sami Ulus Maternity
and Children ’s Health and Diseases Training and Research Hospital,
Ankara, Turkey,4Sanliurfa Education and Research Hospital,
Sanliurfa, Turkey.
Introduction: Germline PTEN mutations are the cause of a group
of cancer susceptibility syndromes such as Cowden and
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes, that are within the PTENhamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) spectrum. They have over-lapping clinical ﬁndings and they are usually inherited autosomal
dominantly. Here, we present a case with multiple abdominal
subcutaneous nodular lesions and dysmorphic features.
Materials and Methods: A 15-year-old male patient was
evaluated in terms of anamnesis, clinical history, family history
and phenotypic ﬁndings. PTEN mutations were investigated in
accord with PHTS pre-diagnosis.
Results: He was born to non-consanguineous parents. His
prenatal and postnatal history were uneventful. Maternal grand-
mother died due to a brain tumor at the age of 47. He was
operated for VSD at the age of two. Macrocephaly, thick and dryhair, low anterior hairline, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, low set
ears, high arched palate, pes cavus, ulnar deviation of 1
sttoes
were notable ﬁndings along with mild intellectual disability. There
were extensive subcutaneous nodular lesions in the abdomen andlegs. Germline PTEN mutations were investigated via Sanger
sequencing and heterozygous PTEN c.-1196_-1185del12 promoter
mutation was detected. Following genetic counseling, parentalstudy was performed for segregation analysis and maternalinheritance was shown.
Conclusions: Although the detected mutation (rs587781340) is
non-consensual in terms of clinical signi ﬁcance, promoter muta-
tions are reported to cause PHTS. Hence, we planned oncological
evaluation and follow-up of the proband and his mother. His
brother and two maternal uncles were also invited for mutationanalysis.
H. Ilgin-Ruhi: None. E. Gokpinar-Ili: None. N. Guleray Lafci:
None. E. Tasdelen: None. S. Altiner: None.
P12.177.C RAD51C and RAD51D germline mutations are
associated to susceptibility to multiple cancers
Jacopo Boni
1,2, Aida Idani1,2, Evan Weber3, Eva Tomiak4, William
Foulkes5,6,7, Zaki el Haffaf8, Barbara Rivera1,2,7
1Program in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Therapy in
Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona),Spain,2Hereditary Cancer Programme, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain,3Division of
Medical Genetics, Department of Specialized Medicine, McGillUniversity Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Department of
Genetics, University of Ottawa, Children ’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario,
Ottawa, ON, Canada,5Cancer Research Program, The Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC,Canada,6Department of Human Genetics, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada,7Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,8Division of Genetics,
Department of Medicine, Centre hospitalier de l ’Université de
Montréal (CHUM), Montreal, QC, Canada.
Introduction: Defects in DNA repair genes have been extensively
associated to cancer susceptibility. In particular, pathogenicgermline mutations in genes involved in homologousrecombination repair pathway lead to a hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC). The RAD51 paralogs RAD51C
and RAD51D were included in this group 10 years ago, when
germline mutations in them were associated to non-BRCA1/2familiar breast/ovarian cancer and ovarian cancer, respectively.However, whether pathogenic germline variants in these genes
are associated to other cancers remains unknown.
Materials and Methods: We have systematically reviewed the
landscape of RAD51C and RAD51D mutations in cancer by
cataloguing reported variants in the literature during the last 10
years, and curating all mutations and phenotypes found in
families with carriers of pathogenic RAD51C/D variants. Data were
obtained from both published reports and in house samples frompatients and families.
Results: A comprehensive catalogue of RAD51C/D variants has
been generated. A total of 248 and 155 unique alterations inRAD51C and RAD51D have been described, respectively. Investiga-
tion of pedigrees found other cancers reported in families with
RAD51C/D mutation carriers, with colorectal, lung, prostate,
pancreatic cancer and leukemia being the most prevalent onesamong ﬁrst relatives.
Conclusions: Here we provide the ﬁrst comprehensive catalo-
gue of RAD51C/D pathogenic variants in cancer. Our works
highlights how the two genes might confer susceptibility to abroader spectrum of cancer types than those characteristic of
HBOC. Fundings. This research was partially funded by the Cancer
Research Society grant OG-24377 to Barbara Rivera.
J. Boni: None. A. Idani: None. E. Weber: None. E. Tomiak:
None. W. Foulkes: None. Z. el Haffaf: None. B. Rivera: None.
P12.178.B Introduction of the renal cell carcinoma microarray
service in the North of Scotland Genetics & Molecular
Pathology Laboratory
Clare Wells , Myra Loomer, Sinclair Dundas, David McClelland,
Benedict Milner, Caroline Clark
NHS, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
Renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) are a highly heterogenous group of
tumours derived from renal tubular epithelial cells, and togetherconstitute the 7
thmost common cancer in the UK. Accurate
classi ﬁcation of these tumours is essential to facilitate appropriate
patient management. Diagnosis has historically relied upon
immunohistochemistry and morphological assessment; howeverresults from these techniques can often overlap between RCC
subtypes, necessitating a more speci ﬁc means of diagnosis.
Each of the three of the most common types of RCCs are
associated with characteristic patterns of chromosomal aberra-tions: clear cell RCCs show loss of 3p, papillary cell RCCs exhibit
gain of chromosomes 7, 8, 12, 16, 17 and 20 and loss of Y, and
chromophobe RCCs are associated with loss of chromosomes,commonly 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17 and 21. Oncocytomas are benignrenal lesions which can show morphological features similar to
malignant RCCs, and are characterised by whole or partial loss of
chromosome 1 and Y. Given the well-de ﬁned chromosomal
aberrations recognised in these tumours, genetic analysis of
RCCs can aid in their classi ﬁcation. The North of Scotland
Genetics & Molecular Pathol ogy Laboratory has offered ﬂuor-
escent in situ hybridisation (FISH) testing on formalin ﬁxed
paraf ﬁn embedded (FFPE) RCC tumours for eight years. More
recently, our laboratory have validated the ThermoFisher
CytoScan 750k SNP microarray platform for genome wideanalysis of FFPE renal tumours. This poster will demonstratethe utility of this powerful diagn ostic tool as we review the initial
phase of its introduction into service.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
426
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608C. Wells: None. M. Loomer: None. S. Dundas: None. D.
McClelland: None. B. Milner: None. C. Clark: None.
P12.179.C Constitutional POLE variants known to be somatic
driver mutations in cancer cause a phenotype reminiscent of
Constitutional Mismatch Repair De ﬁciency
Astrid Sehested1, Julia Maede2, David Scheie3, Olga Østrup4, Brigitte
Bertelsen4, Linea C. Melchior3, Elena Kessler2, Helga Fibiger Munch-
Petersen3, Tomasz Sarosiek5, Reet Pai6, Richard Gallon7, Johannes
Zschocke8,Katharina Wimmer8
1Dept of Pediatrics and Adolescent Me dicine, Rigshospi talet, Copenha-
gen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric He matology/Oncology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,3Department of
Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Copenh agen University Hos pital, Copenha-
gen, Denmark,4Centre for Genomic Medicine , Rigshospitalet, Copenha-
gen University Hospita l, Copenhagen, Denmark,5Luxmed Onkologia,
Warsaw, Poland,6University of Pittsburgh Medi cal Center, Presbyterian
Hospit, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,7Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle
University, Newcastle, United Kingdom,8Institute of Human Genetics,
Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
Introduction: Deﬁciencies of polymerase proofreading (PP) or
mismatch repair (MMR) are typi cally acquired somatically in
neoplastic cells, but can also be const itutional conditions associated
with rare cancer syndromes. Germline heterozygous POLE orPOLD1
pathogenic variants (PVs) cause PP associated polyposis (PPAP),
presenting with colorectal adenom as and carcinomas in adulthood.
Constitutional MMR de ﬁciency (CMMRD), caused by germline bi-
allelic PVs affecting one of four MMR genes, results in a high
propensity for hematological, brain, intestinal tract, and other
malignancies in childhood. Non-mal ignant clinical features, of which
skin pigmentation alterations are the most prevalent, are found in
nearly all CMMRD patients and are important diagnostic markers.
Results: In three cancer patients with a clinical presentation
highly suggestive of CMMRD, we excluded CMMRD and identi ﬁed
a constitutional heterozygous POLE PV. These, and two additional
POLE PVs identi ﬁed in previously published CMMRD-like patients,
have not previously been reported as germline PVs causing PPAPbut are all well-known somatic driver-mutations in hyper-mutatedtumors.
Conclusions: Together these ﬁve cases show that constitutional
heterozygous POLE driver-mutations cause a phenotype distinct
from PPAP but resembling CMMRD due to the associated
childhood/adolescent malignancies and non-malignant features.
Therefore, a severe constitutional PP de ﬁciency caused by de novo
POLE variants, which may have a stronger “mutator ”effect than
POLE /D1PV causing PPAP, should be considered as a differential
diagnosis to CMMRD. The common underlying mechanism, i.e. a
replication error repair defect, and a similar tumor spectrumprovides a good rationale for monitoring of these patientsaccording to protocols proposed for CMMRD.
A. Sehested: None. J. Maede: None. D. Scheie: None. O.
Østrup: None. B. Bertelsen: None. L.C. Melchior: None. E.
Kessler: None. H. Fibiger Munch-Petersen: None. T. Sarosiek:
None. R. Pai: None. R. Gallon: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Cancer
Research UK Commercial Partnerships. J. Zschocke: None. K.
Wimmer: None.
P12.181.A cf-DNA and EVs as sources for biomarkers for early
detection of second primary malignancies in patients with
heritable retinoblastomaNicole Barwinski
1,2, Michael Zeschnigk1, Basant Kumar Thakur2,
Petra Ketteler1,2, Dietmar Lohmann1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany,2Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
Heritable retinoblastoma (Rb) is an autosomal-dominant tumour
predisposition syndrome caused by pathogenic variants of the RB1
gene. Rb-survivors have a high risk to develop a second primary
malignancy (SPM). Development of retinoblastoma is often initiated
by genetic mechanisms that result in loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Itis to be expected that LOH is frequent in SPMs as well.
The aim of this study is to develop a non-invasive blood test for
early detection of SPMs in Rb-survivors. Blood plasma-derived EVs,
EV-DNA and cfDNA are analysed in blood samples from childrenwith Rb and Rb-survivors with and without SPM. DNA released bytumour cells with LOH at the RB1 locus is expected to skew the
ratio of RB1 alleles in EV-DNA and cfDNA.
Using Droplet Digital PCR, the number of genome equivalents
(GEs) was determined in EV-DNA (10 ± 9) and cfDNA (1584 ± 946).With numbers of GEs in this range, multiple informative SNPs need
to be analysed to increase the power of detecting signi ﬁcant
skewing of allele ratios in individuals with SPM compared tobalanced ratios expected in healthy individuals.
The allelic ratio of multiple SNPs is determined by parallel
analysis with Deep Amplicon Next-Generation Sequencing ofcfDNA. To improve analytical accuracy The SiMSen-seq technologywas chosen (Ståhlberg et al. 2017). By incorporating unique
molecular identi ﬁers, this technology reduces overestimation of
sample size because of PCR in ﬂation and, consequently under-
estimation of variance.
This work was supported by the EU Transcan-2 Program and the
Bundesminsterium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF).
N. Barwinski: None. M. Zeschnigk: None. B.K. Thakur: None.
P. Ketteler: None. D. Lohmann: None.
P12.182.B Phenotypic analysis of 106 serrated polyposis
patients
Verena Steinke-Lange
1,2, Anna Lausch2, Monika Morak1,2, Elke
Holinski-Feder1,2
1MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, München, Germany,2Arbeitsgruppe
erbliche gastrointestinale Tumore, Medizinische Klinik und PoliklinikIV–Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany.
Background: Genetic and/or non-genetic causes of serrated
polyposis syndrome (SPS) are widely unknown. SPS patients showa broad phenotypic spectrum regarding polyp burden and age of
onset and might therefore belong to different entities. We
therefore collected phenotypic data of 106 SPS patients toidentify phenotypic subgroups.
Methods: 70 female (66 %) and 36 male patients were enrolled,
53 patients (50 %) ful ﬁlled the WHO criteria for SPS. We calculated
the annual gain of serrated polyps and compared the resultsdepending on different parameters using Mann-Whitney-U tests.
Results: Female patients developed signi ﬁcantly more sessile-
serrated lesions per year than male patients (U =885.500; p =
0.012). This also applied for sessile-serrated lesions of the proximalcolon (U =733.500; p =0.0004), but not for the distal colon (U =
1158.00; p =0.474). Regarding hyperplastic polyps, there was no
signi ﬁcant difference. Smoking and BMI also had no signi ﬁcant
inﬂuence on serrated polyp burden in our cohort. Control
colonoscopy 1-2 years after initial diagnosis revealed polyps inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
427
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 60870%. We were able to ﬁgure out two clinical subgroups: while one
part of the patients was continuously prone to serrated polyps, the
other patients only showed a temporary polyposis with several
inconspicuous colonoscopies afterwards. Hypothetically, the ﬁrst
could be due to a genetic predisposition, while the other mightmainly be exogenic. Only two patients developed colorectal
cancer during surveillance, each after 4-5 years without
colonoscopy.
Conclusions: SPS patients may either have a temporary or
permanent risk for serrated polyps and colorectal cancer. There-
fore, close meshed surveillance by colonoscopy especially
following initial diagnosis is necessary.
V. Steinke-Lange: None. A. Lausch: None. M. Morak: None. E.
Holinski-Feder: None.
P12.183.C Exome sequencing identi ﬁed potential causative
candidate genes for serrated polyposis syndrome
Sophia Peters1, Anna K. Sommer1, Christina Trueck1, Verena Steinke-
Lange2,3, Claudia Perne1,4, Janine Altmueller5, Holger Thiele5, Elke
Holinski-Feder2,3, Isabel Spier1,4, Stefan Aretz1,4
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,2MGZ-Medical Genetics Center Munich, Munich,
Germany,3Arbeitsgruppe erbliche gastrointestinale Tumore, Medizi-
nische Klinik und Poliklinik IV –Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der
Universität München, Munich, Germany,4National Center for
Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,5Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.
Aim: Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is a poorly de ﬁned
colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by
multiple and/or large serrated lesions throughout the colon. Todate, only few molecular signatures have been described and the
etiology of the syndrome has not been identi ﬁed in the vast
majority of patients. The aim of this study is to identify causalgermline variants for SPS.
Methods : To uncover predisposing causative variants, the
exomes of 102 unexplained SPS patients have been sequenced
using leukocyte DNA. For data analysis and ﬁltering, the GATK
software and the Varbank2 software were applied. The germlinevariants were ﬁltered for rare (allele frequency for biallelic ≤1%,
for monoallelic ≤0.1% according to gnomAD and an in-house
database) loss-of-function and missense variants with a CADD-score ≥20.
Results : After ﬁltering and manual inspection, 495 genes
harboring rare heterozygous variants in at least two patientsremained; potentially biallelic variants were found in 189 genes.After prioritizing the genes, promising candidate genes for SPS
that harbor potential biallelic variants include among others
ANKRD17, LAMA5 as well as MCM3 while genes that harbor
heterozygous variants include CDKN1A, CEACAM1 , and PTPRT .
Conclusions : Exome sequencing identi ﬁes potentially causative
germline variants underlying the susceptibility to SPS; however,
the preliminary data indicate considerable genetic heterogeneity.The current work-up includes testing of relatives to determine thezygosity of assumed biallelic variants, analyzing the segregation
with the phenotype, and functional analyses of the most
interesting variants. Additionally, a burden test will be conducted.
S. Peters: None. A.K. Sommer: None. C. Trueck: None. V.
Steinke-Lange: None. C. Perne: None. J. Altmueller: None. H.
Thiele: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. I. Spier: None. S. Aretz:
None.P12.185.A Cancer spectrum and penetrance in a national
cohort of patients with a loss-of-function germline SMARCA4
alteration
Nienke van Engelen
1, Jozef Zsiros1, Saskia M. J. Hopman2, M C. A.
Cornips2, Nienke E. Verbeek2, Carli M. J. Tops3, Maartje Nielsen3,
Dennis K. Bos4, Encarna B. Goméz-García5, Arjen R. Mensenkamp6,
Charlotte W. Ockeloen6, Rolph Pfundt6, Lynne Rumping7, Anne
Goverde8
1Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,4University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,5Maastricht
University Medical Center +, Maastricht, Netherlands,6Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,7Amsterdam
Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,8Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction : Loss-of-function germline SMARCA4 variants pre-
dispose to rhabdoid tumors in children and small cell carcinoma ofthe ovary hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) in girls and women.
Cancer penetrance is unknown, which complicates the develop-
ment of surveillance and prevention guidelines. We thereforedescribe a national cohort of individuals carrying germline
SMARCA4 alterations and their cancer phenotype.
Methods : We have collected clinical and genetic data from
individuals with a germline loss-of-function SMARCA4 alteration
through all Dutch DNA diagnostic laboratories.
Results : We have identi ﬁed 16 individuals from 12 families. In 5
probands the SMARCA4 variant was detected after cancer
diagnosis (4 SCCOHTs, 1 rhabdoid tumor). One patient hasinherited the variant from her mother and grandmother, neither
of whom developed SMARCA4- related cancers. Five probands
(mean age 28 years [range 6-51 years] 4 females), all withoutcancer, carry a de novo 19p13.2 deletion including SMARCA4 and
are affected by developmental delay. Finally, in two probands and
two of their relatives (mean age 33 years [range 15-54 years] 3females), also all without cancer, the SMARCA4 variant was an
incidental ﬁnding.
Conclusion : Our data reveal an incomplete penetrance for
cancer in individuals with germline loss-of-function SMARCA4
alterations and suggest a possibly lower penetrance in patientswith multigene deletions spanning SMARCA4 . We hypothesize that
these larger deletions include additional genes essential for cell
survival. Affected cells might not survive in a homozygous deletedstate, therefore prohibiting tumor development due to a large
deletion affecting the wild type allele, a common somatic
alteration in SMARCA4- related tumors.
N. van Engelen: None. J. Zsiros: None. S.M.J. Hopman: None.
M.C.A. Cornips: None. N.E. Verbeek: None. C.M.J. Tops: None.
M. Nielsen: None. D.K. Bos: None. E.B. Goméz-García: None. A.R.
Mensenkamp: None. C.W. Ockeloen: None. R. Pfundt: None. L.
Rumping: None. A. Goverde: None.
P12.186.B SOX3 function in glioblastoma cells
Jelena Marjanovic
1,Danijela Drakulic1, Idoia Garcia2,3,4, Vladanka
Vukovic1, Paula Aldaz2,4, Laura Garros-Regulez2, Nicolas Sam-
pron2,4,5, Ander Matheu2,3,4, Milena Stevanovic1,6,7
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,2Cellular Oncology group, Biodonostia
Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain,3IKERBASQUE,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
428
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain,4CIBER de Fragilidad y
Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBERfes), Madrid, Spain,5Neuro-oncology
Tumor Board, Donostia Hospital, San Sebastian, Spain,6University of
Belgrade, Faculty of Biology, Belgrade, Serbia,7Serbian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: Glioblastoma (GBM) represents signi ﬁcant public
health problem. Median survival time of patients with this typeof brain tumor is about 15 months despite current therapeutic
strategies including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Thus, searching for new therapeutic treatments for GBM is
warranted. Identi ﬁcation and characterization of molecular
markers might lead to identi ﬁcation of speci ﬁct a r g e t sf o r
treatment of patients with GBM. SOX3 transcription factor is key
regulator of cell fate decisions in numerous developmental
processes. Oncogenic activity of SOX3 has been demonstratedin different cancer types. However, little is known about its
function in GBM.
Materials and Methods: SOX3 expression in human GBM
samples, non-tumoral brain tissues and GBM cells was assessedusing RT-qPCR. To analyze the effects of SOX3 overexpression on
the proliferation, viability, migration and invasion of GBM cells,
immunocytochemistry, MTT and Transwell assays were employed,respectively. RT-qPCR and Western blot analyses were used toanalyze expression of components of Hedgehog signaling path-
way and autophagy markers, respectively.
Results: SOX3 expression was elevated in GBM samples,
patient-derived glioblastoma stem cells and oncospheres derived
from glioblastoma cell lines. SOX3 overexpression led to increase
in the proliferation, viability, migration and invasion of GBM cells,enhanced activity of the Hedgehog signaling pathway andsuppressed autophagy.
Conclusions: SOX3 could be considered as potential molecular
target in GBM.This work was supported by the Ministry ofEducation, Science and Technological Development, Republic ofSerbia (Grant No: 173051 and Grant No: 451-03-68/2020-14/
200042) and by the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts (Grant
No: F 24).
J. Marjanovic: None. D. Drakulic: None. I. Garcia: None. V.
Vukovic: None. P. Aldaz: None. L. Garros-Regulez: None. N.
Sampron: None. A. Matheu: None. M. Stevanovic: None.
P12.187.C The molecular consequences of the novel speckle-
type POZ protein ( SPOP ) gene mutations at the protein level:
A prostate cancer perspective
Isil Ezgi Eryilmaz , Berna Aytac Vuruskan, Onur Kayg ısız, Gulsah
Cecener, Unal Egeli, Hakan Vuruskan
Bursa Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey.
Introduction: SPOP encodes a substrate-binding subunit of a Cullin-
based E3 ubiquitin ligase, which acts as a tumor suppressor byproteasomal degradation of oncogenic targets. The subunit is
composed of the two main domains, MATH, and BTB/POZ. The
overall frequency of SPOP variations ranged from 1.85% to 28.6% in
multiethnic prostate cancer (PCa) cohorts. All of the variations havebeen reported in the MATH domain, s uggesting that the variations
disrupt the substrate interaction. However, we identi ﬁed two novel
SPOP variations localized in the B TB/POZ domain in three PCa
patients (3.4%). The conseque nces of the variations were in silico
analyzed, and the possible effects were discussed at the protein level.
Materials and Methods: Their effects on protein structure,
stability, and function were tested using I-Mutant 2.0 andMutation Taster tools. The 3D structures of the variant proteins
were constructed by the Swiss-Model.Results: The SPOP C203Y and S236R pathogenicities were 93%
and 90%, respectively. Both variants were detected to be disease-
causing and to cause a large decrease in protein stability with
DDG values of -0.08 and -0.00 Kcal/mol. Moreover, the protein
feature and function might be affected via loss of the BTB domainfrom the start point-173 to end point-297, visualized by 3D
constructions of the variants.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report to identify the novel and
disease-causing SPOP variations in a Turkish PCa cohort. Furtherstudies should focus on functional analysis of these variants that
might disrupt the ligase activity due to the loss of the BTB/POZ
domain of SPOP.
I. Eryilmaz: None. B. Aytac Vuruskan: None. O. Kayg ısız:
None. G. Cecener: None. U. Egeli: None. H. Vuruskan: None.
P12.188.D Ef ﬁcient work ﬂow for detection of clinically
relevant abnormalities in leukemias according to NCCN
guidelines
Alex Hastie , Andy W. C. Pang, Joyce Lee, Ernest Lam, Mark
Oldakowski, Alka Chaubey
Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, USA.
Current diagnostic and prognostic genetic testing for leukemias
relies largely on cytogenetic methods. Cytogenetic testinginvolves 2-3 methods including karyotyping, a panel of ﬂuorescent
in situ hybridization (FISH) probes, and chromosomal microarray.
Together these assays are cumbersome, low resolution, expensive,
and require specialized, highly trained operators. Optical genomemapping (OGM) provides a modern solution to detect all clinicallysigni ﬁcant abnormalities using a single standardized work ﬂow. We
demonstrate a work ﬂow for DNA isolation from bone marrow
aspirates or peripheral blood, data collection, variation/abnorm-ality calling, and annotation. DNA isolation via the Bionano Prep
SP involves measuring 1.5 M cells from bone marrow or peripheral
blood, lysing the cells, binding DNA to a paramagnetic disk,washing and eluting the DNA, this process takes 3-4 hours. The fullprocess of DNA isolation, labeling, data collection, and SV calling
takes four days total turn-around-time. We have evaluated system
performance for detection of abnormalities according to theNational Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines forAML, CML, ALL, CLL, and MM patient samples. OGM is able to
detect all cytogenetic level copy number variants and structural
variants that are recommended by NCCN at variant allele fractionsin the 5-10% range of somatic mosaicism, for example, BCR/ABL1,
IGH/CCND1, RUNX1/RUNX1T1, IGH/IL3, Del6q, trisomy 12, 2p +,
PML/RARA, MLL (KMT2A), ATM/TP53, monosomy 7. Takentogether, optical genome mapping is able to provide resultsconcordant with the combination of karyotyping and FISH, while
providing the results in a single assay and with higher sensitivity.
A. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. A.W.C. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. J. Lee: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. E. Lam: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M. Oldakowski:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics.
A. Chaubey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics.
P12.190.B Tissue-speci ﬁc patterns of mutational and tran-
scriptional alterations in tumor suppressors and oncogenes:
an integrative pan-cancer analysisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
429
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Andrea Gelemanovic , Tinka Vidovic, Branka Bernard, Miroslav
Radman, Katarina Trajkovic
Mediterranean Institute for Life Sciences (MedILS), Split, Croatia.
Introduction: Although evident that some tissues are more
susceptible to develop cancer than others, the biological basis of
this tissue variability remains a challenge in cancer research. Here,
we aim to characterize, at the level of mutations and transcrip-tomics, the tissue-speci ﬁc patterns of two key players in the cancer
initiation –activation of oncogenes and inactivation of tumor
suppressors (TS).
Methods: We performed a pan-cancer differential gene
expression analysis for nine cancer types (bladder, breast, colon,
esophagus, kidney, liver, lung, stomach, thyroid gland) using the
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Genotype Tissue Expression(GTEx) adjusting for the effects of age and gender. Transcriptomicsignatures of TSs and oncogenes were compared between the
tissues and correlated with their respective cancer mutational
burden.
Results: Similar trend was observed among tissues with larger
numbers of overexpressed oncogenes and of underexpressed TSs.
Exception were esophagus, lung and liver which displayed both
more overexpressed TSs and oncogenes. Majority were tissue-speci ﬁc, and only 8 TSs were underexpressed and 13 oncogenes
were overexpressed across all tissues. Kidney exhibited a distinct
transcriptomic signature. All tissues had more mutations in TSsthan in oncogenes, and overall a low mutational burden, althoughin a highly tissue-speci ﬁc pattern. Lung had the highest number of
mutations with PCDH9 most frequently mutated (~6% of cancer
samples).
Conclusions: This comprehensive analysis of mutational and
transcriptional alterations in oncogenes and TSs in carcinogenesis
revealed high tissue speci ﬁcity and a low mutational burden,
implying that epigenetic changes and/or strong selection mightparticipate in tissue susceptibility to cancer.
A. Gelemanovic: None. T. Vidovic: None. B. Bernard: None. M.
Radman: None. K. Trajkovic: None.
P12.191.C TP53 gene alone and combination with others
oncogenes hotspot mutations in NSCLC tumor and plasmasamples of female
Ieva Drejeriene
1,2, Arnoldas Krasauskas1,3, Saulius Cicenas1,3, Jurate
Gruode2
1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Klaipeda University Hospital,
Klaip ėda, Lithuania,3National Cancer Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) female patients ’hotspot mutations in oncogenes
in formalin- ﬁxed, paraf ﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tumor DNA and
plasma cfDNA samples.
Materials and Methods: 49 female patients with NSCLC were
included in study. The main morphology was adenocarcinoma -
36 (74%). Hotspot mutations in 22 oncogenes (KRAS, EGFR, BRAF,
PIK3CA, AKT1, ERBB2, PTEN, NRAS, STK11, MAP2K1, ALK, DDR2,CTNNB1, MET ,TP53 ,SMAD4, FBX7, FGFR3, NOTCH1, ERBB4, EGFR1,
FGFR2) were detected using NGS (Ion Torrent ™PGM) Ion AmpliSeq
colon and lung cancer research panel (ThermoFisher). NGS wasperformed from FFPE DNA and plasma cfDNA for every patient.Samples were taken before treatment.
Results: Mutations in TP53 gene was the most prevalent in
female tumor and plasma samples. In 49 FFPE and 49 plasmafemales ’patients ’samples was tested and results show 38 (78%)tumors and 10 (20%) plasma samples had detections one or more
mutations in oncogenes. TP53 gene mutations in tumor samples
were detect 25 (43%) cases: 14 instances with other oncogenes
mutations and 9 instances mutation alone in TP53 gene; whereas,
in plasma samples were detect 5 (38%) times: 3 instances withother oncogene mutations and 2 instances only mutation in TP53
gene
Conclusion: Mutations in TP53 gene are most prevalent in
NSCLC tested group of samples. Although TP53 gene is not related
with lung cancer target therapy yet, identi ﬁcation presents and
quantity of these mutation in plasma NSCLC patients can be used
as a tool for follow up patients.
I. Drejeriene: None. A. Krasauskas: None. S. Cicenas: None. J.
Gruode: None.
P12.192.D Screening for genetic modifying factors in Li-
Fraumeni and heritable TP53 -related cancer syndromes
Gaelle Bougeard
1, Sophie Coutant1, Camille Charbonnier1, Jacque-
line Bou1, Françoise Charbonnier1, Emilie Bouvignies1, Edwige
Kasper1, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont1, Claude Houdayer1, Bertrand
Fin2, Anne Boland2, Jean-François Deleuze2, Laurence Brugières3,
Isabelle Tournier1, Thierry Frebourg4
1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U1245,
Normandie University, Rouen, France,2Centre National de Recherche
en Génomique Humaine, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France,
3Department of Pediatric Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,
4Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U1245,
Normandie University, ERN GENTURIS, Rouen, France.
Penetrance of germline TP53 variants is quite variable even within
families. We performed an extensive comparison of the exome in
253 TP53 variant carriers unaffected in childhood (uac) and in 174
TP53 variant carriers affected in childhood (ac), including 62 with
soft-tissue sarcoma or osteosarcoma (STS-OS), 50 with adrenocor-
tical carcinoma, 20 with choroid plexus carcinoma and 42 withother malignancies. Analysis was performed at the exome level andon a panel of 688 genes including 296 DNA repair genes, 131
cancer predisposition genes (CPG), and genes involved in p53
pathway or drug metabolism. Screening for recurrent additionalrare loss of function, strictly or moderately damaging missensevariants did not reveal a signi ﬁcant enrichment of variants hitting a
speci ﬁc gene in the 174 ac, as compared to the 253 uac. We
observed between both groups a similar number of variants per
patient affecting the 688 genes (6 vs 6.25), 296 DNA repair genes
(2.8 vs 2.9) and 131 CPG (1.57 vs 1.58) and did not observe in ac an
enrichment of variants hitting these genes, as compared to the restof the exome. Analysis of the ac series by tumour type did not showdifferent numbers of variants. However, the pattern in ac with STS-
OS was different from the others, with a predominance of variants
affecting a gene controlling the mesenchymal state. This studyshows that the mechanisms underlying the penetrance of germlineTP53 variants are complex and suggests that the tumour type
depends on the genetic landscape.
246 motsG. Bougeard: None. S. Coutant: None. C. Charbonnier: None.
J. Bou: None. F. Charbonnier: None. E. Bouvignies: None. E.
Kasper: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. C. Houdayer: None. B.
Fin: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. L. Brugières:
None. I. Tournier: None. T. Frebourg: None.
P12.193.A Inhibitors of TRAIL-induced apoptotic pathway: a
study of relative mRNA expression patterns in breast tumorsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
430
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Eirini Roupou1, Maria Michelli1, Ilenia Chatziandreou1, N.V. Micha-
lopoulos2, Panayiotis Karathanasis3, Andreas C. Lazaris1, Angelica A.
Saetta1
11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Ath, Athens, Greece,2Department
of Surgery Attikon Hospital, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece,31st Department of
Propaedeutic Surgery Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine,National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction: TRAIL-induced apoptotic pathway is a promising
therapeutic option as it targets cancer cells with high selectivity invivo but the ef ﬁcacy of TRAIL targeted monotherapies/combina-
tion therapies in clinical trials did not meet the expectations.
Elucidating the expression patterns of pathway ’s inhibitors may
aid in the selection of suitable cancer patients who would bene ﬁt
most from the above mentioned targeted therapies.
Materials and Methods: Relative mRNA expression of TRAIL
pathway inhibitors ( DcR1, DcR2, cFLIP, XIAP, BCL2, BCL-XL, MCL1)
was evaluated in 90 breast cancer tissues, using the RT-PCR/ ΔΔCt
method. The SPSSv22 package was used for statistical analysis.
Results: The pathway inhibitors presented elevated mRNA
levels in 7%-18% of the cases and reduced mRNA levels in 27%-59% of the cases. Analysis of the simultaneous gene expression
revealed linear correlations among different inhibitor pairs, with
the strongest ones between MCL1/cFLIP (R =0,741, p < 0,001) and
MCL1/BCL-XL (R =0,714, p < 0,001). The presence of lymph node
metastasis correlated with cFLIP and BCL-XL expression (p =0,024
and p =0,042, respectively), pStage correlated with cFLIP and
MCL1 expression (p =0,046 and p =0,041, respectively) and the
presence of a PIK3CA mutation correlated with cFLIP and XIAP
expression (p =0,048 and p =0,018, respectively).
Conclusions: In our study, the expression of inhibitors of TRAIL
apoptotic pathway depicted a complex regulation mechanism.Our analysis revealed correlations among inhibitors ’relative mRNA
levels with clinicopathological characteristics and multiple pat-
terns of simultaneous expression. Considering the above, it is ofsigni ﬁcant importance to stratify breast cancer patients using
predictive biomarkers in order to maximize the ef ﬁcacy of TRAIL
targeting therapies.
E. Roupou: None. M. Michelli: None. I. Chatziandreou: None.
N. Michalopoulos: None. P. Karathanasis: None. A. Lazaris:
None. A. Saetta: None.
P12.194.B Exploring Transposon Activity in Hematological
Malignances
Anastasiya Volakhava , Sarka Pavlova, Marcela Krzyzankova, Karol
Pal, Hana Synackova, Alexander Komkov, Sarka Pospisilova, Ilgar
Mamedov, Karla Plevova
CEITEC, Brno, Czech Republic.
Transposable elements are repetitive mobile DNA sequences with
the ability to invade and move within genomes. In the humangenome, the vast majority of transposons is represented byretroelements (REs) that are categorized into several families. The
long interspersed nucleic elements (L1) utilize a “copy-and-paste ”
mechanism to retrotranspose their copies into new genomic loci
through RNA-mediated mechanisms. A subgroup of the shortinterspersed elements called Alu is nonautonomous and relies
upon L1-encoded proteins (ORF1 and ORF2) for their mobilization.
RE activity is one of the most important causes of genomeinstability. Somatic insertions were detected in cancer types, suchas colorectal, lung, or breast carcinomas. To our best knowledge,
no systematic analysis has been performed to date to study RE
activity in hematological malignancies. We aimed to explore RE
activity in chronic lymphocytic and acute lymphoblastic leuke-mias, and myelodysplastic syndrome. To identify tumor-speci ﬁcR E
insertions, we adopted an NGS protocol of amplicons containing a
part of RE from Alu-Ya5, Alu-Yb8, or L1-HS families (the most active
in humans), and its adjacent genomic region. In total, 118 samples(73 tumor and 45 normal DNA) from 49 patients were analyzed.We found 26 candidate insertions in 13 tumor samples that will be
validated using PCR and Sanger sequencing. Additionally, to study
RE activity on the protein level, we implemented Western blotanalysis of ORF1 protein expression. In several cell lines, weobserved ORF1p expression induction after azacytidine treatment
causing genome demethylation. Supported by GACR 19-11299S,
AZV NU21-08-00237, and MH-CZ RVO 65269705.
A. Volakhava: None. S. Pavlova: None. M. Krzyzankova: None.
K. Pal: None. H. Synackova: None. A. Komkov: None. S.
Pospisilova: None. I. Mamedov: None. K. Plevova: None.
P12.195.C Triple Negative Breast Cancer Risk Identi ﬁed by
Ondemand Gen Panel Testing
Mercedes Durán
1, Mónica Arranz1, Enrique Lastra2, Luis Abella3,
Noemí Martínez1, Lara Hernández1, Mar Infante1
1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain,2Hospital Universitario de Burgos, Burgos,
Spain,3Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain.
Introduction: Germline genetic testing with gene panels can
identify women at increased risk of breast cancer. However, thoseat increased risk of triple-negative (estrogen receptor-negative,
progesterone receptor-negative, human epidermal growth factor
receptor-negative) breast cancer (TNBC) cannot be identi ﬁed
because predisposition genes for TNBC, other than BRCA1, have
not been established. The aim of this study was to de ﬁne new
genes associated with increased risk of TNBC.
Materials and Methods: We designed an On-Demand panel for
the analysis of 35-genes associated with inherited cancer
susceptibility. 48 TNBC (BRCA1 negative) patients was performed.
Each DNA sample was checked for concentration using a Qubit 3.0Fluorometer. The library and template preparations wereperformed using the automated Ion Chef System, then sequenced
in Ion S5 with Ion 520 Chip (all Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) according
to the manufacturer ’s instructions. Sequencing results were
analyzed using the Ion Reporter Software.
Results: A total of 3 Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic variants
(PV/LPV) were identi ﬁed in 48 TNBC cases (6,3%), affecting 3
different genes with a current clinical utility for each tumor (Table).
Gene cDNA Protein Consequence
ATM c.5979_5983delTAAAG p.Ser1993Argfs Frameshift
BLM c.1642C > T p.Gln548Ter NonsenseBRIP1 c.206-2A > G – Splicng
Conclusions: This study identi ﬁes several genes that predispose
to TNBC and are associated with high lifetime risks of TNBC and
overall breast cancer. The implementation of gene-panels canimprove the clinical management of TNBC patients in a quick andcost-effective method and the development of targeted ther-
apeutic approaches for TNBC patients.
M. Durán: None. M. Arranz: None. E. Lastra: None. L. Abella:
None. N. Martínez: None. L. Hernández: None. M. Infante: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
431
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P12.196.D mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes promote
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in triple negative breast
cancer cells
Ancuta Jurj1, Olga Soritau2, Lajos Raduly1, Cristian Moldovan1,
Cornelia Braicu1, Ioana Berindan-Neagoe1
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania,2Laboratory of Radiotherapy, Tumor and Radiobiology,
Prof. Dr. Ion Chiricu ţăOncology Institute, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Objective: Exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSC)
are critical players in the tumor niche being implicated in cell-to-cell communication affecting several hallmarks of cancer. The aim
of this study was to investigate the in ﬂuence of MSCs on triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines.
Methods: The TNBC cell lines were represented by MDA-MB-
231 and Hs578T, while MSCs were primary cell cultures. Exosomes
were isolated using ultracentrifugation and were characterized
using the Nano Sight system. Cell viability was detected using theMTT assay while migration was analyzed through wound healingassay. Moreover, we also used 3D culture to assess the exosomes
uptake and to observe their capability of internalization into a 3D
structure. The alterations in expression level of some transcripts(mRNAs and miRNAs) were investigated by qRT-PCR and
immuno ﬂuorescence.
Results: We observed that MSCs-derived exosomes were
incorporated in the TNBC cell lines. Considering cocultureconditions, in TNBC cells the expression level of mesenchymal
markers and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers
at mRNA and miRNA levels were signi ﬁcantly affected. Using
bioinformatics tools, we highlighted the important altered path-ways involved in EMT. In addition, using 3D culture we provided a
comprehensive understanding regarding exosome internalization
in 3D structures.
Conclusion: In the current study we have shown that MSC-
derived exosomes alter the EMT in TNBC cell lines and that these
alterations take place in a spatial-directed manner. Acknowl-edgement: PN-III-P1-1.2-PCCDI-2017-0782, entitled “Advanced
innovative approaches for predictive regenerative medicine ”—
REGMED
A. Jurj: None. O. Soritau: None. L. Raduly: None. C. Moldovan:
None. C. Braicu: None. I. Berindan-Neagoe: None.
P12.197.A Analysis of urothelial carcinomas by targeted RNA-
Seq
Jan Rehker , Marie-Lisa Eich, Sabine Merkelbach-Bruse, Reinhard
Büttner
University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Urothelial carcinomas are the 9
thmost common type of cancer
worldwide. Prognosis for outcome of the disease and treatment
are associated with histopathology of the tumor. We analyzed a
total of 36 samples by targeted RNA sequencing. 9 of the tumorswere low grade (LG), 10 were high grade (HG) and 17 were highgrade tumors that had invaded muscular tissue of the bladder
(HG_MIBC). Out of those, four patients had initial and one follow
up diagnosis. Our study aimed to identify differential expressiongenes between the three subgroups. Samples were divided upinto batches of 14 and 22 samples which were sequenced
independently.Read count derived from a panel of 1,410 genes
was subjected to an analysis with DESeq2. We performedprincipal component analysis (PCA), as well as hierarchical andnon hierarchical clustering. For hierarchical clustering weattempted to identify the most differentially expressed genes
in both batches of samples. No speci ﬁc clusters were observed
for LG, HG and HG_MIBC during PCA. Differentially expressed
genes could be identi ﬁed during hierarchical clustering of the LG
group against HG_MIBC. Of those BMP7, GATA2 and OLR1 wereidenti ﬁe dw i t ha tl e a s ta2 f o l dc h a n g ea n daP< 0 . 0 5( a d j u s t e df o r
multiple testing). We did not identify genes differentially
expressed between HG and HG_MIBC or LG.While differentiationbetween early and late stages of urothelial carcinomas seempossible, the limited number of targets in the gene panel or the
heterogeneity of the tumor type did not allow for identi ﬁcation
of stages in between.
J. Rehker: None. M. Eich: None. S. Merkelbach-Bruse: None. R.
Büttner: None.
P12.198.B FISH UroVysion test and mRNA-based urine test in
detection of urothelial carcinoma
Andreja Zagorac , Ivan Peri ć, Niko Kav čič, Nadja Kokalj Voka č
University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
Introduction: Regular cytologies, cystoscopies and upper urinary
tract imaging are still the gold standard for early diagnosis and
monitoring of urothelial cancer (UC). A variety of commercially
available urinary molecular markers have been introduced fordetecting and monitoring UC. We compared two tests: FISH testUroVysion Bladder Cancer Kit routinely used in our laboratory and
mRNA-based urinary marker test Xpert ®Bladder Cancer Detection.
Material and Methods: Voided urine samples of 204 patients
with hematuria or monitoring for tumor recurrence in patientspreviously diagnosed with UC, after negative cystoscopy were
collected. Urine samples were analyzed using Xpert Bladder
Cancer detection test which measures the levels of ﬁve target
mRNAs (ABL1, CRH, IGF2, UPK1B, ANXA10) by RT-PCR and
UroVysion Bladder Cancer Kit which is designed to detect
aneuploidy for chromosomes 3, 7, 17 and loss of the 9p21 locusby FISH.
Results: 20 malignant tumors were detected: 12 bladder
cancers, 6 ureter cancers and 2 renal pelvis cancers. 13 tumors
were detected with both methods, one was missed with both and6 were detected either with FISH or Xpert. FISH test had an overallsensitivity of 78%, a speci ﬁcity of 93%, a negative predictive value
of 96% and Xpert test had an overall sensitivity of 90%, a
speci ﬁcity of 85% and a negative predictive value of 98%. For 29%
samples we didn ’t get the FISH result.
Conclusions: Both tests had high sensitivity, speci ﬁcity and
negative predictive value. Both methods represent a promisingnew tool in the management of urothelial carcinoma.
A. Zagorac: None. I. Peri ć:None. N. Kav čič:None. N. Kokalj
Voka č:None.
P12.199.C Targeted sequencing of uterine lavage ﬂ
uid for
early detection of gynecologic cancer
Ieva Vaicekauskaite1,2, Diana Zilovic1,2, Ruta Ciurliene1, Rasa
Sabaliauskaite1, Sonata Jarmalaite1
1National Cancer Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of Bioscences,
Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common
gynecological malignancy worldwide, while ovarian cancer (OC) isthe deadliest. The high incidence and mortality rates areattributed to the lack of effective screening techniques. UterineAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
432
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608lavage is a non-invasive technique sampling cells shed into
uterine cavity by EC and OC. Mutations in uterine lavage can be
detected by sequencing and thus could provide an alternative to
invasive biopsies unsuitable for resampling and patient monitor-ing. The aim of this study was to screen uterine lavage ﬂuid and
tissue samples from Lithuanian OC and EC patients for mutations
related to gynecological cancer and to determine their associa-
tions with clinical features.
Materials and Methods: DNA from 51 uterine lavage and 35
tissue samples from 54 patients (32 OC, 11 EC and 11 patients with
benign conditions) were analyzed by targeted NGS using Ion
AmpliSeq ™On-Demand Panel targeting 10 genes commonly
associated with OC and EC.
Results: Using targeted NGS we were able to detect 52
pathogenic and 38 uncertain signi ﬁcance SNPs in 74% (40/54)
patients. 54% (28/54) SNPs were detected in 84% (27/32) bothtissue and uterine lavage sample pairs. In high grade serous OC
patients, the most commonly mutated genes were BRCA1 and
TP53 , while in early stage non-serous OC and EC patients PIK3CA,
PTEN, KRAS and ARID1A mutations were the most common.
Conclusions: ourﬁndings suggest that targeted sequencing of
uterine lavage samples could be a useful non-invasive technique
for gynecological cancer patient screening and molecularproﬁling.
I. Vaicekauskaite: None. D. Zilovic: None. R. Ciurliene: None.
R. Sabaliauskaite: None. S. Jarmalaite: None.
P12.200.D Novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correla-
tions in Slovenian Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease patients
Damjan Glavac
1, Metka Ravnik-Glava č2, Marija Pfeifer3,D u šan
Flisar4, Katrina Novak Andrej čič5, Marko Hawlina6
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia,3Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana,
Slovenia,4Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,5Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre,
Ljubljana, Slovenia,6Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease (MIM no. 199300)
is an autosomal dominant familial cancer syndrome with the
estimated incidence 3/100 000. The most common phenotypes
are retinal and cerebellar haemangioblastomas, renal cell carci-noma, phaeochromocytoma and renal, pancreatic and epididymal
cysts. In our study we have focused to speci ﬁc and novel VHL
mutations mostly related to retinal and cerebellar haemangio-blastomas manifestation in Slovenian population.
Materials and Methods: Retrospective analysis of Slovenian
VHL families included 70 patients and family members. Sanger
sequencing and MPLA (Multiplex ligation-dependent probeampli ﬁcation) methods were used for mutation identi ﬁcation in
the VHL gene.
Results: Two novel missense mutations p.Leu153Pro, p.
Ile151Asn and one new frameshift mutation p.Arg176fs in theVHL gene were identi ﬁed. Also known low penetrance p.Glu70Lys
mutation was identi ﬁed in three of our VHL patients. The most
common ocular ﬁnding comprised retinal haemangioblastomas
(13 eyes), optic disc haemangioblastoma (1 eye), optic nervehaemangioblastoma (2 eyes) and optic disc atrophy following
papilledema.
Conclusions: Two novel missense mutations p.Leu153Pro, p.
Ile151Asn and p.Glu70Lys mutations are related exclusively toretinal and cerebellar haemangioblastomas, while p.Arg176fsmutation phenotype includes also phaeochromocytoma. p.
Glu70Lys mutation, in most populations considered as low
penetrance mutation, in our population showed 100% of
penetration, indeed with the very late onset in one patient whowasﬁrst identi ﬁed with retinal haemangioblastoma only at age 61
years. Our molecular study increases the list of known VHL
mutations and contributes to a better understanding of the
genotype/phenotype correlations in the VHL families. Supportedby Slovenian Research Agency programme P3-0054.
D. Glavac: None. M. Ravnik-Glava č:None. M. Pfeifer: None. D.
Flisar: None. K. Novak Andrej čič:None. M. Hawlina: None.
P12.201.A High rate of (epi)genetic predisposing factors and
an important role for DIS3L2 in a nationwide Wilms tumor
cohort
Janna A. Hol
1, Roland P. Kuiper1, Freerk Van Dijk1, Esmé Waanders2,
Marco J. Koudijs1,2, Reno Bladergroen1, Simon Van Reijmersdal1,
Lionel M. Morgado1, Jet Bliek3, Paola Lombardi3, Saskia Hopman2,
Jarno Drost1,4, Ronald R. De Krijger1,2, Marry M. Van den Heuvel-
Eibrink1, Marjolijn C. J. Jongmans1,2
1Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,2University Medical Center Utrecht / Wilhelmina Children ’s
Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands,3Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,4Oncode Institute, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
Background: Wilms tumor (WT) is the most common childhood
renal tumor, associated with (epi)genetic predisposing factorsincluding Beckwith-Wiedemann Spectrum (BWSp) and WT1-
related syndromes. In this study, we aimed to determine the
prevalence of predisposing factors in relation to phenotypic
ﬁndings, and to identify novel WT predisposition genes.
Methods: Phenotypic data and diagnostic test results were
collected for all children diagnosed with WT in the Netherlands
(2015-2020). Comprehensive BWSp testing was performed,followed by germline (trio-) whole exome sequencing (WES).
Results: 126 patients were identi ﬁed, including one familial WT.
(Epi)genetic predisposing factors were present in 42/126 patients
(33.3%). Heterozygous DIS3L2 variants were identi ﬁed as a novel
predisposing factor in ﬁve patients (4.0%), with a second somatic
hit in 4/4 (100%) tumors tested. Twenty patients (15.9%) were
diagnosed with BWSp, including patients with a molecular
diagnosis in blood-derived DNA (N =8), normal kidney tissue-
derived DNA with at least one additional feature of BWSp (N =8),
or solely a clinical diagnosis of classical Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome (N =4). Four patients without additional BWSp features
harbored 11p15 methylation defects in normal kidney tissue.Remaining ﬁndings included WT1- related syndromes (N =10,
7.9%), Fanconi anemia (N =1),REST (N=1) and NF1 (N=1)
mutations. Candidate WT predisposition genes were identi ﬁed
which require validation in larger cohorts.
Conclusions: (Epi)genetic WT predisposing factors, including
mosaic 11p15 aberrations, were present in at least 33.3% of
patients with WT in this national cohort, with an important role forconstitutional heterozygous DIS3L2 variants. Based on these
results, we encourage standard genetic testing after counseling
by a clinical geneticist.
J.A. Hol: None. R.P. Kuiper: None. F. Van Dijk: None. E.
Waanders: None. M.J. Koudijs: None. R. Bladergroen: None. S.
Van Reijmersdal: None. L.M. Morgado: None. J. Bliek: None. P.
Lombardi: None. S. Hopman: None. J. Drost: None. R.R. De
Krijger: None. M.M. Van den Heuvel-Eibrink: None.
M.C.J.
Jongmans: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
433
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P13 Genome Variation and Architecture
P13.002.C A multivariate analysis identi ﬁes genetic loci asso-
ciated with atherosclerotic plaque composition and cardio-
vascular disease trajectory
Kai Cui1, Joost Mekke2, Saskia Haitjema2, Gerard Pasterkamp3,
Folkert W. Asselbergs1, Michal Mokry3, S W. van der Laan3
1Department of Cardiology, Division heart and Lungs, UMC Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands,2Department of Vascular Surgery, University
Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands,
3Central Diagnostics Laboratory, Division Laboratories Pharmacy,
and Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Uni-versity of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background: From cross-sectional studies we have learned that
the composition of atherosclerotic plaques differs between
individuals, and this contributes to the inter-individual differences
in susceptibility to incident coronary and cerebral events. Inpathological studies, the extent and type of atherosclerosis arecommonly assessed based on histological plaque characteristics
that are linked to plaque rupture and erosion. A better under-
standing of the biology underlying variability in plaque composi-tion will provide insights into the progression of cardiovasculardiseases.
Objectives: We investigated the genetics of the plaque through
multivariate and integrative genome-wide analyses (GWAS) ofindividual plaque characteristics.
Methods: We included carotid endarterectomy patients from
the Athero-Express Biobank Study (n =2,124) with high-density
imputed data and extensive histochemical plaque phenotypingavailable. We used slideToolKit to quantify the number of
endothelial cells, macrophages, and smooth muscle cells (SMCs),
and manually assessed the number of intraplaque vessels, theamount of collagen and calci ﬁcation, the atheroma size, and the
presence of plaque hemorrhage. We ran GWAS on all traits
correcting for age, sex, array used, and genetic ancestry.
Results: We identi ﬁed 3 loci that signi ﬁcantly associate with
CD68+macrophages and ACTA2 +SMCs, p < 5x10
-8. Statistical
ﬁne-mapping revealed 9 variants in the 95% credible set and
functional annotation linked these to genes associated with
malignant neoplasms, circulating cholesterol, and transmembraneproteins, suggesting an effect on cellular proliferation and
cholesterol metabolism.
Conclusions: We provide evidence for 3 loci that modulate
plaque composition through macrophages and smooth musclecell plaque proliferation and cell-cell interactions.
K. Cui: None. J. Mekke: None. S. Haitjema: None. G.
Pasterkamp: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. M. Mokry: None. S.
W. van der Laan: None.
P13.003.D Association of genomic factors for oral health in
the cohort of the Lithuanian Chernobyl catastrophe
liquidators
Aušra Matulevi čienė, Gabriel ėŽukauskait ė, Ingrida Domarkien ė,
Vaidutis Ku činskas, Laima Ambrozaityt ė
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Ionizing radiation (IR) is one of the most signi ﬁcant
environmental factors, affecting human health. It has a severeimpact not only at high but at mild and/or persistent doses ofirradiation. ADAPT (Adaptive genetic mechanisms - acomprehensive study of whole genome variation in the group
of the Lithuanian Chernobyl catastrophe liquidators (LCCLs))
research project analyses the unique group of (93) LCCLs, who
survived for more than 30 years after the accident. In addition toother multifactorial diseases, affecting cardiovascular (75%),skeletal and connective tissue (71%), gastrointestinal (70%) and
other systems, almost half of them (48%) have oral health
problems (OHP), such as periodontitis and tooth loss. In this study,we aim to identify genes that are related to the ethiopathogenesisof OHP in the LCCLs.
Materials and Methods: DNA from 93 LCCLs was extracted
from venous blood and microarray genotyping was performed.These individuals were divided by their health status into case(with OHP) and control groups (without OHP). Association analysis
was performed using SNPs (909) of the genes involved in tooth
health (59 genes). A chi-square test was performed using PLINK .
Results: This study identi ﬁed new associations between ( FGF1,
FGF2, FGF7 and BMP2) genes to high risk of dental health
problems: rs308388 (p =0.003807; OR =2.553), rs34022 (p =
0.005236; OR =2.389), rs1696244 (p =0.003016; OR =2.436),
rs3178250 (p =0.004969; OR =3.493).
Conclusions . Our preliminary results identi ﬁed four new
associations that could underlie the pathogenic IR effects ondental health. This project has received funding from the ResearchCouncil of Lithuania (LMTLT), agreement No. S-MIP-20-35.
A. Matulevi č
ienė:None. G.Žukauskait ė:None. I. Domar-
kien ė:None. V. Ku činskas: None. L. Ambrozaityt ė:None.
P13.004.A Looking back on copy gains: a retrospective review
of clinical relevance and structural mechanisms
Sónia Custódio , Rosário Silveira-Santos, Raquel Rodrigues, Eva Rolo,
Juliette Dupont, Patrícia Dias, Oana Moldovan, Catarina Machado,Márcia Rodrigues, Mariana Soeiro Sá, André Travessa, JoãoRodrigues Alves, Raquel Gouveia Silva, Ana Berta Sousa, Ana Sousa
Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de
Santa Maria - Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisboa,Portugal.
Introduction: Assessing the clinical signi ﬁcance of copy gains is
often challenging for genetic laboratories. While copy lossinterpretation is usually based on haploinsuf ﬁciency, copy gain
effects are much harder to predict, bringing uncertainty to genetic
reports and distress to clinical counseling.
Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of 112 copy
gains identi ﬁed by aCGH (180K CGX-HD, PerkinElmer) in 98
postnatal cases reported from 2015 to 2020. Forty CNVs werefurther characterized by FISH or karyotype.
Results/Conclusions: 43%(48/112) were classi ﬁed as patho-
genic and include CNVs integrating chromosomal rearrangements
[31%(15/48)]; known susceptibility loci of incomplete penetrance[27%(13/48)], syndromic microduplication regions [23%(11/48)],size >8Mb [17%(8/48)], and presence of dosage-sensitive genes
[2%(1/48)]. Parental studies were performed for 26 CNVs: 12(46%)
were de novo, 10(39%) were inherited, and 4(15%) originatedfrom balanced parental rearrangements. 57%(64/112) wereclassi ﬁed as variants of uncertain clinical signi ﬁcance. The latter
were either regions with no clear disease association [70%(45/64)],
or susceptibility loci with low penetrance (cut-off set at 20%)[30%(19/64)]. Inheritance was assessed in 34 CNVs: 28(82%) were
inherited and 6(18%) were de novo. All 13 low penetrance CNVs
with parental studies were inherited, these brought signi ﬁcant
uncertainty to reports. Apart from the latter and excluding CNVson the X chromosome, 12 were inherited from healthy parents,
favoring benignity and lessening the burden of uncertainty. Of theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
434
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 60840 cases with structural information, the majority was in tandem
[25(62%)], but chromosome rearrangements (insertions, derivative
chromosomes and supernumerary marker chromosomes) were
identi ﬁed in 15(38%), stressing the importance of cytogenetic
studies for CNVs >1Mb.
S. Custódio: None. R. Silveira-Santos: None. R. Rodrigues:
None. E. Rolo: None. J. Dupont: None. P. Dias: None. O.
Moldovan: None. C. Machado: None. M. Rodrigues: None. M.
Soeiro Sá: None. A. Travessa: None. J. Rodrigues Alves: None. R.
Gouveia Silva: None. A.B. Sousa: None. A. Sousa: None.
P13.006.C High throughput analysis of disease repeat expan-
sions and contractions by optical mapping
Dong Zhang , Ernest Lam, Jian Wang, Tom Wang, Andy Pang, Henry
Sadowski, Alex Hastie, Mark Oldakowski
bionano genomics, San Diego, CA, USA.
Expansions and contractions of unstable repeats are associated
with a range of degenerative disorders such as myotonic
dystrophy and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD).
These disorders most often involve trinucleotide repeats but havebeen associated with other types of repeat arrays. This can impact
the age of onset in both the current and successive generations.
The phenotype severity is often correlated with the amount ofpathogenic expansion or contraction. Thus, accurate sizing of therepeats is crucial. Southern blotting is the gold standard for
analyzing pathogenic repeats. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is
used as well, but the polymerase is sometimes not able to traversethrough long repeats. Sequencing-based methods are hamperedby limitations in read lengths and the repetitive and polymorphic
nature of these regions. Optical genome mapping with the
Bionano Saphyr platform offers several advantages. With ultra-high molecular weight DNA in nanochannels, one can span and
size large repeat arrays. We analyzed the FMR1 repeat relevant to
Fragile X syndrome using Coriell cell lines. We observed theexpected expansion alleles in the Coriell cell lines, with sizesconsistent with annotation, with the largest expansion being
almost 1000 copies. The control samples had repeats below the
pathogenic cutoff. We also analyzed the DZ4Z repeat onchromosome 4 for FSHD. Bionano offers sample preparation,DNA imaging and genomic data analysis technologies combined
into one streamlined work ﬂow that enables high-throughput
genome-wide analysis of tandem repeat regions of interest.Together, these components allow for ef ﬁcient analysis of diseases
associated with repeat expansion and contraction.
D. Zhang: None. E. Lam: None. J. Wang: None. T. Wang: None.
A. Pang: None. H. Sadowski: None. A. Hastie: None. M.
Oldakowski: None.
P13.007.D Long-read single molecule sequencing to study the
effect of CNV on transcript length of the bacteria-binding
mucosal glycoprotein DMBT1
Adel Alharbi
1, Nongfei Sheng2, Nicklas Strömberg2, Edward Hollox1
1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom,2Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.
The DMBT1 gene codes for the 340kDa-DMBT1 glycoprotein,
predominantly expressed in saliva and at mucosal surfaces, and
binds to a wide variety of pathogens through tandemly-arrangedscavenger receptor cysteine-rich (SRCR) domains. DMBT1 showsextensive multi-allelic germline copy number variation (CNV)
across all populations, with the tandemly-repeated CNV leading to
different alleles with between (7-21) SRCR domains. These alleles
alter the binding of DMBT1 to bacteria. This study aimed toinvestigate the effect of different numbers of SRCR-repeatsvariation on transcript length and protein length. We used a
PCR-based method called the paralogue ratio test and long-range
PCR to precisely genotype the SRCR-repeat number in a humanlung cell line (H292). Using Oxford Nanopore sequencing, we alsosequenced cDNA the same cell line, with the aim of revealing the
length and nature of DMBT1 transcripts. Four full-length DMBT1
transcripts sequenced using a single sequencing read (6.7kb)showed a SRCR-domain number consistent with the genotype.Finally, we compared DMBT1 protein size from saliva, determined
using Western blot, with DNA-based genotype of SRCR-domain
number in a small cohort of healthy individuals to explore therelationship of the CNV encoding the SRCR-domain number to
protein length. We found the genotype variation correlated with
DMBT1 protein size variation, with small DMBT1 proteinscorrelated with fewer SRCR exons. Previous studies havesuggested that alternative splicing or variable glycosylation affects
DMBT1 transcript length and protein size. Our observations do not
rule this out completely, but strongly stress the importance ofgenetically encoded CNV in DMBT1 protein variation.
A. Alharbi: None. N. Sheng: None. N. Strömberg: None. E.
Hollox: None.
P13.008.A VariantAlert: a free service to notify updates in
genetic variant annotations
Rossano Atzeni
1, Matteo Massidda1, Giorgio Fotia1, Paolo Uva2,3
1Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia
(CRS4), Pula, Italy,2IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,3Italian
Institute of Technology, Genova, Italy.
Introduction: Variant reinterpretation based on the availability of
updated annotations is part of the routine work of researchlaboratories: the more data is collected about a speci ﬁc variant,
the higher the probability to reinterpret an unclassi ﬁed variant. To
support the interpretation of genetic variants, we developedVariantAlert, a web-based tool to help researchers and clinicians tokeep informed about changes in variant annotations extracted
from multiple sources.
Materials and Methods: VariantAlert is a web application built
in Django, and uses PostgreSQL as the database backend. The
web server is Nginx. Travis CI performs continuous integration,
automatically running the test suite whenever the codebase ischanged on Github repository. VariantAlert is easy to install locallyor deploy remotely through the use of the Docker platform. A
Make ﬁle allows users to easily start VarianAlert, taking care of
installation, con ﬁguration and running steps.
Results: A user can submit one or more lists of variants which are
daily re-annotated using external resources accessed through API,
such as MyVariant.info annotation API providing links to variant
annotations from gnomAD, COSMIC, ClinVar, CIViC, and manyothers. If a change is detected for the annotation of a variant due tothe upgrade of the underlying resource the user is noti ﬁed by email
and updated annotations are stored on the web-site.
Conclusions: VariantAlert contributes to the interpretation of
genetic variants and their classi ﬁcation by keeping the researchers
constantly informed of the current content of multiple annotation
databases (See https://variant-alert.crs4.it/ )
R. Atzeni: None. M. Massidda: None. G. Fotia: None. P. Uva:
None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
435
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P13.009.B Large genomic imbalances and phenotype
Martine Doco-Fenzy1,2,3, Jean Michel Dupont2,4, Chantal Missir-
ian2,5, Patrick Callier2,6, Valérie Malan7,8, Sylvia Redon2,9, Emilie
Landais1, Lucas Hérissant1, Paul Kuentz2,10, Gaelle Vieville2,11, Marie
Faoucher2,12, Olivier Pichon7,13, Mathilde Pujalte2,14, Perrine Penna-
men7,15, Caroline Thambo7,16, Cedric Lecaignec17, Boris Keren7,18,
Sylvie Jaillard2, Jonathan Levy2,19, Christine Pebrel2,20, Nathalie
Douet9, Céline Bonnet21, Mathieu Egloff22, Eva Pipiras2,23, Charles
Coutton2,24, Pascal Chambon25, Dorothée Reboul26, François Via-
lard2,27, Anne -Claude Tabet2,19, Nicolas Chatron2,28, Caroline Schuth
Bolard2,29, Nicolas Gruchy2,30, Vincent Gatinois2,31, Damien
Sanlaville7,28
1CHU REIMS, REIMS, France,2ACLF, Paris, France,3EA3801 SFR CAP
SANTE, Reim, France,4CHRU Cochin, Paris, France,5CHRU Marseille,
Marseille, France,6CHRU Dijon, Dijon, France,7Achropuce, Paris,
France,8CHRU Necker, Paris, France,9CHRU Brest, Brest, France,
10CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France,11CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble,
France,12CHRU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,13CHU de Nantes,
Nantes, France,14CHU d ’Amiens, Amiens, France,15CHU de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France,16CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,17CHU
Toulouse, Tououse, France,18CHU La Pité Salpétrière, Paris, France,
19CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France,20CHU Clermont Ferrand,
Clermont Ferrand, France,21CHRU de Nancy, Nancy, France,22CHU
Poitiers, Poitiers, France,23CHU Jean Verdier, Bondy, France,24CHRU
de Grenoble, Grenoble, France,25CHU Rouen, Rouen, France,26CHU
Nimes, Nimes, France,27CHU de Versailles, Versailles, France,28CHU
Lyon, Bron, France,29CHRU de Lyon, Lyon, France,30CHU de Caen,
Caen, France,31CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Introduction: The NGS Genome study, improves the "limited"
karyotype observations and gives keys to better understand the
phenotype-genotype links. In routine analysis for ID or malforma-
tions, array-CGH technique identi ﬁes genome losses or gains,
imbalances ranging from the exon scale down to that of entire
chromosome. This technique has made us progress in the
understanding of CNVs with their impact on TADs (topologicallyassociated domains). The interpretation of the pathogenicity ofCNVs follows guidelines based notably on size and inheritance.
But today we remain faced with problems of interpreting the
pathogenicity of large CNVs over 3Mb inherited from normalparents, sometimes in a clinical emergency. The purpose of ourstudies is to establish the composition of the regions of the
genome over 3 or 5 Mb which can be in variable copy number
without phenotypic consequence. This with two sub-questions: dothey have common characteristics that would allow a genetic
counseling in prenatal context and why do large CNV without
phenotypic consequence in a parent is expressed in his offspring?Material and methods: to answer these questions we have
collected among our networks (ACLF and Achropuces) the data
of large CNVs without phenotypic consequences in order to map
these changes and make a bioinformatic analysis of theircharacteristics. The preliminary data on 29188 MCA test show5710 CNVs over 1Mb, among them 40,3% are between 1 and 2Mb.
16,8% between 2 and 3Mb, 7,4% between 3 and 4Mb and
interestingly 15,22% over 10Mb. We report the detailed data ofthe cohort.
M. Doco-Fenzy: None. J. Dupont: None. C. Missirian: None. P.
Callier: None. V. Malan: None. S. Redon: None. E. Landais: None.
L. Hérissant: None. P. Kuentz: None. G. Vieville: None. M.
Faoucher: None. O. Pichon: None. M. Pujalte: None. P. Penna-
men: None. C. Thambo: None. C. Lecaignec: None. B. Keren:
None. S. Jaillard: None. J. Levy: None. C. Pebrel: None. N. Douet:
None. C. Bonnet: None. M. Egloff: None. E. Pipiras: None. C.
Coutton: None. P. Chambon: None. D. Reboul: None. F. Vialard:None. A. Tabet: None. N. Chatron: None. C. Schuth Bolard:
None. N. Gruchy: None. V. Gatinois: None. D. Sanlaville: None.
P13.012.A Two novel deletions in the 5 Untranslated region of
GNAS gene as a cause of pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A
Louise-May Thibaut
1, Arnaud Molin1, Christine Francannet2,
Benjamin Dauriat3, Andreea Apetrei1, Nicolas Richard1
1Normandy University Hospital, Caen, France,2Clermont-Ferrand
University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France,3Limoges University
Hospital, Limoges, France.
The GNAS complex locus encodes the biallelically expressed α
subunit of the stimulatory G protein (G αs) and additional
imprinted or non-coding transcripts. Pseudohypoparathyroidismtype IA (PHP1A) is a rare disease caused by a decrease in the
activity of G αs, characterized by multihormone resistance and the
Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy phenotype (round facies,short stature, subcutaneous ossi ﬁcations, brachydactyly, and
early-onset obesity). The reason of this disorder is maternal
inactivating mutations involving G αs exons.
In this study we investigated two affected individuals,
unrelated, both presenting a typical phenotype of PHP1A. A
methylation-speci ﬁc multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli ﬁ-
cation analysis and a targeted Next Generation Sequencing wereachieved for the two siblings but were not contributive. A wholegenome sequencing (WGS) analysis was performed: the library
preparation (paired-end 2x150 bp) used the NEBNext DNA Library
Prep Kit. The sequencing was performed using an Illuminaplatform and the sequences were aligned at the reference humangenome GRCh38. The data was then processed using several
pipelines (structural variant, variant calling, copy number variant).
The structural variant detected two novel heterozygous
deletions in the 5 ’Untranslated region of GNAS gene for each
sibling, 466 bp and 1439 bp respectively. These deletions were
conﬁrmed by a PCR analysis of the genomic DNA using primers
designed to amplify across both breakpoints of the mutant allele.
The WGS contributes considerably to these cases without
previous diagnosis using standard tecnhiques especially on the
appearance of structural variants. Developing additional strategiesshould be interesting so as to detect these potentially recurringdeletions.
L. Thibaut: None. A. Molin: None. C. Francannet: None. B.
Dauriat: None. A. Apetrei: None. N. Richard: None.
P13.013.B A novel synonymous-predicted variant in exon 1 of
GNAS gene results in a cryptic splice site and causes
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A and pseudopseudohypo-
parathyroidism in a French family
Andreea Apetrei
1, Arnaud Molin1, Nicolas Gruchy1, Manon Godin1,
Claire Bracquemart1, Antoine Resbeut1, Gaëlle Rey2, Gwenaël
Nadeau2, Nicolas Richard1
1Department of Genetics, CAEN, France,2Department of Genetics,
Chambéry, France.
Introduction: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A (PHP1A) and
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) (Inactivating PTH/PTHrP Signaling Disorders type 2, IPPSD2) are two rare autosomal
disorders caused by loss-of-function mutations in the imprinted
GNAS gene, which encodes the αsubunit of the ubiquitously-
expressed G protein (G αs).Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
436
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Material and Methods: We investigated a French family
including 2 patients presenting an IPPSD2 phenotype. GNAS
exons 1-13 and intron/exon boundaries were sequenced and
interpreted following the routine protocol in our moleculargenetics laboratory. Two splicing-prediction algorithms were used.Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction was
used to assess the expression of GNAS . Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction using a gene-speci ﬁc primer was
realized in order to identify the mutant allele.
Results: We identi ﬁed a synonymous GNAS variant
NM_001077488.2:c.108C>A / p.(Val36 =) present in the affected
members with IPPSD2 phenotype. In silico splicing prediction
algorithms were in favor of a deleterious effect of this variant, bycreating a new donor splicing site. The GNAS expression studies in
blood suggested haploinsuf ﬁciency and showed an alternate
splice product demonstrating the unmasking of a cryptic site,leading to a 34 base pairs deletion and possibly, the creation of an
unstable RNA.
Conclusions: We present the ﬁrst familial case of IPPSD2 caused
by a pathogenic synonymou s-predicted variant in GNAS gene. This
observation supports the increasing interest in the identi ﬁcation of
splicing variants, particularly tho se predicted as synonymous, which
are often systematically categori zed as benign. Splice-prediction
algorithms could be added to the b ioinformatic pipelines for MPS
data in routine analysis to improve the detection of such variations.
A. Apetrei: None. A. Molin: None. N. Gruchy: None. M. Godin:
None. C. Bracquemart: None. A. Resbeut: None. G. Rey: None. G.
Nadeau: None. N. Richard: None.
P13.014.C Analysis of neurotransmitter gene expression and
comparison with the receptor density in human hippocampal
regions
Thomas W. Mühleisen
1,2,3, Ling Zhao1, Dominique Hilger1, Bettina
Burger3, Andreas Forstner1,4, Stefan Herms3,4, Per Hoffmann4,3, Karl
Zilles1, Katrin Amunts1,2, Sven Cichon1,3,5, Nicola Palomero-
Gallagher1,2,6
1INM-1, Jülich, Germany,2Cécile and Oskar Vogt Institute for Brain
Research, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany,3Department of Biomedicine, University
Hospital Basel and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland,4Research
Platform Genomics, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,5Institute of Medical Genetics and
Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland,6Department
of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany.
Introduction : The hippocampus plays a crucial role in memory
and learning. We screened for differential expression of neuro-
transmitter receptors and their genes in the cornu ammonis (CA)
and dentate gyrus (DG), to gain insight into their regionalspeci ﬁcity. We directly compared RNA transcripts and protein
densities from the same donor samples.
Methods : Seven fresh-frozen samples were obtained at
autopsy. Donors (71.4 ± 15 years) were free from neurological orpsychiatric diseases. RNA expression was genome-wide analysedand normalized. Receptor densities (protein expression levels)
were quanti ﬁed by autoradiographic analysis.
Results : We analysed four transmitter systems. Highest RNA
expression both in CA and DG were found for the muscarinic
cholinergic and adenosinergic systems, followed by the serotonergic
and dopaminergic systems. Highest protein density showed theadenosinergic and serotonergic systems in both regions, followed bythe cholinergic and dopaminergic systems. Relationship between
RNA expression and protein level differed between CA and DG fordifferent receptors. Genes and proteins of some transmitter systems
were positively correlated (e.g. ADORA1 and A1) while others were
negatively correlated in either one or both regions.
Conclusions : Our ﬁndings suggest the presence of region- and
receptor type-speci ﬁc regulatory mechanisms between CA and
DG. A deduction of receptor densities from gene expression data
alone may therefore be challenging. We hypothesize that the
identi ﬁed differences could be associated with region-speci ﬁc
plasticity mechanisms in learning and memory processes. Fund-
ing: This project has received funding from EU ’s Horizon 2020
programme “Human Brain Project ”under Agreements 785907
(SGA2) and 945539 (SGA3).
T.W. Mühleisen: None. L. Zhao: None. D. Hilger: None. B.
Burger: None. A. Forstner: None. S. Herms: None. P. Hoffmann:
None. K. Zilles: None. K. Amunts: None. S. Cichon: None. N.
Palomero-Gallagher: None.
P13.015.D Role of splicing regulatory elements and in silico
tools usage in the identi ﬁcation of splicing altering deep
intronic variants
Joanna Domènech-Vivó
1, Alejandro Moles-Fernández1, Anna
Tenés2, Sara Hermosa-García1, Orland Diez1,2, Sara Gutiérrez-
Enríquez1
1Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d ’Hebron Institute of
Oncology (VHIO), Vall d ’Hebron Hospital Campus, BARCELONA,
Spain,2Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d ’Hebron
Hospital Universitari, Vall d ’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus,
Barcelona, Spain.
Deep intronic variants can alter splic ing, including intronic regions in
mRNA by activating/creating splicing sites or splicing regulatory
elements (SREs). However, these al terations remain underestimated.
Although different computational tools separately identify variants
affecting cryptic sites (SPLICEAI, MES, SSF or HSF) and SREs (ESRseq),
there is no speci ﬁc pipeline to assess the splicing defects induced by
intronic changes. Our aim is to provide a validated in silico algorithm
to identify them. After a bibliographic review, the spliceogenic effect
of several deep intronic variants was compiled in a pilot set and used
to evaluate the performance of SPLICEAI and to characterize thelandscape of SREs in pseudoexons and canonical exons by ESRseq.The results permitted to generate a pipeline to prioritize variants for
RNA analysis, which was validated i n independent datasets. SpliceAI
reached 86% sensitivity and 92% speci ﬁcity with a threshold of 0.05.
However, its performance was lower in a dataset of exclusively SRE
creating/disrupting variants. Usi ng ESRseq we proved that pseudoex-
ons were signi ﬁcantly enriched in enhancer regulatory elements,
although they were more abundant in canonical exons. The analysisof independent experimental and literature data showed that the
sequential combination of both tools was able to detect 85% of
variants disrupting splicing. This work provides the ﬁrst validated in
silico pipeline, combining tools considering different splicing
conserved elements, to prioritize deep intronic variants for RNA
analysis, which will improve the variants of unknown signi ﬁcance
classi ﬁcation. Carlos III Institute funded by FEDER-a way to build
Europe- [PI16/01218-PI19/01303]; AGAUR FI-DGR2020 andERAPERMED2019-215 support.
J. Domènech-Vivó: None. A. Moles-Fernández: None. A.
Tenés: None. S. Hermosa-García: None. O. Diez: None. S.
Gutiérrez-Enríquez: None.
P13.018.C Case report of two Brazilian families with Li-
Fraumeni Syndrome phenotype with a variant of uncertain
signiﬁcance in TP53Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
437
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Deivid C. de Souza , Gisele Santos Oliveira, Vanessa N. Kozak
Hospital Erasto Gaertner, Curitiba, Brazil.
Introduction: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a genetic disorder
that predisposes to a wide-spectrum of tumors (premenopausalbreast cancer, soft-tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma, central nervous
system tumor, adrenocortical carcinoma) at an early age. While
more than 70% of pathogenic variants in TP53 are missensevariants, including the most common variant in southern Brazil
(TP53:c.1010G>A, p.Arg337His), the vast majority occurs very
infrequently, and thus their clinical signi ﬁcance is uncertain or
conﬂicting.Case report: We herein report the cases of two
unrelated families with the same genetic variant (TP53:c.718A>G,
p.Ser240Gly), which has con ﬂicting interpretations of pathogeni-
city in ClinVar (variant of uncertain signi ﬁcance vs. likely
pathogenic). Both families ful ﬁll the Chompret criteria for Li-
Fraumeni Syndrome. Intriguingly, a member of one of the families
had a high-grade serous ovarian cancer (malignant neoplasia not
usually associated with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome) at 23 years of age.
Conclusion: Based on our analysis of these two different
Brazilian families, we suggest that TP53:c.718A>G may be a
clinically signi ﬁcant variant. Although ovarian cancers have been
found to occur excessively in at least some families who have metcriteria for LFS, their link to the syndrome is not de ﬁnitely
established. The observation of an individual with early-onset
ovarian carcinoma can further contribute to our understanding ofthe phenotypic variability that may be caused by one variant ofTP53, even within the same family.
D.C. de Souza: None. G.S. Oliveira: None. V.N. Kozak: None.
P13.021.B MicroRNA binding sites and their potential role in
human disease
Olga Plotnikova
1,Alexandra Filatova2, Mikhail Skoblov2
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: MicroRNAs play an important role in regulation of
gene expression and can be associated with human disease.Despite the extensive research, bioinformatics prediction of
microRNA binding sites remains a challenge. Available tools still
lack accuracy and sensitivity, complicating their use for studyingrole of microRNA-binding sites mutations in human disease.Previously, we systematically analyzed the experimentally identi-
ﬁed mRNA-microRNA duplex regions from available CLASH and
CLIP datasets. In the present work, we use the obtained data toidentify microRNA-binding sites, potentially associated withcancer and hereditary disorders.
Materials and Methods: To search for potential disease-
associated microRNA-binding sites we used previously createdby us "Exp-miBR annotator" tool ( http://score.generesearch.ru/
services/mirna/ ) as well as available data from COSMIC and ClinVar
databases. For experimental study of microRNA-binding sites, weused psiCHECK2 luciferase system. Protein and mRNA expressionlevel was measured using luciferase dual-assay and RT-PCR.
Results: Bioinformatic analysis revealed 148 high-con ﬁdence
microRNA-binding sites in human genes belonging to the COSMICtier1 oncogenes group. We selected four out of them forexperimental validation (in CDK6 ,CCND2 ,DEK,SRSF2 genes) and
showed that investigated microRNA-mRNA interactions could
regulate gene expression through various mechanisms. Furtheranalysis of pathogenic variants from ClinVar identi ﬁed 961 variants
localized in high-con ﬁdence microRNA-binding sites and only sixvariants were localized in 3 ’UTRs. For two of them we also
performed an experimental test.
Conclusions: Our previous work reported a high-con ﬁdence
microRNA-mRNA interactions allowed us to identify microRNA-binding sites, mutations in which could potentially play role in thedevelopment of human cancer and hereditary disorders.
O. Plotnikova: None. A. Filatova: None. M. Skoblov: None.
P13.022.C Risk of mitochondrial deletions is affected by the
global secondary structure of the mitochondrial genome
Victor Shamanskiy
1, Alina A. Mikhailova2,1, Kristina Ushakova1,
Alina G. Mikhailova1,3, Sergei Oreshkov1, Dmitry Knorre4,5, Evgenii O.
Tretiakov6, Marianna Zazhytska7, Samuel W. Lukowski8, Chia-Wei
Liou9, Tsu-Kung Lin9, Wolfram S. Kunz10,11, Alexandre Reymond12, Ilia
Mazunin13,14, Georgii A. Bazykin13,15, Konstantin Gunbin1,16, Jacques
Fellay17, Masashi Tanaka18,19,20, Konstantin Khrapko21, Konstantin
Popadin1,12,17,22
1Center for Mitochondrial Functional Genomics, Immanuel Kant
Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russian Federation,2Institute
for Evolution and Biodiversity, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany,3Vavilov Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow,
Russian Federation,4Laboratory of Systems Biology and Computa-
tional Genetics, Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology,
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation,
5Institute of Molecular Medicine, Sechenov First Moscow State
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation,6Department of
Molecular Neurosciences, Center for Brain Research, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria,7Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biophysics, Mortimer B. Zuckerman Mind Brain andBehavior Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA,8Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia,9Neurology, Kaohsiung Chang-Gung Memorial Depart-
ment of Hospital and Chang-Gung University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan,
10Division of Neurochemistry, Department of Experimental Epileptol-
ogy and Cognition Research, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany,
11Department of Epileptology, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,12Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,13Center of Life Sciences, Skolkovo Institute of
Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Russian Federation,14Department
of Genomic Medicine, Fomin Women ’s Health Clinic, Moscow,
Russian Federation,15Sector of Molecular Evolution, Institute for
Information Transmission Problems (Kharkevich Institute) of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,16Insti-
tute of Molecular and Cellular Biology SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,17School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,18Department for Health and
Longevity Research, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation,Health and Nutrition, Tokyo, Japan,19Department of Neurology,
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan,
20Department of Clinical Laboratory, IMS Miyoshi General Hospital,
Saitama, Japan,21Biology Department, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA, USA,22Department of Life Sciences, Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Ageing is often associated with clonal expansion of somatic
mitochondrial deletions, while their origin is still poorly known.
Deletions are often ﬂanked by direct nucleotide repeats, however,
repeats solely do not provide an exhaustive explanation ofdeletion distribution. Here, we hypothesized that repeats have
higher chances to be realized into deletions in case of their spatial
proximity. Analyzing the distribution of human deletions weobserved a hot spot (6-9kb and 13-16kb), which is not explainedby direct repeats and might be driven by close contacts of these
two regions during mtDNA replication. Using several in silicoAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
438
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608approaches we reconstructed the secondary structure of the
major arc and proposed that it is organized as a large-scale
hairpin-like loop with a center close to 11 kb and stem between
6-9 kb and 13-16 kb. mtDNA Hi-C data of healthy and COVID-19patient samples also demonstrated a high-density region in theexpected contact zone. In our ﬁnal model, we demonstrated that
repeats within the contact zone are 3-times more mutagenic as
compared to repeats outside the contact zone, which clari ﬁes also
well known increased mutagenicity of the common repeat (8470-8482 bp and 13447-13459 bp). The proposed topological model
improves our understanding of the mechanisms of deletion
formation in the human mitochondrial genome and opens apossibility to predict deletion burden in different humanhaplogroups and mammalian species.
V. Shamanskiy: None. A.A. Mikhailova: None. K. Ushakova:
None. A.G. Mikhailova: None. S. Oreshkov: None. D. Knorre:
None. E.O. Tretiakov: None. M. Zazhytska: None. S.W. Lukowski:
None. C. Liou: None. T. Lin: None. W.S. Kunz: None. A. Reymond:
None. I. Mazunin: None. G.A. Bazykin: None. K. Gunbin: None. J.
Fellay: None. M. Tanaka: None. K. Khrapko: None. K. Popadin:
None.
P13.023.D Mobile Element Insertion: Mild haemophilia B
caused by HNRNPC processed pseudogene inserted in the F9
Amy Dericquebourg
1,2,Nicolas Chatron3,4, Mathilde Frétigny1,
Claude Négrier1,2, Christine Vinciguerra1,2, Yohann Jourdy1,2
1Service d ’hématologie Biologique, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie
Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,2EA 4609 Hémostase et
cancer, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France,3Genetics
Department, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France,4NeuroMyoGène
Institute, University of Lyon, Claude Bernard University Lyon 1, Lyon,
France.
The conventional genetic exon-focused approaches fails in about
1% of haemophilia B patients. We hypothesized that deep intronicvariations could be pathogenic and this motivated our strategy forwhole- F9sequencing by targeted short-read paired-end sequen-
cing. Herein, we report a genetically unresolved mild haemophilia
B patient (FIX:C =46 IU.dL
-1) harboring a pathogenic retro-
transposition of a mobile element. In F9intron 6 (c.727
+1853_1854ins), we identi ﬁed the insertion of a 1.377 kb
processed pseudogene (retrocopy) of HNRPNC transcript
(NM_004500.6) lacking the end of the 3 ’UTR, in opposite
orientation to the F9. A single other variant was discarded after
minigene assay. The sequence of the insertion showed the
hallmarks of a target-primed reverse transcription event: (i) poly(A)tail, (ii) target site duplication, and (iii) a consensus LINE-1endonuclease cleavage site. Formal con ﬁrmation that this inser-
tion leads to an abnormal F9splicing is ongoing with a minigene
assay. This observation highlights the ef ﬁciency of our whole-gene
approach to detect intronic structural variants and solveunexplained haemophilia B. While the rate of such retrotransposi-
tion is estimated to be around 1/6200 meiosis, this is only the
second observation of a monogenic disease caused by aprocessed pseudogene insertion. For other diseases, we anticipatethat structural variant calling on whole genome sequencing data
will reveal more cases and contribute to the progressive reduction
of the unsolved cases. We believe that our observation can help toraise awareness around these rare events.
A. Dericquebourg: None. N. Chatron: None. M. Frétigny:
None. C. Négrier: None. C. Vinciguerra: None. Y. Jourdy: None.P13.024.A Multisite de novo mutations after paternal expo-
sure to ionizing radiation
Fabian Brand
1, Manuel Holtgrewe2, Leonie Weinhold3, Alexej
Knaus1, Matthias Schmid3, Dieter Beule2, Peter Krawitz1
1Institut for genomics statistics and bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany,
2Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany,3Institut für Medizinische
Biometrie, Informatik und Epidemiologie, Bonn, Germany.
In our ongoing study we evaluate the effects of ionizing radiation
on the offspring of exposed soldiers.
We sequenced the whole genome of 270 individuals from 76
families to an average coverage of 30X on an Illumina NovaSeq.
Eighteen offspring of twelve families have earlier been sequenced
on a HiSeq X, three of which have now been resequenced. Ourcontrol cohort consists of 1275 families with no known exposureto irradiation which have been sequenced on HiSeq devices. We
found that A>C and T>G transversions are enriched in NovaSeq
data.
Our focus lies on speci ﬁc mutational patterns such as MSDNs (at
least two de novo mutations within 20bp) which are suspected to
have a causal relationship with ionizing radiation with high linear
energy transfer.
After accounting for age and sequencing platform, we found no
signi ﬁcant difference in the mean number of de novo mutations
(DNMs). We found on average 5.4 MSDNs/offspring in the casecohort and 3.9 MSDNs/offspring in the control cohort. Wedetected 43% more MSDNs per DNM in the case cohort (p <
0.00001). The number of mutations in MSDN clusters is increased
33% on average (p =0.018) in the offspring of radar soldiers.
To validate our results, all complex de novo variants will be
resequenced using long read techniques. These reads are used to
assert the paternal origin of all MSDNs. To correlate our ﬁndings
with the amount of ionizing radiation each radar soldier wassubjected to during his service, we aim to incorporate retro-
spective dosage estimations into the analysis.
F. Brand: None. M. Holtgrewe: None. L. Weinhold: None. A.
Knaus: None. M. Schmid: None. D. Beule: None. P. Krawitz:
None.
P13.025.B Role of hypomorphic variants in variable expres-
sivity of Noonan syndrome
Viviana Tritto
1, Eleonora Mangano2, Maria T. Bonati3, Paola
Bettinaglio1, Cristina Battaglia1,2, Roberta Bordoni2, Paola Riva1
1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy,2Institute of Biomedical
Technologies, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Segrate (Milano),Italy,3Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano,
Milano, Italy.
Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant
multisystem disorder, caused by mutations in RAS pathway ’s
genes. It ’s characterized by a variable expressivity of speci ﬁc
clinical signs including craniofacial anomalies, congenital heartdefects, and neurocognitive delay. Interestingly, for 20-30% of
patients is not possible to provide molecular diagnosis, suggesting
that different genes or mechanisms are involved in NSpathogenesis.
Materials and Methods: We studied selected variants from
WES analysis of four NS patients negative to the conventional NSAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
439
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608mutation screening, through eVai Variant Interpretation platform
(enGenome). Patients showed a digenic or compound hetero-
zygous inheritance of RAS pathway hypomorphic variants,
singularly present in healthy parents (PMID: 32514133).
Results: Five heterozygous missense mutations candidate as
genetic modi ﬁers passed our ﬁltering steps including variants with
MAF less than 0.05 and eVai pathogenicity score at least 3.5,
associated with clinical conditions sharing at least 4 HumanPhenotype Ontology terms with the patient. A patient showedtwo variants, one in CACNA1G, a gene related to Spinocerebellar
ataxia with autosomal dominant inheritance, and the other one in
KDM5B, a gene associated with autosomal recessive mentalretardation. In each of the other patients, only one potentialpathogenic variant was found. The mutated genes were PC,
related to Leigh syndrome inherited as an autosomal recessive
trait, SMAD4, with autosomal dominant inheritance in Myhresyndrome, and DDR2, related to Spondylometaphyseal dysplasia
caused by recessive mutations.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings suggest possible modi ﬁer genes to
be implicated in NS variable expressivity and phenotype severity,providing new insights in the pathogenesis.
V. Tritto: None. E. Mangano: None. M.T. Bonati: None. P.
Bettinaglio: None. C. Battaglia: None. R. Bordoni: None. P. Riva:
None.
P13.026.C Are copy-number gains in 17p11.2 not involving
RAI1 still Potocki-Lupski Syndrome?
Christopher M. Grochowski
1, Lorraine Potocki1, Anna Lindstrand2,
Claudia M. B. Carvalho3, James R. Lupski1
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,2Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden,3Paciﬁc Northwest Research Institute, Seattle,
WA, USA.
Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS) (MIM: 610883) is a microduplica-
tion disorder caused by copy-number gains spanning the dosage-sensitive gene RAI1 . Clinically, PTLS is de ﬁned by a spectrum of
developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), infantile hypo-
tonia and congenital anomalies. The majority of PTLS cases (64%)
are caused by non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR)between repeat gene clusters on 17p11.2, resulting in a recurrent~3.6 Mb duplication. Interestingly, patients with copy-number
gains in 17p11.2 not including RAI1 and a DD phenotype often
receive a presumed diagnosis. To date, we have ascertained 12cases with copy-number gains in 17p11.2 not involving RAI1 with
a broad phenotype of DD/ID and performed high-resolution
arrayCGH as well as whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on a subsetof samples. Genomic complexities identi ﬁed in this cohort include
DUP-NML-DUP, DEL-DUP as well as marker chromosomes. Three
cases appear to involve an identically overlapping copy number
gain (including a duplication, a triplication and a 6x ampli ﬁcation)
with one of the breakpoints mapping to the structurallypolymorphic cancer associated isodicentric 17q breakpoint cluster.
Further analyses in this region will help to delineate if this
phenotype is i) associated with the 17p11.2 copy-number gain, ii)represents a milder form of the disease and/or iii) was due topathogenic variation located elsewhere in the genome. Patients
with atypical presentations of the normal PTLS genotype or
phenotype present a chance to better delineate the spectrum ofthe disease. Furthermore, such gains may illuminate SV mutagen-
esis mechanism(s) and provide insight into potential PTLS
contributing genes other than the ‘driver RAI1 gene ’.
C.M. Grochowski: None. L. Potocki: None. A. Lindstrand:
None. C.M.B. Carvalho: None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; 23andMe. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Regen-
eron Pharmaceuticals.
P13.027.D Housekeeping gene and protein expression
changes in CCD1079Sk cell line during passages
Omer Faruk Duzenli
1,2,3, Emrah Yucesan4, Beyza Goncu1,5
1Bezmialem Vakif University, Experimental Research Center, Istanbul,
Turkey,2Istanbul University, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,3Istanbul
University, Graduate School of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey,
4Bezmialem Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,5Bezmialem Vakif University,
Vocational School of Health Service, Department of Medical Servicesand Techniques, Istanbul, Turkey.
Introduction: The genes that are commonly expressed in different
tissue types are called housekeeping genes. The expression levelsof certain genes or proteins may exhibit different or similarpatterns regardless of the tissue type. The housekeeping genes
and proteins are often used during the normalization of the mRNA
and protein expressions. Herein, our aim is to de ﬁne the most
stable reference gene and protein for a healthy human ﬁbroblast
cell line which may be used as a candidate for functional studies.
Materials and Methods: In this study, we used a ﬁniteﬁbroblast
cell line derived from healthy h uman skin (CCD1079Sk(ATCC ®CRL-
2097™)).The expression levels of four commonly used reference
genes and proteins including ACTB (β-actin), GAPDH ,RPLP0 ,a n d
SDHA expression were examined. The study was performed by
collecting samples in each passag e between 25 and until senescence
occurs at passage 55.The ct values were obtained by using qRT-PCR.
Protein lysates were used for Western Blot. The stability of mRNA and
protein expression were evaluated by using RefFinder.
Results: GAPDH was the most stable reference gene and
protein. The least stable reference gene and protein was found
RPLP0. Particularly, RPLP0 protein isoforms were detected andisoform-1 expression signi ﬁcantly decreased by passages.
Conclusions: Collectively, we strongly suggest that GAPDH will
be the most suitable and stable reference gene and protein for the
CCD1079Sk. The RPLP0 gene was found unstable during each
passage and using the RPLP0 gene as a reference may be
misleading. Funding: This project was supported Bezmialem Vakif
University, Scienti ﬁc Research Committee(No:20200917)
O.F. Duzenli: None. E. Yucesan: None. B. Goncu: None.
P13.029.B Ring chromosome 22 in patients with 22q13
duplication, 22q13 interstitial deletion, and 22q13 terminaldeletion
Anthony Nemr
1, Tony Yammine1, Rita Esber1, Rita BouChedid1,
Melissa Daou1, Georges Hilal1, Chantal Farra1,2
1Medical Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Saint-Joseph University,
Beirut, Lebanon,2Medical Genetics Department, Hotel-Dieu de
France University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
Introduction: Ring chromosomes result from telomeric deletion
and/or dysfunction in the short and long chromosomal armsfollowed by fusion of terminal ends. Numerous 22q13.3 terminaldeletion cases presenting with a ring chromosome 22 have been
reported. 22q13.3 chromosomal region is, furthermore, reportedly
involved in few cases of interstitial deletion beyond SHANK3 gene
and rare cases of duplication.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
440
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and methods: Three unrelated patients with a
constitutional ring chromosome 22 karyotype were recruited upon
individual or parental informed consent for further aCGH analysis
and clinical data collection.
Results: In patient 1, a 22q13.32q33 duplication encompassing
SHANK3 gene was identi ﬁed. The patient presented with
dysmorphic features, neonatal hypotonia, severe neurodevelop-
mental and speech delay, as well as, Lennox-Gastaut seizures,scoliosis, hip dysplasia, and joint hypermobility. Patient 2 showedmosaic interstitial deletion of the 22q13.31q33 region, excluding
SHANK3 gene. The deleted region encompassed UPK3A ,FBLN1,
ATXN10 ,WNT7B , and CELSR1 genes with partial involvement of
PARVB gene. The patient presented with neurodevelopmental and
speech delay, neonatal hypotonia, growth delay, and ureter
anomaly. Patient 3 showed a terminal deletion of 22q13.33 region,
including the gene SHANK3 . He presented with bilateral congenital
glaucoma, microcephaly, right hand angioma, and right foot
syndactyly.
Conclusions: Ring chromosome 22 along with terminal
duplications and interstitial deletions have not been previouslyreported. The cases presented here emphasize the wide range of
clinical manifestations of this chromosomal anomaly while
uncovering variable underlying gene rearrangements andinvolvements.
A. Nemr: None. T. Yammine: None. R. Esber: None. R.
BouChedid: None. M. Daou: None. G. Hilal: None. C. Farra: None.
P13.030.C Psychoemotional stress induces the changes in the
content of satellite III (1q12) and telomere repeats in humanleukocyte DNA
Svetlana V. Kostyuk
1,Pavel E. Umriukhin1,2, Elizaveta S. Ershova1,
Anton D. Filev1, Vera A. Michailova1, Andrey V. Martynov1, Roman V.
Veiko1, Natalia N. Veiko1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Previously, it was shown that CNVs of human
satellite III (1q12) fragment (f-SatIII) and telomere repeat (TR)reﬂect human cells response to oxidative stress. The major
research question: What are the f-SatIII and TR CNVs in human
leukocyte as a function of psychoemotional stress.
Materials and Methods: We chose a model of psychoemo-
tional stress experienced by the second year medical students
during the exams. Blood samples were taken in a stressful
conditions (preparation for exams and exams) and in a controlnonstressful period. Biotinylated DNA-probes were used for f-SatIII,rDNA and TR quantitation in leukocyte DNA by the non-
radioactive quantitative hybridization for seventeen medical
students. Flow cytometry analysis was used for lymphocytes ’
oxidative stress markers (NOX4, 8-oxodG and ɣH2AX) detection.
Involved in the DNA repair and lymphocyte death proteins levels
were also determined.
Results: Oxidative stress markers (NOX4, 8-oxodG and ɣH2AX)
increase signi ﬁcantly in students ’lymphocytes during psychoe-
motional stress. BAX1, BCL2, p53, LC3, p65 (NF-kB), BRCA1, NRF2,
MDM2, RAD50 and MRE11A proteins levels in the students ’
lymphocytes increased under stress. F-SatIII and TR contentssigni ﬁcantly change in DNA isolated from blood leukocytes
against the background of stable rDNA content. After holidays,
f-SatIII content in DNA decreases, and the TR content increases.
Conclusions: Stress in students during exams induces oxidative
stress and signi ﬁcant f-SatIII and TR content ﬂuctuations in DNA
against stable ribosomal repeat content background. A hypothesisis proposed explaining quantitative f-SatIII and TR polymorphism
under stress. Study was supported by RFBR project №19-34-90072
and Russian Science Foundation ( №18-15-00437).
S.V. Kostyuk: None. P.E. Umriukhin: None. E.S. Ershova: None.
A.D. Filev: None. V.A. Michailova: None. A.V. Martynov: None. R.
V. Veiko: None. N.N. Veiko: None.
P13.031.D Rare variant analysis of obesity associated genes in
young adults from a consanguineous population of Pakistan
Sadia Saeed
1,2, Qasim M. Janjua3, Attiya Haseeb4, Roohia Khanam4,
Emmanuelle Durand2, Emmanuel Vaillant2, Lijiao Ninj2, Alaa
Badreddine2, Mickaël Canouil2, Mehdi Derhourhi2, Amélie Bonne-
fond2,1, Muhammad Arslan4, Philippe Froguel1,2
1Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
2University of Lille, Inserm UMR 1283, CNRS UMR 8199, EGID, Institut
Pasteur de Lille, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France,3University
College of Medicine, The University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan,
4School of Life Sciences, Forman Christian College, Lahore,
Pakistan.
Introduction: Pakistan has one of the highest rates of con-
sanguinity worldwide. Our previous studies in this population
demonstrate an exceptionally high prevalence (30-49%) ofmonogenic obesity in children, mainly due to homozygousmutations in LEP and LEPR genes. Here, for the ﬁrst time, we
assess rare variants (MAF < 0.001 in gnomAD) in obesity associated
genes in adults with severe obesity from the same region.
Methods: Genomic DNA from randomly selected 128 subjects
(BMI=37.7 ± 0.5; Age =18.7 ± 0.3) was screened by conventional
or augmented whole exome analysis.
Results: We identi ﬁed thirteen subjects carrying 13 variants in 7
monogenic obesity genes ( LEPR ,PCSK1 ,MC4R ,NTRK2 ,POMC,
SH2B1 and SIM1) of which 4 predicted (likely) pathogenic through
ACMG criteria. We further identi ﬁed a novel homozygous stop-
gain mutation in ASNSD1 gene, inactivation of which in mouse
results in obesity. Additionally, we identi ﬁed 10 homozygous
mutations in genes previously linked to obesity-associated traits
through GWAS. Finally, analyses of CNVs resulted in identi ﬁcation
of 4 copy-loss variants.
Conclusions: Of signi ﬁcance is the identi ﬁcation of novel/rare
variations in genes linked to obesity by GWAS and mouse knock-
outs providing mechanistic leads to genetic identi ﬁcation of
severe obesity in human. Whereas in this adult cohort variants in
genes involved in the downstream leptin signalling appear to be
more prevalent, inactivating mutations in genes encoding keyregulators of leptin melanocortin pathway are absent ( LEP)o r
under-represented ( LEPR ). This is presumably due to high
pathogenicity and mortality risk, and social disadvantage, in
children with LEP or LEPR de ﬁciency. Supported by MRC, ANR-10-
LABX-46 and ANR-10-EQPX-07-01 (PF)
S. Saeed: None. Q.M. Janjua: None. A. Haseeb: None. R.
Khanam: None. E. Durand: None. E. Vaillant: None. L. Ninj:
None. A. Badreddine: None. M. Canouil: None. M. Derhourhi:
None. A. Bonnefond: None.
M. Arslan: None. P. Froguel: None.
P13.033.B Performance benchmarking for calling and phasing
of single-nucleotide polymorphisms and structural variants
using Nanopore sequencing
Rocío Esteban, Anthony Doran, Irina-Alexandra Vasilescu, Daniel J.
Turner, David Stoddart, Sissel Juul, Eoghan Harrington, Philipp
ReschenederAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
441
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and structural variants
(SVs) are critical for our understanding of how genomic changesdrive phenotypes. In the past there has been a strong focus onSNPs without taking into account haplotype or long-range
information. With the advent of long read sequencing, this focus
has been shifting towards larger SVs uncovering their signi ﬁcance
across a broad range of ﬁelds, from diseases such as cancer to
encoding desirable crop traits. Equally, the importance of
haplotype information has become more apparent i.e., to identify
compound heterozygous variant combinations as disease-causingcandidates.Read lengths and coverage routinely obtained fromNanopore sequencing allow unique mapping across repetitive
regions which are enriched in SVs. Furthermore, single reads can
span large and complex variation end-to-end and cover multiplesingle nucleotide variants for phasing.To assess the performance
of SV calling and read phasing with Nanopore sequencing, we
sequenced the well characterised GM24385 cell line andcompared the resulting SV and SNP calls against the Genome-In-A-Bottle truth set. We found high precision and recall for SNP
calling (>99.5%) and SV calling (>95% and >97% respectively) and
median phase block lengths of up to 2.6 Mbp. Furthermore, weelucidated the impact of read length, read depth, SV type andlength on SV calling performance especially in repetitive regions
and investigated what percentage of the human genome can be
conﬁdently phased.Finally, we illustrated how both SV calling and
phasing can be combined and applied to complex regions of the
human genome like the MHC locus.
R. Esteban: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. A. Doran: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. I.
Vasilescu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies Ltd. D.J. Turner: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. D.
Stoddart: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies Ltd. S. Juul: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. E. Harring-
ton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies Ltd. P. Rescheneder: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd.
P13.034.C Characterization of disease associated tandem
repeat regions in Slovenian population from exome sequen-cing data using Expansion Hunter
Gaber Bergant , Ale šMaver, Borut Peterlin
Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Variation in tandem repeat (TR) sequences is common in the human
genome and normally not associated with human genetic disorders.However, large repeat expansions a re increasingly recognized as an
important cause of human genetic disorders. While point variants are
well characterized across the human genome, population data on
structural variants in TR regions remain lacking. For this reason, weanalyzed exome sequencing data o f 4.329 patients consecutively
referred to our center for diagnostics of diverse rare genetic
disorders. We used Expansion Hunter to estimate TR variation in 36
genes, where repeat expansions are associated with human geneticdisorders. TR variation characteriz a t i o ni nt h eS l o v e n i a np o p u l a t i o n
yielded informative results for 73,893 alleles in 17 TR regions and was
limited to coding, UTR, and several we ll-covered non-coding regions.
Premutation was detected in 653 (0.88%) and full mutation in 27(0.04%) alleles. The resulting TR pro ﬁle is comparable to other
previously published European cohorts. We provide the TR pro ﬁle forcomparison with other populations as well as for the use in
diagnostics of rare genetic diso rders as a source of background
structural genetic variability. The results con ﬁrm that TRs represent
an important source of human genetic variability which can be partly
detected using ES, however, la rger whole-genome sequencing
studies are required for their genome-wide characterization.
G. Bergant: None. A. Maver: None. B. Peterlin: None.
P13.035.D De novo mutation in ancestral generations evolves
haplotypes contributing to disease
Zeynep Hande Coban Akdemir1, Xiaofei Song2, Davut Pehlivan2,
Ender Karaca2, Yavuz Bayram2, Francisco Ceballos3, Tomasz
Gambin4, Shalini Jhangiani2, Donna Muzny2, Richard Lewis2, Pengfei
Liu2, Eric Boerwinkle1, Ada Hamosh5, Richard Gibbs2, V. Reid Sutton2,
Nara Sobreira5, Claudia Carvalho2, Jennifer Posey2, Chad Shaw2,
Dave Valle5, James Lupski2
1UTHealth School of Public Health, Houston, TX, USA,2Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,3Instituto de Salud Carlos III, National
Center of Microbiology, Madrid, Spain,4Warsaw University of
Technology, Warsaw, Poland,5Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
We investigated the in ﬂuences of admixture and consanguinity on
the genetic architecture of disease by generating a variomederived from exome sequencing (ES) of 1,416 unrelated Turkish(TK) individuals, (643 unaffecteds, and 773 affecteds with various
disease phenotypes. Clustering closely with European genomes,
the TK population consists of two main subpopulations: comparedto the ﬁrst cluster (N =285), the second cluster (N =1,131)
demonstrated a higher fraction of European and South Asian ( P=
1.57e
-4and 8.77e-7) and a lower fraction of Middle Eastern ( P=
8.78e-7) ancestry. Intriguingly, only 10% and 5% respectively of the
ﬁrst (N=660,255) and second cluster (N =1,845,686) variants are
present in the Greater Middle Eastern (GME) variome, emphasizing
the necessity of an independent TK control database ( https://
turkishvariomedb.shinyapps.io/tvdb/ ) for variant interpretation.
Higher coef ﬁcient of inbreeding (F) values observed in the TK
affecteds vs. unaffecteds (0.053 vs. 0.028, P =2.35e-18) manifested
in an increased genome-wide burden of long-sized (>3.227 Mb)regions of homozygosity (ROHs) (114.24 vs. 59.14 Mb, P=8.77e-
18), inferring ‘young haplotypes ’, derived as de novo variant alleles
in antecedent generations of the clan. These ROHs are enriched
for ultra-rare, multi-locus, homozygous, deleterious variants andwe hypothesize their combinatorial effects produce blended
phenotypes accounting for the observed disease. Further, a
retrospective analysis of previously published cases with > =2
disease loci (N =69) revealed that those cases display signi ﬁcantly
increased F values (0.062 vs. 0.038, P =2e-4) and total span of
long-sized ROHs (186 vs. 141.78 Mb, P =0.012). These data
support a Clan Genomics model for disease in a population.
Z.H. Coban Akdemir: None. X. Song: None. D. Pehlivan: None.
E. Karaca: None. Y. Bayram: None. F. Ceballos: None. T. Gambin:
None. S. Jhangiani: None. D. Muzny: None. R. Lewis: None. P.
Liu: None. E. Boerwinkle: None. A. Hamosh: None. R. Gibbs:
None. V. Sutton: None. N. Sobreira: None. C. Carvalho: None. J.
Posey: None. C. Shaw: None. D. Valle: None. J. Lupski: None.
P13.036.A Dissecting expansion dynamics and nucleotide
variation in human-speci ﬁc variable number tandem repeats
Meredith M. Course, Arvis Sulovari, Kathryn Gudsnuk, Evan E. Eichler,
Paul N. ValdmanisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
442
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
There are over 55,000 variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) in
the human genome. However, their internal sequence composi-tion and length variability amongst humans is largely unknown.Using long-read whole genome sequence information available
from 32 phased individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project and
Human Genome Structural Variant Consortium, we examined theinternal sequence and length of >50 VNTRs, prioritized by thosethat are unique to humans or expand speci ﬁcally in the human
lineage. We ﬁnd several examples of VNTRs that fall into one of
three categories: 1) repeats that have identical internal repeatunits, but which differ in length amongst individuals andgeographical super-populations; 2) repeats with nucleotide
substitutions at each copy of the repeat but with a de ﬁned order
to these substitutions and 3) repeats with substantial diversity inboth length and internal sequence of the repeat. Interrogating
these repeats has revealed common patterns of repeat expansions
and contractions across VNTRs. In addition, we ﬁnd several
tandem repeats that are signi ﬁcantly different in length between
different 1000 Genomes Project super-populations. These ﬁndings
build on our multiplexed long-read sequence analysis of a 69bp
intronic repeat in WDR7 in >300 individuals, which revealed
multiple origins of the repeat that have continued to expand in adirectional manner. Collectively, we are building a framework for
understanding how repeats expand, how this information can be
leveraged to help inform patterns of human migration, andmechanisms by which repeat expansions can lead to disease state.
M.M. Course: None. A. Sulovari: None. K. Gudsnuk: None. E.E.
Eichler: None. P.N. Valdmanis: None.
P14 Cytogenetics
P14.002.C 16p13.11p11.2 triplication syndrome: a new
recognizable genomic disorder characterized by Bionano
optical mapping and whole genome sequencing
Romain NICOLLE
1,2, Karine Siquier-Pernet2, Marlène Rio2,3, Anne
Guimier3, Emmanuelle Olivier4, Patrick Nitschke4, Christine Bole-
Feysot5, Serge Romana1,2, Alex Hastie6, Vincent Cantagrel2, Valérie
Malan1,2
1Service d ’Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Paris, France,2Developmental Brain Disorders
Laboratory, Imagine Institute, Paris, France,3Département de
Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,
4Bioinformatics Core Facility, Imagine Institute, Paris, France,
5Genomics Platform, Imagine Institute, Paris, France,6Bionano
Genomics, San Diego, CA, USA.
Highly identical segmental duplications (SDs) account for over 5%
of the human genome and are enriched in the short arm of thechromosome 16. These SDs are susceptibility factors for recurrentchromosomal rearrangements mediated by non-allelic homolo-
gous recombination (NAHR). Chromosomal microarray analysis
(CMA) has been widely used as the ﬁrst-tier test for individuals
with neurodevelopmental disorders and several genomic imbal-ances involving the 16p-arm have been identi ﬁed with this
technic. However, the resolution of CMA and the limitations of
short-reads whole genome sequencing (WGS) technology don ’t
allow the full characterization of the most complex chromosomal
rearrangements preventing a good understanding of the under-
lying mechanism. Herein, we report on two unrelated patientswith a novo 16p13.11p11.2 triplication detected by CMA sharing a
similar phenotype including hypotonia, severe neuro-
developmental delay with profound speech impairment and
hyperkinetic behavior, chronic otitis media and distinctive facialfeatures. Furthermore, the CMA also detected a 16p11.2 duplica-
tion which is approximately 450 kb in size for patient 1 and 300 kb
in size for patient 2. Complete genetic characterization of these
events was unreliable by WGS because the breakpoints lie withinSDs. Consequently, we used Bionano optical mapping to fullycharacterize these chromosomal abnormalities. Thus, we propose
a two-step mechanism to explain these rearrangements: a U-type
exchange at a distal SD between homologous chromatids, and aNAHR event at BP1-BP3 region for patient 1 and BP1-BP2 regionfor patient 2. In conclusion, Bionano Genomics is a useful
technology for unravelling the origin of complex chromosomal
rearrangements involving SDs.
R. Nicolle: None. K. Siquier-Pernet: None. M. Rio: None. A.
Guimier: None. E. Olivier: None. P. Nitschke: None. C. Bole-
Feysot: None. S. Romana: None. A. Hastie: None. V. Cantagrel:
None. V. Malan: None.
P14.003.D The new chromosome 2p15-p13.2 microduplication
syndrome: a case report
Dario Di Salvio
1, Maria Tessitore2, Maria Anna Siano2, Mariateresa
Falco3, Piero Pignataro4, Rita Genesio4, Daniela Melis2
1A.O.U. Federico II, Naples, Italy,2Department of Medicine, Surgery
and Dentistry, Scuola Medica Salernitana, University of Salerno,
Salerno, Italy,3Pediatric Unit San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d ’Aragona
University Hospital, Salerno, Salerno, Italy,4Department of Molecular
Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II,
Naples, Italy.
Introduction: Microdeletions of various sizes in the 2p16.1-p15
chromosomal region have been assembled together under the
2p16.1-p15 microdeletion syndrome. Children with this syndrome
usually share features including microcephaly, developmental delay,feeding problems, facial dysmorphism (e.g. epicanthus, ptosis,
bitemporal narrowing, telecanthus), urogenital and skeletal abnorm-
alities. We present a child with an interstitial 11,3 Mb duplication of2p15-p13.2.Case report. We report a 11-months-old girl withneurodevelopmental delay, hypotonia and minor dysmorphic
features (epicanthal folds, left e ye ptosis, broad nasal root, rounded
forehead, retrognathy and preauricolar appendages). A chromoso-mal microarray analysis demonstrated a microduplication of 11,3 Mbon chromosome 2p15-p13.2, containing 99 OMIM genes.
Conclusions: Clinical features of patients with microduplication
of this region have been described in few reports in literature andrarely registered in laboratory databases. These are distinct from
those of children with the 2p16.1-p15 microdeletion syndrome:
speci ﬁcally in few cases is described the presence of hypotonia,
the head circumference is within the normal range and theneurodevelopmental delay is less severe. BCL11A, USP34 and
PEX13 genes of the 2p16.1-p15 region have been usually
described as involved in neurodevelopmental delay in childrenwith microduplication of 2p16.1-p15 region; these genes are notinvolved in this region, although our patient shares phenotypic
characteristics with those affected by 2p16.1-p15microduplication.
The genes UGP2, MDH1, ASCT1, EMX1, and EXOC6B, comprised inthe region described in this report, are involved in neurodevelop-ment and they could be responsible for the neurological
phenotype.
D. Di Salvio: None. M. Tessitore: None. M. Siano: None. M.
Falco: None. P. Pignataro: None. R. Genesio: None. D. Melis:
None.
P14.004.A Duplication of 8p23.1 detected in a prenatal
cytogenetic studyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
443
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Rosa Martorell1, Albert Tubau2, Jordi Rosell1, Victor Asensio1, Carme
Vidal1, Laura Torres1, Damià Heine1, Antonia Obrador1, Iciar
Martinez1
1Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain,
2Hospital Universitari Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
Duplications of 8p23.1 have been associated with a wide variety of
presentations from euchromatic variants to developmental delayand heart disease. Here, we present a de novo duplication of
8p23.1 found at a prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. A 32-year-old
woman was referred for prenatal diagnosis for cervical incompe-tence. Before a cervical cerclage we performed a routinecytogenetics study. We found an apparent duplication of 8p23.1
in the amniotic ﬂuid cells on G-banding. The appearance of
cytogenetic duplication was seen as a ﬁne G-dark band at the
center of an expanded G-light 8p23.1 band. Both parents hadnormal karyotype. We investigated the region using oligonucleo-
tide array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH). The study
showed a ≈5Mb genomic duplication of band 8p23.1 that did not
run into euchromatic variants and it modi ﬁed the dosage of SOX7
and GATA4 genes.Patients with duplication of band 8p23.1 show a
diversity of clinical ﬁndings.There are debates about the relation-
ship of the duplicated GATA4 gen and congenital genetic defectsin these patients. Long et al., 2013 published the ﬁrst evidence
that the duplication of SOX7 gen has a strong association with
heart defects, while in 2015 Barber et al., found that the variableexpressivity in patients with duplications 8p23.1 should be causedby the duplication and interactions of the SOX7 and GATA4
transcription factors. However, in our case, congenital cardiac
defects were not observed by fetal ultrasound. After geneticcounselling the parents chose to continue their pregnancy and atthis moment the pregnancy is continuing.
R. Martorell: None. A. Tubau: None. J. Rosell: None. V.
Asensio: None. C. Vidal: None. L. Torres: None. D. Heine: None.
A. Obrador: None. I. Martinez: None.
P14.005.B Cytogenetic pro ﬁle of newly diagnosed patients with
acute myeloid leukemia - a single centre retrospective study
Dinnar Yahya
1, Tsanka Ruseva2, Mari Hachmeriyan1, Lyudmila
Angelova3, Ilina Micheva1, Trifon Chervenkov1
1UMHAT "St. Marina", Varna; Medical University "Prof. Dr. Paraskev
Stoyanov", Varna, Bulgaria,2UMHAT "St. Marina", Varna, Bulgaria,
3Medical University "Prof. Dr. Paraskev Stoyanov", Varna, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Acute myeloid leukemia(AML) is a heterogeneous
group of disorders, seen predominantly in adults. It originatesfrom abnormally differentiated myeloid progenitors as a result ofnumerous genetic events. AML is characterized by wide genetic
heterogeneity, complex pathogenesis and variable survival rate.
Identi ﬁcation of cytogenetic abnormalities at diagnosis is impor-
tant for classi ﬁcation, prognosti ﬁcation, treatment choice and
response determination.
Materials and methods: We conducted a retrospective study
on newly diagnosed adult patients with AML who underwentconventional cytogenetic analysis(CCA) in the Laboratory of
Medical genetics, Varna between 01.2019-12.2020. A total of 74
patients were tested using bone marrow samples and G-bandingtechnique. CCA was performed accordingly with the International
System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature 2016 .
Results: Karyotyping was successful in 63 (85.1%) of the
evaluated patients with 11 (14.9%) samples lacking metaphaseplates. CCA showed normal karyotype(NK) in 34 (54%), andabnormal karyotype in 29 (46%) cases. According to the European
LeukemiaNet risk strati ﬁcation 2017 , 6 (9.5%) of the patients were
with favorable, 44 (69.8%) with intermediate, and 13 (20.6%) with
adverse risk. The two-year study showed overall survival of 64%,24% and 10%, respectively, which correlated with the risk groups.
Conclusions: CCA is a basic method in AML diagnosis,
incorporated in classi ﬁcation and risk strati ﬁcation. Due to
technical problems the method is not always informative. Also,given the known molecular genetic markers, signi ﬁcant for
diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring, it is highly recommended
to combine karyotyping with molecular genetic analysis. This is
particularly important in cases of unsuccessful CCA or NK whereadditional clari ﬁcation is essential.
D. Yahya: None. T. Ruseva: None. M. Hachmeriyan: None. L.
Angelova: None. I. Micheva: None. T. Chervenkov: None.
P14.006.C Constitutional chromosomal abnormalities over 28
years services at King Abdulaziz Medical City tertiary medicalcenter, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Mohammed A. AlBalwi
1,2,3, Aziza Alkhaldi1, Dina Hommam1,
Mohammmed Adam1, Alaa AlMeleih1, Abdulelah Abunadi1, Salman
Alsaad1, Yazeed Althobaiti1, Hala Alomair1, Ghady Alfaggy1, Barak
Alawad1, Alwaleed Almalki1, Ashwag Alghamdi1, Bader Almuzzani1,3,
Nasser Alatwi1
1King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2King Saud bin
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3King
Abdullah International, Medical Research Center, King Saud bin
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction: Despite advances molecular diagnostic techniques
such as aCGH, WES and WGS, cytogenetic chromosomal analysis
still the golden standard test for detection most of the geneticabnormalities.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective review of 15,836
referred cases over a period of 28 years (1992-2020) werediagnosed with standard karyotyping analysis for constitutionalchromosomal abnormalities at Cytogenetics laboratory, Depart-
ment of Pathology and Laboratory medicine at King Abdulaziz
Medical City, Ministry of National Guard - Health Affairs, Riyadh.
Results: Constitutional chromosomal aberrations were detected
in 2081 cases, with 13.14% overall positive rates of abnormal
cytogenetic ﬁndings (2081/15,836). Among the cases with
chromosomal aberrations, 1616 (77.7%) were numerical abnorm-alities and 465(22.3%) were structural abnormalities. For the
numerical abnormalities: 4 cases (0.24%) were with triploidy; 1144
(70.8%) with trisomy 21; 133 (8.23%) with trisomy 18; 86 (5.32%)with trisomy 13; 9 (0.56%) with mosaic autosomal trisomy; 66(4.1%) with 45,X; 91 (5.6%) with 47,XXY; 12 (0.74%) with 47,XXX; 6
(0.37%) with 47,XYY; and 65 (4.0%) with a mosaic sex chromosome
aberration. For the structural abnormalities: 132 cases (28.3%)were with reciprocal translocation; 28 (6.0%) with Robertsoniantranslocation; 33 (7.1%) with inversion; 158 (34%) with deletion; 31
(6.7%) with duplication; 50 (10.8%) with isochromosome; 14 (3.0%)
with ring chromosome; and 19 (4.1%) with marker chromosome.
Conclusions: Our result has presented the largest series of
constitutional chromosomal cases in Saudi Arabia that might help
in better patient care management and better counseling for the
affected families for future family planning.
M.A. AlBalwi: None. A. Alkhaldi: None. D. Hommam: None. M.
Adam: None. A. AlMeleih: None. A. Abunadi: None. S. Alsaad:
None. Y. Althobaiti: None. H. Alomair: None. G. Alfaggy: None.
B. Alawad: None. A. Almalki: None. A. Alghamdi: None. B.
Almuzzani: None. N. Alatwi: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
444
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P14.007.D Clinical ﬁndings on chromosome 1 copy number
variations
Filipa Leitão1, Joel Pinto1,2, Carolina Almeida1,2, Vera Lima1,2,
Armanda Passas3, Miguel Leão4, Ana Grangeia4,1,2,S oﬁa Dória1,2
1Department of Pathology, Genetics Service, Faculty of Medicine -
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,2I3S-Instituto de Investigação e
Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal,
3Neurodesenvolvimento- UNIA, Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/
Espinho –CHVNG, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal,4Clinical Genetics
Service, Centro Hospitalar de são João, Porto, Portugal.
Background: Copy number variants (CNVs) are a major contribu-
tion to genome variability. The presence of CNVs on chromosome
1, the largest human chromosome, is a known cause of morbidity.The main objective of this study was to contribute for chromo-some 1 disease map, through the analysis of patients with
chromosome 1 CNVs.
Methods: Using the array-CGH database of the Department of
Genetics of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, patientswith a pathogenic (P) or probably pathogenic (VOUS-PP) CNVs on
chromosome 1 detected by array-CGH were included in the study.
Clinical information was collected for all patients. Databases andrelated literature were used for a better understanding of the
genotype-phenotype correlation.
Results: From a total of 2380 patients included in the database
we identi ﬁed 24 patients (1,0%) with chromosome 1 CNVs, P (9
cases) or VOUS-PP (15 cases). These CNVs account for 7.1% (24/
341 CNVs) of the total P/VOUS-PP CNVs included in the database.
The most common CNVs found were on 1q21.1 (either deletionsor duplications), with some of them also spanning the 1q21.2region. Four patients presented additional CNVs on chromosomes
8, 16 and 17.
Conclusion: This study reinforces the association between
chromosome 1 CNVs and neurodevelopmental disorders/cranio-
facial dysmorphisms. However, it also strengthened the idea that
not always the interpretation of CNVs and the genotype-phenotype correlation is a linear task since a wide spectrum ofvariants can be identi ﬁed between benign CNVs and clearly
pathogenic CNVs.
F. Leitão: None. J. Pinto: None. C. Almeida: None. V. Lima:
None. A. Passas: None. M. Leão: None. A. Grangeia: None. S.
Dória: None.
P14.010.C From cytogenetics to cytogenomics - what is the
underlying idea?
Thomas Liehr
Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena,
Germany.
Research and diagnostics in human, with chromosomes in focus,
were originally designated as “cytogenetics ”. Working with human
chromosomes rather than DNA was very popular in the 1970s/1980s. However, latest since ~1990s, mainstream human mole-cular geneticists looked at people dealing with chromosomes as
something like ‘outdated fossils ’. Interestingly, this attitude was
never justi ﬁed by any evidence, and it is imperative to understand,
that all available techniques to study the human genome - atdifferent levels of resolutions, and at level of the single cell or by
approaching millions of cells at time - rather complement, than
play against each other. Cytogeneticists feel driven by a not-real(?)pressure from ﬁeld, and (over)reacted in parts by changing well-
established designations from “cytogenetics ”to“cytogenomics ”,as: the “international system of cytogenetic nomenclature (ISCN) ”
was renamed to “international system of cytogenomic nomen-
clature ”in 2016, “American Cytogenetics Conference ”to“Amer-
ican Cytogenomics Conference ”in 2018, “
European Cytogenetics
Conference ”to“European Cytogenomics Conference ”in 2019.
Astonishingly, no de ﬁnition is given for cytogenomics, neither in
ISCN nor anywhere in literature. Here we provide a de ﬁnition for
cytogenomics, which has a comprehensive and integrative view.Accordingly, cytogenomics is equivalent to what was de ﬁned as
“chromosomics ”by Uwe Claussen (Jena-Germany) in Cytogenet
Genome Res. 2005). His idea was, to subsume under such a term
all chromosome-related research with the goal to lead us to novelconcepts in biology. Cytogenomics should be used in future as agenome- and chromosome-oriented term, with the goal to
describe research, rather than technical approaches.
T. Liehr: None.
P14.011.D Down syndrome with an inherited translocation t
(6;21)(q13;q22)
Rawia Kammoun
1, Imene Boujelbene1, Ikhlas Ben Ayed1, Nourhene
Gharbi1, Mohamed Ali Ksentini1, Ines Ouertani2, Fatma Abdelhedi1,
Hassen Kamoun1
1Medical Genetics Department, Hedi Chaker Hospital, sfax, Tunisia,
2Department of Congenital and Inherited Disorders,Charles Nicolle
Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Background : In less than 5% of cases, Down syndrome (DS,
OMIM#190685) is due to translocation.The most commontranslocations observed are between the long arms of chromo-some 21 and another acrocentric. Few translocations involving
other chromosomes have been reported. We report a rare case of
DS due to a balanced maternal t(6;21)(q13;q22).
Clinical report : A 3-year-old girl was referred with her parents
for genetic counseling. She was the ﬁrst child of healthy non-
consanguineous parents. Her mother, with a history of threeunexplored spontaneous abortions, had 30 years old at concep-tion. The proband was born after a poorly followed pregnancy. DS
was clinically suspected at birth. The growth is normal and motor
development was delayed. Biological and radiological investiga-tions were normal. Karyotype con ﬁrmed the diagnosis and
showed 47,XX,t(6;21)(q13;q22), +21 which was inherited from a
balanced maternal translocation.Prenatal diagnosis was indicated
in the next pregnancy and the fetal karyotype was normal (46,XX).
Discussion : This is the ﬁrst report of DS due to an inherited t
(6;21). Balanced parental translocations involving chromosome 21
are responsible for most familial cases of DS. In this case, 3-to-1disjunctional segregation has occurred. Other possibilities ofsegregation are possible and can give non-viable fetus which
explained the spontaneous abortions.The recurrence risk for DS
due to an inherited translocation is dif ﬁcult to evaluate and it is
about 10%. Thus, prenatal diagnosis should be offered to thesefamilies. We highlight the importance of determination of
cytogenetic mechanisms in DS that provides the appropriate
genetic counseling.
R. Kammoun: None. I. Boujelbene: None. I. Ben Ayed: None.
N. Gharbi: None. M. Ksentini: None. I. Ouertani: None. F.
Abdelhedi: None. H. Kamoun: None.
P14.013.B Chromatid cohesion defect in a patient with
pathogenic variant of the FAM111A gene
Marta Rusmini , Simona Cavani, G.A. Rotulo, F Caroli, D Coviello,
Isabella Ceccherini, Maja Di RoccoAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
445
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ist G. Gaslini, genova, Italy.
Pathogenic heterozygous mutations of the FAM111A gene are
reported in both osteocraniostenosis (GCLEB; OMIM #602361) andKenny Caffey syndrome type 2 (KCS2; OMIM #127000), howeverthe function of this gene and its role in the cellular biology is still
unknown. The cytogenetic examination of an infant with pre and
postnatal growth failure, normal psychomotor development,skeletal abnormalities and idiopathic hypercalciuria causingnephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis and brain calci ﬁcations, has
incidentally identi ﬁed an unexpected defect of chromatids
cohesion during metaphase. Because the patient ’s clinical
phenotype was not consistent with known cohesinopathies, awhole exome sequencing was performed, and a de novo FAM111A
missense variant identi ﬁed, showing a frequency <10E-5, affecting
a highly conserved codon, neighbor to codons bearing eitherKCS2 or GCLEB causative changes, and predicted as pathogenic.
Our ﬁndings expand the clinical phenotype associated with
FAM111A mutations beyond KCS2 and GCLEB and, consistentwith FAM111A interaction with the Proliferating cell nuclearantigen (PCNA) and its re-localization to chromatin during the S-
phase, suggest a role of this gene as chromatin replication factor
and of the present associated phenotype as a novel coesinopathy.
M. Rusmini: None. S. Cavani: None. G. Rotulo: None. F. Caroli:
None. D. Coviello: None. I. Ceccherini: None. M. Di Rocco: None.
P14.014.C Frequency of aneuploidy in diploid androgenetic
hydatidiform moles
Pernille Walbum Kristensen
1,2, Lotte Andreassen3, Marianne
Geilswijk3, Thomas Poulsen2, Isa Niemann3, Lone Sunde1,2
1Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark,2Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark,3Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Introduction: A hydatidiform mole is a non-viable conceptus,
many are diploid and with androgenetic genome. In some cases,the genome is homozygous, as if it originates from onespermatozoon. In other cases, the genome is heterozygous, often
from two spermatozoa. One recent study has observed a higher
frequency of aneuploidy in heterozygous, compared to homo-zygous diploid androgenetic hydatidiform moles (Scienti ﬁc
Reports (2020) 10:17137).
Methods: During a 35-year period, samples were collected from
>800 conceptuses, suspected to be hydatidiform moles bygynecologists. Ploidy was estimated by karyotyping. Parental
origin of the genome was determined by analyzing 9-31
polymorphic loci. Inclusion criteria were diploidy, successfulkaryotyping, and androgenetic origin of the genome. Multiplepregnancies and mosaics were excluded.
Results: Among 209 (near) diploid androgenetic hydatidiform
moles, 176 were homozygous, and 33 heterozygous. Amonghomozygous hydatidiform moles 0 showed aneuploidy. Amongheterozygous hydatidiform moles 3 showed aneuploidy (9%). A
signi ﬁcantly higher frequency of aneuploidy was shown in diploid
androgenetic heterozygous hydatidiform moles, compared todiploid androgenetic homozygous hydatidiform moles (p =0.005).
Conclusion: Our results support, that in diploid androgenetic
hydatidiform moles, the frequ ency of aneuploidy is higher in
conceptuses showing heterozygosity, than in those showing homo-zygosity. A part of the explanation may be related to the number of
centrioles. In the zygote, the centrioles originate from the sperma-
tozoon. Thus, in a diploid androgenetic homozygous hydatidiformmole there should be one pair of centrioles, in a heterozygoushydatidiform mole there should be two. Two pairs of centrioles might
disturb the segregation of chrom osomes, causing aneuploidy.
P.W. Kristensen: None. L. Andreassen: None. M. Geilswijk:
None. T. Poulsen: None. I. Niemann: None. L. Sunde: None.
P14.015.D Incidental ﬁnding of DFNB1 locus deletion carriers
associated with non-syndromic deafness after prenatal ana-lysis in amniotic ﬂuid
Matías Pérez , María Luz Bellido, Teresa de Haro
Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
Introduction: Deletions in DFNB1 locus at chromosome 13q11-
q12 are uncommon in most populations. This locus includes GJB2
and GJB6 genes that express connexins at the cochlea. We present
the case of parents carriers with heterozygous deletions in the
DFNB1 locus encompassing different parts of the GJB6 and CRYL1
genes and the putative regulatory region of the GJB2 gene,
discovered after array-CGH analysis in amniotic ﬂuid (AF) from its
fetus.
Methods: Array-CGH analysis was performed by a CGX
TMHD
v1,1 4-plex array 180 k (PerkinElmer), with an average resolution of40 kb in the backbone and 20 kb in the regions of interest.
Results:
DFNB1 locus could present two different size deletions. The
most common deletion with a size of 309 kb encompasses GJB6
(from exon 1) and CRYL1 gene, and the second one of 232 kb
encompasses from GJB6 intron 5 to intron 4 of CRYL1 , both
present in the fetus.
Conclusion: Incidental ﬁnding are growing in importance since
the appearance of new technologies. These incidental ﬁndings are
clinically relevant in counseling genetic for the family for future
pregnancies and it is also necessary to consider the medicalbene ﬁt for the clinical care of patient.
M. Pérez: None. M. Bellido: None. T. de Haro: None.
P14.016.A Cytogenetic and Y chromosome microdeletion
analysis in infertile male patients with azoospermia. A
hospital based lab experience in Karachi, Pakistan
MUHAMMAD ISRAR NASIR , Ijaz Ahmad, Muhammad Ammad
LIAQUAT NATIONAL HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL COLLEGE, KARACHI,
Pakistan.
Background: Infertility was found to affect approximately 10%-
15% of the couples, worldwide. The chromosomal abnormality ismore common in infertile men. The aim of this study was toevaluate the frequency and type of chromosomal abnormalities
and Y-chromosome Micro-deletions in the infertile men with
Normal Chromosomal Component.
Materials and Methods: A total of 105 infertile males, with
azoospermia, were included in this prospective observational
study. Samples were collected from the infertile males, andexamined by Karyotype analysis. Males who were found havingNormal 46,XY Karyotype were further tested for Y chromosome
micro-deletion by PCR. Phenotypic Features like Height, Weight,
Head Circumference were recorded. Other information gatheredwere ethinic group and marriage information. Informed Consentwas collected from each individual.
Results: Among the 105 infertile patients, (19%) exhibited
chromosomal abnormality, including 13 (12.3%) subjects withAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
446
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608typical Klinefelter syndrome, Four (3.8%) with the autosomal
chromosome abnormality. Two cases showed (4.76%) two cells
lines Normal Chromosomal component with 47, XXY. One Patient
demonstrated 46,XX PHENOTYPIC MALE Karyotype. Of 85Individuals with Normal Karyotype 46,XY, Further testing forY-Chromosome Micro-deletion reveled 4 individuals with AZFC
and One individual with AZF b +c deletion.
Conclusion: The results from this study demonstrated that
chromosomal abnormalities are common in the infertile men witha higher frequency of sex chromosomal abnormality, especially
those with the numerical type. This study also highlights the
importance of Cytogenetic ﬁndings in decision making and better
management of the patients in infertility clinics.
M.I. Nasir: None. I. Ahmad: None. M. Ammad: None.
P14.017.B Familial segregation analysis of copy number
variants: a crucial role of FISH (over array CGH)
Irene Mademont-Soler
1, Carles Garrido2, Dolors Casellas-Vidal1,
Javier Nieto-Moragas1, Susanna Esteba-Castillo3, Ariadna Cherino1,
Núria Cortés1, Elvira Vilà1, Ana Morales2, María José Naharro2, Miquel
Àngel Caamaño2, Xavier Queralt1, María Obón1
1Hospital Universitari de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain,
2Reference Laboratory, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,3Institut
d’Assistència Sanitària, Salt, Spain.
Introduction: Constitutional insertional translocations are a rare
ﬁnding in clinical cytogenetics, but their unbalanced forms may lead
to intellectual disability and/or other congenital anomalies. In the lastyears, it has been suggested that these chromosomal rearrange-
ments are more frequent (1:500) tha n previously thought (1:80000).
Materials and Methods: A family with an insertional transloca-
tion (inherited in both balanced and unbalanced forms) ispresented. The techniques used for its characterization included
array CGH, FISH and high resolution karyotyping.
Results: Array CGH performed in two sisters with moderate
intellectual disability, macrocephaly and skeletal anomaliesidenti ﬁed, in both of them, a deletion of 8.6 Mb of chromosome
10q23.1q23.31. Family FISH studies (together with high resolution
karyotyping) revealed that the mother and a healthy brotherpresented an insertion of 10q23.1q23.31 into 6q1?3. Thus, thedeletion identi ﬁed in both sisters was the result of an unbalanced
segregation of a balanced maternal rearrangement.
Conclusions: Segregation studies of copy number variants are
often performed exclusively by array CGH. Such approach may
lead to misdiagnosis in some families, as balanced rearrangements
(such as insertional translocations), cannot be detected by thistechnique. Our results strongly support once more the need forFISH and conventional karyotyping to resolve adequately these
cases. The recognition of familial balanced chromosomal rearran-
gements is crucial for genetic counselling, because if they areinherited the recurrence risk changes radically. Of note, suchcharacterization could also be performed by whole-genome
sequencing, although this technique is not routinely used
nowadays for the study of these families.
I. Mademont-Soler: None. C. Garrido: None. D. Casellas-Vidal:
None. J. Nieto-Moragas: None. S. Esteba-Castillo: None. A. Cherino:
None. N. Cortés: None. E. Vilà: None. A. Morales: None. M. Naharro:
None. M. Caamaño: None. X. Queralt: None. M. Obón: None.
P14.018.C Three additional marker chromosomes in a girl with
global developmental delay and microcephaly
Ilona Dietze-Armana
1, Maren Wenzel1, Thomas Liehr2, Karl Mehnert11genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany,2Jena University Hospital, Friedrich
Schiller University, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany.
Introduction: Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC)
are de ﬁned as additional centric chromosome fragments too small to
be characterized unambiguously by b anding cytogenetics alone (ISCN
2020). Further techniques are required for identi ﬁcation like molecular
karyotyping or different methods o f molecular cytogenetic. Live birth
rate of sSMC is 0.05%, but incidence in children investigated fordevelopmental delay is 0.3% ( http://cs-tl.de/DB/CA/sSMC/0-Start.
html ). Case report: We report about an 18 month old girl with global
developmental delay, muscular h ypotonia, microcephaly and mild
facial dysmorphisms. Family history was unremarkable.
Results: Because of muscular hypotonia SMA was excluded.
Chromosome analysis of peripheral blood revealed an unbalanced
karyotype with two abnormal cell lines. First, two nonmosaic alikebisatellited sSMC were found. Second, an additional ringchromo-
some in mosaicism was detected. Molecular karyotyping showed
no genomic imbalance. We characterized the ﬁrst two markers by
FISH as inv dup(15). The other sSMC was characterized by subcen-MFISH. This investigation showed the origin from chromosome 1.
Karyotype: mos 49,XX, +inv dup(15)(q11.2)x2, +r(1)(p1?1.2q22.?1)
[5]/48,XX, +inv dup(15)(q11.2)x2[35]. Furthermore, no UPD(15) was
detected and gene panel analysis was normal. Parental chromo-some analysis showed paternal origin with one inv dup(15),
karyotype: mos 47,XY, +inv dup(15)(q11.1)[23]/46,XY[7], whereas
the ringchromosome originated de novo.
Conclusion: Despite low level mosaicism we suggested that
ringchromosome r(1) is cause of the phenotype of our patient.
However, clinical ﬁndings are heterogeneous in relation of size,
material in p or q arm and mosaicism/nonmosaic.
I. Dietze-Armana: None. M. Wenzel: None. T. Liehr: None. K.
Mehnert: None.
P14.019.D A de novo pericentric inversion of chromosome 17
disrupting the PAFAH1B1 gene in a patient with Miller-Dieker
lissencephaly syndrome
Fatma Maazoun
1,2, Imène Boujelbene1,2, Nourhène Gharbi1,2,
Mohamed Ali Bouhlel Bouhlel1,2, Sahar Aouichaoui1,S o ﬁene
Hentati1, Fatma Kammoun3, Chahnez Triki3, Hassen Kamoun1,2,
Fatma Abdelhedi1,2
1Medical Genetics Department, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia,
2Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine of Sfax,
Sfax, Tunisia,3Child Neurology Department, Hedi Chaker Hospital,
Sfax, Tunisia.
Background: Miller-Dieker Lissencephaly Syndrome (MDLS,
OMIM#247200), is characterized by classic lissencephaly, dysmorphic
features and/or many other congenital anomalies. MDLS is caused by
microdeletions containing at least two genes, PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE ,
mapped on the 17p13.3 region, while isolated lissencephaly can result
from heterozygous mutation or deletion of PAFAH1B1 .
Clinical report : We report the case of a 7-month-old boy,
referred to genetic counselling because of west syndrome andlissencephaly. He was the third child of healthy non-consanguineous parents. Physical examination showed that
growth and head circumference were on the mean curve. Some
characteristic dysmorphic features were noted, including bitem-poral narrowing, small eyes, epicanthus, depressed nasal bridge,
small nose with anteverted nostrils and micrognathia. Neurologi-
cal examination showed axial hypotonia, peripheral hypertoniaand increased deep tendon re ﬂexes. Cardiac and abdominal
ultrasound showed no abnormalities, whereas brain MRI docu-
mented classic lissencephaly.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
447
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results : Cytogenetic analyses were performed on cultured
peripheral blood lymphocytes. The karyotype revealed a peri-
centric inversion of chromosome 17: 46,XY,inv(17)(p13.3;q23).
Parental karyotypes were normal indicating that this rearrange-ment occurred de novo. FISH analysis showed that PAFAH1B1 was
disturbed by the breakpoints of this structural variant.
Discussion : It is well documented that PAFAH1B1 haploinsuf ﬁ-
ciency is responsible for isolated lissencephaly, however thepatient described here shares features with MDLS which might beexplained either by lack of expression (position effect) or by
deletion of other genes located in 17p13.3 region. In this regard,
further genetic studies, such as RT-qPCR and array CGH will beperformed leading to better genotype phenotype correlations.
F. Maazoun: None. I. Boujelbene: None. N. Gharbi: None. M.
Bouhlel: None. S. Aouichaoui: None. S. Hentati: None. F.
Kammoun: None. C. Triki: None. H. Kamoun: None. F.
Abdelhedi: None.
P14.020.A Tissue-speci ﬁc monosomy 13 in a patient with
hemihypertrophy, facial dysmorphism, short digits and optic
nerve colobomas
David Bohanna
1, Claire Vince1, Natalie Harper1, Lucy Osland-Jones1,
Donna Evans1, Susan Hamilton1, Dominic McMullan1, Nicola K.
Ragge2,3
1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women ’s
and Children ’s Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,
2West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham
Health Partners, Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s Foundation
Trust, UK, Birmingham, United Kingdom,3Faculty of Health and Life
Science, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Mosaic monosomy 13 is a rare cytogenetic ﬁnding associated with
a variable phenotype that includes growth de ﬁciency, micro-
cephaly, brain malformations, facial dysmorphism, hand and feet
defects, and genitourinary anomalies. Diagnosis is often delayeddue to a normal result in the lymphocytes.
We describe a girl who presented with body asymmetry,
plagiocephaly, microcephaly, myelomeningocoele, cradle cap,
digital and skeletal anomalies, hypertelorism and optic nervecolobomas during the neonatal period. Subsequently she wasdiagnosed with a small cerebellum, left sensorineural deafness,
right conductive deafness, wide-spaced nipples, smaller left
kidney, sparse hair and delayed development. Combined micro-array and karyotype of a blood sample was normal.
Clinical suspicion of mosaic monosomy 13 was raised following
a case report in the literature, and prompted analysis of a skinbiopsy. Microarray analysis detected a ~84Mb deletion ofchromosome 13, likely to be present in a signi ﬁcant proportion
of cells. Con ﬁrmatory chromosome analysis showed a 46,XX,del
(13)(q12.3) karyotype. The deletion encompasses the majority ofchromosome 13, consistent with a diagnosis of mosaic monosomy13. In addition to providing a diagnosis, and a low recurrence risk
for future pregnancies, this result is associated with a raised
tumour risk, most notably for retinoblastoma, osteosarcoma and
other tumours requiring life-long surveillance.
The clinical diagnosis of mosaicism may be under recognised,
and should be considered in individuals displaying some of these
features, particularly body asymmetry. This paper also highlights
the possibility that other individuals with multiple developmentalanomalies, including eye anomalies may have an underlyingdiagnosis of tissue-limited mosaicism.
D. Bohanna: None. C. Vince: None. N. Harper: None. L.
Osland-Jones: None. D. Evans: None. S. Hamilton: None. D.
McMullan: None. N.K. Ragge: None.
P14.021.B 47,XXY/46,XX/46,XY mosaic Klinefelter Syndrome
accompanied by mixed connective tissue disorder: A very rare
case
Aysel Kalayci Yigin, Mustafa Tarik Alay , Deniz Agirbasli, Mehmet
Seven
Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty,
Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is the most frequent chromosomal
disorder in males. KS is mainly characterized by tall stature,eunuchoid habitus, narrow shoulders, small testes, gyneco-mastia, and infertility. Biochemical analysis usually shows low
serum testosterone, high serum f ollicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels with impairedspermatogenesis. Mixed connective tissue disorder (MCTD) isa systemic, autoimmune disease characterized by overlapping
signs and symptoms of systemic lu pus erythematosus, systemic
sclerosis, polymyositis. The di sease is least common in males
compared to females. Here, we report the ﬁrst time 47,XXY[83]/
46,XX[4]/46,XY[13] mosaic Klinefelter syndrome with the MCTD.
Only 3 cases were reported as 47, XXY regular type KS withMCTD, so far. Our case is a 50-year-old male referred to ourdepartment with lower extremity rash, persistent fever,
arthralgia, muscle weakness, dry eye and mouth, and Ray-
naud ’s phenomenon. In physical examination, eunuchoid body,
sparse axillary and pubic hair growth, small testes, bilateralgynecomastia, digital ulcers, tel angiectasias, and splenomegaly
were detected. Chromosome analysis of the patient revealed
an abnormal karyotype of 47,XXY[ 83]/46,XX[4]/46,XY[13]. FISH
analysis indicated that ish(SRYx1),(DZYx1)(DZX1x2)[92/100]/ish
(SRYx0),(DYZ1x0)(DZX1x2)[5/100] /ish(SRYx1), (DZYx1)(DZX1x1)
[3/100]. Autoimmune diseases are more common in females. Itmight be associated with escape from X-inactivation in earlyembryogenesis. Hence, due to the gene dosage effect,
X-overexpression may cause an increased gene dosage and
that may cause susceptibility to autoimmune disease. Due tothe KS patients having an extra X-chromosome it might be
array[hg19] size Avg
valueGene deleted Status Heritage Classi ﬁcation
Father 13q12.11(20,797,139-
21,097,970)x1.300,83
kb-0,918 GJB6 and CRYL1 Ht AR Pathogenic
Mother 13q12.11(20,804,067-
21,032,170)x1.228,10
kb-0,964 Partial deletion of GJB6 and
CRYL1Ht AR Pathogenic
AF
fetus13q12.11(20,798,175-
20,803,032)x16,87 kb -1,403 GJB6 and CRYL1 Hm AR Pathogenic
-6,477
-1,310Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
448
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608explained with a similar mechanism. This rare ﬁnding ’s
contribution to the literature is notable.
A. Kalayci Yigin: None. M.T. Alay: None. D. Agirbasli: None. M.
Seven: None.
P14.022.D More accurate penetrance estimates for neurosus-
ceptibility loci lead to signi ﬁcantly reduced penetrance
estimates
Shuxiang Goh1, Rhys Bowden2, Mark Pinese3, Edwin Kirk1
1Sydney Children ’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia,2Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia,3University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia.
Introduction: Penetrance has been de ﬁned as the proportion of
individuals with a given genetic change who display a phenotypic
change. We show that this is an ambiguous de ﬁnition that leads to
two different interpretations. One interpretation is used byclinicians and counsellors (essentially ‘the likelihood that the
variant will cause a phenotype ’). A different mathematical
interpretation has been used to calculate penetrance based on
Bayes ’theorem (essentially ‘the likelihood the variant may been
seen in association with a phenotype ’). The latter de ﬁnition
encompasses individuals who have the variant by chance -
associated with but not causal of the phenotype. The interpreta-tions are incompatible. As a result, many of the publishedpenetrance estimates for neurosusceptibility loci, intellectual
disability, schizophrenia and autism are overestimated.
Methods: We provide a mathematical rationale for a more
clinically-meaningful formula for estimating penetrance. We alsoimprove the data used in the formula. We justify our approach in
changing the background rate of any physical or intellectual
disability from 5.12% used by some authors, to 1.1% forintellectual disability. This results in penetrance estimations for
neurosusceptibility loci that are approximately 5-fold lower in
some instances.
Results: When the two approaches are combined, we ﬁnd that
the penetrance for most neurosusceptibility loci are markedly
decreased. Some previously low-penetrant neurosusceptibility loci
are recalculated as having a penetrance of 0%.
Conclusion: Most neurosusceptibility loci have a lower
penetrance than previously estimated. This has potential diag-
nostic and counselling implications in both the prenatal and
postnatal settings.
S. Goh: None. R. Bowden: None. M. Pinese: None. E. Kirk:
None.
P14.023.D Characterization of breakpoint regions of appar-
ently balanced translocations by optical genome mapping
Jenny Schiller
1, Karolina Bilska1, Uwe Heinrich1, Eva-Maria Krim-
mel1, Stephanie Demuth2, Imma Rost1
1MVZ Martinsried, Martinsried, Germany,2Mitteldeutscher Praxisver-
bund Humangenetik, Praxis Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany.
In the process of our optical genome mapping veri ﬁcation study, 7
cases with an apparently balanced translocation were examined to
gain deeper insight into the translocation breakpoints. In 3 cases, we
were able to narrow down the translocation breakpoints to arelevant gene by optical genome mapping thus identifying thecause of the patients ’symptoms. As an example we present a 23
years old woman with a learning disability, who is carrier of a
translocation t(3;20), analyzed by chromosome- and microarrayanalysis. In the family, the mother and 2 half siblings are carriers ofthe translocation t(3;20) and are also affected with learning disability.Using Bionano Genomics technology, we were able to pin down the
translocation breakpoints to the following genes: AC096887.1
(breakpoint on chromosome 3) and CHD6 (breakpoint on chromo-
some 20; OMIM *616114). This case shows that optical genomemapping is very helpful and well suited to detect translocations andto characterize balanced translocation breakpoints.
J. Schiller: None. K. Bilska: None. U. Heinrich: None. E.
Krimmel: None. S. Demuth: None. I. Rost: None.
P14.024.A Optical genome mapping: a cytogenetic revolution
Valeria Orlando
1, Silvia Genovese1, Laura Ciocca1, Viola Alesi1, Sara
Loddo1, Silvia Di Tommaso1, Marina Trivisano2, Maria Lisa Dentici3,
Alessandro Ferretti2, Antonio Novelli1
11- Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics
Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Roma, Italy,22- Rare
and Complex Epilepsy Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Bambino
Gesù Children Hospital, Roma, Italy,33- Medical Genetics Unit,
Academic Department of Pediatrics, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital,Roma, Italy.
Balanced translocations are chromosome structural rearrange-
ments relatively common in human population. A ﬁne character-
ization of the rearrangement is crucial for the identi ﬁcation of
gene disruption at breakpoints and for the evaluation of thepathological outcome. Karyotype, FISH and CMA can provideimportant genomic information but cannot de ﬁne rearrange-
ments at a proper resolution.We describe a 6-years-old female
with normal development until epilepsy onset at 16 month with afebrile seizure. Then she experienced drug resistant generalized orfocal to generalized seizures often in clusters and cognitive
decline. Diagnosis of Dravet Syndrome was made. At last follow up
she showed drug resistant epilepsy with daily seizures, cognitive,motor, and severe language de ﬁcits and behavioural disturbances.
NGS analysis did not reveal pathogenic variants in genes
associated with epileptic encephalopathies. Karyotype analysisshowed a balanced translocation involving chromosomes 2 and18 with breakpoints at 2q24.3 and 18q21.1. Microarray analysis
detected a 181 Kb de novo microdeletion at 2q24.3, involving
SCN2A gene.Optical Genome Mapping(OGM) was used tocharacterize the rearrangement and to verify the correlationbetween the 2q24.3 microdeletion and the translocation break-
point. OGM con ﬁrmed the SCN2A microdeletion but showed a
complex rearrangement involving four different breakpoints. Inparticular, a paracentric inversion at 2q24.3 was shown to disrupt
SCN1A gene, associated to Dravet syndrome. Our patient ’s severe
phenotype is due to the concomitant loss of function of SCN1Aand SCN2A.This new technology allowed a proper characterizationof the rearrangement, de ﬁning a better molecular diagnosis that
leads to precise treatments and clinical outcome.
V. Orlando: None. S. Genovese: None. L. Ciocca: None. V.
Alesi: None. S. Loddo: None. S. Di Tommaso: None. M.
Trivisano: None. M. Dentici: None. A. Ferretti: None. A. Novelli:
None.
P14.025.B A novel case of a girl with partial trisomy
12q24.21q24.33 and review of the literature
Lautaro Plaza-Benhumea
1, Monica Martin-DeSaro2, Olga Messina-
Baas3, Sergio Cuevas-Covarrubias4
1Hospital Perinatal, Monica Pretelini, EdoMex, Mexico,2Pediatrics
Department, Hospital Materno Infantil ISSEMyM, EdoMex, Mexico,
3Hospital General de Mexico, CDMX, Mexico,4Hospital General deAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
449
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, CDMX, Mexico.
Abnormalities of chromosome 12, specially 12p, can occur
commonly resulting in well-known phenotypes, but trisomy 12q israrely reported. The majority of cases had duplication involving theregion 12q24/qter due to segregation of a maternal balanced
translocation. Other rearrangements involved translocations with
chromosomes 2, 4, 5, 9, 11, 17, 18, 21, mosaicism or pericentricinversion. Trisomy 12q can be characterized by a clinicallyrecognizable syndrome including craniofacial dysmorphy, growth
failure, occasional brain malformations, abnormalities of the
extremities, skeletal and thoracic malformations, cardiovasculardefects, anogenital abnormalities like cryptorchidism, psychomotordelay and ontellectual disability The microarray assay exhibited an
approximately 19.35Mb gain of the long arm of chromosome 12 at
12q24.21q24.33 (Fig. 3). The mother´s FISH showed ish ins(21;12)(p11.2;q24.21q24.33)(RP11-946G22 +). We report the case of a girl
with partial trisomy 12q24.21q24.33.
L. Plaza-Benhumea: None. M. Martin-DeSaro: None. O.
Messina-Baas: None. S. Cuevas-Covarrubias: None.
P14.026.C Expanding phenotype in a patient with partial
trisomy 13q/monosomy 3p resulting from a paternal recipro-cal 3p;13q translocation
Monica Martin-DeSaro
1, Lautaro Plaza-Benhumea2, Luz Gonzalez-
Huerta3, Olga Messina-Baas4, Sergio Cuevas-Covarrubias5
1Medical Genetics Department, Hospital Materno Infantil ISSEMyM,
EdoMex, Mexico,2dHospital Perinatal, Monica Pretelini, EdoMex,
Mexico,3Hospital General de México, EdoMex, Mexico,4Hospital
General de Mexico, CDCMX, Mexico,5Hospital General de Mexico,
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, CDMX, Mexico.
Individuals with 3p deletion present a great clinical variability.
Apparently, a 1.5 Mb terminal deletion, including CRBN and CNTN4
genes, is suf ﬁcient to cause this syndrome. Partial trisomy 13q is
an uncommon chromosomal abnormality with a variable pheno-typic expression, but in most cases patients have a phenotype
resembling complete trisomy 13. The aim of the present study is
to describe a Mexican 9-old-months male with 3pdel/13qdup anda novel clinical ﬁnding. He presented facial dysmorphism and
multiple congenital alterations. Echocardiogram reported cardiac
insuf ﬁciency with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and pulmonar
hypertension, not previously reported. Karyotype from the fatherwas 46,XY,t(3;13). Microarray assay of the proband exhibited an
approximately 2.6Mb loss at terminal 3p26.3 and a 27.7Mb gain of
the long arm of terminal chromosome 13 at q31.1q34. Theproband suffered a chromosomal unbalance with a partial trisomiccomponent 13q31.1-q34 and a monosomic component 3p26.3
from paternal origin. Microarray assay of both parents were
normal. Although clinical spectrum is too high in this chromoso-mal aberration, the proband showed a cardiomyopathy notpreviously reported. This data enriches the spectrum of clinical
manifestations in 3pdel/3qdel chromosomopathy.
M. Martin-DeSaro: None. L. Plaza-Benhumea: None. L.
Gonzalez-Huerta: None. O. Messina-Baas: None. S. Cuevas-
Covarrubias: None.
P14.027.D In depth evaluation of a 9p tetrasomy
Maximilian Radtke, Mareike Mertens, Susanna Schubert
University of Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.Introduction: We present a rare case of hypertrophy of the choroid
plexus with chromosome 9p triplication. Chromosome 9p triplica-
tion is an abnormality with two extra copies of genetic material on
the short arm (p) of chromosome 9. The symptoms and the severityof the condition depend on the size and location of the triplicationand the genes that are involved. The general symptoms include
growth retardation, recurrent joint dislocations, scoliosis, develop-
mental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral problems anddistinctive facial features.
Materials and Methods: We report a case of a 1-year old male
patient presenting in our genetic counselling unit with speech and
motor developmental delay, hydrocephalus and hypertrophy ofthe choroid plexus with consecutive ventriculomegaly. The familyhistory is unremarkable. We performed exome-sequencing with
subsequent karyotyping and FISH-analysis. For speci ﬁc delineation
of the chromosome 9 haplotype, we conducted a NGS-basedallele-fraction analysis.
Results: The NGS-based CNV-analysis revealed a 40 Mb
triplication (CN4) on chromosome 9, region 9p:31023-40232529.Karyotyping (GTG- and C-banding) and FISH-analysis ( ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridisation) with a CEP 9 probe (9p11-q11 Alpha Satellite
DNA) revealed an additional marker chromosome, which was
identi ﬁed as an additional isodicentric chromosome 9p.
Conclusion: The karyotyping, FISH- and bioinformatic analysis
revealed that the initial NGS-based diagnostic of a 9p triplication
turned out to be a complete tetrasomy 9p with an additional
isodicentric chromosome. Our genetic analysis therefore supportsthe importance of gene dosage measurement with NGS-based
CNV analysis, Karyotyping, and FISH analysis for identifying causes
of choroid plexus hypertrophy.
M. Radtke: None. M. Mertens: None. S. Schubert: None.
P14.028.A Case report: a reciprocal translocation between
chromosomes 4 and 12 at a 14 years old boy
Sandra Grigore
1, Doina Guzun1,2, Florin R. Nitu1
1Sante Clinic, Bucharest, Romania,2Fundeni Clinical Institute,
Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: Reciprocal translocations occur when part of one
chromosome is exchanged with another part of another chromo-some. Translocations can disrupt functional parts of the genome
and have implications for protein production with phenotypic
consequences. Reciprocal translocations are one of the mostcommon structural chromosome reorganizations in humans, with
an incidence of approximately 0.14% in newborn.
Materials and Methods: We present a case of a 14 years old
boy with obesity, puberty delay and cryptorchidism.
Results: High resolution chromosome analysis revealed a
reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 4 and 12 with
ISCN formula: 46,XY,t(4;12)(q33;q22).
Conclusion :W ed i d n ’tﬁnd another case reported with this
transocation. We believe that the translocation breakpoints disrupt an
essential gene, and the gene is inactivated and behaves as a point
mutation, which could explain the phenotype. It would be useful toperform molecular analysis for establishing the affected gene.
S. Grigore: None. D. Guzun: None. F.R. Nitu: None.
P14.029.B Increased methylation of genes responsible for
fetal-maternal interaction in chorionic villi of miscarriageswith trisomy 16
Stanislav A. Vasilyev
1,2, Ekaterina N. Tolmacheva1, Oksana Yu.
Vasilyeva1, Tatiana V. Nikitina1, Elena A. Sazhenova1, Anton V.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
450
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Markov1, Ekaterina S. Serdyukova2, Viktoria V. Demeneva1, Igor N.
Lebedev1
1Scienti ﬁc Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National
Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation,2National
Research Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Aneuploidy is the leading cause of early human embryonic death
with trisomy 16 being the most frequent. Moreover, trisomy 16 isfrequently found con ﬁned to the placenta, with a chromosomally
normal fetus. According to our results obtained using In ﬁnium
HumanMethylation27 BeadChip (Illumina), miscarriages withtrisomy 16 showed signi ﬁcant hypermethylation in promoters of
90 genes (deltaB>0.15). Among them, the genes of secreted
proteins were enriched (29 genes, p =5.8 E-8), and 10 more genes
encoded receptors. This makes it relevant to study the effects oftrisomy 16 on epigenetic regulation of genes responsible fortrophoblast differentiation and fetal-maternal interaction. DNA
methylation level of promoters of ﬁve genes (ANKRD53, GATA3,
CALCB, TRPV6, and SCL13A4) was analyzed in detail using targetedbisul ﬁte massive parallel sequencing in the chorionic villus
trophoblast of 22 miscarriages with trisomy 16 and 10 induced
abortions.
Miscarriages with trisomy 16 had elevated DNA methylation
level in the promoters of all studied genes compared to induced
abortions (from 1 to 45 differentially methylated CpG-sites per
gene, 6-38 % of all analyzed CpG-sites, p < 0.05). Speci ﬁc
differentially methylated CpG-sites were identi ﬁed in transcription
factor binding sites. Obtained results indicate that epigenetic
abnormalities, potentially affecting the embryonic genome
stability and regulation of the signal interaction betweenaneuploid embryo and mother, can be a potential cause ofpregnancy termination in the presence of aneuploidy in
extraembryonic tissues.
The study was supported by the Russian Science Foundation
(19-74-10026).
S.A. Vasilyev: None. E.N. Tolmacheva: None. O.Y. Vasilyeva:
None. T.V. Nikitina: None. E.A. Sazhenova: None. A.V. Markov:
None. E.S. Serdyukova: None. V.V. Demeneva: None. I.N.
Lebedev: None.
P14.030.C Uterine leiomyomas with an apparently normal
karyotype comprise cryptic heteroploid cell subpopulations
Alla S. Koltsova , Anna A. Pendina, Olga A. E ﬁmova, Olga G.
Chiryaeva, Natalia Yu Shved, Maria I. Yarmolinskaya, Nikolai I.
Polenov, Vladislava V. Kunitsa, Tatiana G. Tral, Gulrukhsor Kh
Tolibova, Vladislav S. Baranov
D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproduc-
tology, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Cytogenetic analysis of uterine leiomyoma (UL) cell cultures
reveals clonal chromosome abnormalities in 60% of ULs. The latter
are believed to occur secondarily during tumorigenesis. We aimed
to check whether ULs with an apparently normal karyotypecomprise "hidden" cell subpopulations with numerical chromo-some abnormalities (heteroploid cells). Using interphase FISH with
centromeric DNA probes (Vysis CEP 7 (D7Z1) SpectrumGreen and
Vysis CEP 16 (D16Z3) SpectrumOrange, AbbottLaboratories), weanalyzed the copy number of chromosomes 7 and 16 in ninekaryotypically normal ULs. Chromosome copy number was
screened in 1000 cultured and 1000 non-cultured cells of each
UL. All of the ULs included both normal disomic cells representinga predominant subpopulation and heteroploid cells reaching amaximum frequency of 21.6% (mean 9.8%) in vivo and 11.5%
(mean 6.1%) in vitro. The spectrum of heteroploid cells was similar
in vivo and in vitro and mostly consisted of monosomic and
tetrasomic cells. However, their frequencies in the culturedsamples differed from those in the uncultured ones: while themonosomic cells decreased in number (Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
p=0.0195), the tetrasomic cells became more numerous (Wil-
coxon signed-rank test, p =0.0078). Our results suggest that ULs
with an apparently normal karyotype revealed in vitro consist ofboth karyotypically normal and heteroploid cells. Different
frequencies of heteroploid cells in vivo and in vitro suggest their
regulation by tumor microenvironment and point towards theirsigni ﬁcance for UL pathogenesis. Supported by RSF №19-15-
00108.
A.S. Koltsova: None. A.A. Pendina: None. O.A. E
ﬁmova: None.
O.G. Chiryaeva: None. N.Y. Shved: None. M.I. Yarmolinskaya:
None. N.I. Polenov: None. V.V. Kunitsa: None. T.G. Tral: None. G.
K. Tolibova: None. V.S. Baranov: None.
P14.031.D Investigation of a de novo complex intrachromo-
somal X chromosome rearrangement in a girl with primary
amenorrhea
Voula Velissariou
BIOIATRIKI HEALTH GROUP, ATHENS, Greece.
A 16-year-old female with primary amenorrhea, hypoplastic
womb, fully developed secondary female characteristics, normal
height and learning dif ﬁculties was referred for CMA studies. CMA
analysis (Cytoscan 750K, Affymetrix) revealed a female pro ﬁle with
numerous deletions and duplications affecting one of the two X
chromosomes. In total, ﬁfteen different clinically signi ﬁcant CNVs
were identi ﬁed. Of these, the largest is an 81 Mb deletion in the
long arm at Xq13.2q28 containing 370 OMIM genes and two
deletions in the short arm at Xp22.2p22.11 and Xp11.3p11.23,
11.2Mb and 3.8Mb in size, containing 56 and 46 OMIM genes,respectively. The presence of XIST was con ﬁrmed with locus
speci ﬁc FISH. Furthermore, X-Inactivation studies using the
Androgen Receptor (AR) gene, showed completely skewed
inactivation pattern. High resolution GTG-banding, revealed a 46,X,der(X) karyotype in the proband, while parental studies werenormal. Molecular karyotyping by Multi-color FISH (Metasystems)
ruled out inter-chromosomal rearrangements, showing that the
abnormal sex chromosome is solely composed of genomicmaterial deriving from chromosome X. Combined with the CMA
analysis revealing multiple adjacent duplication/deletion regions
in the highly remodeled p-arm of the derivative X-chromosome,our data suggest the involvement of serial fork stalling andtemplate switching (FoSTeS), or microhomology-mediated break-
induced replication (MMBIR) events, leading to Chromoanasynth-
esis in the Lyonized aberrant chromosome. The phenotypicoutcome of this rare sex chromosome rearrangement may beattributed to combined dosage effects of genes that escape
X-inactivation. [SG1]This can be excluded
V. Velissariou: None.
P15 New Technologies and Approaches
P15.001.A A complex DMD gene mutation of a carrier
revealed by linked read WGS
Maria Elena Onore
1, Annalaura Torella1, Francesco Musacchia2,
Francesca Del Vecchio Blanco1, Paola D ’Ambrosio1, Mariateresa
Zanobio1, Giulio Piluso1, Vincenzo Nigro1,2Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
451
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Università degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy,
2Tigem- Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli,
Italy.
Today, the use of NGS gene panels, WES or WGS, has changed our
approach to the diagnostic process. However, NGS analysis could
be ineffective in identifying large and complex genomic
rearrangements. In the effort to overcome this limitation, wehave applied a new 10x linked-read sequencing technology thatcombines single-molecule barcode with short-read, to solve NGS-
negative patients. First, we were able to distinguish similar genes,
asSMN1 and SMN2 and identify structural variants in genes with
similar pseudogenes such as PKD1 orPKD2 . We also performed
WGS on two trios with rare diseases who were WES-negative.
Particularly interesting is the use to de ﬁne the large rearrange-
ments in the DMD gene which are the most common cause of
dystrophinopathies including Duchenne (DMD) and Becker (BMD)
muscular dystrophy. Here, we show the case of a DMD carrier with
an unsolved genetic state. A deletion of exons 16-29 in DMD genewas responsible for BMD phenotype in male of her family. MLPAand array-CGH analysis showed a normal dosage of these exons
and an increased dosage of ﬂanking exons 1-15 and 30-34. The
WGS 10x was able to phase both X chromosomes, showing thedeletion of exons 16-29 on one allele and the duplication of exons1-34 on the second one in the DMD gene. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate that 10x linked-read technology can be a
useful tool for improving our understanding of unsolved geneticconditions in a very feasible way.
M. Onore: None. A. Torella: None. F. Musacchia: None. F. Del
Vecchio Blanco: None. P. D ’Ambrosio: None. M. Zanobio: None.
G. Piluso: None. V. Nigro: None.
P15.002.B The clinical utility of optical genome mapping for
the assessment of genomic aberrations in acute lymphoblasticleukemia
Jonathan Lukas Lühmann
1, Marie Stelter1, Marie Wolter1, Jose-
phine Kater1, Jana Lentes1, Anke Katharina Bergmann1, Max
Schieck1, Gudrun Göhring1, Anja Möricke2, Gunnar Cario2, Martin
Schrappe2, Brigitte Schlegelberger1, Martin Stanulla3, Doris
Steinemann1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hann-
over, Germany,2Department of Pediatrics I, ALL-BFM Study Group,
Christian-Albrechts University Kiel and University Medical CenterSchleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany,3Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
Introduction: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most
prevalent type of cancer occurring in children. Nowadays, 85-90%
of patients with ALL can reach a long-term cure; yet, ALL does
reoccur in about 15-20% of all patients and can be cured in just30%-50% of the relapsed cases. ALL is molecularly characterized
by an increasing number of structural genomic aberrations that
strongly correlates with prognostic and clinical outcomes. Usually,a combination of cyto- and molecular genetic methods (karyotyp-ing, array-CGH, FISH, RT-PCR, RNA-seq) is needed to identify all the
underlying genomic aberrations present in ALL. This research aims
to investigate the feasibility of optical genome mapping (OGM), aDNA-based method, to detect structural variants in an all-in-oneapproach.
Methods: As proof of principle, twelve pediatric B-cell precursor
ALL samples from ALL-BFM-2000 and AIEOP-BFM-ALL-2017 wereanalyzed by means of OGM using the Saphyr system (BionanoGenomics). Intensive validation of the results was performed bycomparing OGM data to existing data from routine diagnostic
work ﬂows. Result: All structural alterations among translocations
(e.g., t(1;19), dic(9;12)), aneuploidies (e.g., -7, -11, high hyperdi-
ploidy), and copy number variations (e.g., IKZF1
plusproﬁle) known
from established techniques were detected by OGM as well.Moreover, OGM revealed a more complex structure of a known
translocation t(12;21) and detected additional alterations, among
those a small deletion in SETD2 as well as a strati ﬁcation relevant
gene fusion of JAK2 /NPAT in an archived sample.
Conclusion: This pilot study demonstrates that OGM has the
potential to detect strati ﬁcation-relevant markers in an all-in-one
approach in ALL.
J.L. Lühmann: None. M. Stelter: None. M. Wolter: None. J.
Kater: None. J. Lentes: None. A.K. Bergmann: None. M. Schieck:
None. G. Göhring: None. A. Möricke: None. G. Cario: None. M.
Schrappe: None. B. Schlegelberger: None. M. Stanulla: None. D.
Steinemann: None.
P15.003.C ACACIA: A Customized Array Cgh for solving
unsolvable genetic dIseAses
Annalaura Torella1,2, Francesca Del Vecchio Blanco1, Giancarlo
Blasio1, Mariateresa Zanobio1, Roberta Zeuli1, Maria Elena Onore1,
Francesca Romano1, Cristina Peduto1, Francesco Piluso1, Michela
Napoli1, Esther Picillo1, Giovanni Vicidomini1, Floriana Secondulfo1,
Paola D ’Ambrosio1, Giulio Piluso1, Vincenzo Nigro1,2
1Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli, Italy,
2Tigem-Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy.
The introduction of whole exome sequencing has allowed a
successful diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous disorders
inducing enormous optimism for the future of rare disease
diagnosis. However, about 50% of patients do not receive amolecular diagnosis, making it crucial to develop and implement
strategies for understanding all mechanisms underlying rare
diseases. To date, the trio analysis of WES is powerful in detectingqualitative DNA changes, but nearly blind in recognizing smallquantitative changes like intragenic deletions/duplications.
Although many algorithms have been developed to derive
quantitative information from WES data, these remain inaccurate,needing further exon-by-exon validation. Therefore, we set out todevelop a new high-resolution quantitative test, designing an
exome-based array CGH (ACACIA) with a full single-exon coverage.
The design provides probes covering 7,835 genes: all knownhuman disease genes are included plus 2,599 candidate genes
with lower- than-expected mutations. ACACIA was developed
using the Agilent SurePrint G3 Custom CGH Microarray, 1x1Mtechnology. Under the Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program(TUDP), a large cohort of over 600 rare disease patients is already
available. Of these, approximately 50% are still without disease
causing mutations or with only one putative mutation in gene ofknown recessive disorders. Preliminary validation experimentsconﬁrmed that ACACIA is able to identify small intragenic copy
number mutations (CNMs), even when a single exon is involved.
Unsolved pediatric cases from the TUDP project will be analyzedusing ACACIA. We are con ﬁdent that an additional percentage of
cases can be solved with this innovative approach.
GRANT "ACACIA" D.R. 138 17/02/2020
A. Torella: None. F. Del Vecchio Blanco: None. G. Blasio:
None. M. Zanobio: None. R. Zeuli: None. M. Onore: None. F.
Romano: None. C. Peduto: None. F. Piluso: None. M. Napoli:
None. E. Picillo: None. G. Vicidomini: None. F. Secondulfo: None.
P. D ’Ambrosio: None. G. Piluso: None. V. Nigro: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
452
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P15.004.D Automated variant classi ﬁcation work ﬂows main-
tain quality standards, support standardisation and reduce
turn-around times in a rare disease laboratory
Helen Savage
Congenica Ltd, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
As demand for genomic testing increases, variant analysts
encounter increasingly complex patients in addition to their
routine cases. While increased access to testing should be
celebrated, the use of ﬁrst-line exome and genome testing makes
variant interpretation a key bottleneck, as highly skilled analystsare not experts on all genes/disorders encountered.
A timely diagnosis has a huge impact on patients and families;
providing answers to questions such as “why is my child
different? ”, informing reproductive choice, providing access to
support, information about prognosis and early treatment to
improve patient outcomes. However, the increased effort needed
to familiarise analysts with novel genes and variants increasesturnaround times and may lead to delays in reporting. With a ﬁnite
workforce laboratories may face a lack of resources for analysis of
complex cases, leading to an extended diagnostic odyssey for
patients and their families. This issue was con ﬁrmed in a survey of
Clinical Laboratories, which identi ﬁed that 71% are at, or
approaching, capacity.
Automation is commonplace in the diagnostic laboratory; from
liquid-handling robotics, to automated bioinformatics pipelinesprocessing large volumes of data. As unsupported manual
interpretation is not a scalable solution, is it time to embrace
semi-automation of variant interpretation, to provide the geno-mics workforce with more time to diagnose the most complexcases, so that no patient is left behind?
Here we present the case for automating analysis of cases, to
rapidly generate high-quality, relevant results supporting thediagnosis of patients with rare disease, without compromising the
diagnostic yield each analysis.
H. Savage: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Congenica Ltd.
P15.005.A Automation of NGS library preparation for low
input, degraded samples
Li Liu
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Over the years, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
work ﬂows have become more and more complex, and they
include a variety of sample types such as Formalin Fixed Paraf ﬁn
Embedded (FFPE) samples and Cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Despite
their relevance in disease-oriented research, sequencing FFPE and
cfDNA samples remain challenging due to their low DNA qualityand quantity. The creation of libraries for NGS itself is a tedious
process further challenged by dif ﬁcult sample types. Automation
of library preparation can relieve the burden, but not all liquidhandlers are the same, especially when it comes to minimizingerrors.
Methods: In this poster, we present automated performance of
the IDT xGen Prism DNA library preparation kit on the new BiomekNGeniuS liquid handler. With 4 cfDNA samples (10 ng each) wegenerated libraries following a modular automated work ﬂow that
minimized hands-on time and manual interactions such as
reagent aliquoting. We sequenced the samples on an IlluminaNextSeq 550 sequencer and mapped the sequenced reads againsthuman reference genome using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner.Results: All the libraries passed the vendor recommended
quality assessments and we observed no signs of DNA or sample
loss. After sequencing, >99.5% of the reads aligned with the
reference. Percentage of singletons were <0.23%. In terms ofpercentage reads aligned, automated libraries showed lessvariability between replicates than manually prepared libraries.
Conclusions: The results indicated that the automated work-
ﬂow is successful at preparing NGS libraries from low DNA
quantity challenging samples such as cfDNA.
L. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Beckman
Coulter life Sciences.
P15.006.B Automation of NGS library preparation for cancer
panels
Kristina Lu , Zachary Smith
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has become the
gold standard in oncology research. As the sequencing cost (e.g.,
instrumentation and sequencing chemistry) decreases and the
sequencing data storage and analytics capacity increases, ef ﬁ
cient
library preparation methods are becoming increasingly important
for the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of cancer. Parallel
processing of samples through automation can help to rapidlycreate NGS libraries with minimal hands-on time. However, thequality of the created library is also important for the downstream
analysis.
Methods: In this poster, we evaluate the automation of the
AmpliSeq for Illumina Cancer HotSpot Panel v2 protocol on thenew Biomek NGeniuS. We loaded the liquid handler with 6
samples at the input concentration of 10 ng. We sequenced the
libraries on an Illumina NextSeq 550 sequencer and analyzed thedata using BaseSpace.
Results: We created libraries using the standard work ﬂow and
all libraries passed the quality thresholds. Our sequencing resultsshowed that >97% of reads aligned with the target with uniformcoverage. We were able to identify all gene variants expected
from the panel at high allele frequency.
Conclusions: Our results show that, apart from time savings,
automation can also create high-quality NGS libraries.
K. Lu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Beckman
Coulter life Sciences. Z. Smith: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Beckman Coulter life Sciences.
P15.007.C Automation of NGS library preparation for hybrid
capture
Zachary Smith
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has revolutio-
nized Biology due to its high throughput, scalability and speed. Asa result, scientists are able to study biological systems at a depthnever before possible, to ﬁnd answers to complex biological
questions. Despite these advancements, the creation of NGS
libraries is a tedious process. Protocols such as hybrid capture cantake several days to complete and require multiple manualinteractions and pipetting.
Methods: To overcome these challenges, we automated
Agilent ’s SureSelect XT kit combined with the Human Exon V6
panel, which has a two-day long work ﬂow on the new Biomek
NGeniuS liquid handler. We started with four samples of CoriellAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
453
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608DNA, at input concentration of 200 ng. After shearing, we placed
the samples and kit reagents on the liquid handler, in their original
reagent vials. We prepared the libraries in the automated liquid
handler, following vendor recommended safe stop points. Wesequenced the libraries on an Illumina NextSeq 550 sequencerand analyzed the data using BaseSpace.
Results: All libraries passed the vendor recommended QC
threshold. Our sequencing data showed that the automatedlibraries covered >93% targeted regions and >97% of the readsaligned with the reference.
Conclusions: Our automation approach successfully created
sequencing-ready libraries while minimizing manual pipetting,handling errors and manual touchpoints.
Z. Smith: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Beck-
man Coulter life Sciences.
P15.008.D Comprehensive carrier screening strategy for
challenging genomic conditions
Evrim Unsal , Suleyman Aktuna, Leyla Ozer, Merve Polat, Volkan
Baltaci
Yuksek Ihtisas University, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Universal carrier screening test is a widespread
approach for determining couples with increased risk of having anaffected child due to ethnicity or consanguineous marriage.Hotspot screening for common mutations has been replaced by
NGS-based Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS) covering 100-400
diseases. Recent idea is that speci ﬁcity/sensitivity and uniform
coverage are more important than the number of genes involved.In this study, the validation data of 64 patients with carrier
screening panel targeting coding regions of 420 genes are
presented.
Materials and Methods: A multiplex sequencing panel
targeting 100% of coding bases plus ﬂanking regions for 420
genes was created with Ion AmpliSeq ™Designer and data analysis
was perfomed using Carrier Reporter Software. 32 clinical sampleswith known variants including pseudogene mutations and CNVs
were tested. 18 genes dif ﬁcult to analyze due to presence of
pseudogenes, gene conversions and paralogues were selected forthe study including GBA, HBA1/HBA2, CYP21A2, CYP11B1, SMN1/SMN2, VWF. CFTR and DMD genes are added for CNV information.
Results: Results revealed that 27 of 35 previously detected
variants are called by the analysis algorithm. 8 false negativeswere detected in 6 genes (CYP21A2, GLA, GBA, CYP11B1, HBA1/
HBA2, ITGB3, VWF). Additionally, potential false positive calls were
detected, majority of which lies in gene coversion regions (ABCC6,CBS, CYP21A2).
Conclusions: These results suggest that a correction algorithm
for gene conversion is required. After the initial analysis, special
algorithms were adopted enabling detection of all variants in 8false negative samples making the test 100% sensitive forchallenging variants.
E. Unsal: None. S. Aktuna: None. L. Ozer: None. M. Polat:
None. V. Baltaci: None.
P15.009.A The ﬁrst Saudi baby with classic homocystinuria
diagnosed by universal newborn screening
TALAL SALEH ALANZI , Sarar Mohamed, Fahad AlHarbi, Joharah
AlFai ﬁ
Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.Classic homocystinuria (CH) is an inborn error of metabolism
caused by cystathionine beta-synthase enzyme de ﬁciency.
Affected patients present with intellectual disability and other
comorbidities. If diagnosed early in infancy and started treatment,inevitable complications can be prevented. Newborn screening(NBS) uses tandem mass-spectroscopy (MSMS) to measure the
amino acid levels. In CH, the ﬁrst-tier screening test is the
measurement of methionine by MSMS. If methionine remainedelevated in the recall sample, plasma level for homocysteine isperformed. A newborn infant underwent routine NBS in our
institute that showed elevated methionine in the ﬁrst and the
recall sample. Thereafter, total serum homocysteine was found tobe elevated, consistent with the diagnosis of CH. An early medicaland dietary management was commenced for this ﬁrst Saudi baby
diagnosed with homocystinuria by universal NBS. This report
demonstrates that NBS for CH is feasible and effective inpreventing the disease burden.
T.S. Alanzi: None.
P15.010.B Optimized shallow whole-genome sequencing for
large CNV detection in rare genetic disorders
Anett Marais , Krishna Kumar Kandaswamy, Antonio Romito,
Natalia Ordonez, Dan Diego Alvarez, Katja Bruesehafer, Volkmar
Weckesser, Peter Bauer, Jonas Marcello
Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany.
Large copy number variations (CNVs) represent a signi ﬁ
cant
fraction of genomic alteration in human disease. Next GenerationSequencing (NGS) methods are increasingly used for CNVdetection, slowly replacing chromosomal microarray analysis
(CMA). Low covered genomic regions and representation bias
can be reduced by NGS based CNV analysis without increasingerror rates or loosing robustness. Bene ﬁts of shallow WGS (sWGS)
over CMA were evaluated in a detailed method comparison and
veriﬁed on birth defects, but the challenge of affordable rapid
settings for large scale clinical testing remained largely unsolved.
We demonstrate the feasibility of sWGS implementation in
routine diagnostics of rare genetic disorders based on a
systematic comparative analysis to CMA and introduce Cen-toLCV™, an end-to-end sWGS pipeline for large scale detection of
clinically relevant copy number alteration. The sensitivity is
signi ﬁcantly higher compared to CMA with an average of 147
CNVs per sWGS sample. We ﬁnd 13x higher CNV detection
capabilities for 10-20kb sized CNVs with an overall increase of 6x
over the whole size range, while others report up to 20x increase
with a majority of detections in the range of 1-10kb, the mostprevalent range in standard samples. Our diagnostic rate is at22.4%, resulting in a clear pathogenic ﬁnding in 7.1 % cases, in line
with previous studies. Furthermore, we detect chromothripsis and
triploid events.
Altogether, we con ﬁrm sWGS as an excellent tool to perform
CNV detection in large scale diagnostics and suggest a rapid
replacement of CMA analysis in favor of resolution, throughput
and affordability.
A. Marais: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Cen-
togene AG. K.K. Kandaswamy: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Centogene AG. A. Romito: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Centogene AG. N. Ordonez: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. D.D. Alvarez: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. K. Bruesehafer: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. V.
Weckesser: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene
AG. P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
454
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Centogene AG. J. Marcello: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Centogene AG.
P15.012.D Implementation barriers of dynamic consent in
clinical genetics
Tita Alissa Bach , Sharmini Alagaratnam, Serena Elizabeth Marshall
DNV GL, Oslo, Norway.
Introduction: The reach and relevance of clinical genetics to
complement the increased preval ence of personalised diagnostic
and therapeutic decision making for patients is growing. To
accompany this, there are demands for technologies and processes
that support informed patient dec ision making. Dynamic consent is
an approach that can facilitate two-way communication, setting andmodifying of consent preferences by patients over time and meet
the needs of clinical genetics environments. Despite these bene ﬁts,
implementation to date is limited.
Methods: A literature review and semi-structured interviews
with experts, supported by a survey of clinical genetics profes-
sionals, were employed to identify and map the barriers to
implementation of dynamic consent in clinical genetics.
Results: The ﬁndings revealed six categories of barriers and
sub-barriers: 1. ethical barriers (ensuring trust, autonomy versus
information overload, sharing data, and revoking previouslyconsented data), 2. legal and regulatory barriers (regulation, useof data, and the GDPR), 3. knowledge and competence barriers
(consent comprehension, and variable user backgrounds), 4.
ﬁnancial barriers (investment versus gain), 5. cultural and
organisational barriers (stakeholder engagement and collabora-tion, and cultural shift), 6. technological barriers (security,
traceability and transparency, and interoperability).
Conclusion: In addition to the bene ﬁts of dynamic consent in
clinical genetics environments, it also has the potential to support
paradigm shifts for medicine in other specialties. As more use
cases develop where dynamic consent approaches can be applied,the barriers identi ﬁed pinpoint several focus areas that should be
considered prior to and as developments of dynamic consent
solutions are underway.
T. Bach: None. S. Alagaratnam: None. S. Marshall: None.
P15.013.A Polyvalent CD8A CSR messenger RNA encoded to
generate a modi ﬁed transcription factor IIIA polypeptide
intended to seek out, bind to and neutralize the COVID-19
genome, this modi ﬁed human CD8A CSR mRNA additionally
carrying nucleotide coding to generate the COVID-19 B1.1.7spike protein to be mounted on the surface of the cell, to actas a vaccine
Lane B. Scheiber II , Lane B. Scheiber
Osteoporosis & Arthritis Center, Richmond, VA, USA.
Introduction: The coronavirus pandemic has demonstrated a
need to strike directly at viral genomes inside host cells.
Materials and Methods: Utilizing teachings of human genetics,
the CD8A CSR messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) was re-coded
to carry both a cure for COVID-19 and an updated vaccine.
Results: Following 5 ’leader end of CD8A mRNA, is attached
nucleotide coding for a modi ﬁed human TFIIIA polypeptide
(TI9606) designed to target the poly uracil tail of negative-sense
coronavirus ’s genome. Utilizing published amino acid-nucleotide
binding algorithm, we altered zinc ﬁngers 1-6 of native humanTFIIIA polypeptide to cause the protein to seek out and bind to the
33 uracil nucleotide tail of the negative-sense coronavirus
genome. Fixing a 365 amino acid polypeptide to coronavirus
genome interferes with replication of the virus, halting thepathogen ’s infectious nature. Following a UAA ‘AND ’command,
we added nucleotide coding for the ‘S
’protein associated with
B1.1.7 variant, to include N501Y and E484K variants to the Wuhan-
Hu-1 coronavirus, followed by a second UAA, then followed by 3 ’
terminal end of CD8A mRNA and a poly adenine tail.
Conclusion: We designed a 7,029 nucleotide medically
therapeutic mRNA to generate two polypeptides. First protein, a
modi ﬁed TFIIIA polypeptide to bind to the COVID-19 genome;
second protein to be mounted on the surface of the cell alertingthe immune system to B1.1.7 spike protein. Administration via
nanomicelle technology.
Polyvalent mRNA to both neutralize Coronavirus genome and function
as a COVID-19 B1.1.7 vaccine
▓
L.B. Scheiber II: None. L.B. Scheiber: None.
P15.014.B Inhibition of MAD2L2 and NUDT16L1 impacts
homology directed repair in CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing
Arina A. Anuchina , Milyausha I. Zaynitdinova, Anna G. Demchenko,
Svetlana A. Smirnikhina, Alexander V. Lavrov
Research Centre for Medical Genetics(RCMG), Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Enhancing gene editing ef ﬁcacy through impacting
repair mechanisms is the widespread approach when using
CRISPR-Cas9 system. After introducing double-strand break (DSB)
several repair mechanisms can act. Two major are non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homology directed repair(HDR). NHEJ is the major, however, error-prone way, while HDR
provides correct donor-template repair. To enhance HDR ef ﬁcacy
and inhibit NHEJ we use knockdown of MAD2L2 , one of NHEJ
participants, and overexpression of NUDT16L1 , that inhibit the
main NHEJ factor action.
Materials and methods: Experiments were performed on
HEK293T cell line. CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid with spCas9(1.1) gene and
sgRNA cassette targeted to the mutated GFP sequence was co-transfected with peGFPmut plasmid with eGFPmut gene under CMV-
promoter. ssODN with 143bp of wild-type GFP sequence was used as
repair template for HDR. Plasmid with NUDT16L1 CDS under CMV
promoter was used for NUDT16L1 overexpression. After lipofection
cells were cultured 72h, HDR level was measured with ﬂow
cytometry of the restored GFP- ﬂourescence in case of successful
HDR.
Results: We revealed that MAD2L2 knockdown increases HDR
approximately 5 times (10.9% vs 2.1% control HDR level, p =
0.027). However, we observed almost four-fold (4.78% vs 1.3%, p=0.0067) decrease of HDR after NUDT16L1 overexpression.
Conclusions: Thus, we reached 5-fold enhancement of HDR
that can be used in editing of pathogenic human mutations.
Decrease of HDR due to NUDT16L1 overexpression gives new
information about the protein, and can be used in further studies
ofNUDT16L1 . The study was supported by the grant #19-34-90130
of Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR).
A.A. Anuchina: None. M.I. Zaynitdinova: None. A.G. Dem-
chenko: None. S.A. Smirnikhina: None. A.V. Lavrov: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
455
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P15.015.C Targeting clinically signi ﬁcant dark regions of the
human genome with high-accuracy, long-read sequencing
Ian McLaughlin , John Harting, Zev Kronenberg, Cheryl Heiner, Lori
Aro
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
Introduction: There are many clinically important genes in “dark ”
regions of the human genome. These regions are characterized as
dark due to a paucity of NGS coverage as a result of short-read
sequencing or mapping dif ﬁculties. Low NGS sequencing yield can
arise in these regions due to the presence of various repeatelements or biased base composition while inaccurate mapping
can result from segmental duplications. Long-read sequencing
coupled with an optimized, robust enrichment method has thepotential to illuminate these dark regions.
Materials and Methods: Using PacBio highly accurate long-
read (HiFi) sequencing, coupled with a long-PCR targeted
enrichment method, we investigated two important dark regiongenes that are challenging to accurately type with short-readsequencing due to associated pseudogenes: CYP21A2 , responsible
for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and GBA, responsible for
Gaucher disease. For each gene, our aim was to cover regions ofpathogenic mutations in a single contiguous sequence or set of
sequences that can be assayed in a single reaction. Coriell samples
containing known pathogenic mutations were studied in replicate.For each target region, SMRTbell libraries were generated frompooled amplicons and sequenced on a PacBio Sequel II System.
Results: All pathogenic CYP21A2 and GBA variants were
accurately called in the test samples. These variants includedwhole-gene deletions, gene duplication, gene fusions, recombi-nant exons, and phased compound heterozygotes.
Conclusions: We demonstrate that HiFi sequencing can enable
accurate characterization of clinically important dark regions ofthe human genome that are typically inaccessible to short-read
sequencing.
I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences. J. Harting: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Bios-
ciences. Z. Kronenberg: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences. C. Heiner: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences. L. Aro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ
cant;
Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences.
P15.016.D Micro ﬂuidics for micro clinical samples: Lowering
the limits of PCR-free WGS sample sizes through automation
Kate Cunningham1, Beatriz Rodríguez-Alonso2,3,4,Adam Barner1,
Eugenia Carvajal1, Nathan Hoverter5, Ting Wang1, Kaitlin Chaung6,
Shweta Belur2,3,4, Mais Jebrail1, Severine Margeridon1, Greg Gonye7,
Eric Chow6, Aleksandar Rajkovic2,3,4, Foteini Christodoulou1
1Miroculus Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA,2Department of Pathology,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,
3Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,4Institute of Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, USA,5Purigen Biosystems, Inc, Pleasanton, CA,
USA,6UCSF, Center for Advanced Technology (CAT), San Francisco,
CA, USA,7Purigen Biosystems, Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA.
The promise of personalized medicine is best captured in the
concept of preimplantation genetic testing (PGT). Current
methodologies fall short due to inability to fully sequenceembryos to detect all pathogenic variants. To maximize healthybaby outcomes PCR-free Whoe Genome Sequencing (WGS)is
desired, but nearly impossible due to the limited amount and
quality of samples. To address these challenges, two novelmicro ﬂuidic technologies were integrated for ef ﬁcient DNA
extraction and PCR-free WGS library production.
Using isotachophoresis-based DNA extraction (Ionic ®Puriﬁca-
tion System, Purigen Biosystems) gDNA was extracted from downto 2,500 cells followed by micro ﬂuidic PCR-free library preparation
(Miro CanvasTM, MicroculusTM). WGS (20X coverage) from
GM12878 cells revealed comparable results for the automatedvs manual methods ( ≥Q30 87.8% vs 87.9%, alignment 99.7% vs
99.7%). The automated work ﬂow detected ~90% of the same
SNVs as the manual methods. Well-characterized variants were
identi ﬁable: 1) G-to-A transition in CYP2C19 exon5 in GM12878, 2)
F508 deletion mutation in CTFR in GM07339, 3) R553X mutation inGM07461. Miro Canvas libraries present superior sequencing
metrics than manually prepped libraries when PCR-free assay
receives very low gDNA input amounts.
This novel combination of technologies allows for hands-off,
PCR-free library preparation for WGS of low cell number samples.
We have successfully detected known pathogenic variants acrossdifferent cell lines using as few as 2,500 cells, providing a pathforward to achieving the full potential of WGS inclinical scenarios
where samples are small, rare, and irreplaceable.
K. Cunningham: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Miroculus, Inc.. B. Rodríguez-Alonso: None. A. Barner: None. E.
Carvajal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus,
Inc.N. Hoverter: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Purigen Inc. T. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc.. K. Chaung: None. S. Belur: None. M.
Jebrail: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus,
Inc.S. Margeridon: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Miroculus, Inc. G. Gonye: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Purigen Biosystems, Inc.. E. Chow: None. A. Rajkovic:
None. F. Christodoulou: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc..
P15.017.A Impact of clean-up kits on DNA sequencing quality
and ef ﬁciency
Tracy Andrews
Beckman Coulter United Kingdom Limited, High Wycombe, United
Kingdom.
The applications of DNA sequencing in biological research are
growing. A signi ﬁ
cant driver of this growth is Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS), a modern DNA sequencing technologyinstrumental in achieving complete DNA sequences or genomes
of humans, many animals, plants, and microbial species. Clean-up
kits are a pivotal part of the NGS process. They have an immediateimpact on ef ﬁciency and on quality, as well as key impacts
downstream. Clearly, it is not worth jeopardizing entire DNA
sequencing operations and more, simply to save pennies on theprice per sample of cheaper but lower performance, poorerquality, and less ef ﬁcient kits. It is therefore critical to examine a
DNA sequencing clean-up kit before selection and compare itsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
456
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608overall performance with others, either when starting NGS
operations or when considering changing to a different clean-up
kit solution. While clean-up kit cost is always a factor, switching to
cheaper or other products is not necessarily more advantageousand focusing exclusively on price can have highly undesirableconsequences. Here we describe 5 factors and their possible
impacts to evaluate before switching a clean-up chemistry.
T. Andrews: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Beckman Coulter United Kingdom Limited.
P15.018.B Genetic carrier screening for monogenic disorders
prevalent among yakut ethnic group using population speci ﬁc
low density DNA microarray
Mira Savvina , Nadezhda Maksimova, Aitalina Sukhomyasova
North-Eastern federal university, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
Genetic studies of population isolates have great potential to
provide a unique insight into genetic differentiation andphenotypic expressions. Yakut population represents genetic
isolates with its unique geographic situation and speci ﬁc history
that have resulted in a relatively higher prevalence of geneticdisorders that caused by speci ﬁc mutation rarely found or cannot
be found in other populations. The heterozygous carrier frequency
of mutations 4582_4583insT in CUL7 gene, с.5741G>A in NBAS
gene, с.806С>ТinDIA1 gene, c.1090G>C in FAH gene, c.-23 +1G>A
inGBJ2 gene causing ﬁve monogenic disorders prevalent among
yakut ethnic group: 3-M syndrome, SOPH-syndrome, Tyrosinemia
type 1, Methaemoglobinaemia type 1, Nonsyndromic hearing lossand deafness (DFNB1) type 1A respectively was estimated usinglow density DNA microarray. After genotyping of 120 samples
from healthy individuals of yakut origin the frequency of
heterozygous carriage were estimated: mutation 4582_4583insTinCUL7 gene -2%, mutation с.5741G >A in NBAS gene-1,6%,
с.806С>ТinDIA1 gene- 2,5% , c.-23+1G>A in GBJ2 gene -2,9%. The
data was validated by real-time PCR and PCR-RLFP methods. Thedeveloped population speci ﬁc low density oligonucleotide micro-
array can be considered as an alternative low-cost tool for
heterozygous carrier screening and genetic diagnostics in republic
of Sakha (Yakutia). The research is conducted under the statetarget program: project FSRG-2020-0014 “Genomic of Arctic:
epidemiology, hereditary and pathology ”
M. Savvina: None. N. Maksimova: None. A. Sukhomyasova:
None.
P15.020.D Extracellular vesicles with speci ﬁc surface proteins
are associated with decreased body fat and obesity
Ranran Zhai
1, Xia Shen1,2, Lu Pan3, Zhijian Yang1, Ting Li1, Zheng
Ning1,3, Yudi Pawitan3, James F. Wilson2,D iW u4
1Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China,2University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom,3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden,4Vesicode AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
Obesity has a highly complex genetic architecture, making it
difﬁcult to understand the underlying disease mechanisms,
despite the large number of loci discovered via genome-wideassociation studies (GWAS). Omics technologies provide newperspectives to better understand disease processes. As a proxy of
cellular biology, extracellular vesicles (EVs) are useful for studying
cellular regulation of complex phenotypes. Here, in a cohort of 96individuals from Orkney, we utilized a novel technology to detect113 surface proteins across millions of individual EVs in eachindividual ’s plasma sample and conducted GWAS of the
abundance of EVs with different protein-protein combinations.
Integrating the results with existing obesity GWAS, we inferred 66
types of EVs carrying combinations of 12 surface proteins to beassociated with adiposity-related traits such as waist circumfer-ence. We veri ﬁed such associations between the abundance of
particular EVs and body fat measured by DEXA scans. GWAS of EVs
carrying two surface protein markers revealed genome-widesigni ﬁcant cis-EV-QTL, even given the relatively tiny sample size.
Our ﬁndings provide evidence that EVs with speci ﬁc surface
proteins are genetically and phenotypically associated with
obesity, guiding future EV biomarker discovery.
R. Zhai: None. X. Shen: None. L. Pan: None. Z. Yang: None. T.
Li:None. Z. Ning: None. Y. Pawitan: None. J.F. Wilson: None. D.
Wu: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Vesicode AB.
P15.021.A Improving the ef ﬁciency of EGFP editing by CRISPR-
Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complexes
Yana Slesarenko , Alessya Bykonya, Arina Anuchina, Milyausha
Zaynitdinova, Alexander Lavrov, Svetlana Smirnikhina
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, MOSCOW, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The issue of optimal delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 into cells
remains unresolved. Fortunately, the delivery ef ﬁciency could be
increased using sgRNA and Cas9 protein in form of the ribonucleo-
protein (RNP) complex. In th is study, we compared the ef ﬁciency of
indels formation in the EGFP gene and the c.337delG mutation
correction ef ﬁciency in this gene via delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 in the
plasmids and RNP.
Materials and methods: We used HEK293T cell line, EGFP
plasmid without mutation (introduction of indels) and with thec.337delG mutation (used ssODN to correct the mutation). RNP
complexes consisted of SpCas9 protein (NEB) and sgRNA to
EGFPwt orEGFPmut (Guide-it sgRNA IVT Kit, Takara Bio). RNP
lipofection was performed with Lipofectamine CRISPRMAX andwith Lipofectamine 2000 for plasmids and ssODN. The ef ﬁciency
of indel formation and mutation correction was analysed by ﬂow
cytometry. The Mann-Whitney test and t-test were used to ﬁnd
the signi ﬁcance of differences in editing ef ﬁciency.
Results: The results showed that the ef ﬁ
ciency of indels
formation in the EGFP using RNP increased by 2.8 fold (p < 0.05).
The average ef ﬁciency of mutation correction was 27.81% using
RNP and 4.85% with plasmid delivery (p < 0.05). Further optimiza-
tion of the delivery protocols for plasmids and RNP increased the
efﬁciency of mutation correction in EGFP to 16.99% (p < 0.05) and
35.22%, respectively.
Conclusion: The results of the work indicate the ef ﬁciency of
indels formation in the EGFP gene and correcting the c.337delG
mutation in this gene signi ﬁcantly increased using RNP for CRISPR-
Cas9 delivery.
Y. Slesarenko: None. A. Bykonya: None. A. Anuchina: None.
M. Zaynitdinova: None. A. Lavrov: None. S. Smirnikhina: None.
P15.022.B Large gene panel sequencing in clinical setting -
experience from 3044 patients
Hanno Roomere1, Ülle Murumets1, Sander Pajusalu1,2, Ustina
Šamarina1, Tiina Kahre1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of Clinical Genetics,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
457
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: The need for genetic testing has grown in recent
years. Illumina ’s TruSight One Expanded (TSO) panel targeting
~6700 genes has been used to diagnose patients with suspectedmonogenic disorders in Estonia. Physicians and laboratories canchoose to analyse all of the genes on the panel or focus on a
speci ﬁc genes or subpanels only.
Materials and Methods: Altogether 3044 individuals were
analysed using TSO panel during 2018-2020. The patients werereferred to testing by many doctors from different clinics and
specialities.
Results: Molecular variant was reported for 699 (23%)
individuals. (Likely) pathogenic variants were found in 505 (17%)of cases and variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) in 194 (6%).
VUS were reported only when further studies to con ﬁrm the
pathogenicity were possible. The most common indications fortesting were mental retardation, 862 cases (14% positive);
metabolic disorders, 590 (31%); epilepsy, 400 (22%); muscle
diseases, 237 (35%); mitochondrial diseases, 236 (25%). Surpris-ingly, there were no ﬁndings from Parkinson ’s disease and
dystonia gene panel. Patients were consented for reporting
secondary ﬁndings. In 18 patients out of 1255, (1.4%) a pathogenic
variant was found in ACMG 59 gene list. In addition, physiciansorder a reanalysis for 126 previously negative cases, which lead to13 (10.3%) additional molecular diagnoses.
Conclusions: TSO panel is a powerful tool for detection of rare
genetic disorders in clinical practice, with about 25% of diagnosticsensitivity. An accurate clinical diagnosis and provision of relevant
clinical information increases the diagnostic yield.
H. Roomere: None. Ü. Murumets: None. S. Pajusalu: None. U.
Šamarina: None. T. Kahre: None.
P15.023.C GRIN2B novel de-novo variants the cause of
patients with generalized severe hypotonia as primaryreferral condition
FAIDON NIKOLAOS TILEMIS
1,2,NIKOLAOS M. MARINAKIS1, MARIA
SVINGOU1, KYRIAKI KEKOU1, KONSTANTINA KOSMA1, MARIA ROSER
PONS3, JOANNE TRAEGER-SYNODINOS1
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, St. Sophia ’s Children ’s Hospital,
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,Athens, Greece,2Research University Institute for the Study and
Prevention of Genetic and Malignant Disease of Childhood, St.
Sophia ’s Children ’s Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Athens, Greece,31st Department of Pediatrics, St. Sophia ’s
Children ’s Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Introduction : The GRIN2B gene plays a crucial role in normal
neuronal and brain development. GRIN2B is member of the
N-methyl -D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) gene family and is
implicated in many cases of neurological disorders. The mostcommon GRIN2B -related disorders, which are inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner, include mild to profound develop-
mental delay/intellectual disability and muscle tone abnormalities,such as hypotonia.
Materials and Methods : Three patients with prominent central
hypotonia, were referred to the Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
following clinical evaluation, pre-test counselling and signedconsent. Previous testing for Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA),
Prader-Willi and karyotype were negative. Whole Exome Sequen-
cing (WES, ~19,000 genes) was implemented using HumanCore Exome kit (Twist Bioscience) for library preparation and aNextSeq-500 system (Illumina) for sequencing. Bioinformatic
analysis was performed using BWA and GATK algorithms, the
VarAFT annotation and ﬁlter tool and ExomeDepth for CNV
detection. Variants were evaluated using VarSome database andcategorised according to ACMG guidelines.
Results : Two novel de-novo heterozygous nucleotide variants
c.1606G>A and c.2459G>C and one de-novo heterozygous large
deletion, encompassing the entire GRIN2B gene, were identi ﬁed
through WES. All variants were classi ﬁed as Pathogenic according
to ACMG guidelines.
Discussion : These ﬁndings support that GRIN2B variants are
frequently and strongly associated with prominent hypotonia ofcentral origin. Also, this study indicates the importance of callingCNVs from exome sequence data using CNV calling algorithms,
such as ExomeDepth, to increase the diagnostic yield of WES. The
combined detection of point mutations and CNVs makes WES avery useful diagnostic test for patients with hypotonia.
F.N. Tilemis: None. N.M. Marinakis: None. M. Svingou: None.
K. Kekou: None. K. Kosma: None. M.R. Pons: None. J. Traeger-
synodinos: None.
P15.024.D High resolution HLA typing with NGSgo MX6_1 and
PacBio HiFi sequencing
Ian McLaughlin
1, John Harting1, Sake van Wageningen2,Hanneke
Merkens2, Loes A. L. van de Pasch2, Maarten Penning2, Erik H.
Rozemuller2
1Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA,2GenDx, Utrecht, Nether-
lands.
Reliable NGS-based HLA typing requires high-quality reads of
sufﬁcient length to resolve ambiguities. Short read sequencing has
the advantage of being of high quality but can sometimes lead to
ambiguous HLA typing due to limited phasing. This study
investigates whether PacBio HiFi sequencing on a Sequel IISystem (Paci ﬁc Biosciences) allows for generating long, high
quality reads with full phasing, supporting reliable and unambig-
uous HLA typing.
A 58 gDNA sample panel was ampli ﬁed using the NGSgo ®-MX6-
1 ampli ﬁcation strategy for HLA-A, B, C, DRB1, DQB1 and DPB1
(GenDx). Products were processed in a PacBio library preparation
work ﬂow using SMRTbell Express Template Prep Kit 2.0 and
barcoded overhang adapters. Libraries were sequenced on aSequel II System, and data was analyzed in NGSengine ®.High
quality data was generated for all samples. As promised by long-
read sequencing, all loci could be completed phased whichresolves genotype ambiguities reported by short read sequencing,even for samples with sparsely distributed heterozygous positions
as identi ﬁed in DPB1. The typing results of all loci in all samples
were 100% concordant to the pre-type information. Depth ofcoverage was constant across the complete amplicon.
PacBio HiFi sequencing of amplicons generated with NGSgo-
MX6-1 results in high-quality, long read sequences of HLA. The
long reads contribute to a constant depth of coverage combinedwith full phasing and low noise levels, allowing for reliable HLA
typing with limited ambiguities. This new long read sequencing
strategy is an attractive alternative to current short read sequencetechnologies with limited phasing capacity.
I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Paciﬁc Biosciences. J. Harting: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. S. van Wageningen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GenDx. H. Merkens: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GenDx. L.A.L. van deAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
458
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Pasch: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GenDx. M.
Penning: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GenDx. E.
H. Rozemuller: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; GenDx.
P15.025.A Estimating the X chromosome-mediated risk for
developing Alzheimer ’s disease
Carmel Armon , Sharon Wolfson, Rivka Margalit, Liraz Avraham, Yael
Bugen, Amir Cohen, Adi Meiri, Ran Shorer
Tel Aviv University School of Medicine and Shamir (Assaf Harofeh)
Medical Center, Zerif ﬁn, Israel.
Background: Parental lineage has been shown to increase the risk
of Alzheimer ’s disease (AD) in the offspring, with greater risk
attributed to maternal lineage. While 40 genes/loci have been
linked to the risk of developing AD, none has been found on the X
chromosome.
Methods: We reviewed retrospectively records of patients aged
55-80 years presenting to our memory disorders clinic with
amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) or early AD between
May 2015-September 2020. We estimated the risk for developingAD mediated by the X chromosome in a subgroup of late-onset
patients with aMCI or early AD and unilateral ancestral history of
AD or dementia by analyzing their numbers (a-d) de ﬁned as
follows:
Probands Paternal side affected Maternal side affected
Women a b
Men c d
The odds ratio OR =(a:b)/(c:d) estimates the relative risk
conferred by the X chromosome, controlling for confounders.
The estimated proportion of risk mediated by the X chromosome
is calculated as (OR-1)/)OR.
Results: 40 women aged 66.1 +5.1 years (mean +standard
deviation) and 31 men aged 68.1 +6.5 were identi ﬁed. The OR was
(18:22)/(6:25) =3.4, (95% con ﬁdence interval 1.1-10.1; p =0.027).
The estimated proportion of genetic risk borne by the Xchromosome in this population is 70%.
Conclusions: Our numbers are small and the ﬁndings
preliminary, requiring replication. This approach may provide anestimate for the proportion of risk mediated by the X chromosomein individuals who develop AD with unilateral ancestral lineage,
and is generalizable.
C. Armon: None. S. Wolfson: None. R. Margalit: None. L.
Avraham: None. Y. Bugen: None. A. Cohen: None. A. Meiri:
None. R. Shorer: None.
P15.026.B Using next generation sequencing and liquid
biopsy techniques to provide a new option for a patient with
colorectal cancer to monitor cancer recurrence after surgery
Chia Cheng Hung
1, Tze Kang Lin1,2, Yu Lin Lin3, Chieh Wei Huang4,
Chang Wei Yeh4, Hwei Ming Wang5, Yi Ning Su1,6
1Soﬁva Genomics, Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan,2Graduate Institute of
Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan,3Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
4National Center for High Performance Computing, National Applied
Research Laboratories, Hsinchu, Taiwan,5Division of Colorectal
Surgery, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan,6Dianthus Maternal Fetal Medicine Clinic, Taipei, Taiwan.
Background: Liquid biopsy is a new technology to analyze
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) from tumors. Frequency detectingof driver mutations in ctDNA should be an alternative option formonitoring disease progression.
Method: The patient was diagnosed with colorectal cancer in
December 2017 by iFOBT. We used next-generation sequencing(NGS) based 197 targeted genes panel assay and sequenced on anIllumina NextSeq 550.
Results: The tumor markers, CEA19-9 and CEA, were tested and
the results were 5.11 ng/ml and 4.23 U/ml, respectively. InFebruary 2018, the result of tissue biopsy detected two mutations,APC p.Gln1406* (55.2%) and TP53 p.Asn239Asp (58.0%). The liquid
biopsy also detected the same mutations with mutation rates
0.44% and 0.38%, respectively. The case underwent surgicaltreatment and the postoperative report showed T3N0M0 in March
2018. After received adjuvant postoperative treatment with 5-FU
in April 2018, intensive follow-up for CEA19-9 and CEA were 6.18ng/ml and 2.18 U/ml, respectively. However, the liquid biopspyshowed no abnormalities. After a course of treatment, the patients
achieved liquid biopsy and medical imaging examine for an
average of 2 to 6 months to monitor cancer recurrence. Except forthe detection of a new gene mutation (TP53 p.Lys132Glu, 0.19%)in August 2018, the monitoring results of liquid biopsy are all
normal in October 2018, April 2019, November 2019, and April
2020. Similarly, CT scan and colonoscopy tracking also found noabnormalities.
Conclusion: In addition to the tumor markers, the liquid biopsy
can be an option to continued monitor cancer progression toassist medical imaging examine results.
C.C. Hung: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva
Genomics Co., Ltd. T.K. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva Genomics Co., Ltd.. Y.L. Lin: None. C.W. Huang:
None. C.W. Yeh: None. H.M. Wang: None. Y.N. Su: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva Genomics Co., Ltd..
P15.027.C CRISPs regulates ef ﬁcient ﬂagellar energetics and
optimal sperm function
Avinash Gaikwad
1,2, Ashwin Nandagiri3, David Potter4, Ranga-
nathan Prabhakar5, Sameer Jadhav6, Julio Soria7, Reza Nosrati5,
Moira O ’Bryan8
1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany,2School of Biological Sciences, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia,3IITB-Monash Research Academy, Mumbai,
India,4Monash Micro Imaging - Advanced Optical Microscopy,
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia,5Department of Mechanical
& Aerospace Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia,
6Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technol-
ogy-Bombay, Mumbai, India,7Laboratory for Turbulence Research in
Aerospace and Combustion (LTRAC), Department of Mechanical &Aerospace Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia,
8School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia.
Introduction: Cysteine- RIch Secretory Proteins (CRISPs) are highly
expressed in the epididymis and are hypothesized to be involvedin establishing optimal functional competence. Previously, it hasbeen shown that CRISPs can regulate ion ﬂow via various sperm
ion channels, and thus potentially regulate sperm function,
including motility.
Materials and methods: We use image-analysis and hydro-
dynamic calculations to show that epididymal CRISPs signi ﬁcantly
inﬂuences sperm ﬂagellar beating. This was achieved byAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
459
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608developing an image-analysis algorithm that utilizes proper
orthogonal decomposition to study the complex dynamics and
beating pattern of the sperm ﬂagella.
Results: Sperm from wildtype mice exhibited rhythmic and
sinusoidal ﬂagella beating. By contrast, sperm from Crisp1-/-and
Crisp4-/-knockout mice displayed asymmetric ﬂagellar beating. The
changes observed between genotypes were characterized by
reconstructing an average beat cycle, which revealed that Crisp1-/-
sperm possessed an in ﬂexible mid-piece and a highly asymmetric
waveform at the distal regions of the ﬂagella. By contrast, the Crisp4-/-
sperm were constrained along the entire length of the ﬂagella. We
found that Crisp1-/-and Crisp4-/-sperm had altered periodicity of
ﬂagellar oscillations between cycles and lowered ﬂagellar amplitude,
reduced oscillating frequency of the ﬂagella and reduced rates of
energy dissipation along the ﬂagella. Excitingly, these de ﬁcits could
be largely rescued by the addition of recombinant CRISPs to sperm.
Conclusions: Collectively, the data reveal that CRISPs play a
signi ﬁcant role in establishing ef ﬁcient sperm ﬂagella waveform
and function and thus, fertility. This data also suggests the use ofrecombinant CRISPs may be of bene ﬁt in assisted reproductive
technologies.
A. Gaikwad: None. A. Nandagiri: None. D. Potter: None. R.
Prabhakar: None. S. Jadhav: None. J. Soria: None. R. Nosrati:
None. M. O ’Bryan: None.
P15.028.D CoverageMaster: a clinical grade and user oriented
CNV caller
Melivoia Rapti1, Emmanuelle Ranza2, Stylianos E. Antonarakis3,
Federico A. Santoni1
1Centre Hospitalier Unive rsitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland,
2Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Gen omic Medicine, Geneva, Switzer-
land,3University of Geneva Medical F aculty, Geneva, Switzerland.
Copy number variation (CNV) is the most frequent structural alteration
in the human genome. Aberrant number of copies of speci ﬁc genes
or genomic regions are known to cause pathogenic conditions. Whileadvances in next generation sequencing (NGS) have provided a
standardized way for accurate coding variant analyses through whole
exome sequencing (WES), CNV detection still relies on probe-basedmethods, that are complementary to NGS approaches in clinicaldiagnostics. Limited arrayCGH resolution, poor MLPA scalability and
additive costs are pushing for WES to become the primary strategy for
identifying CNVs. However, WES technical issues made it dif ﬁcult so
far to standardize a procedure for CNV detection, mostly because of
the high false positive rates. Here, w e introduce CoverageMaster (CM),
a CNV calling algorithm based on depth-of-coverage maps fromaligned short sequence reads. CNVs are inferred with Hidden Markovprobabilistic Models at the nucleotide-level in the Wavelet com-
pressed space, while existing methods utilize ﬁxed length windows or
exon averages. This approach allows the user to visually inspect theoutput to further reduce the false positive rate. Indeed, CM providethe graphical representations of the predicted CNVs for all the genes
of interest, and optionally, a wig formatted ﬁle compatible with USCS
Genome Browser for detailed visuali zation of the target regions.CM is
being tested with research and clinic al data as a supportive diagnostic
tool and preliminary data and already validated cases suggest the
concrete possibility of WES-based CNV callers to replace arrayCGH
and MLPA in the near future.
M. Rapti: None. E. Ranza: None. S. Antonarakis: None. F.
Santoni: None.
P15.029.A Review of mitochondrial genome analysis in over
7,500 patients using clinical grade mtDNA sequencingJonna Tallila , Marita Isokallio, Inka Saarinen, Miko Valori, Ville
Kytola, Pauli Siivonen, Pertteli Salmenpera, Massimiliano Gentile,
Johanna Sistonen, Tero-Pekka Alastalo, Juha Koskenvuo
Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland.
Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases are a heterogeneous group
of disorders caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. Mixed popula-
tions of both normal and mutant mitochondrial DNA can coexistin a single cell (heteroplasmy). The proportion has important
consequences in understanding mitochondrial disease, as the
heteroplasmy level contributes to the severity of mitochondrialdisorders and a phenotypic manifestation occurs only when acritical threshold level is exceeded.
Methods: We developed a highly sensitive and clinically
validated mtDNA assay based on hybridization-based capture ofmtDNA and next-generation sequencing (NGS) that is able todetect very low heteroplasmy levels of SNVs, INDELs and
deletions. The mean read depth across the mitochondrial genome
was 18,224x, and 100% of base pairs were covered at least 1000x.Sensitivity to detect SNVs and INDELs with over 10% heteroplasmywas 100%. For SNVs with 5-10% and <5% heteroplasmy levels the
sensitivity was 93.3% and 88.9%, respectively.
Results: A diagnostic (pathogenic/likely pathogenic) mtDNA
variant was identi ﬁed in 116 patients, contributing to a diagnostic
yield of 1.5%. Not surprisingly, the most common recurrent variant
was m.3243A>G (40 patients with heteroplasmy levels rangingfrom 5.8 to 70.9%), which underlies maternally inherited diabetes,hearing loss, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke-like episodes (MELAS). Single large deletions ranging in
size from 4.4 to 7.6kb with heteroplasmy levels of 6.8 to 54.5%were observed in 4 cases.
Conclusions: Mitochondrial disorders may be caused by
pathogenic variants of genes encoded by either nDNA or mtDNA,
thus combining a high-quality mtDNA analysis with routine panel-based diagnostics improves the diagnostic yield.
J. Tallila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. M. Isokallio: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Valori: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. V.
Kytola: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. P. Siivonen: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi
ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Salmenpera: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J.
Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.
P15.030.B Molecular karyotyping with Nanopore sequencing
Pamela Magini1, Alessandra Mingrino2, Barbara Gega2, Davide
Bolognini2, Gianluca Mattei3, Roberto Semeraro2, Patrizia Mongelli1,
Laura Desiderio1, Maria C. Pittalis1, Tommaso Pippucci1, Alberto
Magi3
1U.O. Genetica Medica, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e
Clinica, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze, Italy,3Dipartimento
di Ingegneria dell ’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Firenze,
Firenze, Italy.
Introduction: Copy number variants (CNVs) play important roles
in the pathogenesis of several genetic syndromes. Traditional andmolecular karyotyping are considered the ﬁrst-tier diagnostic testsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
460
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608to detect macroscopic and cryptic deletions/duplications. How-
ever, their time-consuming and laborious experimental protocols
protract diagnostic times by three to ﬁfteen days. Long read
sequencing approaches, such as Oxford Nanopore sequencing(ONS), have the ability to reduce time to results for the detectionof CNVs with the same resolution of current state-of-the-art
diagnostic tests. We compared ONS to molecular karyotyping for
the detection of pathogenic CNVs to demonstrate its clinicalutility.
Material and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood samples of 7 patients with previously diagnosed
causative CNVs of different sizes and allelic fractions. Largerchromosomal anomalies included trisomy 21 and mosaic tetras-omy 12p. Among smaller CNVs we tested two reciprocal genomic
imbalances in 7q11.23 (1.367 Mb), a 170 kb deletion encompass-
ing NRXN1 and mosaic 6q27 (1.231 Mb) and 2q23.1 (408 kb)
deletions. DNA libraries were prepared following Oxford Nanopore
protocol and sequenced on the GridION device for 48 h. Data were
analysed in online mode, using NanoGLADIATOR.
Results: ONS identi ﬁed all pathogenic CNVs with detection time
inversely proportional to size and allelic fraction. Aneuploidies
were called after only 30 minutes of sequencing, while 30 hours
were needed to call CNVs < 500 kb also in mosaic state (44%).
Conclusions: Through a rapid and simple work ﬂow, Nanopore
technology allows the molecular diagnosis of genomic disorders
within 30 minutes to 30 hours time-frame.
P. Magini: None. A. Mingrino: None. B. Gega: None. D.
Bolognini: None. G. Mattei: None. R. Semeraro: None. P.
Mongelli: None. L. Desiderio: None. M.C. Pittalis: None. T.
Pippucci: None. A. Magi: None.
P15.031.C Accessing whole human genome methylation
through nanopore sequencing: potential for application inhuman genetics
Catarina Silva
1,2,3, Miguel Machado1, Sebastião Rodrigues2,3, Luís
Vieira1,2
1Technology and Innovation Unit, Department of Human Genetics,
National Institute of Health Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal,
2Centre for Toxicogenomics and Human Health (ToxOmics), Genetics,
Oncology and Human Toxicology, Nova Medical School, UniversityNova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal,3Nova Medical School|FCM,
University Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
Introduction: Several genetic diseases are associated with
cytosine methylation (5 ’-mC) of CpG dinucleotides. Assessment
of whole genome 5 ’-mC status frequently requires treatment with
sodium bisul ﬁte or digestion with methylation-sensitive restriction
enzymes. However, modi ﬁcation of DNA sequences can lead to a
sub-optimal methylation pro ﬁle due to technical biases. Here we
assessed the potential of nanopore sequencing (NS) to character-ize whole genome 5 ’-mC using native DNA.
Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA extracted from HEL cell
line was sequenced in a MinION following a rapid library
preparation protocol (Oxford Nanopore Technologies). Methyla-tion calling was performed using the nanopype pipeline. Several Rscripts were used to compare NS data with publicly available
digital restriction enzyme analysis of methylation (DREAM) and
methylation array data.
Results: NS mimicked the expected genomic distribution of
CpGs at ~10X average genome coverage. A higher number of
methylated CpGs was found in shores and shelves compared toCpG islands, compatible with the role of those genomic regions ingene regulation. The correlation of methylation frequencies (MF)was higher with microarray than with DREAM data, and increased
to a maximum of ~0.89 at 17X. In contrast to NS, DREAM and
microarray data showed a tendency towards extreme and
intermediate MF values for CpG shores, shelves and open searegions.
Conclusions: NS provides unbiased whole genome methylation
calling and a faithful representation of the CpG pro ﬁles in various
genomic contexts. We conclude that NS can be used to studyabnormal DNA methylation patterns in genetic diseases (sup-ported by ToxOmics and GenomePT).
C. Silva: None. M. Machado: None. S. Rodrigues: None. L.
Vieira: None.
P15.032.D Introduction of a walk-away automated Roche NGS
work ﬂow solution: Integrated KAPA Library Preparation,
KAPA Target Enrichment and the AVENIO Edge instrument
Persis Wadia , Joshua Lefkowitz, Edwin Malfarta, Arrezo Moghad-
dasi, Smriti Sharma, Benjamin Morck, Patrick Ton, Tim Williams,Michael Pintor, Jennifer Dasgupta, Arash Fararooni, Arafat Al-Ariemy,
Bill LaRochelle, Pierre-Luc Janvier, Neda Razavi
Roche, Pleasanton, CA, USA.
Introduction: By automating and simplifying NGS work ﬂow steps,
a variety of diagnostic applications become practical and robust,thus increasing the ef ﬁciency of precision medicine. The AVENIO
Edge instrument provides a complete walk-away automated NGS
library prep solution with on-deck QC from extracted nucleic acid
with minimal hands-on time and ﬂexibility for KAPA Target
Enrichment. Feasibility of an NGS work ﬂow with zero pipetting
steps using Roche KAPA Library Preparation and KAPA Target
Enrichment reagents with an AVENIO Edge instrument was
explored.
Methods: Performance, carry-over contamination rate, turn-
around time, DNA quantitation module testing, were representa-
tive experiments comparing automated vs. manual capturework ﬂows using Roche KAPA HyperCap Work ﬂow v3.0 reagents
on the AVENIO Edge instrument. Representative panels including
KAPA HyperExome Panels were tested with pre-capture and post-
capture pooling work ﬂows using genomic DNA. Sequencing data
was analyzed through internal pipelines and included percentreads on-target, fold-80 base penalty, mean target coverage, total
duplicate rate, 90th/10th percentile ratio, mean insert size.
Results: The AVENIO Edge Quant kit results and sequencing
metrics were similar between automated and manually prepared
samples for all representative panels. No signi ﬁcant differences
were observed from reagent lot-to-lot, run to run & between
instruments with minimal contamination across runs. Averageturn-around-time for 24 sample processing was ~31 hours.
Conclusions : We successfully demonstrated the integration and
performance of the complete Roche KAPA HyperCap Work ﬂow
v3.0 leveraging KAPA Library Preparation and KAPA TargetEnrichment reagents on the AVENIO Edge instrument, enabling
the broader adoption of NGS in precision medicine and ultimately
improving patient outcomes.
P. Wadia: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. J.
Lefkowitz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. E.
Malfarta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. A.
Moghaddasi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche.
S. Sharma: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. B.
Morck: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. P.
Ton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. T.
Williams: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. M.
Pintor: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. J.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
461
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Dasgupta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. A.
Fararooni: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. A.
Al-Ariemy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. B.
LaRochelle: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche.
P. Janvier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche. N.
Razavi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Roche.
P15.033.A Monitoring circulating tumor DNA predicts cancer
recurrence by using liquid biopsy in a colorectal cancer
patient
Chia Cheng Hung1, Hwei Ming Huang2, Tze Kang Lin1,3, Chieh Wei
Huang4, Chang Wei Yeh4,Yi Ning Su1,5
1Soﬁva Genomics, Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan,2Division of Colorectal
Surgery, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan,
3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan,4National Center for
High Performance Computing, National Applied Research Labora-tories, Hsinchu, Taiwan,5Dianthus Maternal Fetal Medicine Clinic,
Taipei, Taiwan.
Background: Liquid biopsy is an alternative tool for discover
tumor-speci ﬁc mutations. The current clinical application is
focusing on early prediction of cancer recurrence.
Method: Liquid biopsy via circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in
blood test results were collected from a 62-year old patient withstage IV (T3N0M1) colorectal cancer after one month, three
months and one year of surgery. The targeted sequencing of 197
genes was used for tumor-derived ctDNA analysis by nextgeneration sequencing (NGS).
Results: In September 2019, the patient was found metastatic
adenocarcinoma of lung in right upper and right lower lobes. The
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining showed CK7 negative, CK20positive, CDX-2 positive and TTF-1 negative. Using the mutations
detected by liquid biopsy, we found one FBXL7 c.1351 G>A (p.
Ala415Thr) mutation and the mutation was 0.89% in October2019. After three months of surgery (January 2020), we noted thesame mutation but the mutation rate was increasing to 0.99%.
Another nine mothers later (October 2020), the mutation rate was
a roughly 2-fold increase to 1.68%. The percentage of recurrentsomatic mutations reveal insight cancer recurrence. The patientwas diagnosed as metastatic lung cancer by using PET imaging in
November 2020. The liquid biopsy predicts cancer recurrence
months earlier than PET imaging.
Conclusion: The usefulness of liquid biopsy for cancer
recurrence and metastasis after surgery shows the clinical need
to identify patients at high risk. Early detection of mutations usingliquid biopsy could be used as a novel and highly sensitive tool formonitoring cancer progression.
C.C. Hung: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva
Genomics Co., Ltd.. H.M. Huang: None. T.K. Lin: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva Genomics Co., Ltd.. C.W.
Huang: None. C.W. Yeh: None. Y.N. Su: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; So ﬁva Genomics Co., Ltd..
P15.034.B Combining exome/genome sequencing with data
repository analysis reveals novel gene-disease associations for
a wide range of genetic disorders
Aida Bertoli-Avella
1, Krishna Kandaswamy1, Suliman Khan1,
Natalia Ordonez-Herrera1, Kornelia Tripolszki1, Christian Beetz1,
Maria Rocha1, Alize Urzi1, Ronja Hotakainen1, Anika Leubauer1,
Ruslan Al-Ali1, V. Karageorgou1, O. Moldovan2, P. Dias2,A .
Alhashem3, B. Tabarki3, M. Albalwi4,5, A. Alswaid6, Z. Al-Hassnan7,
N. Al Hashmi8, L. Al Gazali9, H. Cheema10, M. Zaki11, I. Hüning12,A .Alfares4,13, W. Eyaid14,5, F. Al Mutairi14,5, M. Alfadhel14,5, F. Alkuraya15,
N. Al-Sannaa16, A. AlShamsi9, N. Ameziane1, A. Rolfs1,17, P. Bauer1
1CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, Germany,2Serviço de Genética
Médica. Hospital de Santa Maria. Centro Hospitalar Universitáriode Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal,3Division of Pediatric Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,4Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,5King Abdullah International
Medical Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, MNGHA, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
6College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health
Sciences. King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
7Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital &
Research Center, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia,8National Genetic Center, Royal hospital Muscat,
Muscat, Oman,9Department of Pediatrics, Tawan Hospital, Al-Ain,
United Arab Emirates,10Pediatric Department of Gastroenterology.
Children ’s Hospital of Lahore Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan,11Clinical
Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome ResearchDivision, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt,12Institute of
Human Genetics. University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck,
Germany,13Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Qassim
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,14Division of Genetics, Department
of Pediatrics, King Abdullah Specialized Children Hospital, King
Abdulaziz Medical City, MNGHA, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,15Department
of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,16John Hopkins Aramco Health Care, Pediatric
Services, Dharan, Saudi Arabia,17University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany.
Introduction: Despite comprehensive genetic testing, over half of
the patients with genetic diseases remain molecularly undiag-
nosed. A presumably major reason is that the causative variants
are in genes, for which there is insuf ﬁcient or no evidence for an
association with disease. We aim to discover novel gene-disease
associations in patients that remained undiagnosed after perform-
ing exome/genome sequencing (ES/GS).
Methods: We followed two approaches: i) a patient-centered
approach, which after routine diagnostic analysis systematically
interrogates variants in genes not yet associated to human
diseases, and ii) a gene-variant centered approach. For the latter,we focused on de novo variants in patients that presented with
neurodevelopmental delay (NDD) and/or intellectual disability (ID),
which are the most common reasons for genetic testing referrals.
Gene-disease association was assessed using our data repositorythat combines ES/GS data and Human Phenotype Ontology terms
from over 33,000 patients.
Results: We suggest six novel gene-disease associations based
on 38 patients with variants in the BLOC1S1, IPO8, MMP15, PLK1,
RAP1GDS1 , and ZNF699 genes. Furthermore, our results support
causality of 31 additional candidate genes. Following the ClinGen
guidelines, these 31 gene-disease associations can be upgradedfrom having “limited ”evidence to “moderate ”or“strong ”, based
on 56 patients. The phenotypes included syndromic/non-syndro-
mic NDD/ID, oral-facial-digital syndrome, cardiomyopathies, mal-
formation syndrome, short stature, skeletal dysplasia, and ciliarydyskinesia.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the value of data
repositories, which combine clinical and genetic data, for
discovering and con ﬁrming gene-disease associations. Genetic
laboratories should be encouraged to pursue such analyses for the
bene ﬁt of undiagnosed patients.
A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene GmbH. K. Kandaswamy: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. S. Khan: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. N. Ordonez-Herrera:Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
462
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH.
K. Tripolszki: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene GmbH. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. M. Rocha: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. A. Urzi: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. R. Hotakainen:
None. A. Leubauer: None. R. Al-Ali: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. V. Karageorgou: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. O.
Moldovan: None. P. Dias: None. A. Alhashem: None. B. Tabarki:
None. M. Albalwi: None. A. Alswaid: None. Z. Al-Hassnan: None.
N. Al Hashmi: None. L. Al Gazali: None. H. Cheema: None. M.
Zaki: None. I. Hüning: None. A. Alfares: None. W. Eyaid: None. F.
Al Mutairi: None. M. Alfadhel: None. F. Alkuraya: None. N. Al-
Sannaa: None. A. AlShamsi: None. N. Ameziane: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. A. Rolfs: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH. P.
Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene
GmbH. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene GmbH.
P15.035.C Optical Genome Mapping: where molecular techni-
ques give up
Viola Alesi1, Francesca Romana Lepri1, Silvia Genovese1, Valeria
Orlando1, Sarah Loddo1, Silvia Di Tommaso1, Matteo Luciani2,
Federica Deodato3, Rossella Capolino4, Antonio Novelli1
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Translational Cytogenomics
Research Unit, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy,
2Haemophilia Centre, Bambino Gesù Paediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy,
3Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Rome,
Italy,4Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù
Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy.
Optical genome mapping (OGM) is a new technology able to
provide information about numerical and structural rearrangementsat high resolution. We describe three cases in which it allowed anexhaustive molecular diagnosis. The ﬁrst patient presented with
Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1, an autosomic dominant disease caused
by variants in NF1 gene. NGS tested negative, while MLPA analysis
detected two non-contiguous deletions involving NF1exons 4-7 and
31-36 respectively. OGM detected the two known microdeletions,
along with a 56 Kb intragenic inversion, having the two deletions as
breakpoints. The second patient had hemophilia A, an X-linkedrecessive condition caused by mutation in F8gene. NGS and MLPA
tested negative. OGM analysis showed a 556 Kb inversion in Xq28,
whose proximal breakpoint interrupted F8gene. The third patient
presented with an Alpha-mannosidosis disease, a recessive geneticcondition caused by mutations in MAN2B1 .N G Sd e t e c t e da
homozygous variant in MAN2B1 , segregated only from the mother,
while SNP-array tested negative. A 5.3 Kb paternally inheriteddeletion was detected by OGM, involving the 3 ’portion of MAN2B1 .
OGM represents a powerful upgrade to cytogenetics providing
genome-wide data not achievable with other techniques. In the
presented cases, OGM was used to detect cryptic rearrangements,explaining clinical phenotype. The development of moleculartechniques and the stasis of cytogenetics have led to underestimate
the causative role of structural micro-rearrangements. This new
technology will provide a wide overview of genomic complexity andwill help both in addressing a diagnosis and in underlining the
molecular mechanism of genomic disease.
V. Alesi: None. F. Lepri: None. S. Genovese: None. V. Orlando:
None. S. Loddo: None. S. Di Tommaso: None. M. Luciani: None.
F. Deodato: None. R. Capolino: None. A. Novelli: None.P15.036.D Gene editing strategy for alpha-1 antitrypsin
deﬁciency through CRISPR-cas9 in liver organoids
Sara Perez-Luz
1, Gema Gomez-Mariano1, Ignacio Perez de Castro1,
Iago Justo2, Alberto Marcacuzco2, Loreto Hierro3, Cristina Gar ﬁa3,
Beatriz Martínez-Delgado1
1IIER, Madrid, Spain,2Hospital 12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain,3Hospital
La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Alpha-1 Antitrypsin de ﬁciency (AATD) is an
inherited condition characterized by reduced levels of serumAAT due to mutations in SERPINA1 gene. More than 90% of severe
deﬁciency patients are homozygous for PiZ (Glu342Lys) mutation
located in exon 5. The PiZ allele causes the AAT protein to
polymerize in hepatocytes, limiting secretion into the circulation,resulting in plasma levels 10% to 15% of the levels of normal Mhomozygotes. Liver organoids are an interesting model to develop
a gene edition CRISPR/Cas9 strategy as a gene therapy to treat
AATD.
Materials and Methods: Using HITI technology (Homology-
Independent Targeted Integration) we have design a single-
stranded RNA guide (gsRNA) to target cas9 endonuclease to intron
4-5 and introduced a wild-type exon 5 into the SERPINA1 gene of
PiZ organoids. CRISPR/Cas9 machinery was delivered into the
organoids using the NEPA21 electroporator.
Results: We have ﬁrst tested the CRISPR/Cas9 machinery in the
hepatocarcinoma cell line HepG2 to optimize conditions. Inorganoids, we have produced several pools in which CRISPR/
Cas9 activity (insertions and deletions, Indels) was measured by
TIDE analyses, being one single nucleotide deletion the mostfrequent event when using this sgRNA guide. We are now testingwhether minicircles containing the correct exon 5 are capable of
restoring alpha-1 antitrypsin levels in the genomic-edited
organoids.
Conclusions: These gene-edited organoids could be an ideal
model for the development of a gene therapy for DAAT.
S. Perez-Luz: None. G. Gomez-Mariano: None. I. Perez de
Castro: None. I. Justo: None. A. Marcacuzco: None. L. Hierro:
None. C. Gar ﬁa:None. B. Martínez-Delgado: None.
P15.037.A Personal Automation for Whole Genome Sequen-
cing: Evaluating Digital Micro ﬂuidics Across Two Different
PCR-free Protocols
Eugenia Carvajal
1, Adam Barner1, Julia Yoo1, Preetham Hosur1,
Michely Ternadi1, Tom Howd2, Tim Desmet2, Fay Christodoulou1,
Mais Jebrail1, Severine Margeridon1
1Miroculus Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA,2Broad Institute Genomics
Platform, Cambridge, MA, USA.
There is increasing demand for PCR-free WGS (e.g. rapid diagnosis
of newborns, Tumor/Normal somatic sequencing) enabling
identi ﬁcation of more variants without ampli ﬁcation-associated
artifacts. Traditional automation requires commitment to a smallset of protocols, necessitating high throughput and batching, tojustify the investment of time, space, and capital.
Fully-automated library construction on Miro CanvasTM from
MiroculusTM uses electromechanical forces for dispensing, mov-ing reagents, mixing, thermocycling, magnetic bead clean-ups,and eluting on a single-use electronics-free cartridge.
PCR-free WGS protocols were compared to manual and high-
throughput liquid handler library preparation: 1) Miro PCR-freeAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
463
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608WGS Library Prep Kit with mechanical fragmentation, 2) Illumina
DNA PCR-free Prep Kit with tagmentation.
Miro PCR-free WGS libraries (n =178) were prepared using
sheared gDNA inputs (75-500ng) from multiple sources (NA12878and donor blood samples). Twenty-six Illumina DNA PCR-freelibraries were generated using NA12878 inputs (50-500ng).
Miro Canvas libraries demonstrated equivalent or better
sequencing metrics compared to both manual efforts and ahigh-throughput plate-based liquid handler using the same kit.Miro PCR-free WGS libraries consistently achieved >95% bases at
20X coverage and >98%HetSNP sensitivity with 109Gb sequenced
across inputs (100-500ng). Libraries from the liquid handler systemrequired 5Gb more to achieve the same.
Sequencing Illumina DNA PCR-free libraries demonstrated
equivalent insert size, coverage and %excluded total metrics
compared to manually-prepared libraries with average insert sizeof 425bp and average yield of 10nM (300ng-500ng input).
With Miro Canvas, “on-demand ”automation for WGS PCR-free
protocols using mechanical fragmentation or tagmentation allowsfor more consistent, higher quality WGS libraries.
E. Carvajal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Miroculus, Inc. A. Barner: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc. J. Yoo: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc. P. Hosur: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc. M. Ternadi: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc.. T. Howd: None. T.
Desmet: None. F. Christodoulou: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc. M. Jebrail: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc. S. Margeridon: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Miroculus, Inc..
P15.038.B Determining if polygenic scores provide clinical
utility
Sowmiya Moorthie
1,2, Alison Hall1, Joanna Janus1, Tanya Brigden1,
Chantal Babb de Villiers1, Laura Blackburn1, Mark Kroese1
1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Cambridge Public
Health, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Polygenic scores (PGS) have been developed as the
mechanism by which knowledge of common variants can be usedto investigate genetic contributions to disease risk. Several clinical
applications have been discussed. However, demonstrating utility
is one of the key barriers to implementation and uptake.
Materials and methods : We applied our expert knowledge of
genetic test evaluation, regulation and implementation to PGS
analysis to identify potential issues from these perspectives. Ourinvestigation was from the viewpoi nt of hypothetical implementation
of PGS analysis as a novel biomarker test within the UK National
Health Service. We also reviewed published and grey literature, and
conducted interviews of key individuals using a semi-structuredprocess to understand differing perspectives on the utility of PGS.
Results: Determining the utility of PGS is linked to under-
standing the nature of the test offered and its intended purpose.
This extends beyond demonstration of the performance char-acteristics of a PGS model and requires consideration of the test,its intended purpose and context of use, in order to examine the
implications of test use on healthcare pathways. Our analysis
indicates that a lack of clarity on these aspects along withuncertainties in how such tests are regulated are impeding
assessment of their utility and therefore their implementation.
Conclusion: We were able to outline factors that impact on
considerations of utility of PGS use in healthcare. Clear articulationof proposed applications, specifying the clinical context of use andtarget population are important in developing evidence towards
demonstrating the utility of PGS tests.
S. Moorthie: None. A. Hall: None. J. Janus: None. T. Brigden:
None. C. Babb de Villiers: None. L. Blackburn: None. M. Kroese:
None.
P15.039.C Deep, rapid and unbiased plasma proteomics with
Proteograph ™enables proteogenomic studies with differen-
tial analysis of proteoforms
Margaret K. R. Donovan , John E. Blume, Marwin Ko, Ryan W. Benz,
Theodore L. Platt, Juan C. Cuevas, Sera ﬁm Batzoglou, Asim Siddiqui,
Omid C. Farokhzad
Seer, Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA.
Introduction: C o m p r e h e n s i v ec o v e r a g eo ft h ep r o t e o m er e m a i n s
elusive because of proteoforms arising from alternative splicing,
allelic variation, and protein modi ﬁcations. Protein variations are
critical to protein function, expa nding our knowledge of biological
states of diseases, which requires unbiased protein coverage at
sufﬁcient scale. Scalable, deep and unbiased proteomics studies have
been impractical due to cumbersome and lengthy work ﬂows
required for complex sample s, like blood plasma. Here, we
demonstrate the power of Proteograph in a proof-of-concept
proteogenomic analysis of 80 healthy controls and 61 early-stagenon-small-cell lung ca ncer (NSCLC) samples to dissect differences
between protein isoforms arising from alternative gene splicing, as
well as the identi ﬁcation of novel peptides arising from allelic
variation.
Materials, Methods and Results: Processing the 141 plasma
samples with Proteograph yielded 2 1,959 peptides corresponding to
2,499 protein groups. Using peptides with signi ﬁcant abundance
differences (p < 0.05; Benjamini-Hochberg corrected), we extractedproteins comprised of peptides where at least one peptide had
signiﬁcantly higher plasma abundance, and another signi ﬁcantly
lower plasma abundance in controls vs. cancer, resulting in a set ofsixteen proteins. For three of these proteins, the abundance variationis putatively explained by underlying protein isoforms. To identify
protein variants, we performed exome sequencing on 29 individuals
from the NSCLC study, created personalized mass spectrometrysearch libraries for each individual, and identi ﬁed 464 protein variants.
Conclusions: Proteograph can generate unbiased and deep
plasma proteome pro ﬁles that enable identi
ﬁcation of protein
variants and peptides present in plasma, at a scale suf ﬁcient to
enable population-scale proteomic studies.
M.K.R. Donovan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Seer, Inc. J.E. Blume: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Seer, Inc. M. Ko: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seer,
Inc.R.W. Benz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seer,
Inc.T.L. Platt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁc a n t ;S e e r ,I n c .
J.C. Cuevas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seer, Inc.
S. Batzoglou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seer,
Inc.A. Siddiqui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seer,
Inc.O.C. Farokhzad: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Seer, Inc..
P15.040.D Rare disease case- ﬁnding using a digital tool in UK
primary care - a pilot study
William Evans, Orlando Buendia , Connor Toal, Pradeep Ravichan-
dran, Lara Menzies
Mendelian Ltd, London, United Kingdom.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
464
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: This study implemented MendelScan, a primary
care rare disease case ﬁnding tool, into a UK NHS population. Rare
disease diagnosis is a key priority of the UK Rare Disease
Framework.
Methods: A UK primary care locality with 68,705 patients was
examined. MendelScan encodes diagnostic/screening criteria for
multiple rare diseases, mapping clinical terms to appropriate
SNOMED CT codes (UK primary care standardised clinicalterminology) to create digital algorithms. These algorithms wereapplied to a pseudo-anonymised structured data extract of the
electronic health records (EHRs) in this locality to “ﬂag”‘at risk
patients who may require further evaluation. All ﬂagged patients
then underwent internal clinical review; for those that passed, areport was returned to their GPs.
Results: 55 of 76 disease criteria ﬂagged at least one
patient.227 (0.33% of the total population) patients were ﬂagged;
18 were already diagnosed for the disease.75/227 (33%) passed
our internal review. 36 reports were returned to the GP. Feedback
is currently available for 28/36:
Reasonable
possible
diagnosis
(Advanced for
investigation)Diagnosis
has
already
been
excludedThere is a
clear
alternative
aetiologyDoes
not
appear
to be
accuratePatient
no
longer at
the
practice
#o f
patients
EHR96 1 0 2 1
Conclusions: This pilot demonstrates that implementation of
such a toolis feasible at a population level with promisingfeedback from service users. The tool identi ﬁed credible cases,
subsequently referred for further investigation. Future work
includes the ongoing follow up of ﬂagged cases to ascertain if a
ﬁnal diagnosis is reached, and ongoing iterative performance-
based validation of diagnostic algorithms.
W. Evans: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Mendelian Ltd. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau,symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Takeda, Intrabio. O.
Buendia: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelian
Ltd.C. Toal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Mendelian
Ltd.P. Ravichandran: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Mendelian Ltd. L. Menzies: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Mendelian Ltd.
P15.041.A Acoustic Droplet Ejection of Aqueous Solutions
from an Acoustic Tube - Enabling qPCR
Maria Savino
Beckman Coulter France SAS, Villepinte, France.
Acoustic droplet ejection (ADE) is a ﬂuid dispensing technology,
whereby high-frequency sound waves are focused on the surface
of aﬂuid to eject nano- and picoliter volumes with high accuracy
and precision. We acoustically transferred 500 nL of gDNA (0.78 to100 ng/ μL) using an Echo Quali ﬁed Acoustic Tube and an Echo
655T into a qPCR plate. The achieved average accuracy and
precision Coef ﬁcient of Variation (CV) values for transfers were
measured to be <5%. This performance has enabled us to performa quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction gene expres-
sion assay build using the housekeeping gene, ß-actin. Assay
Work ﬂow•gDNA was sheared using a Covaris g-TUBE into 8kb
fragment sizes. •Fragmented 8kb gDNA was used to generate an
8-point 2-fold standard curve. •100 ng/ μL, 50 ng/ μL, 25 ng/ μL, 12.5
ng/μL, 6.25 ng/ μL, 3.13 ng/ μL, 1.56 ng/ μL, 0.78 ng/ μL AnEcho
Quali ﬁed Acoustic Tube was ﬁlled with 50 μL of each standardcurve dilution point. •0.5μL gDNA was transferred using an Echo
655T to a 9.5 μL qPCR reaction. −32 replicates per each standard
curve dilution point •
0.5μL gDNA was transferred using a hand
held pipette (P2) to a 9.5 μL qPCR reaction as an experimental
control. •gDNA was ampli ﬁed using housekeeping gene, β-actin.
Conclusions •We present a new work ﬂow to transfer sheared
gDNA using Echo liquid handling technology. •The gDNA was
transferred from Echo quali ﬁed tubes with comparable results to
traditionalmethods. •We can further miniaturize the assay as the
Echo 655T can accurately, precisely andreproducibly transfer 2.5
nL drops.
M. Savino: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Beckman Coulter France SAS.
P15.042.B Biomek i7 Hybrid Automated Workstation Enables
Automation of the Promega GoTaq Probe 2- Step RT-qPCR
System
Bhagya Wijayawardena, Michael Hayes
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) is
widely used for quantifying the amount of a speci ﬁc RNA
sequence in a sample. This method has proven extremely useful
in a variety of work ﬂows, including gene expression quanti ﬁcation
and the diagnosis of infectious diseases, such as RNA viruses.Laboratory automation offers many advantages over manually
preparing RT-qPCR assay plates, such as increased throughput and
minimized likelihood of user-introduced error.
Materials and Methods: Here we describe automation of the
Promega GoTaq Probe 2-Step RT-qPCR work ﬂow using a Biomek
Hybrid Automated Workstation.
Results: The automated method performed equivalently to
manually performed assays, as 1 ng RNA input produced cycle
threshold (CT) values of 21.60 ± 0.06 and 21.68 ± 0.08 for manual
and automated methods, respectively. Additionally, the auto-mated method maintained the wide dynamic range of the GoTaqkit. RNA input could be accurately quantitated over the entire
range of inputs tested, from 10 ng to 3 pg, and when analyzed
with linear regression, an R2 value of 0.9986 was observed.
Conclusions: Together the data presented here shows that the
Biomek i7 Hybrid Automated Workstation can automate the RT-
qPCR work ﬂow, providing high quality results, while reducing user
hands-on time and the possibility of user-introduced error.
B. Wijayawardena: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Beckman Coulter Life Sciences. M. Hayes: None.
P15.043.C Enzymatic DNA Synthesis (EDS) enables decentra-
lized and same-day access to DNA oligos critical for the study
and detection of SARS-CoV-2
Benoit Derrien
1, Chew Yee Ngan2, Rahul Maurya2, Sophie Romero1,
Nadège Tardieu1, Henri Lachaize1, Maëllys Kevin1, Maryke Appel1,
Margarita L. Martinez-Fierro3, Idalia Garza-Veloz3, Alba S. H.
Centeno-Ramirez4, Xavier Godron1, Chia-Lin Wei2
1DNA Script, LE KREMLIN BICETRE, France,2The Jackson Laboratory
for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA,3Autonomous University
of Zacatecas, Zacatecas, Mexico,4Zacatecas State Health Services,
Zacatecas, Mexico.
The COVID-19 pandemic precipitated one of the most concen-
trated scienti ﬁc efforts ever focused on the epidemiology,
genomics, biochemistry and evolution of a single pathogen, andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
465
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608on the development of diagnostic tests, treatments and vaccines.
One unforeseen consequence of this effort was a global bottle-
neck in synthetic DNA supply, which currently relies on highly
centralized phosphoramidite-based production and third-partylogistics.
We have developed a novel enzymatic DNA synthesis (EDS)
technology, which utilizes a highly engineered TdT enzyme,
reversibly terminated nucleotides and a solid support. Thisenables same-day, on-demand DNA production with a benchtop“printer ”— in a standard laboratory environment, requiring no
specialized technical skills.
We have used the SYNTAX ™EDS System to produce oligos for
SARS-CoV-2 LAMP, NGS and FISH assays. In this study, we reporton the performance of EDS primers in the ARTIC network ’s hCoV-
19 amplicon sequencing protocol ( https://artic.network/ncov-
2019 ). Libraries were prepared from two synthetic RNA control
templates and ﬁve clinical samples with RT-qPCR Cq values
ranging between 18.5 and 30.9. Comparable coverage (depth and
uniformity) and 100% concordant SNP calling results wereobtained with EDS primers and those obtained from commercialsuppliers. Phylogenetic analysis of clinical isolates was performed
in the context of >200 SARS-CoV-2 sequences submitted to public
databases between December 2019 and June 2020.
Our study demonstrates that the EDS technology is mature
enough to support genomics and life science applications, and
holds the promise to revolutionize access to synthetic DNA —
particularly in settings where in-house synthesis and fast iterationtranslates to tangible advantages.
B. Derrien: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA
Script. C. Ngan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; The
Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine. R. Maurya: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; The Jackson Laboratory for
Genomic Medicine. S. Romero: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. N. Tardieu: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. H. Lachaize: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. M. Kevin: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. M. Appel: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. M.L. Martinez-Fierro: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Autonomous University
of Zacatecas. I. Garza-Veloz: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Autonomous University of Zacatecas. A.S.H. Centeno-
Ramirez: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Zacatecas
State Health Services. X. Godron: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; DNA Script. C. Wei: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine.
P15.044.D A fully automated work ﬂow for SARS-CoV2 RNA
detection
Jethary Rader1, Kinnari Watson1,Han Wei2
1Opentrons Labworks Inc, Brooklyn, NY, USA,2Beckman Coulter Life
Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Introduction: Viral pandemics present a signi ﬁcant threat to
public health worldwide due to their vast and rapid spread ofinfection. The current outbreak of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) hashighlighted a critical need to support high-throughput RNA
detection. Here we demonstrate a fully automated work ﬂow for
SARS-CoV2 RNA detection with minimum manual processingtimes and provide users a robust, reproducible analysis solution
during an outbreak.
Methods: Synthetic nasal matrix was spiked in with different
concentrations of heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2, and RNA wasextracted using RNAdvance Viral kit on the Opentrons platform.
Limit of detection (LoD) was quanti ﬁed by RT-qPCR. In order tovalidate the RNA extracted with Opentrons can be sequenced, the
viral RNA sequence was aligned to a known SARS-CoV-2 sequence.
Results: We observed that using the automated work ﬂow, the
LoD is 1 copy/uL for SARS-CoV-2 with a mean Ct 36. There is 100%detection for all the samples (N =20) that spiked-in 1 copy/uL
heat-inactivated virus. The alignment showed the samples to be
very similar amongst each other and are similar when aligned to
the Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 strain (2019-nCoV/USA-WA1/2020). Thecoverage is high among all the tested samples. The automatedwork ﬂow can accommodate sample numbers from 8 to 96. To run
96 samples, about2.5 hours is needed with only 40 mins hands-on
time, and each sample requires 10 tips.
Conclusions: In this proof of principle study, we demonstrate a
robust and reliable automation work ﬂow for viral RNA detection.
J. Rader: None. K. Watson: None. H. Wei: None.
P15.045.A Development of a novel, instrument-free, single-
cell RNA sequencing technology (PIPseq) and its applicationto drug pathway discovery in lung cancer
Iain Clark
1, Christopher D ’Amato2, Ahmad Osman2, Sruti Pandey2,Y i
Xue2, Aaron May-Zhang2, Robert Meltzer2, Sepehr Kiani2,Kristina
Fontanez2, Adam Abate3
1UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA,2Fluent BioSciences, Watertown, MA,
USA,3University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA.
Introduction: Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has
enabled unprecedented insight into the biology of individualcells across a broad range of discovery and disease -relevantapplications. Traditional scRNA-Seq work ﬂows have included
single cell sorting into wells, co-capture of cells with barcoded
beads using micro ﬂuidics, or in-cell combinatorial indexing. Fluent
BioSciences has developed Pre-templated Instant Partitions (PIPs)
to simultaneously segregate complex cell mixtures into partitions
with barcoded template particles that can be easily processed forscRNA-Seq (PIPseq) without the need for complex instrumentationor micro ﬂuidic consumables. Here, we use PIPseq to bioinforma-
tically discriminate the transcriptomes of Ge ﬁtinib resistant and
sensitive cell lines after drug treatment.
Materials and Methods: To evaluate tyrosine kinase inhibitor
effects on adenocarcinoma cellular transcriptomics, PC9 cells,
H1975 cells, or a mixed population (9:1) of PC9 and H1975, cells
were treated with Ge ﬁtinib and processed with PIPseq. UMAP
analyses of the transcriptome were performed and overlapped for
each experiment.
Results: We demonstrate drug-treatment dependent gene
expression changes in lung adenocarcinoma cells treated withthe tyrosine kinase inhibitor Ge ﬁtinib. The resulting cell expression
proﬁles clearly segregate by treatment condition in UMAP
projections indicating PIPseq ’s ability to faithfully detect responses
to drug exposure.
Conclusion: These studies establish the ef ﬁcacy of PIPseq for
single-cell transcriptomic analysis across multiple drug treatment
conditions. The simple PIPseq work ﬂow is optimized for compar-
ing multiple sample treatment conditions in a single controlledexperiment. With minimal upfront cost of implementation, PIPseq
is easily implemented in any molecular research lab, and
democratizes the accessibility of scRNA-Seq across manyapplications.
I. Clark: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);Modest; Fluent BioSciences. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;Fluent BioSciences. C. D ’Amato: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. A. Osman: A. Employment (full orAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
466
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. S. Pandey: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. Y. Xue: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. A.
May-Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent
BioSciences. R. Meltzer: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Fluent
BioSciences. S. Kiani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Fluent BioSciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent
BioSciences. K. Fontanez: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; FluentBioSciences. A. Abate: C. Other Research Support (supplies,
equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest;
Fluent BioSciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioS-
ciences. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; Fluent
BioSciences.
P15.046.B Application of a novel instrument-free and
micro ﬂuidics-free single-cell analysis technology (PIPseq) that
is well suited for viral applications in resource constrainedlaboratories
Jacquelyn Turcinovic
1, John Connor1, Aaron May-Zhang2, Ahmad
Osman2,Robert Meltzer2, Sepehr Kiani2, Kristina Fontanez2
1Boston University, Boston, MA, USA,2Fluent BioSciences, Watertown,
MA, USA.
Introduction: Single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has made
profound impacts in the study of cellular and molecular diversity
in complex tissues. In the study of virology, this resolution ofsingle-cell transcriptional changes in response to viral infection
provides valuable insight into the mechanisms of infection and
host response.
Materials and Methods: Current scRNA-Seq methods are not
easily adopted in the virology lab as they are expensive, require
complex instrumentation and consumables, and hence can be
challenging to implement in a laboratory with limited resourcesand accessibility. Fluent BioSciences has developed a novelscRNA-Seq approach with Pre-templated Instant partitions (PIP-
seq) that enables the analysis of thousands of cells without
requiring complex instrumentation and consumables. The smallformat and convenient work ﬂow, with the lack of instrumentation,
allows PIPseq to be easily implemented in high-containment
laboratories.
Results: Using a GFP-expressing control virus, we have
demonstrated simultaneous capture and barcoding of viral and
cellular transcriptomes, identi ﬁed cellular gene expression shifts in
response to viral infection, and identi ﬁed gene expression
responses in non-infected cells from low MOI infected samplescompared to mock controls. Furthermore, we have demonstrated
that the PIPseq protocol is effective at inactivating residual virus in
sequencing library samples, thus enabling convenient samplepost-processing outside of the virology laboratory.
Conclusion: PIPseq is an effective method to study viral-host
interactions at a single-cell resolution. The ongoing COVID-19
pandemic exempli ﬁes the need for new tools and methods to
elucidate the mechanisms of viral infection, pathogen-host
responses, and diversity in cellular responses to infection.
J. Turcinovic: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment,
receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; FluentBioSciences. J. Connor: C. Other Research Support (supplies,equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest;
Fluent BioSciences. A. May-Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. A. Osman: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. R. Meltzer: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Fluent BioSciences. S. Kiani: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences. K. Fontanez:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fluent BioSciences.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Modest; Fluent BioSciences.
P15.047.C Simultaneous pro ﬁling of human TCR and BCR
rearrangements at the DNA level
Alexander Y. Komkov
1,2, Anna Miroshnichenkova2,1, Anastasia
Smirnova1,3, Valeria Tkachenko1,4, Yuri Lebedev1, Dmitry Chudakov1,
Ilgar Mamedov1,2
1Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Dmitry
Rogachev National Medical Research Center Of Pediatric Hematol-
ogy, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation,
3Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russian
Federation,4Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Immune receptors repertoire (TCR/BCR) pro ﬁling is
a powerful source of basic and applied insights in immunoge-netics. The most sensitive and reliable method for TCR/BCR
proﬁling is DNA based target multiplex PCR in combination with
high-throughput sequencing. The most existing multiplex-basedmethods enable to analyze TRA, TRB, TRD, TRG, IGH, IGK and IGL
loci but only separately. It substantially limits the applicability of
this approach for the analysis of samples with restricted targetDNA amounts. Here we resolve this issue by proposing the ﬁrst
technology for joint detection of all TCR/BCR rearrangements in a
single multiplex PCR reaction.
Material and methods: Sequences of TCR/BCR V, D and
J-genes for primers design were downloaded from IMGT database.Test samples of genomic DNA were extracted from PBMC of
healthy volunteers. Each mixed TCR/BCR repertoire was obtained
by multiplex PCR with subsequent Illumina sequencing and dataanalysis using MiXCR software.
Results : Multiplex primers were designed using k-mer
approach. Artifacts were removed by primers redesign after eachiteration of library sequencing and analysis. Primer concentrationsin the resulting set were normalized using iROAR software. The
ﬁnal multiplex system (exclusively distributed by MiLaboratory)
was successfully tested on 20 DNA samples from PBMC with seriesdilutions: 50000, 5000, 500 and 50 genome equivalents.
Conclusion : The developed system decreases the labor
intensity of TCR/BCR analysis and it is indispensable for TCR/BCR
proﬁling of small populations of T/B lymphocytes, tumor in ﬁltrated
lymphocytes and residual leukemic cells. This work was supportedby RSF grant №20-75-10091 and RFBR grant №20-015-00462.
A.Y. Komkov: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grantsalready received); Signi ﬁcant; Principal investigator RSF grant
№20-75-10091, RFBR grant №20-015-00462. A. Miroshnichen-
kova: None. A. Smirnova: None. V. Tkachenko: None. Y.
Lebedev: None. D. Chudakov: None. I. Mamedov: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
467
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P15.048.D Semi-targeted sequencing of fusion transcripts in
prostate cancer
Ugne Drazdauskiene1, Zana Kapustina1,2, Justina Medziune1,3,
Monika Gasiuniene1, Ruta Sindikeviciene1, Varvara Dubovskaja1,
Rasa Sabaliauskaite4, Arvydas Lubys1
1Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Institute of
Biosciences, Life Sciences Center, Vil nius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
3Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Geosciences, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania,4National Cancer Institute, Vilnius,
Lithuania.
Introduction: Chromosomal rearrangements are the most common
genetic changes in cancer genomes and they often lead to the
formation of gene fusions whic h may be transcribed into fusion
transcripts. Current detection methods rely on PCR- or hybridization-based techniques that do not allow the detection of novel fusion
breakpoints. To overcome thes e challenges, we developed a new
rapid and accurate identi ﬁcation method, termed fusion sequencing
via terminator-assisted synthesi s (FTAS-seq), for high-throughput
gene fusion pro ﬁling.
Materials and Methods: We developed oligonucleotide-
tethered dideoxynucleotides (OTDDNs) to capture unknownsequences downstream of the target site. Modi ﬁed OTDDNs,
upon random incorporation during primer extension reaction,
create DNA fragments of a desired average length, withsimultaneous labeling of a corresponding DNA strand withsequencing adapter. Oligonucleotide modi ﬁcation then serves as
a priming site for subsequent synthesis of cDNA strand. We
prepared semi-targeted RNA-seq libraries from prostate cancercell line RNA and clinical samples and sequenced them.
Results: We applied FTAS-seq to study TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
transcripts in prostate cancer cell line NCI-H660 to validate the
approach. Also, we applied the FTAS-seq to evaluate TMPRSS2-ERG
expression levels and variety in clinical samples.
Conclusions: Additionally, this method can be used to analyze
genomic rearrangements, such as ALK gene fusions in non-small
cell lung cancer specimens. FTAS-seq could be successfullyapplied for the known and novel breakpoints detection. It is a
good alternative to amplicon sequencing as it has greater
discovery potential at the same level of cost-effectiveness.
U. Drazdauskiene: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB. Z. Kapustina: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Modest; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB. J.
Medziune: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Thermo
Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB. M. Gasiuniene: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB. R.
Sindikeviciene: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB. V. Dubovskaja: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics
UAB. R. Sabaliauskaite: None. A. Lubys: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Baltics UAB.
P15.049.A Integration of genomics and transcriptomics to
identify DNA damage defects in PID patients prone to cancer
Lynn Backers
1,2,3, Bram Parton1,2,3, Mattias Van Heetvelde1,2,3,
Marieke De Bruyne1,2, Kim De Leeneer1,2,3, Anne Vral4, Filomeen
Haerynck5, Kathleen B. M. Claes1,2,3
1Ghent University, Department of Biomo lecular Medicine, Gent, Belgium,
2Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium,3Cancer Research
Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium,4Ghent University, Department of
Human Structure and Repair, Gent, Belgium,5Ghent University,
Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Gent, Belgium.Introduction: Primary immunode ﬁciencies (PIDs) are a heteroge-
neous group of disorders caused by genetically determined defects
of the immune system, predisposin g to life-threatening complica-
tions such as severe and recurrent infections, auto-immunity andmalignancies. A subset of PIDs is caused by pathogenic germline
variants in DNA repair genes. As a consequence these patients are
radiosensitive and present with increased cancer risk. Since PIDpatients are exposed to radiation for several reasons (bone marrow
transplantation, radiotherapy , diagnostic imaging), identi ﬁcation of
the genetic defect is important for risk strati ﬁcation and improved
therapeutic management. As in only 5-20% of the patientspathogenic variants are found in currently known PID genes, we
hypothesize that defects in additional DNA damage response genes
may be involved in PID patients prone to malignancies.
Materials and Methods: WES data is analyzed by a DNA
damage response panel consisting of +/- 1230 genes. Extensive
ﬁltering results in a long list of variants of unknown clinical
signi ﬁcance (VUS). To facilitate variant prioritization we are
complementing WES with transcriptomics on RNA extracted fromshort term lymphocyte cultures. We search for expression and
splicing outliers in the transcriptome.
Results: Using this approach we identi ﬁed a homozygous
intronic variant, outside the canonical splice sites, in a DNA repairgene not previously linked to PID. RNA-seq revealed out-of-frame
exon skipping. Further functional validations to establish a link
with the phenotype are ongoing.
Conclusions: These ﬁrstﬁndings encourage the implementa-
tion of transcriptomics in the workup of PID patients to improve
diagnosis and patient management.
Grant/Award Number: FWOTBM2018000102L. Backers: None. B. Parton: None. M. Van Heetvelde: None.
M. De Bruyne: None. K. De Leeneer: None. A. Vral: None. F.
Haerynck: None. K.B.M. Claes: None.
P15.050.B Unraveling the genetic thread of rare disorders by
exome sequencing
Petroula Gerasimou
1, Andri Miltiadous1, Ioannis Kyprianou1,
Jianxiang Chi1, Violeta Anastasiadou2, George Tanteles3, Paul
Costeas1
1Karaiskakio Foundation, Nicosia, Cyprus,2Department of Clinical
Genetics, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus,
3Department of Clinical Genetics, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Over the last few years, Next Generation Sequencing has become an
essential tool in laboratory practice due to its high throughput,analytic accuracy, and potential c ost-effectiveness. Exome sequen-
cing (ES) has revolutionized dia gnostic procedures in medical
genetics. Previous diagnostic approaches, involved a combinationof cytogenetic and metabolic methods as well as targeted genesequencing with a success rate of identifying the genetic cause in
around 20-30% of undiagnosed patients. This percentage of
diagnostic yield in undiagnosed c ases rises to 25-50% with ES. In
addition, the true impact of ES is evident from the opportunity to endpatient ’s diagnosis anxiety, offer family prognosis or timely diagnosis
and family planning, proper care protocols, and psychological and
emotional well-being. In collaboration with medical geneticists andoncologists, the molecular laborato ry of Karaiskakio Foundation (KF),
offers whole exome sequencing (ISO15980 accredited since 2019)
using SureSelect Human All Exon V7 (Agilent CA, USA) to patientswith hereditary cancer or rare syndrome suspicion that wereotherwise molecularly undiagnosed. With this latest technology in
molecular diagnostics, KF have assisted in the molecularly diagnosisAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
468
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608of more than 150 patients with genetic diseases to date, 99 of whom
would not have had this opportuni ty through other conventional
methods. 51 cases have been tested and diagnosed for Cancer
Diseases, Overgrowth syndromes and Rasopathies and Pigmentarydisorders, while another 40 have been con ﬁrmed for rare genetic
syndromes such as Chanarin Dor fmann; Central core disease;
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 29; Dehydrated hereditary stomatocy-
tosis; Cornelia De Lange; Joubert S yndrome 23; Ehlers-Danlos, among
other.
P. Gerasimou: None. A. Miltiadous: None. I. Kyprianou: None.
J. Chi: None. V. Anastasiadou: None. G. Tanteles: None. P.
Costeas: None.
P15.051.C Whole genome sequencing in apparently balanced
de novo chromosomal translocations in 10 patients withmalformations and/or intellectual disability
Irene Valenzuela Palafoll
1, Alejandro Romera-Lopez2, Anna M.
Cueto-Gonzalez1, Alfonso Andujar3, Dan Diego4, Sonia Santillan5,
Guillermo Marco6, Christian Moya7, elena garcia-arumi1, Ivon cusco1,
Eduardo F Tizzano1
1Hospital Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,2Sistemas Genómicos
-Ascires, Valencia, Spain,3Sistemas genómicos, valencia, Spain,
4sistemas genómicos, Valencia, Spain,5Sistemas genómicos, Valen-
cia, Spain,6Sistemas Genómicos, Valencia, Spain,7Sistemas genó-
micos- Ascires, Valecia, Spain.
Balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCA) are a class of
structural variation involving rearrangement of chromosomeorganization without a concomitant large gain or loss of DNA. Aﬁve-fold increase in the prevalence of karyotype BCAs has been
reported among subjects with neurodevelopmental disorders.
Genome technologies can ef ﬁciently reveal BCA breakpoints at
nucleotide resolution; however, a limited number of BCAs have
been evaluated to date. We used whole genome sequencing
(WGS) to characterize breakpoints of BCAs at the molecular levelin 10 patients with intellectual disability and/or congenitalanomalies. Breakpoints were characterised by a paired-end low
depth WGS and were successfully mapped in all of them. In four
cases mapping of breakpoints clearly identi ﬁed the molecular
cause of the phenotype. Two of these patients had a disruption ofregulatory elements: one in MEF2C TAD and the other in SOX9 .I n
the remaining two patients one had an intragenic disruption of
GRIN2B and the other had intragenic disruption of EHMT1 . Another
patient without prior NGS studies showed a SNV[X1] in ANKRD11
that was identi ﬁed as responsible of the phenotype. In the
remaining ﬁve patients even though their breakpoints were
successfully mapped, no molecular explanation was found toexplain their respective phenotypes. In our experience, WGS
allowed precisely mapping breakpoints in our patients, constitut-
ing an unparalleled opportunity to improve our understanding ofgenes involved in genetically complex disorders. Characterizationof BCAs at nucleotide resolution offers new insights into their
mechanisms of formation and a yield of potentially novel genes
associated with human development
I. Valenzuela Palafoll: None. A. Romera-Lopez: None. A.M.
Cueto-Gonzalez: None. A. Andujar: None. D. Diego: None. S.
Santillan: None. G. Marco: None. C. Moya: None. E. garcia-
arumi: None. I. cusco: None. E. Tizzano: None.
P16 Diagnostic Improvements and Quality Control
P16.001.D Fusion gene detection by RNA-Seq complements
AML diagnostics and identi ﬁes recurring NRIP1-MIR99AHG
rearrangementsPaul Kerbs
1,2,3, Sebastian Vosberg1,2,3, Stefan Krebs4, Alexander
Graf4, Helmut Blum4, Anja Swoboda1, Aarif M. Nazeer Batcha5, Ulrich
Mansmann5, Dirk Metzler6, Caroline A. Heckman7, Tobias Herold1,2,3,
Philipp A. Greif1,2,3
1Department of Medicine III, University Hospital, LMU Munich,
Munich, Germany,2German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site
Munich, Munich, Germany,3German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Munich, Germany,4Laboratory for Functional Genome
Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany,
5Department of Medical Data Processing, Biometry and Epidemiol-
ogy, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany,6Division of Evolutionary
Biology, Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, Planegg-Martinsried,Germany,7Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Identi ﬁcation of fusion genes in clinical routine is mostly based on
cytogenetics and targeted molecular genetics, such as metaphase
karyotyping, FISH and RT-PCR. However, sequencing technologies
like RNA-seq are becoming more important in clinical routine. Toevaluate the performance of fusion gene detection by RNA-seqcompared to standard diagnostic techniques, we analyzed 806
RNA-seq samples from AML patients using two state-of-the-art
software tools, namely Arriba and FusionCatcher. RNA-seqdetected 90% of fusion events that were reported by routine
with high evidence, while samples in which RNA-seq failed to
detect fusion genes had overall lower and inhomogeneoussequence coverage. Based on properties of known and unknownfusion events, we developed a work ﬂow with integrated ﬁltering
strategies for the identi ﬁcation of robust fusion gene candidates
by RNA-seq. Thereby, we detected known recurrent fusion eventsin 26 cases that were not reported by routine. Moreover, weidenti ﬁed 157 novel robust fusion gene candidates. Finally, we
detected the novel recurrent fusion gene NRIP1 -MIR99AHG
resulting from inv(21)(q11.2;q21.1) in nine patients (1.1%) andLTN1 -MX1 resulting from inv(21)(q21.3;q22.3) in two patients
(0.25%). We demonstrated that NRIP1 -MIR99AHG results in over-
expression of the 3 ’region of MIR99AHG and the disruption of the
tricistronic miRNA cluster miR-99a/let-7c/miR-125b-2. Interestingly,upregulation of MIR99AHG and deregulation of the miRNA cluster,
residing in the MIR99AHG locus, are known mechanism of
leukemogenesis in acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. Our ﬁndings
demonstrate that RNA-seq has a strong potential to improve thesystematic detection of fusion genes in clinical applications and
provides a valuable tool for fusion gene discovery.
P. Kerbs: None. S. Vosberg: None. S. Krebs: None. A. Graf:
None. H. Blum: None. A. Swoboda: None. A.M. Nazeer Batcha:
None. U. Mansmann: None. D. Metzler: None. C.A. Heckman:
None. T. Herold: None. P.A. Greif: None.
P16.002.A The effect of the high resolution chromosomal
microarray analysis on diagnosis of single gene disorders
Ahmet Cevdet Ceylan
1,2, Vahap Topçu2,Esra Habiloglu2, Gülay
Güleç Ceylan1,2, Nur C. Semerci Gündüz1,2
1ANKARA YILDIRIM BEYAZIT UNIVERSITY, Ankara, Turkey,2Ankara
City Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, Turkey.
Introduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis is a ﬁrst-stage test
that is used for the diagnosis of intellectual disability and globaldevelopmental delay. Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) candetect well-known microdeletion syndromes. It also contributes to
the diagnosis of single gene disordersif high resolution array is used.
Methods: Illumina 850k ®chips were used to perform CMA in
2000 affected individual for different clinical reasons at AnkaraCity Hospital in 2019-2020. Data analysis was performed usingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
469
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608BlueFuse Multi 4.5 software. Only changes associated with the
patient ’s phenotype below 500 kb were re-analysed.
Results: 34 pathogenic variants w ere detected out of 2000
patients. 13 of them were homozygous deletion which areJuvenile parkinsonism-2(3),Auto somal recessive(AR) Deafness-2
(2),Rotor(2),AR Spinocerebellar at axia-18, AR Hyper-I gE,Infantile-
onset limb and orofacial dyskinesia, Joubert, Hair-Brain, Pitt-
Hopkinslike syndromes. 19 detected variants were heterozy-gous or hemizygous CNVs ’associated with Marfan(6), Duch-
enne muscular dystrophy(3),L andau-Kleffner(3), Phelan-
McDermid(2), Tuberous sclerosis-2, Hyperekplexia, Langer
mesomelic dysplasia,Growth hormone de ﬁciency, GLUT1 de ﬁ-
ciency syndromes. Two of them were heterozygous duplicationwhich results Simpson-Golabi- Behmel and Xq28 Duplication
Syndromes.
Discussion: CMA is the gold standard method for detecting
CNVs. As higher resolution scanning chips are used, smaller CNVs
can be detected. Although the percentage of diagnosis of CMA
varies according to the disease, different rates between 10-25%have been reported. In our study, we evaluated the pathogenicCNVs below 500 kb and revealed that the 1.7% diagnosed rate
more. Especially, detection of some deletions as homozygous and
diagnosis of DMD before speci ﬁc symptoms reveals the impor-
tance of CMA.
A. Ceylan: None. V. Topçu: None. E. Habiloglu: None. G. Güleç
Ceylan: None. N. Semerci Gündüz: None.
P16.003.B Clinical Genetics Assessment Tool (CGAT): A novel
and simple approach for pediatricians to suspect geneticdisorders
Aitor López-González
1, David Ferri1, Dídac Casas-Alba1, Daniel
Cuadras2, Francesc Palau1, Antonio Martínez-Monseny1
1Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain,2Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: The identi ﬁcation of children with a genetic
disorder is a challenge for pediatricians and clear criteria for
referral to Clinical Genetics Units are still lacking. We aim toelaborate a simple clinical tool to identify patients with a greaterprobability of having a genetic disorder.
Methods: A single-center descriptive and retrospective study
was carried out based on electronic medical records. Patientsunder 18 years of age followed up in our Clinical Genetics Unit
from June 2018 to January 2019 were selected.
Results: From a total of 450 patients, 304 were included. The
variables most associated with diagnosis were: diagnosticorientation in the referral (p =0.001), multiple congenital anoma-
lies (MCA) (p < 0.001), short stature (SS) (p < 0.001), intellectual
disability (ID) (p =0.001), craniofacial dysmorphic features (p =
0.006), ectodermal (p =0.004), onco-hematological (p =0.034),
ophthalmological anomalies (p =0.006) and failure-to-thrive (p =
0.034). A ROC curve was created (AUC 0.73), with 84.4% sensitivity
and 44.7% speci ﬁcity to reach a genetic diagnosis if 2 or more of
these variables were present. ORs of reaching a genetic diagnosisfor patients with SS, ID and MCA were 11.46 (p =0.003); SS and ID
5.57 (p < 0.001); SS and MCA 9.18 (p < 0.001); and ID and MCA
31.67 (p < 0.001).
Conclusions: This is one of the ﬁrst studies exploring the
predictive value of clinical variables on reaching a genetic
diagnosis. The pediatrician ’s knowledge on Clinical Genetics
appears to have a key impact on it. SS, ID and MCA may formthe sides of a triangle constituting a simple clinical genetics
assessment tool (CGAT) for referral to Clinical Genetics Unit.A. López-González: None. D. Ferri: None. D. Casas-Alba:
None. D. Cuadras: None. F. Palau: None. A. Martínez-Monseny:
None.
P16.004.C Copy number variants in a large cohort analysed
with whole-exome sequencing: lessons for genetic diagnosis
Fátima Lopes
1,2, Alexandra M. Lopes1,2, Paulo Silva1,2, Susana
Sousa1,2, Sara Morais1,2, Joana Sá1,2, Ana Filipa Brandão1,2, Ana
Lopes1,2, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1,2, João Parente Freixo1,2, Jorge
Sequeiros1,2, Jorge Oliveira1,2
1CGPP-IBMC –Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
2i3S–Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) enables the simultaneous
analysis of all coding regions of the human genome. AlthoughWES started by targeting primarily the detection of singlenucleotide variants and small insertion/deletions, bioinformatics
tools have been developed to help detecting copy number
variants (CNVs). The aim of this work was to evaluate the ef ﬁcacy
of read depth-based CNV detection in routine diagnostics. We
performed WES in 3,319 consecutive samples (2016 through
2020), referred for genetic testing in a wide variety of diseases.Exomes were captured with Agilent ’s SureSelect Human AllExon
(n=2819) or Twist ’s Human Core Exome Kit (n =500) and
sequenced on Illumina platform HiSeq4000 or NovaSeq. CNVs
detection by read depth-based analysis was performed withVarSeq (Golden Helix). CNVs considered likely to contribute topatients ’phenotype were con ﬁrmed either by qPCR or MLPA.
From 3,319 patients tested, 152 clinically relevant CNVs (36
duplications, 116 deletions) were reported, a diagnostic yield of4.6%. Subdividing by panel or disease group, yield was 7.6% for an
ocular diseases ’panel, 6.8% for neurodevelopment spectrum
disorders, 4.1% with clinical exome, 4.0% with neuroexome, 4.3%for WES trios, 3.3% in neuromuscular diseases, 2.3% in movementdisorders, 2.1% in vascular diseases and 1.8% in neuropathies.The
inclusion of read depth-based CNV detection from NGS data in
routine bioinformatics pipelines is a cost-effective add-on fordiagnostic laboratories. Nevertheless, given the high rate of falsepositives, this strategy requires con ﬁrmation by another metho-
dology of all clinically relevant CNVs detected.
F. Lopes: None. A. M. Lopes: None. P. Silva: None. S. Sousa:
None. S. Morais: None. J. Sá: None. A. Brandão: None. A. Lopes:
None. R. Bastos-Ferreira: None. J. Parente Freixo: None. J.
Sequeiros: None. J. Oliveira: None.
P16.005.D Congenital anomalies and genetic disorders in
neonates and infants: a single-center observational cohortstudy
Abderrahim Marouane
1, Richelle A. C. M. Olde Keizer2, Geert W. J.
Frederix2, Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers1, Willem P. de Boode3, Wendy A. G.
van Zelst-Stams1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Health Sciences
and Primary Care, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands,
3Department of Neonatology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Amalia Children ’s Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Objective: Neonates with genetic disorders or congenital
anomalies (CA) contribute considerably to morbidity and mortalityAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
470
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). In many of these
neonates, an underlying genetic condition is identi ﬁed through-
out life. The objective of this study is to study the prevalence of
genetic disorders in an academic level IV NICU by identifying anddescribing assessed genetic disorders, used genetic testingmethodologies, and both timing of or time to diagnosis.
Study design: This is a retrospective analysis of infants
admitted to the NICU of the Radboud University Medical Centerbetween 1 October 2013 and 31 October 2015. Data werecollected until infants reached at least two years of age.
Results: 13% (194/1,444) of the patients were genetically tested.
Approximately one-third (32%; 4 61/1,444) of our cohort had a CA.
37% (72/194) had a laboratory-con ﬁrmed genetic diagnosis. In 53%
(38/72) the diagnosis was made post-neonatally (median age =209
days) using assays including exome sequencing. 63% (291/461) of
the patients with CA, however, never received genetic testing,despite being clinically similar those who did.
Conclusions: Genetic disorders were suspected in 13% of the
cohort, but only con ﬁrmed in 5%. Most received their genetic
diagnosis in the post-neonatal period. Extrapolation of thediagnostic yield suggests that up to 6% of our cohort may have
remained genetically undiagnosed. Our data show the need to
improve genetic care in the NICU for more inclusive, earlier andfaster genetic diagnosis to enable tailored management.
A. Marouane: None. R.A.C.M. Olde Keizer: None. G.W.J.
Frederix: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. W.P. de Boode: None. W.
A.G. van Zelst-Stams: None.
P16.006.A Clinical impact in 120 undiagnosed cases of
extending single proband WES to trio analysis
Monica Martinez-Garcia
1, Gema Gordo1, Julia Gonzalez-Rincon1,
Celia Rodriguez-Solera1, Irene Diez1, Angel Carro1, Iker Sanchez-
Navarro1, Eva Barroso1, Guillermo Martin-Serrano1, Marta Hervas1,
Andrea Fuente-Revenga1, Pablo Solar1, Marta Carcajona1, Noelia
Sánchez-Bolivar1, David Rodriguez1, Miguel Angel Grillo1, Rocio
Jadraque2, Carmen Carrascosa3, Ana Fontalba4, Asuncion Villa-
nueva5, Maria Dolores Miramar6, Ana Rodriguez-Valle6, Silvia
Izquierdo6, Ricardo Gonzalez-Tarancon6, Paolo Maietta1, Sara
Alvarez1
1Unidad de secuenciación, NIMGenetics S.L., Madrid, Spain, Madrid,
Spain,2Hospital General Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain,
3Complejo Hospitalario Unviersitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain,
4Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain,
5Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain,6Hospital
Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
Background: Exome trio analysis is an effective strategy to
identify causal variants responsible for rare genetic disorders. The
goal of this study was to identify the effectiveness of a trio analysisto establish the genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with aprevious whole exome sequencing analysis (WES).
Methods: A cohort of 120 probands, with a median age of 5 y.o,
primarily studied by targeted or clinical exome, and most of themwithout a clear clinical diagnosis (mainly, neurodevelopmental
disorders) was extended to trio analysis. WES was performed using
Twist Bioscience technology with NovaSeq 6000 System. Sequen-cing reads were analyzed using DRAGEN BioIT Platform and an in-house pipeline.
Results: The molecular diagnosis was obtained in over 30% of
the extended studies. Depending on the initial analysis, a newdiagnostic variant was identi ﬁed, or the segregation pattern
pointed to a previously identi ﬁed variant. These genomic changes
were mainly de novo missense novel variants (42%), and most of
them were in genes with a known OMIM association. Manyvariants with mild overlapping phenotype were dismissed.Chromosomes 1 and X were the most representative ones
presenting causal variants located in genes involved in cell
differentiation, chromatin remodeling and DNA replication.
Conclusion: The extension of single proband WES to trio
analysis, HPOs prioritization, and recurrent updating of databasesare essential to establish the de ﬁnite diagnosis by discriminating
causal variants among overlapping pathologies, discovering new
genes, and changing variants categorization. We show theadvantages of using a stepwise approach to WES diagnosis inclinical institutions.
M. Martinez-Garcia: None. G. Gordo: None. J. Gonzalez-
Rincon: None. C. Rodriguez-Solera: None. I. Diez: None. A.
Carro: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: None. E. Barroso: None. G.
Martin-Serrano: None. M. Hervas: None. A. Fuente-Revenga:
None. P. Solar: None. M. Carcajona: None. N. Sánchez-Bolivar:
None. D. Rodriguez: None. M. Grillo: None. R. Jadraque: None. C.
Carrascosa: None. A. Fontalba: None. A. Villanueva: None. M.
Miramar: None. A. Rodriguez-Valle: None. S. Izquierdo: None. R.
Gonzalez-Tarancon: None. P. Maietta: None. S. Alvarez: None.
P16.007.B WINGS: Wales Infants and ChildreNs Genome
Service. Rapid and accurate clinical analysis of variants fromWhole Genome Sequencing assays using a user friendly webapplication
Joseph Halstead
All Wales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Introduction: In 2020 the All Wales Medical Genomics Service
(AWMGS) implemented a rapid Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)service for critically ill children. The original in house bioinfor-
matics solution for ﬁltering variants had several limitations. 1) The
results were displayed in a text ﬁ
le which limited the annotations
which that could be displayed. 2) Scientists analysing the case
could not modify ﬁltering parameters to investigate cases in more
detail. 3) Applying custom virtual gene panels required trainedbioinformaticians. 4) There was no method for calculating inhouse variant frequency. To overcome these limitations AWMGS
has developed a web application for analysing WGS cases.
Methods: The application has been developed using a
combination of the Python based web framework Django andthe SQL database Postgres. The software is accessible to users via
a modern web browser. WGS Trios from 11 previous cases were
uploaded to the software and the results analysed.
Results: The web application successfully replicated the results
from the previous cases. The software was able to process each
case in less than 15 minutes when running on a desktopcomputer. The software successfully identi ﬁed variants which
occurred in separate samples helping to identify assay speci ﬁc
sequencing artefacts. Users were able to rapidly investigate the
variants in speci ﬁc genes without needing bioinformatics support.
Discussion: The new web application gives scientists analysing
WGS cases greater ﬂexibility whilst maintaining the sensitivity of
the original bioinformatics solutions. Future work will integrate
other AWMGS NGS assays into the software.
J. Halstead: None.
P16.009.D Offering exome-wide NGS analysis within a
diagnostic time-frame: promise or pitfall
Kristin M. Abbott
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
471
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Whole exome sequencing with panels involving only genes with
known disease interactions are routinely applied in the diagnostic
testing. Exome-wide genetic analyses, considering all protein coding
genes, could increase diagnostic yield, but at the cost of turn-aroundtimes. Still, the relatively high number of unsolved cases afterroutine NGS panel diagnostics prompted us to develop a structured
analysis approach to allow exome-wide analysis within a diagnostic
time-frame. Our analysis strategy is based on 4 key principles: 1) it isonly offered as follow-up NGS testing after WES-based gene paneldiagnostics is negative, 2) it is offered as a trio-analysis with healthy
parents, 3) a speci ﬁc variant/gene ﬁlter strategy based on
inheritance is used and 4) a consequent analysis strategy withstepwise decision points and scheduled consultation moments isalso used. We have completed approximately 340 exome-wide
analyses over the last three years, averaging approximately 10 cases
per month with a TAT of 42 days. Thirty percent of our unsolvedcases receive a result based on literature, animal studies and other
information. Results include relevant genes outside the previously
requested panels, and new relevant information not available duringthe original analysis. New candidate genes have also been identi ﬁed.
Future follow-up of literature and databases will determine whether
these candidate genes prove to be valid, increasing diagnostic yield
even more. In conclusion, with our systematic approach, weachieved higher diagnostic yield within a 42 day TAT, thus showingthat exome wide screening is feasible for implementation in a
diagnostic setting.
K.M. Abbott: None.
P16.010.A Belgian guidelines for the frequency of participation
of the Medical Centers of Human Genetics to External QualityAssessment schemes for analyses focused on rare diseases
josephine lantoine
1, Anne Brysse2, Vinciane Dideberg2, Kathleen B.
M. Claes3,S oﬁe Symoens3, Wim Coucke1, Valérie Benoit4, Sonia
Rombout4, Martine De Rycke5, Sara Seneca5, Lut Van Laer6, Wim
Wuyts6, Anniek Corveleyn7, Kris Van Den Bogaert7, Catherine
Rydlewski8, Françoise Wilkin8, Marie Ravoet9, Elodie Fastré9, Arnaud
Capron1, Nathalie M. Vandevelde1
1Department of Quality of Laboratories, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium,
2Center of Human Genetics, CHU of Liege, University of Liege, Liège,
Belgium,3Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium,4Center of Human Genetics, Institut de Pathologie et de
Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium,5Center for Medical Genetics, Universitair
Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium,6Center
of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital and University of
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium,7Center for Human Genetics, University
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,8Center of Human Genetics, Hôpital
Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Anderlecht, Belgium,9Center for
Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholi-
que de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
Aims: The participation to external quality assessments (EQAs) is
required for the ISO15189 accreditation of the Belgian Medical
Centers of Human Genetics. However, no directives on the minimal
frequency of participation to genetic EQAs exist and Europeanrecommendations in this ﬁeld are heterogeneous. This potentially
impacts healthcare quality.
Method: In order to address this lack, genetic EQAs offered by
accredited providers and focused on analyses used for rarediseases ’diagnosis were analyzed by a working group in order to
propose minimal frequencies of participation to EQA and
recommendations for dealing with poor performances andchange management.Results: Our guidelines offer a decisional algorithm built on 3
key principles: (i) the recommended annual assessment of all
techniques and technological platforms, if possible through EQAs
covering the technique, genotyping and interpretation, (ii) thetriennial assessment of the genotyping and interpretation ofspeci ﬁc germline mutations and pharmacogenomics analyses, (iii)
the documentation of actions undertaken in the case of poor
performances and the participation to a quality control thefollowing year. Besides, these guidelines demonstrate the cost-effectiveness of the rationalization of the frequency of participa-
tion to these quality controls.
Conclusions: These guidelines are built on the analysis of a
large panel of quality controls and data collected from the Belgiancenters. However, they are totally applicable to other countries
and will facilitate and improve the quality management of the
medical centers of human genetics.
JL and NMV are supported by the Belgian National Institute for
Health and Disability Insurance (grants W4043.0100.6 and
W4043.0100.8).
J. lantoine: None. A. Brysse: None. V. Dideberg: None. K.B.M.
Claes: None. S. Symoens: None. W. Coucke: None. V. Benoit:
None. S. Rombout: None. M. De Rycke: None. S. Seneca: None. L.
Van Laer: None. W. Wuyts: None. A. Corveleyn: None. K. Van
Den Bogaert: None. C. Rydlewski: None. F. Wilkin: None. M.
Ravoet: None. E. Fastré: None. A. Capron: None. N.M.
Vandevelde: None.
P16.011.B DNA re-analysis of highly suspected FAP patients
by CZECANCA NGS panel
Petra Slavíková, Jitka Štekrová, Petra Kleiblová, Petra Zemánková,
Markéta Urbanová
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 1st Medical Faculty
Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic.
Introduction: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a cancer
predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in tumor
suppressor gene APC, which is inherited in autosomal dominant
manner. The aim of this study was to re-analyze old DNA samplesof highly suspected patients whose diagnosis previously failed tobe con ﬁrmed by at that time commonly used methods of
molecular diagnostics.
Materials and Methods:
Next generation sequencing was
performed on patients ’DNA isolated from peripheral blood
lymphocytes (N =78, samples from years 1993-2004) using gene
panel CZECANCA (Czech Cancer Panel for Clinical Application,version 1.2) that covers 226 genes and where APC gene
encompasses also the promoter region that was proven to be
important in FAP diagnostics.
Results: In our cohort, 18 % (14/78) of re-analyzed patients
carry pathogenic variant in the APC gene (class 4 and 5). The most
common deleterious type of mutation in APC, frameshift and
nonsense variants, were found in 5 and 2 patients respectively. We
have also detected 2 patients with deletions in the promoter 1Bregion. In another 10 % of patients we detected pathogenicvariants in other genes associated with colorectal cancer
predisposition, which led to reevaluation of their diagnosis. We
have recorded variants of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance among 25
% of patients.
Conclusions: NGS gene panel CZECANCA proved to be a
valuable tool that brought improvement in diagnostic yield of FAPpatients in our cohort. Based on the obtained data, we were ableAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
472
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608to con ﬁrm or reevaluate diagnosis. Funding: Charles University
Research Fund Progress Q28/LF1.
P. Slavíková: None. J.Štekrová: None. P. Kleiblová: None. P.
Zemánková: None. M. Urbanová: None.
P16.014.A Validations of genotyping array analysis as a
diagnostic method in medical genetics
Martina Witsch-Baumgartner1, Silja Burkhard1, Beatrix Mühlegger1,
Rebekka Gröbner1, Gunda Schwaninger1, Peter Kirchmeier2,
Johannes Zschocke1
1Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,2JSI medical
systems GmbH, Ettenheim, Germany.
Introduction: We evaluated the potential of standard genotyping
arrays for diagnostic purposes in a clinical setting.
Methods: Genotyping results with the Global Screening Array
(Illumina GSA-24 v.2.0 or v3.0 +Multi-Disease content) were
assessed in 530 independently sequenced diagnostic DNAsamples for 29 clinical indications involving 55 different genes
and 129 different variants. Data analysis and variant reporting was
performed with the SeqArray software (JSI, Germany).
ID="Par5422"> Results: Analysis of 122/129 not previously GSA-
validated variants ful ﬁlled quality criteria in all samples and
showed correct identi ﬁcation. 8/129 variants failed quality thresh-
olds but were not genotyped as absent either. Assay sensitivitythus was 94% but there were no true false negatives. One gene
(LDLR ) showed three false positive results, possibly linked to the
high number of LDLR variants on the array; there were no false
positives in the other genes studied. Genotyping was fullyaccurate for speci ﬁc target variants (e.g. genes F5, F2, ALDOB,
DPYD, LCT ). Clinical sensitivity for monogenic diseases depended
on the gene and variant spectrum. In phenylketonuria, 87.5% ofgenotypes and 93.5% (29/31) of alleles (predicted for Europe: 93%)
were correctly determined by array analysis. The allele detection
rate for cystic ﬁbrosis (75%) was lower because of non-inclusion of
relevant variants on the array. In familial hypercholesterolaemia,101/262 individuals were mutation-positive by sequencing;
mutation identi ﬁcation by array was achieved in 68/262 indivi-
duals (26%).
Conclusion: Array genotyping is reliable for validated variants
and may be used as a cost-effective ﬁrst-line screening method for
common monogenic diseases in a diagnostic setting.
M. Witsch-Baumgartner: None. S. Burkhard: None. B.
Mühlegger: None. R. Gröbner: None. G. Schwaninger: None. P.
Kirchmeier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; JSI medical
systems GmbH. J. Zschocke: None.
P16.015.B Clinical utility of the Human Phenotype Ontology
terms in the assessment of copy number variants through
whole exome sequencing
Barbara Masotto , Yolanda Moreno-Sáez, Dan Diego-Álvarez, Anna
Baquero-Vaquer, Uxía S. Esperón-Moldes, Rosario Ferrer-Avargues,
Alfonso Andújar, Tania Otero-Rodríguez, Natalí Riva, Vanesa Felipe-Ponce, Elena Mesa-Rísquez, Isabel Sánchez-Guiu, María D. Ruiz, RoserMartínez-Rubio, Amparo Girós-Pérez, María Sánchez-Ibáñez, Sergio
Lois, Oscar Rodríguez, Ángela Arilla-Codoñer, Cristina Torres-Vidal,
Norma Aliaga, Laura Cano, Ángela Gaspar, Ana Perpiñán-López, NuriaSerrano, Clara Casañ, Celia Buades-Gomis, Alejandro Romera-López,
Cristian M. Moya-Aguilera, Mayte Gil-Borja, Sonia Santillán-Garzón
Ascires Sistemas Genomicos, Paterna, Valencia, Spain.The identi ﬁcation of copy number variants (CNVs) through whole
exome sequencing (WES) leads to the detection of variants that
challenge clinical interpretation. The use of Human Phenotype
Ontology (HPO) terms could allow to undermine such challenges.The aim of this study is to assess the clinical utility of HPO termsand determine the coincidence between the suspected diagnosis
(when provided) and genetic ﬁndings. We selected 30 patients
who underwent WES and in whom (likely) pathogenic CNVs weredetected. HPO terms were assigned according to the mostrelevant clinical features in the medical record and each patient
was categorized based on the number of terms selected: 1; 2 to 5;
6 to 10; more than 10. HPO terms were compared to thoseassociated with the identi ﬁed CNV. The suspected diagnosis was
compared to the molecular ﬁndings. In 26 out of 30 patients an
initial diagnosis was presumed; in 14 cases the molecular ﬁndings
coincided and in 12 they did not. In 4 patients no suspected
diagnosis was referred. All patients had at least a single HPO CNV-
term match except one. When 2 to 5 terms were selected, the
average match was 59.4%, 6 to 10 terms 34.5% and more than 10terms 20.0%. CNVs identi ﬁcation aided by the selection of HPO
terms, highlights the clinical relevance of those variants in which
HPO terms match. However, the greater the number of selected
terms, the lesser the match. This recalls the importance of anaccurate genotype-phenotype correlation after the geneticdiagnosis is done.
B. Masotto: None. Y. Moreno-Sáez: None. D. Diego-Álvarez:
None. A. Baquero-Vaquer: None. U.S. Esperón-Moldes: None. R.
Ferrer-Avargues: None. A. Andújar: None. T. Otero-Rodríguez:
None. N. Riva: None. V. Felipe-Ponce: None. E. Mesa-Rísquez:
None. I. Sánchez-Guiu: None. M.D. Ruiz: None. R. Martínez-
Rubio: None. A. Girós-Pérez: None. M. Sánchez-Ibáñez: None. S.
Lois: None. O. Rodríguez: None. Á. Arilla-Codoñer: None. C.
Torres-Vidal: None. N. Aliaga: None. L. Cano: None. Á. Gaspar:
None. A. Perpiñán-López: None. N. Serrano: None. C. Casañ:
None. C. Buades-Gomis: None. A. Romera-López: None. C.M.
Moya-Aguilera: None. M. Gil-Borja: None. S. Santillán-Garzón:
None.
P16.016.C Mitochondrial DNA integrity of induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs): mandatory screen for unwanted variants
before any use of iPSCs
Flavia Palombo
1, Camille Peron2, Leonardo Caporali1, Angelo
Iannielli3, Alessandra Maresca1, Ivano Di Meo2, Claudio Fiorini1,4,
Alice Segnali2, Tiina Manninen5, Francesca L. Sciacca2, Ambra Rizzo2,
Sonia Levi3, Anu Suomalainen5, Alessandro Prigione6, Vania
Broccoli3,7, Valerio Carelli1,4, Valeria Tiranti2
1IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
2Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy,
3Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milano,
Italy,4Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, Uni-
versity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,5Research Programs Unit,
Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum-Helsinki, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland,6Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
(MDC), Berlin, Germany,7National Research Council (CNR), Institute
of Neuroscience, Milano, Italy.
The generation of inducible plur ipotent stem cells (iPSCs) is a
revolutionary technique allowing pr oduction of pluripotent patient-
speci ﬁc cell lines used for disease modelling, drug screening and cell
therapy. Integrity of nuclear DNA (nDNA) is mandatory to allow iPSCs
utilization, while qual ity control of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is
rarely included in the iPSCs validation process, although it has beenAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
473
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608demonstrated that mtDNA mutations in iPSCs impact on their ﬁnal
phenotype. In this study, we performed mtDNA NGS deep
sequencing during the transition from parental ﬁbroblasts to
reprogrammed iPSC and to differentiated neuronal precursor cells(NPCs) obtained from controls and patients affected by mitochon-drial disorders carrying pathogenic mutations either in mtDNA or
nDNA. Our results indicate that at each step, mtDNA variants,
including those potentially pathogenic, ﬂuctuate emerging or
disappearing. In this way, pathogenic variants reaching a highheteroplasmy load could have a detrimental effect in differentiated
cells. Furthermore, the mtDNA haplogroup background might be
also relevant for the rate of mtDNA variants emergence in iPSCs. Thepatients age clearly impacted on the load of somatic variants inparental ﬁbroblasts, but tended to van ish with number of passages
in iPSCs. Importantly, we show tha t also the differentiating step to
NPCs may be affected by similar issues. In conclusion, we stronglysuggest including mtDNA analysis a s an unavoidable assay to obtain
fully certi ﬁed usable iPSCs, con ﬁrming the existence of “universal low
level heteroplasmy ”affecting any human individual. Grant no. 2018-
01 to VT and grant RF-2018-12366703 to VC, VB and VT.
F. Palombo: None. C. Peron: None. L. Caporali: None. A.
Iannielli: None. A. Maresca: None. I. Di Meo: None. C. Fiorini:
None. A. Segnali: None. T. Manninen: None. F.L. Sciacca: None.
A. Rizzo: None. S. Levi: None. A. Suomalainen: None. A.
Prigione: None. V. Broccoli: None. V. Carelli: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-
ness); Modest; Chiesi. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;GenSight Biologics, Stealth BioTherapeutics, Santhera Pharmaceu-
ticals, Chiesi. V. Tiranti: None.
P16.017.D Mosaicism: challenges for next-generation sequen-
cing analysis
Louisa Sanchez
1, Evelyn Douglas1, David Lawrence2, Julien
Soubrier1, Song Gao1, Lesley McGregor3, Christopher Barnett3, Karin
Kassahn1, Sui Yu1, Kathryn Friend1
1SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia,2CCB ACRF Cancer
Genomics Facility, Adelaide, Australia,3Women ’s and Children ’s
Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia.
It has been estimated that 0.5-8.3% of apparently de novo
pathogenic variants in autosomal dominant disorders are in fact
inherited from a parent with low-level mosaicism for the variant
(variant allele frequency (VAF) of 2-29%). This has signi ﬁcant
implications for recurrence risk in future pregnancies, and
therefore must be given due consideration when analysing
next-generation sequencing (NGS) data.
Automated trio analysis pipelines ﬁltering for de novo variants
may discard these variants as inherited, depending on their
parameters. A secondary analysis comparing VAF in the proband
and apparently unaffected parents can be used to identify theseinherited ‘de novo ’variants in clinically relevant genes. Using this
approach, we have detected a mosaic TGFBR2 variant (VAF of 20%)
in a clinically unaffected individual with multiple children with
Marfan syndrome. It has also lead to the identi ﬁcation of a
heterozygous HECW2 variant in a patient with intellectual
disability and severe autistic features. The patient ’s clinically
unaffected father was mosaic for this change (VAF of 30%).
Additional challenges surrounding the identi ﬁcation of mosai-
cism in NGS data include determining the clinical signi ﬁcance of
variants detected with a low VAF in affected probands, and
analysis of appropriate tissue types in cases of suspected somaticmosaicism.L. Sanchez: None. E. Douglas: None. D. Lawrence: None. J.
Soubrier: None. S. Gao: None. L. McGregor: None. C. Barnett:
None. K. Kassahn: None. S. Yu: None. K. Friend: None.
P16.018.A Detection of mtDNA variants from short-read
genome sequencing data: analysis of 55 families from a rare
disease cohort
Sander Pajusalu
1,2, Sanna Puusepp1,2, Karit Reinson1,2, Kai Muru1,2,
Tiia Reimand1,2, Monica H. Wojcik3,4, Anne O ’Donnell-Luria3,4, Katrin
Õunap1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of Clinical Genetics,
United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,3Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Broad Center for Mendelian Genomics,Cambridge, MA, USA,4Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston
Children ’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Introduction: Due to the clinical heterogeneity and nonspeci ﬁc
phenotypes, disorders caused by mtDNA variants cannot be
reliably distinguished from the disorders caused by nuclear gene
variants. We hypothesized that by analysing mtDNA from genomesequencing data in patients with various severe pediatric-onset
disorders, we may increase diagnostic sensitivity.
Materials and Methods: The study group consisted of 55
families with a total of 167 individuals. In all individuals, PCR-freeshort-read genome sequencing from blood-extracted DNA was
previously performed with an average autosomal depth of 37.2x
(range 29.2x to 69.2x). After rigorous analysis of nuclear genomevariants, 21 families had been diagnosed with either a known ornovel monogenic disorders, while the other 34 remained
undiagnosed. The mtDNA variants were detected using the
GATK4 mitochondrial pipeline. Variants were considered asheteroplasmic if variant allele balance was 5-80%.
Results: The mean mtDNA coverage ranged from 188x to
9,221x with an average of 2,629x. All 61 mother-proband pairs hadmatching mitochondrial haplogroups, validating the variant call-ing process. On average one heteroplasmic variant per sample
was detected; however, this rate dropped to 0.29 when d-loop
regions were excluded. We detected a previously undescribedheteroplasmic missense variant in MT-CYB gene in a patientwithout a previous molecular diagnosis. Notably, this patient has
mitochondrial disease criteria score of 6 indicating probable
mitochondrial disorder.
Conclusions: mtDNA variant detection is reliable, quick and
cost-effective complementary analysis that can be performed on
rare-disease cohorts with available genome sequencing data.
Funding: MOBTP175, PRG471S. Pajusalu: None. S. Puusepp: None. K. Reinson: None. K.
Muru: None. T. Reimand: None. M.H. Wojcik: None. A.
O’Donnell-Luria: None. K. Õunap: None.
P16.019.B Multilocus Imprinting Disturbance (MLID) testing in
imprinting disorders: Joint position statement to standardizediagnostic testing for MLID
Thomas Eggermann
1, Deborah Mackay2, Karen Temple2, David
Monk3, Eamonn Maher4, Andrea Riccio5, Frederic Brioude6, Agnes
Linglart6, Matthias Begemann1, Katja Eggermann1, Miriam Elbracht1,
Karen Gronskov7, Jet Bliek8, Paola Lombardi8, Guiomar Perez de
Nanclares9, Masayo Kagami10, Irene Netchine6, Tsutomu Ogata10,
Zeynep Tümer7Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
474
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany,2University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom,3University of East
Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom,4University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom,5University of Naples II, Naples, Italy,6Sorbonne
University, Paris, France,7Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark,
8University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,9Hospital
Universitario Araba. Sede Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain,
10Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan.
With the implementation of compr ehensive tests in the genetic
diagnosis of imprinting disorders (ImpDis), there is a substantial
increase in observations of no vel, complex and heterogeneous
molecular ﬁndings. Notably, a subset of patients with Beckwith-
Wiedemann and Silver-Russell sy ndromes, as well as transient
neonatal diabetes mellitus, the 14q32 and GNAS associated
ImpDis, show multilocus imprinting disturbances (MLID), i.e.aberrant methylation at multiple imprinted loci in the genome.
As recent studies show, MLID contributes to the clinical
heterogeneity of ImpDis, and an increased risk for reproductivefailure in the families. In fact, the precise identi ﬁcation of the
type of defect is often a prerequisite for the clinical manage-
ment and genetic counselling in families with ImpDis. The ﬁrst
cases of MLID and its clinical relevance were reported more than15 years ago, and reliable commercial laboratory tests areavailable; despite this, there is no implementation of MLID
testing in routine diagnosti cs, nor any consensus on the
deﬁnition of MLID, clinical indications for MLID testing, or
molecular indications of imprinted loci to be tested. Based on
their long experience with molec ular and clinical diagnostics of
imprinting disorders, genetic c ounselling and treatment, the
authors will address these open questions, and suggest theconditions of implementati on of MLID testing in routine
diagnostics.
T. Eggermann: None. D. Mackay: None. K. Temple: None. D.
Monk: None. E. Maher: None. A. Riccio: None. F. Brioude: None.
A. Linglart: None. M. Begemann: None. K. Eggermann: None. M.
Elbracht: None. K. Gronskov: None. J. Bliek: None. P. Lombardi:
None. G. Perez de Nanclares: None. M. Kagami: None. I.
Netchine: None. T. Ogata: None. Z. Tümer: None.
P16.020.C The clinical validation of GeneProof PCR Kits for
detection of thrombotic polymorphisms on myCROBE
®Fully
Automated Instrument
Kamila Poláková1, Petr Janda1, Dita Bedná řová1, Lenka Tomái-
ková2, Ivan Slí2, Eva Jansová1,3
1GeneProof a. s., Brno, Czech Republic,2Unilabs Slovensko, s. r. o.,
Bánská Bystrica, Slovakia,3Mendel University in Brno, Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brno, Czech Republic.
Introduction: Combination of acquired and inherited risk factors
can lead to disbalance of coagulation system which is related tomany serious disorders. Each assay needs to be detected
separately and without automatization, it is a time-consuming
process. The aim of this study was to evaluate clinical performancecharacteristics of the innovated GeneProof PCR assays intendedfor diagnostics of thrombophilic mutations in myCROBE
®Fully
Automated Instrument.
Materials and Methods: The clinical validation was performed
on 842 whole blood samples in total, 184 for Factor II, 186 for
Factor V, 111 for Factor XIII, 123 for MTHFR A1298C, 123 for MTHFR
C677T and 115 for PAI-1. The samples were extracted, detected,and evaluated in myCROBE®Fully Automated Instrument using
innovated GeneProof PCR Kits for myCROBE. The correct genotype
was con ﬁrmed in collaboration with clinical site at the UnilabsSlovensko, s. r. o. using CE IVD GeneProof PCR Kits with croBEE
201A NA Extraction Kit.
Results: Comparison of myCROBE PCR Kits and GeneProof CE
IVD PCR Kits demonstrated high reliability which is expressed byNegative percentage agreement (FII, FV, FXIII, PAI-1 - 100 %,MTHFR A1298C - 98.04 %, MTHFR C677T - 96.72 %) and Positive
percentage agreement (FII, FV, FXIII, MTHFR A1298C, PAI-1 - 100 %,
MTHFR C677T - 96.77 %).
Conclusions: The results of clinical validation demonstrate a
very good diagnostic parameter of the GeneProof assays and
together with myCROBE
®Fully Automated Instrument proved to
be very convenient and time-saving tool for testing of thrombo-philic mutations in clinical routine.
K. Poláková: None. P. Janda: None. D. Bedná řová: None. L.
Tomáiková: None. I. Slí: None. E. Jansová: None.
P16.021.D Virtual genetic assessments for neonatal intensive
care unit patients
Demetra Georgiou1,2, Libuse Pazderova1, Harry Leitch2, Emanuel
Curetean1, Teena Ferguson1, Jan Cobben2
1Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom,
2North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, United
Kingdom.
Introduction: The North West Thames Regional Genetics Service,
supports a number of a highly specialised Neonatal units, which
are geographically distant. The introduction of the NHS Rapid
exome sequencing for acutely ill neonates and children (RAPS) in2020, increased the need for urgent ward consultations. TheCOVID19 pandemic, has made the delivery of urgent Genetic ward
consultations extremely challenging.
Methods: A digital solution pilot has been developed to
address this challenge which started with videoconferencing. We
since acquired a mobile trolley with a high de ﬁnition camera that
is placed in the busiest neonatal ward in our region. We utilisedNHS approved IT solutions to facilitate quicker assessment withvirtual remote consultations, utilising streaming video to pheno-
type the child and consult with parents and Neonatologists.
Outcomes: Clinical geneticists can remotely review neonates and
provide support promptly and ef ﬁciently. With the use of remote
video calls for the assessment of acutely unwell neonates in North
West London, the diagnostic rate of RAPS DNA analysis appeared
to be very high (~70%). This indicates that virtual remotephenotyping to guide the DNA analysis, can be successfully used
instead of live ward consultations. We will report on quality and
speed of assessment, as well as clinician and patient satisfaction.We will furthermore provide a ﬁnancial evaluation of this novel
service.
D. Georgiou: None. L. Pazderova: None. H. Leitch: None. E.
Curetean: None. T. Ferguson: None. J. Cobben: None.
P16.022.A Importance of careful transcript identi ﬁcation for
pathogenicity assessment of the rare and confusing variant inthe SCN5A gene
Anna Shestak
1, Leonid Makarov2, Vera Komolyatova2, Liubov
Skorodumova3, Irina Kolesnikova3, Eduard Generozov3, Elena
Zaklyazminskaya1
1Petrovsky National Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Center for Syncope and Cardiac Arrhythmias in Children
and Adolescents of the Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow,Russian Federation,3Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
475
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Continuously growing request for Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) drive the automatization of processes fromprimer design to variant calling and interpretation. The purpose of
this study is to demonstrate the rare situation when the variant
was correctly evaluated only by combination of NGS techniquesand Sanger sequencing.
Methods: Female sportsman (15 y.o.) underwent genetic
counseling and DNA testing due to QT interval prolongation
registered during ECG Holter monitoring. Genetic testing of theproband was performed in two independent laboratories. PrimaryDNA testing was performed by WES using the Ion Proton ™System.
Target panel sequencing of 11 genes encoding cardiac ion
channels was performed using PGM IonTorrent. Search for avariants in noncanonical and canonical exons 6 was performed by
Sanger sequencing.
Results: The cascade familial screening and control re-
sequencing were provided for proband with identi ﬁed genetic
variant p.S216L (g.38655290G>A, NM_198056.2:c.647C>T,
rs41276525) in the canonical exon 6 of the SCN5A gene after
receiving data from another laboratory. Control Sanger and NGSsequencing revealed the absence p.S216L in the canonical exon 6and con ﬁrmed the presence of p.S216L (g.38655522G>A,
c.647C>T, rs201002736) in the noncanonical exon 6 of the SCN5A
gene. The identi ﬁed variant was re-interpreted. The noncanonical
transcripts of the exon 6 of the SCN5A gene is poorly represented
in cardiac tissue (gnomAD). The detected variant was found in
proband ’s healthy mother.
Conclusion: The correct interpretation of genetic data requires
close cooperation between cliniciants and researchers. It can help
to avoid ﬁnancial costs and stress for probands and families.
A. Shestak: None. L. Makarov: None. V. Komolyatova: None.
L. Skorodumova: None. I. Kolesnikova: None. E. Generozov:
None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None.
P16.025.D Circulating exosomal miRNAs as potential biomar-
kers of Parkinson ’s disease
Selene De Benedittis
1, Ida Manna2, Andrea Quattrone1, Enrico
Iaccino3, Gennarina Arabia1, Aldo Quattrone2,4
1Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy,
2Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology (IBFM), National
Research Council (CNR), Section of Germaneto, 88100 Catanzaro,
Italy, Catanzaro, Italy,3Department of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine, University "Magna Graecia" of Catanzaro, 88100 Catan-zaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy,4Neuroscience Research Center, Uni-
versity Magna Graecia, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy.
Introduction: Parkinson ’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurode-
generative disorder with the clinical characteristics of bradykine-
sia, tremor and rigidity. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding
RNAs observed in biological ﬂuids, where can be shuttled in
exosome, extracellular vesicles that play an important role in cell-to-cell communication. miRNAs have been investigated and
suggested as important biomarkers for the evaluation of disease,
including neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, we selected aset of miRNAs commonly studied in neurodegenerative diseases,
and studied their expression levels in serum exosomes to evaluate
their feasibility and potential application as biomarkers in PD.
Materials and Methods: 24 patients with PD were included in
study group, and 24 age- and sex-matched healthy subject wereincluded in control group. The blood samples were processed for
serum isolation, and exosomes isolation and miRNAs extraction
were done using commercial kits. The expression of exosomal
miRNAs was analyzed by reverse transcriptase quantitative Real-time PCR (RT-qPCR). The relative expressions of miRNAs werenormalized to the exogenous reference cel-miR-39 expression.
miRNAs data analysis was performed using the 2 −ΔCt method.
Differences between groups were assessed using Student ’s t-test
and results were considered to have statistically signi ﬁcant
difference if p< 0.05.
Results: Among all tested miRNAs only 2 were differentially
expressed. Compared with controls, patients with PD showed asigni ﬁcantly higher expression of circulating exosomal miR-150-
5p, while exosomal miR-132-3p was signi ﬁcantly lower.
Conclusions: The development of biomarkers based on miRNAs
requires further study, but these preliminary results suggestedthat exosomal miR-150-5p and miR-132-3p might be candidate PD
diagnostic biomarkers.
S. De Benedittis: None. I. Manna: None. A. Quattrone: None.
E. Iaccino: None. G. Arabia: None. A. Quattrone: None.
P16.026.A The collection of samples from pregnant women at
different stages of gestation to search for early biomarkers ofpregnancy complications
Roman A. Illarionov
1,2,3, Olga V. Pachuliia1, Nataliya O. Yurkina1,
Maria G. Butenko1, Elena S. Vashukova1, Andrey S. Glotov1
1D.O. Ott The Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,2Saint-
Petersburg State Institute of Technology (Technical University),Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation,3Saint-Petersburg University,
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Biobanks today represent a modern basic platform
providing access to quality biomaterial. The search for early
biomarkers of pregnancy complications will reveal new perspec-tives in early diagnosis. The aim of the project is to create acollection of samples of pregnant women at different stages of
gestation to search for early biomarkers of pregnancy
complications.
Material and methods: Collection, storage and processing of
biological samples of pregnant women at different stages of
gestation and associated clinical data, quality control.
Results. The collection includes peripheral blood samples from
204 women; whole blood, serum, plasma, buffy coat, and urine
were collected during pregnancy, and placenta and umbilical cord
blood samples were collected during labor. A clinical andanamnestic information was obtained about each pregnantwoman, which includes data on the woman ’s health status, the
course of gestation, and the outcome of pregnancy. The quality
control of the collection samples was carried out. The study of themicroRNA expression pro ﬁle in healthy women at different stages
of gestation and different types of biomaterial was carried out.
Conclusion : The creation of a collection of samples of pregnant
women is a signi ﬁcant groundwork for future fundamental and
applied research in various ﬁelds of biomedicine. Research on the
basis of the collection may allow a study of the pathogenetic
mechanisms of various gestational complications, and the
development of new methods for their diagnosis and treatment.Funding. This study was ﬁnancially supported by a Russian Science
Foundation grant 19-75-20033.
R.A. Illarionov: None. O.V. Pachuliia: None. N.O. Yurkina:
None. M.G. Butenko: None. E.S. Vashukova: None. A.S. Glotov:
None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
476
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P16.027.B Diagnostic Power and Clinical Impact of Exome
Sequencing in a Cohort of 500 Patients with Rare Diseases
Caio Robledo D. A. C. Quaio1, Caroline Monaco Moreira1, Gil
Monteiro Novo Filho1, Patricia Rossi Sacramento-Bobotis1, Sandro
Felix Perazzio1, Aurelio Pimenta Dutra1, Michele Groenner Penna1,
Rafael Alves da Silva1, Rodrigo Fernandes Ramalho1, Rafaela Rogerio
Floriano de Sousa1, Miguel Mitne-Neto1, Wagner Antonio da Rosa
Baratela1, Chong Ae Kim2
1Fleury Medicina e Saúde, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil,2Instituto da
Criança, Hospital das Clínicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo - SP, Brazil.
Rare diseases comprise a diverse group of conditions, most of
which involve genetic causes. We describe the variable spectrumofﬁndings and clinical impacts of exome sequencing (ES) in a
cohort of 500 patients with rare diseases. In total, 164 primary
ﬁndings were reported in 158 patients, representing an overall
diagnostic yield of 31.6%. Most of the ﬁndings (61.6%) corre-
sponded to autosomal dominant conditions,followed by auto-somal recessive (25.6%) and X-linked (12.8%) conditions. These
patients harbored 195 variants, among which 43.6% are novel in
the literature. The rate of molecular diagnosis was considerablyhigher for prenatal samples (67%; 4/6), younger children (44%; 24/
55), consanguinity (50%; 3/6), gastrointestinal/liver disease(44%;
16/36) and syndromic/malformative conditions (41%; 72/175). For15.6% of the cohort patients, we observed a direct potential forthe redirection of care with targeted therapy, tumor screening,
medication adjustment and monitoring for disease-speci ﬁc
complications. Secondary ﬁndings were reported in 37 patients
(7.4%). Based on cost-effectiveness studies in the literature, wespeculate that the reports of secondary ﬁndings may in ﬂuence an
increase of 123.2 years in the life expectancy for our cohort, or
0.246 years/cohort patient. ES is a powerful method to identify themolecular bases of monogenic disorders and redirect clinical care.
C.D.A.C. Quaio: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Fleury Medicina e Saude. C. Moreira: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. G. Novo Filho: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude.
P. Sacramento-Bobotis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. S. Perazzio: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. A. Dutra: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude.
M. Groenner Penna: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Fleury Medicina e Saude. R. Silva: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. R. Ramalho: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. R. Sousa: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude.
M. Mitne-Neto: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Fleury
Medicina e Saude. W. Baratela: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; Fleury Medicina e Saude. C. Kim: None.
P16.028.C Laboratory proactivity can solve non-diagnostic
whole exome sequencing: Probing new genes in old data
Juliana Heather Vedovato-dos-Santos
1, João P. Kitajima1, Juliana
Jordão1, Erika L. Freitas1, Mara D. O. Ribeiro1, Julia G. Salomão1,
Luiza L. P. Ramos1, Larissa A. Costa1, Luciana Bispo1, Fernanda
Monti1,2, Caroline Freitas1, Fabíola Paoli Monteiro1, Fernando Kok1,3
1Mendelics Genomic Analysis, São Paulo, Brazil,2Jô Clemente
Institute, São Paulo, Brazil,3University of São Paulo, School of
Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil.Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) is often the most
efﬁcient and most widely available diagnostic tool for patients
under investigation for a Mendelian disorder, however, asigni ﬁcant proportion of clinical exomes (60%-75%) is non-
diagnostic. Reanalysis is often the next step in the diagnostic
odyssey of many patients. We propose a more ef ﬁcient approach
to the reanalysis of WES data, based on our experience applyingthis "targeted-reanalysis" method to 299 patients under investiga-
tion for genetic disorders, screened over 6 years (2015-2021).
Materials and Methods: Our approach to reanalysis consists of
three steps: 1. Periodically searching the medical literature for newgene-disease associations; 2. Actively searching our database forpatients with variants in these genes; 3. Performing a targeted
reanalysis of those variants, considering only patients whose
original WES data was non-diagnostic.
Results: The diagnostic yield of this targeted reanalysis was
24.4%, with a de ﬁnite diagnosis identi ﬁed for 73 of the 299
patients. In 7 additional cases, we reported variants of unknownsigni ﬁcance relevant to the patient ’s phenotype, which we
strongly believe are responsible for the clinical features.
Conclusions: Reanalysis of non-diagnostic WES data is a proven
method of maximizing the diagnostic yield of whole exomesequencing in a clinical setting. It is usually initiated by clinicalgenetics providers, and the diagnostic yield is generally between
10 and 12%. Our data demonstrate that targeted reanalysis
signi ﬁcantly increases the diagnostic yield, further highlighting the
potential of this method for solving previously undiagnosed cases.
J.H. Vedovato-dos-Santos: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. J.P. Kitajima: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. J.
Jordão: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics
Genomic Analysis. E.L. Freitas: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. M.D.O. Ribeiro: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic
Analysis. J.G. Salomão: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. L.L.P. Ramos: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. L.
A. Costa: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics
Genomic Analysis. L. Bispo: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. F. Monti: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. C.
Freitas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics
Genomic Analysis.
F.P. Monteiro: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis. F. Kok: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Mendelics Genomic Analysis.
P16.029.D Detecting inversions in routine molecular diagnosis
Edwige Kasper1, Sophie Coutant1, Sandrine Manase1, Stéphanie
Vasseur1, Pierre Macquère1, Gaëlle Bougeard1, Laurence Faivre2,
Olivier Ingster3, Thierry Frebourg1, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont1,
Claude Houdayer1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, Depart-
ment of Genetics and reference center for developmental disorders,
FHU G4 Génomique, F-76000 Rouen, France, Rouen, France,2Centre
de Lutte Contre le Cancer Georges François Leclerc, Dijon,France32Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon,
France, Dijon, France,3Department of Genetics, University Hospital
Centre Angers, Angers, Pays de la Loire, France, Angers, France.
Inversions, i.e. a change in orientation of a segment of DNA, are a
recognized cause of human diseases . Despite considerable progress
in sequencing and bioinformatics approaches, they remain oftenAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
477
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608overlooked due to their balanced nature and mapping issues.
Inversions can have brutal effects by disrupting the coding sequence
or more subtle impacts on gene e xpression. We described two
families that exemplify these aspects.The ﬁrst family (F1) displayed a
sibship with 2 constitutional mismatch repair de ﬁciency (CMMRD)
patients and a family history of colon cancer in the maternal branch
only. The second family (F2) displayed 2 sisters affected by
endometrial cancer and one brother with colon cancer. Both parentswere deceased and no information was available.
The families were analyzed using an “augmented ”panel
including the major colon cancer genes with their intronic and
ﬂanking genomic regions. Inversions were called using GRIDSS. In
F1, we evidenced a PMS2 pathogenic splice variation and, in thepaternal branch, a low penetrance PMS2 inversion encompassing
the promoter region to intron 1, thereby con ﬁrming the CMMRD
diagnosis. In F2, we found an inversion involving the 5 ’part of
MSH6 and the 3 ’part of the nearby gene ANXA4, explaining the
familial history.Inversion detection mandates “augmented ”panels
or WGS and dedicated tools, but makes a valuable contribution tothe diagnostic rate. Moreover, one can expect that a fraction ofinversions, which may alter slightly gene expression, would act
also as low-risk or modifying genetic factors.
1E. Kasper: None. S. Coutant: None. S. Manase: None. S.
Vasseur: None. P. Macquère: None. G. Bougeard: None. L.
Faivre: None. O. Ingster: None. T. Frebourg: None. S. Baert-
Desurmont: None. C. Houdayer: None.
P16.030.A Translational diagnostics program: an in-house
pipeline to validate genetic variants in children with undiag-nosed and rare diseases
Jordi Pijuan
1, María Rodríguez-Sanz1, Daniel Natera-de Benito2,
Anna Altisent1, Carlos Ortez2,3, Raúl Benítez4, Andrés Nascimento2,3,
Janet Hoenicka1,3, Francesc Palau1,3,5
1Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Molecular Medicine –IPER, Institut
de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain,2Neuromuscular
Unit, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain,4Automatic Control
Department and Biomedical Engineering Research Center, UniversitatPolitècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain,5Department of Genetic
Medicine –IPER, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and Hospital Clínic
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: There are approximately 7,000 rare diseases
affecting 350 million people worldwide. Diagnosis is essential forthe management and treatment of patients. Next-generationsequencing have hugely improved the prospects of obtaining a
molecular diagnosis, but genetic variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance
(VUS) or inconsistent patient phenotype prevent the diagnosis.Herein, we show the results of the in-house TranslationalDiagnostics Program (TDP) to validate genetic variants as part of
the diagnostic process with the close intramural collaboration
between physicians, clinical scientists, and researchers.
Materials and methods: 43 undiagnosed patients in which the
exome test showed a VUS or a phenotype-genotype incongruity
were selected. The TDP pipeline comprises four steps: (i) precision
phenotype evaluation, (ii) literature review and in silico biology
studies on the pathogenicity of variants (iii) experimental
functional studies (e.g., protein subcellular localization, protein
interactions and activity) of transfected cells lines or patients ’
ﬁbroblasts, and (iv) diagnosis decision-making.
Results: Reassessment of the phenotype and in silico biology
experiments allowed diagnosis in 10 patients. In the remaining 33patients, we performed comparative computational analysis of
confocal microscopy images and experiments related to protein
function. Biological validation was achieved in 14 patients, the
genetic variant was rejected in two patients, and 17 cases areongoing. The overall diagnostic rate is currently 55.8%.
Conclusions: PDT supports and resolves intramural medical
problems when the clinical signi ﬁcance of the patient ’s variant is
unknown or clinically inconsistent.
Grants: ISCIII: DTS16/00196; Generalitat de Catalunya and
FEDER: SLT002/16/00174, 2015 FEDER/S-21, SLT002/16/00306;
Fundación Isabel Gemio; Torró Solidari: RAC1/Torrons Vicens;
2020BR-IRSJD-CdTorres.
J. Pijuan: None. M. Rodríguez-Sanz: None. D. Natera-de
Benito: None. A. Altisent: None. C. Ortez: None. R. Benítez:
None. A. Nascimento: None. J. Hoenicka: None. F. Palau: None.
P16.031.B Transthyretin, Retinol-binding protein, retinol and
T4 circulating levels in the Mallorca population of TTR V30Mcarriers
Eugenia Cisneros-Barroso , Juan González, Adrián Rodríguez,
Tomás Ripoll-Vera, Inés Losada
Fundació Institut d ’Investigació Sanitària Illes Balears –IdISBa, Spain,
Spain.
To date, more than 140 mutations in the TTR gene have been
described. Val30Met (p.Val50Met) is the most common one in
general and in particular in the island of Majorca (Spain) where
ATTRV30M amyloidosis is considered endemic. Serum Transthyr-etin levels have already been reported to be decreased forPortuguese, Japanese and Swedish TTR V30M carriers. However,
no studies have been done in the population of Mallorca. We have
been able to identify 200 TTR V30M from the endemic foci ofMallorca. Data on serum TTR levels are available for 100 of them.
We then show the analysis of serum transthyretin levels in the
TTRV30M carriers from the endemic foci of Mallorca. TTR circulatesprimarily as a 55 KDa tetramer. In the blood, the TTR tetramerbinds to the retinol binding protein complex and a small amount
of T4 and transports it to different tissues. Although TTR is the only
known RBP transporter that facilitates the transport of retinol,there are two other T4 transporter proteins: albumin andthyroxine binding globulin. TTR plays a secondary role in the
transport of T4 in blood while, although, it is the main transporter
at the level of cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Then we have also determined
the levels of retinol, RBP and T4 in 100 TTRV30M carriers from
Mallorca. This is the ﬁrst study that focuses on the study of TTR
and its circulating partners blood levels in the endemic foci ofMallorca island.
E. Cisneros-Barroso: None. J. González:
None. A. Rodríguez:
None. T. Ripoll-Vera: None. I. Losada: None.
P16.033.D Solving the unsolved: 4 years of experience of the
Italian Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program
Raffaele Castello1, Annalaura Torella1,2, Manuela Morleo1, Michele
Pinelli1, Francesco Musacchia1, Alessandra Varavallo1,2, Margherita
Mutarelli1,3, Sandro Ban ﬁ1,2, Angelo Selicorni4, Milena Mariani4, Silvia
Maitz5, Valeria Capra6, Andrea Accogli6, Marcello Scala6, Vincenzo
Leuzzi7, Anna Commone7, Francesca Nardecchia7, Serena Galosi7,
Mario Mastrangelo7, Donatella Milani8, Corrado Romano9, Pinella
Failla9, Donatella Greco9, Chiara Pantaleoni10, Claudia Ciaccio10,
D’Arrigo Stefano10, Nicola Brunetti-Pierri1,11, Giancarlo Parenti1,11,
Gerarda Cappuccio1,11, Andrea Ballabio1,11, Antonietta Coppola12,
Martino Montomoli13, Maria Alice Donati14, Teresa Mattina15,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
478
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Marcella Zollino16, Simona Amenta16, Albina Tummolo17, Claudia
Santoro18, Giulio Piluso2, Valerio Bonolis2, Roberta Zeuli2, Giancarlo
Blasio2, Daniele De Brasi19, Francesca Del Vecchio Blanco2, Angela
Peron20, Gennaro Oliva21, Diego di Bernardo1,22, Ermanno Rizzi23,
Giorgio Casari24,1, Vincenzo Nigro1,2
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy,
2Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania “Luigi
Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy,3Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent
Systems “Eduardo Caianiello ”, ISASI, National Research Council,
Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy,4Department of Pediatrics, ASST
Lariana Sant ’Anna Hospital, San Fermo della Battaglia, Italy,5MBBM
Foundation, Monza, Italy,6Neuroscience Department, Giannina
Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy,7Department of Human Neuroscience,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy,8Pediatric Highly Intensive
Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’Granda, Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy,9Oasi Research Institute - IRCCS, Troina, Italy,
10Developmental Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neuro-
logico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy,11Department of Translational
Medicine, Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,
12Department of Neuroscience and Reproductive and Odontostoma-
tological Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,13Pediatric
Neurology, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories,
Neuroscience Department, A Meyer Children ’s Hospital, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy,14Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Regional
Reference Centre Expanded Newborn Screening, Meyer Children
Hospital, Florence, Italy,15Department of Biomedical and Biotechno-
logical Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy,16Institute of
Genomic Medicine, Catholic University, Gemelli Hospital Foundation,
Rome, Italy,17Department of Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Genetics
and Diabetology, Giovanni XXIII Children ’s Hospital, Bari, Italy,
18Pediatric Surgery, Department of Women, Children, General, and
Specialist Surgery, Campania University “Luigi Vanvitelli ”, Naples,
Italy,19Department of Pediatrics, AORN Santobono Pausilipon,
Naples, Italy,20Child Neuropsychiatry Unit-Epilepsy Center (Service
of Medical Genetics), San Paolo Hospital, Department of Health
Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Milan, Italy,
21Institute for High Performance Computing and Networking,
National Research Council, Naples, Italy,22Department of Chemical,
Materials and Industrial Production Engineering, University of Naples
Federico II, Naples, Italy,23Fondazione Telethon, Milan, Italy,24Vita-
Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
Rare genetic diseases affect millions of children worldwide.
Diagnosis is essential to carry out scienti ﬁc research on the causes
and new treatments, but it is unavailable for many cases. TheTelethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program (TUDP) is a multicentric
Italian national program with the objective of studying a broad
spectrum of rare paediatric-onset monogenic disorders, charac-terized by severe multisystem manifestations, neurological invol-vement, and dysmorphic features. The TUDP has adopted whole
exome sequencing (WES) of the child and its parents as entry-level
test. After phenotypic annotation and trio/quartet WES (com-pleted in 573 families), the TUDP network found a causativemutation in 49% of cases. In particular, in 79% of diagnosed
patients a phenotypic extension in known disease genes was
identi ﬁed, while for the remaining 21% variants in newly
discovered disease genes were identi ﬁed. A signi ﬁcative propor-
tion of TUDP patients have putative pathogenic mutations in
genes not fully characterized /not associated with Mendelian
diseases. Assuming all experimental steps are performed accord-ing to a high standard, the very high success rate of TUDP could
be the effect of the rigorous patient selection criteria used.
Another explanation for the success rate of TUDP refers to thehigher parental age in Italy, which is associated with the easieridenti ﬁcation of de novo dominant exonic mutations, present in
68% of cases solved by TUDP. In addition, TUDP bene ﬁted from aclose well-orchestrated collaboration between bioinformaticians,
more than 50 clinical geneticists and basic scientists, and from the
interactions between academia, 14 Italian pediatric hubs, and
patient families.
R. Castello: None. A. Torella: None. M. Morleo: None. M.
Pinelli: None. F. Musacchia: None. A. Varavallo: None. M.
Mutarelli: None. S. Ban ﬁ:None. A. Selicorni: None. M. Mariani:
None. S. Maitz: None. V. Capra: None. A. Accogli: None. M. Scala:
None. V. Leuzzi: None. A. Commone: None. F. Nardecchia: None.
S. Galosi: None. M. Mastrangelo: None. D. Milani: None. C.
Romano: None. P. Failla: None. D. Greco: None. C. Pantaleoni:
None. C. Ciaccio: None. D. Stefano: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri:
None. G. Parenti: None. G. Cappuccio: None. A. Ballabio: None.
A. Coppola: None. M. Montomoli: None. M. Donati: None. T.
Mattina: None. M. Zollino: None. S. Amenta: None. A. Tummolo:
None. C. Santoro: None. G. Piluso: None. V. Bonolis: None. R.
Zeuli: None. G. Blasio: None. D. De Brasi: None. F. Del Vecchio
Blanco: None. A. Peron: None. G. Oliva: None. D. di Bernardo:
None. E. Rizzi: None. G. Casari: None. V. Nigro: None.
P16.034.A Genomic analysis; gene panel versus phenotype
based variant ﬁltering, a comparative analysis
Cleo C. van Diemen, Kristin M. Abbott, Annemieke van der Hout, Inge
Mulder, Kim de Lange, Krista van Dijk-Bos, Lennart F. Johansson,
Joeri K. van der Velde, Dennis Hendriksen, Bart Charbon, S van denRoek, Martine T. Meems-Veldhuis, Henny H. Lemmink, Morris A.
Swertz, Birgit Sikkema-Raddatz, Marielle E. van Gijn
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Gene panel and whole exome sequencing is now mainstream in
clinical practice. Despite many different software tools to support
analysis, the diagnostic yield is still limited to 20-70%, dependingon the phenotype. Moreover, the process remains time consum-
ing and labor intensive. Currently, the most common data-analysis
strategy is the use of ﬁxed gene-panels. However, ﬂexible,
phenotype-based analysis is gaining attention and might bepreferable for complex phenotypes or heterogeneous diseases. To
determine which strategy is most ef ﬁcient and results in the
highest diagnostic yield, we compared three different analysisstrategies: ﬁrstly, our current diagnostically used Alissa software
(Agilent), a gene-panel based analysis; secondly Moon software
(Diploid), a phenotype-based analysis using arti ﬁcial intelligence;
thirdly an in-house developed variant interpretation pipeline (VIP),using both strategies. We prospectively included 300 patients
(either in trio design or singletons), a diverse group re ﬂecting our
diagnostic spectrum. The reasons for referral were developmentaldelay, fetus with multiple congenital abnormalities at ultrasound,critically ill children from intensive care unit, cardiomyopathy,
hereditary cancer, epilepsy, and skin abnormalities. The outcome
measures were number of diagnoses, estimated time needed foranalysis, and number of variants left requiring manual interpreta-tion. Preliminary results indicate that the time needed for analysis
and amount of variants left for interpretation was the lowest in the
phenotype-based analysis. The number of diagnoses in theepilepsy group was higher, however, in the gene-panel basedanalysis. Potential additional diagnoses are currently being
investigated. The preliminary data indicate that it depends on
the phenotype of the patient which strategy is preferable.
C.C. van Diemen: None. K.M. Abbott: None. A. van der Hout:
None. I. Mulder: None. K. de Lange: None. K. van Dijk-Bos: None.
L.F. Johansson: None. J.K. van der Velde: None. D. Hendriksen:
None. B. Charbon: None. S. van den Roek: None. M.T. Meems-
Veldhuis: None. H.H. Lemmink: None. M.A. Swertz: None. B.
Sikkema-Raddatz: None. M.E. van Gijn: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
479
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P16.035.B Whole Exome Sequencing in critically ill neonates
and infants: diagnostic yield and predictability of monogenic
diagnoses
Tasja Scholz1, Tatjana Bierhals1, Fanny Kortüm1, Davor Lessel1,
Christian Kubisch1, Dominique Singer2, Martin Ernst Blohm2, Anna
Perez2, Jessika Johannsen3, Jonas Denecke3, René Santer3, Philipp
Deindl2, Maja Hempel1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Uni versity Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,2Division of Neonatology and Pediatric
Intensive Care, Department of Pedia trics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,3Department of Pediatrics,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Introduction: Monogenic diseases play an i mportant role in critically
ill neonates and infants treated in the intensive care unit (ICU). Thisstudy aims to determine the diagnostic yield of whole-exome
sequencing (WES) for monogenic dis eases and to identify phenotypes
associated with a genetic etiology.
Methods: From March 2017 to March 2020, a comprehensive
diagnostic work-up including WES was performed in a single
academic center in 61 unrelated, critically ill neonates and infants
below 1 year of age with an unknown underlying disease. Weconducted 59 Trio-WES, 1 Duo-WES, and 1 Single-WES analyses.
Symptoms were classi ﬁed according to the Human Phenotype
Ontology (HPO).
Results: The overall molecular genetic diagnostic rate within
was 46% (28/61), with a genetic diagnosis of 50% (15/30) in
preterm neonates. Identifying the genetic cause of disease has
facilitated an individualized management in the majority ofpatients. A positive or negative predictive power of speci ﬁc
clinical features for a genetic diagnosis could not be observed.
Conclusion: WES is a powerful non-invasive diagnostic tool in
critically ill neonates and infants with a high diagnostic rate. Werecommend initiating WES as early as possible due to the impact
on management and family counseling. Recommendations
regarding the clinical utility of WES in critically ill neonates andinfants should not be based on phenotype alone. We present aclinical work ﬂow for the application of WES for critically ill
neonates and infants in an interdisciplinary setting.
T. Scholz: None. T. Bierhals: None. F. Kortüm: None. D. Lessel:
None. C. Kubisch: None. D. Singer: None. M.E. Blohm: None. A.
Perez: None. J. Johannsen: None. J. Denecke: None. R. Santer:
None. P. Deindl: None. M. Hempel: None.
P16.036.C Identi ﬁcation of structural variation in constitu-
tional disorders by optical genome mapping
Andy Wing Chun Pang , Alex Hastie, Alka Chaubey
Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, USA.
Chromosome disorders form a major category of genetic disease.
Karyotype analysis, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
microarrays are currently used in clinical cytogenetics and
molecular diagnostics. CMA is the ﬁrst line test recommended
by American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG), AmericanAcademy of Pediatrics (AAP), and America Academy of Neurology
(AAN), however, CMA miss many classes of structural variants such
as balanced translocations and inversions and cannot make callsin in segmental duplications and repeats. Recent advances inoptical genome mapping (OGM) have the potential to address
these shortcomings. Bionano Genomics ’Saphyr platform extracts
megabases long DNA, labels at speci ﬁc motifs, and linearizes
through NanoChannels. These molecules at least 150kbp in lengthare then digitized and assembled de novo into chromosomal-armlength optical maps. Due to the long length of the assembled
maps, large structural variants (SVs) can be captured by aligning to
the public human reference assembly. We applied this platform to
study the genomes of multiple constitutional disorders. Wedetected segmental duplication mediated deletions such as a1.9 Mbp deletion in 7q11.23 (Williams-Beuren Syndrome), and a
3.7 Mbp deletion in 17p11.2 in (Smith-Magenis Syndrome). Optical
mapping also captured 12q +, trisomies 13 and 21, and it detected
rearrangements such as t(2;10) and t(9;21) translocations. Further-more, OGM detected repeat expansions in Fragile X and repeat
contractions in FSHD. In conclusion, in one platform, optical
genome mapping has the potential to identify a broad range ofgenomic abnormalities, and to improve the characterization ofSVs.
A. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi
ﬁcant; Bionano
Genomics. A. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Bionano Genomics. A. Chaubey: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Bionano Genomics.
P17 Bioinformatics, Machine Learning and Statistical Methods
P17.002.A Bioinformatic approach to detect alternative spli-
cing and integration of omics data for the study of neurolo-gical diseases
Valérie Triassi1,2, Éric Bareke1, Sébastien Audet1,3, Marjorie Labrec-
que1,2, Martine Tétreault1,3
1CHUM Research Center, Montréal, QC, Canada,2Bioinformatics
program, Department of biochemistry and molecular medicine,Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada,3Department of
Neuroscience, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
Interpretation of genetic data is a big challenge and genetic
testing often results in the identi ﬁcation of variants of unknown
signi ﬁcance. Several of these variants may disrupt normal RNA
splicing or affect gene expression. The aim of this project is to set
up a pipeline in order to identify and characterise variants ofinterest in a pathological setting. To determine if variants have afunctional impact, our pipeline focuses on alternative splicing as
well as the integration of exome and transcriptome data. We used
SpliceAI, an ef ﬁcient tool for predicting the impact of variants on
alternative splicing and rMATS, which best predicts if an
alternative splicing event occurs from exon-intron junctions. A
combination of these two tools further increases detectionefﬁciency. Then, we integrated DNA-seq and RNA-seq variants to
detect allelic imbalances. Custom scripts also integrate variants
with the list of alternative splicing events, previously generated
using SpliceAI and rMATS in order to associate a variant to asplicing junction for both data sets (DNA and RNA). Gene carryingvariants or alternative splicing events were also assessed
differential expression. The variants sought are rare and therefore
require a consistent and ef ﬁcient pipeline in order to facilitate the
detection of these events. Moreover, the integration of omics data
makes it possible to obtain a research track on genes which are
more interesting and to be prioritized. This pipeline makes itpossible to optimize the search for potentially pathogenic variantsin heterogeneous neurological diseases, such as myopathies and
muscular dystrophies.
V. Triassi: None. É. Bareke: None. S. Audet: None. M.
Labrecque: None. M. Tétreault: None.
P17.004.C Gene-SCOUT: gene-based biomarker signatures can
assist identi ﬁcation of novel genes from phenome-wide
association analysesAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
480
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Lawrence Middleton , Quanli Wang, Andrew Harper, Abhishek Nag,
Dimitrios Vitsios, Slavé Petrovski
AstraZeneca, Melbourn, Royston, United Kingdom.
Gene-SCOUT (Gene-Similarity fr om COntinUous Traits) is a gene
similarity score that takes a user-de ﬁned gene and identi ﬁes other
human genes with a similar quantitative trait ﬁngerprint. A
ﬁngerprint represents the statistical associations arising from
studying ~1300 quantitative traits in the UK Biobank 300K exomes.
For each pair of genes that shared at least one signi ﬁcant (p < 1x10-
5) quantitative trait associations we adopted the cosine similarity
m e a s u r et oc a p t u r et h ed i r e c t i o no ft h ee f f e c t .U s i n g APOB as an
exemplar, the top ten ranked genes identi ﬁed to have the most
comparable quantitative trait ﬁngerprint to APOB are: PCSK9 ,
GIGYF1 ,NPC1L1 , ZNF229 ,ANGPTL3 , RRBP1, ACVR1, SLC4A1 ,APOC3
andPDE3B .T h ee n r i c h m e n to f known cholesterol lowering targets
among the top hits demonstrates the robustness of our approach
while also suggesting some alternative genes for follow-up.
Importantly, Gene-SCOUT provides opportunities to expand ourunderstanding of causal gene networks by identifying genes ofsimilar biology. We accompany the results with a rich web-resource
allowing the user to explore in detail similar genes based on a query
gene. The web-resource provides a gene network to help visualiseand explore genes that are similar to each other according to their
ﬁngerprint. In addition, we provide enrichment analyses based on
neighbouring genes establishing whether genes close to each otherare also enriched for biological processes or UK Biobank diseasetraits. Gene-SCOUT can facilitate the discovery of novel genes
beyond those reported in conventional PheWAS analyses and
enables them to be assessed against established disease targets.
L. Middleton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. Q. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. A. Harper: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. A. Nag: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. D. Vitsios: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
P17.006.A Leveraging auxiliary data from arbitrary distribu-
tions to boost GWAS discovery with Flexible cFDR
Anna Hutchinson
1, Guillermo Reales2, James Liley3, Chris Wallace1
1MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,2Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology &
Infectious Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,3University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King-
dom.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed thou-
sands of genetic variants that are associated with complex traits.
However, due to multiple testing constraints GWAS associationsmust exceed a stringent “genome-wide signi ﬁcance threshold ”in
order to be considered robust. Consequently, GWAS discovery is
currently hampered by the lack of statistical power to detectweaker associations.
The conditional false discovery rate (cFDR) framework provides
a tool to leverage one GWAS study to improve power in another.
Here, we describe an extension to the cFDR framework, called“Flexible cFDR ”, that supports auxiliary data from arbitrary
distributions whilst controlling the FDR. Our method can be used
to iteratively leverage any type of functional genomic data with
summary GWAS data to increase power for GWAS discovery, andwe introduce an all-encompassing R package to do this, called‘fcfdr ’(https://annahutch.github.io/fcfdr/ ).We illustrate the ﬂexibility of our method by leveraging GWAS
p-values for rheumatoid arthritis, binary data on SNP overlap with
transcription factor binding sites and H3K27ac histone modi ﬁca-
tion data in T helper cells, to identify seven newly signi ﬁcant
genomic regions that are associated with type 1 diabetes, ofwhich six validated in a larger study. In a second application, we
leverage H3K27ac histone modi ﬁcation data in asthma relevant
cell types, identifying four signi ﬁcant associations with asthma, of
which three validated in the UK Biobank data resource.
Thus, as the already expansive range of functional genomic data
grows, our method can exploit this information to increase
discovery and provide a more complete picture of geneticassociations.
A. Hutchinson: None. G. Reales: None. J. Liley: None. C.
Wallace: None.
P17.007.B Software assessment for prioritization of germline
causal variants of disease from whole-exome sequencing data
Eva Tosco-Herrera
1, Alejandro Mendoza-Alvarez1, Hector
Rodriguez-Perez1, Adrian Muñoz-Barrera2, Antonio Iñigo-Campos2,
Almudena Corrales1,3, Francisco Martinez Bugallo4, Carol Prieto
Morin4, Rafaela González-Montelongo2, Jose Miguel Lorenzo-
Salazar2, Carlos Flores1,2,3, Laura Ciuffreda1, Itahisa Marcelino-
Rodriguez1,5
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de la
Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Genomics Division,
Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de
Tenerife, Spain,3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain,
4Clinical Analysis Service, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de la
Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,5Instituto de Tecnologías
Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
Spain.
Introduction: Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES) experiments
analyze DNA sequences from protein-coding genomic regions,where more than 80% of pathogenic and causal variants ofMendelian diseases are located. Frequently, WES provides a large
number of variants per sample (15,000-25,000 variants). Despite
causal variant prioritization is necessary for clinical diagnosis,bioinformatic standards are lacking. Here we benchmarked freesoftware tools for variant prioritization of causal variants from
empirical WES data.
Materials and methods: A total of 62 WES data from patients
with a known genetic diagnosis were obtained using a HiSeq 4000
Illumina ®system, using 75 bp paired-end reads and a 100 bp
padding to capture the exon- ﬂanking regions. Consistent quality
controls and BWA-GATK v3.8 Best Practices were followed forgermline variant identi ﬁcation using the GRCh37/hg19 human
genome as reference. Whenever necessary, the Human Phenotype
Ontology terms were manually inspected according to thedeclared phenotypes. Different parameters were considered forthe performance assessment of nine software tools.
Results and conclusions: Five of the tools were fully evaluated,
because of technical limitations and installation issues in theothers. Based on conservative ﬁrst-gene rankings, the highest
diagnostic yield was found for Exomiser (69.3%), followed by
AMELIE (46.7%), and Tapes (19.3%). In conclusion, the tools for
variant prioritization provided largely different diagnostic yields,with Exomiser being the best performing tool. Funding: Ministerio
de Ciencia e Innovación (RTC-2017-6471-1; AEI/FEDER, UE); ITER
agreement OA17/008; FIISC (FIIS19/48); ACIISI (TESIS2020010002);Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CD19/00231); ECIT CGIEU0000219140.
E. Tosco-Herrera: None. A. Mendoza-Alvarez: None. H.
Rodriguez-Perez: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. A. Iñigo-Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
481
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Campos: None. A. Corrales: None. F. Martinez Bugallo: None. C.
Prieto Morin: None. R. González-Montelongo: None. J. Lorenzo-
Salazar: None. C. Flores: None. L. Ciuffreda: None. I. Marcelino-
Rodriguez: None.
P17.009.D Need for speed in whole-genome sequencing data
analysis: Benchmarking the new generation of alignment andvariant calling tools
Sylvan M. Caspar1,2, Patricia Stoll1, Janine Meienberg1, Gabor
Matyas1,3
1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Founda-
tion for People with Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland,
2Laboratory of Translational Nutrition Biology, ETH, Schwerzenbach,
Zurich, Switzerland,3Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Introduction: Large datasets of whole-genome sequencing (WGS)
require fast read alignment and variant calling pipelines. However,the current de facto standard pipeline BWA/GATK is hampered by
long runtime, warranting faster alternatives with comparable
accuracy (sensitivity/precision). Here, we benchmark novel ultra-fast WGS data analysis pipelines.
Materials and Methods: Alignment and variant calling were
performed for publicly-availa ble reference datasets (HG001-
HG004), while measuring runtime, as well as for ~50 in-houseWGS samples (60× PCR-free, PE150) using BWA/GATK, DRAGEN,
GENALICE, Isaac/Strelka2, Para bricks (GPU-accelerated BWA/
GATK and BWA/DeepVariant), and Sentieon (CPU-accelerated
BWA/GATK and BWA/DNAscope). For the reference datasets,sensitivity and precision were assessed using the GIAB truth sets
(v.4.2.1) according to the GA4GH guidelines. For our in-house
samples, we performed benchma rking on reportedly (likely)
pathogenic HGMD/ClinVar variants, enabling performance
assessment for sequence varia nts with potential clinical
relevance.
Results: We show that accelerated alignment and variant
calling tools reach similar or even better results than standard
BWA/GATK (sensitivity/precision >0.999 in high-con ﬁdence
regions), with runtimes decreased by a factor of ~17×, 24×, 25×,~53×, and ~84× for Parabricks, Sentieon, Isaac/Strelka2, DRAGEN,and GENALICE, respectively. Furthermore, despite high overall
concordance, our data revealed considerable differences in the
calling of (likely) pathogenic HGMD/ClinVar variants.
Conclusions: Accelerated alignment and variant calling tools
represent signi ﬁcantly faster alternatives to standard BWA/GATK
for the primary (GRCh37 or GRCh38) or secondary (e.g. transitionto GRCh38) analyses of ever-growing WGS data. However, cautionis needed regarding variant calling performance, particularly in the
detection of (likely) pathogenic HGMD/ClinVar variants which
should not be missed in clinical WGS.
S.M. Caspar: None. P. Stoll: None. J. Meienberg: None. G.
Matyas: None.
P17.010.A Mutation showers and mutation fog patterns arise
via different APOBEC3 mechanisms in tumors
David Mas-Ponte
1, Fran Supek1,2
1IRB Barcelona - Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona,
Spain,2Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA),
Barcelona, Spain.The study of the somatic mutations in human tumors has led to
the characterization of a diverse set of mechanisms which can
create multiple genetic changes in a single event. The activity of
APOBEC3 (A3) mutagenic enzymes is the major contributor tothese clustered events and is known for its striking mutationshowers (kataegis) occurring during the repair of DNA break-
points. However, the mechanisms underlying the overall A3
mutation burden, which can be considerable in lung, breast,bladder, and head-and-neck cancers, are less understood.
We systematically measured and classi ﬁed the diverse patterns
of clustered mutations in tumors focusing on APOBEC activity. We
identi ﬁed a new pattern ( “omikli ”, greek for fog) of non-recurrent
and diffuse hypermutation which is highly predictive of the overallmutagenic activity of this enzyme in a cancer, and the burden of
cancer driver mutations.
This mechanism is independent of that underlying kataegis, and
generates short clusters of 2 to 4 mutations. While kataegis
predominantly results from the activity of the APOBEC3B paralog,
omikli results from the APOBEC3A paralog.
Our data suggests an association with the activity of mismatch
repair (MMR) machinery which can provide the single stranded
DNA needed as a substrate for the A3 activity. Due to this
association, mutations coming from the omikli mechanismaccumulate in the early-replicating and gene-rich parts of thegenome. Thus, APOBEC mutagenesis has a high propensity to
generate impactful, gene-altering mutations, exceeding other well
known carcinogens such as tobacco smoking and UV-light.
Published as Mas-Ponte & Supek (2020) Nature Genetics
D. Mas-Ponte: None. F. Supek: None.
P17.012.C Using SMASH for the detection of cancer cells
Sibylle Wil ﬂing
1,2,3, Sarah M. Hücker4, Jens Kunze4, Claudio Lottaz1,
Christoph A. Klein4, Stefan Kirsch4
1Institute of Functional Genomics, Statistical Bioinformatics, Uni-
versity of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany,2Center for Human
Genetics, Regensburg, Germany,3Department of Neurology, Bezirksk-
linikum Regensburg, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Ger-
many,4Division of Personalized Tumor Therapy, Fraunhofer Institute
for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Regensburg, Germany.
Introduction: Chromosomal instability is one of the hallmarks of
cancer and usually detected by expensive and time-consuming
array CGH or low coverage whole genome sequencing. Thedemand for a cheap, ﬂexible-resolution and reliable method for
the detection of single cancer cell CNV aberrations is increasing.
SMASH (Short Multiply Aggregated Sequence Homologies, Wanget al., 2016) enables genomic copy number variation identi ﬁcation
and seems to be a promising method to solve this problem.
Materials and Methods: Based on a cost-effective NGS method
previously established by Fraunhofer ITEM, we developed animproved and ﬂexible SMASH algorithm to determine high-
resolution CNV pro ﬁles of single cells from a breast cancer (SKBR3)
and a lymphoblast cell line (GM12878).
Results: Our SMASH version detected larger CNV aberrancies
(up to 500.000 bins/genome with mean bin length of 5.256 bp)and distinguished breast cancer cells from the lymphoblastic cells
in a fast (runtime about one hour), inexpensive (WGS coverage
required: less than 0.7) and reliable (high concordance betweencells from the same cell line, good concordance with results from
PacBio sequencing) way with ﬂexible resolution.
Conclusions: SMASH is suitable for the detection of CNV
changes and thus can be used to discriminate between cancerAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
482
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608cells with genomic instability and normal cells at very low
coverage. Higher coverage and resolution allow more detailed
characterization of copy number gains and losses. In the future,
SMASH might be able to diagnose cancer e. g. from circulatingtumor cells in a simple blood sample.
S. Wil ﬂing: None. S.M. Hücker: None. J. Kunze: None. C.
Lottaz: None. C.A. Klein: None. S. Kirsch: None.
P17.013.D A cancer genomics reference resource and imple-
mentation toolkit around GA4GH standards
Qingyao Huang1,B oG a o1, Rahel Paloots1, Paula Carrio-Cordo2,
Ziying Yang1,Michael Baudis1
1University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland,2Paula Carrio Cordo,
Zürich, Switzerland.
The Progenetix oncogenomics resource provides sample-speci ﬁc
cancer genome pro ﬁling data and biomedical annotations as well
as provenance data for cancer studies. Especially through morethan 100k genomic copy number number (CNV) pro ﬁles from over
500 cancer types, Progenetix empowers comparative analyses
vastly exceeding individual studies and diagnostic concepts.
Progenetix has been used in research studies, clinical diagnostics
and in the development of data standards for the Global Alliance for
Genomics and Health (GA4GH) and the European bioinformaticsinitiative ELIXIR. The Beacon +service, implemented on top of
Progenetix data, has been instrumental in developing and testing
features of the Beacon protocol such as structural variant queries,
"handover" data delivery and the implementation of queries forphenoptypic and diagnostic parameters for the upcoming Beaconv2 protocol. During development of GA4GH metadata concepts and
schemas - which in ﬂuenced standards such as the Phenopackets
format - cancer speci ﬁc annotations from Progenetix have informed
conceptual requirements and domain-speci ﬁc mappings. The
resource ’s focus on structural genome variants has been instru-
mental in addressing their speci ﬁcr e q u i r e m e n t si nG A 4 G Hs c h e m a
development and the Beacon protocol.
We demonstrate how an open genomic reference resource has
been built around emerging GA4GH standards and how it is being
used to support ongoing and future developments in GA4GH andELIXIR implementation studies, including an introduction aboututilizing the Progenetix code repositories for genomics resource
development. Highlights from the aggregation of cancer genomic
proﬁling data and the associated annotations will be presented.
progenetix.orggithub.com/progenetix
Q. Huang: None. B. Gao: None. R. Paloots: None. P. Carrio-
Cordo: None. Z. Yang: None. M. Baudis: None.
P17.014.A Matching cell lines with cancer type and subtype of
origin via mutational, epigenomic, and transcriptomic patterns
Marina Salvadores
1, Francisco Fuster-Tormo1,2, Fran Supek1,3
1Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Barcelona, Spain,2Institut
de Recerca Contra la Leucèmia Josep Carreras, Badalona, Spain,
3Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona,
Spain.
Introduction: Human-derived cancer cell lines are widely used as
tumor models, for which their tissue-of-origin provides biological
context. However, not all cell lines are suitable as models and
those that better resemble the biological and molecular char-acteristics of the original cancer should be prioritized.Materials and Methods: We used gene expression and DNA
methylation pro ﬁles from 9039 human tumors to generate 16
cancer type classi ﬁers. We applied them to 614 cell lines obtaining
a resemblance score for each cancer type. Then, we searched forassociations between drug response and biomarkers using theoriginal cancer type labels versus taking into account the new
cancer type predictions.
Results: We found 366 (60%) cell lines whose both transcrip-
tomic and epigenomic pro ﬁles strongly resemble their cancer
type-of-origin. For these cell lines we provided tentative subtypes.
Surprisingly, we identi ﬁed 35 (6%) cell lines that better matched a
different tissue type than the one they were originally annotatedwith, both by transcriptome and epigenome. Accounting for thesenew labels in cell line panels (i.e. removing suspect cell lines)
changed the interpretation of drug screening association studies,
revealing previously unknown genomic determinants of sensitivityor resistance.
Conclusions: When selecting a panel of cell lines for experi-
mental work, we suggest that those better resembling the tissue-of-origin by the transcriptomic and epigenomic patterns shouldbe prioritized. This work was recently published as Salvadores et
al. (2020) Science Advances, DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aba1862. Fund-
ing: ERC Starting Grant, FPU fellowship, ICREA professorship andIRB core funding.
M. Salvadores: None. F. Fuster-Tormo: None. F. Supek: None.
P17.015.B Nucleosome positioning based identi ﬁcation of
tissue contributions in cell-free DNA
Sebastian Röner
1,2, Martin Kircher1,2
1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,2Berlin Institute
of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is found in many bodily ﬂuids and is
believed to derive primarily from apoptosis of hematopoietic cells.
In the context of certain physiological conditions or diseaseprocesses, the proportion of tissues contributing to cfDNAchanges. These observations led to an increased research interest
in cfDNA for so-called liquid biopsies.
Besides tracing genetic alleles and methylation states, past
studies showed that cfDNA fragmentation is associated withnucleosome footprints and DNA binding (Snyder et al.,2016). The
fragments carry remnants of their cell-type speci ﬁc epigenome,
which can be leveraged to infer tissues-of-origin. We previouslyprototyped a pipeline based on Windowed Protection Scores and
quanti ﬁcation of nucleosome distances from Fast Fourier Trans-
formation. We showed that cfDNA from healthy individuals moststrongly correlates with expression of hematopoietic cell-types. Incontrast, in samples from late-stage cancer patients the major
contributions align with the cancer ’s tissue-of-origin.
Here, we describe an easy-to-use computational pipeline
implemented to identify these major contributions to cfDNAsamples ( https://github.com/kircherlab/cfDNA ). Based on read
alignments to GRCh37 or GRCh38, nucleosome-positioning signals
around transcribed genes are automatically quanti ﬁed and
correlated with gene expression values of the Human ProteinAtlas (Uhlén et al., 2015). The most correlated expression pro ﬁles
are highlighted for each sample, with the option to contrast them
to another sample (e.g. disease vs. control, time points). Thework ﬂow is implemented in Snakemake and Python, with all
software dependencies managed via conda. With increased
scalability and usability, this analysis can now be easily performedon a wide range of cfDNA samples.
S. Röner: None. M. Kircher: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
483
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P17.016.C Cutevariant: a GUI-based desktop application to
explore genetics variations
sacha schutz
Université Brest, Brest, France.
Cutevariant is a user-friendly GUI based desktop application for
genomic research designed to search for variations in DNAsamples collected in annotated ﬁles and encoded in the Variant
Calling Format. The application imports data into a local relational
database wherefrom complex ﬁlter-queries can be built either
from the intuitive GUI or using a Domain Speci ﬁc Language (DSL).
Cutevariant provides more features than any existing applications
without compromising on performance. The plugin based
architecture provides highly customizable features. Cutevariant isdistributed as a multiplatform client-side software under an opensource licence and is available at https://github.com/labsquare/
Cutevariant . It has been designed from the beginning to be easily
adopted by IT-agnostic end-users.
S. schutz: None.
P17.017.D Automated Deep Learning Software for PCR/
Capillary Electrophoresis Fragment Analysis Enables Ef ﬁcient
Pan-Ethnic CFTR Testing at Scale
Elliot Hallmark , Jacob Ashton, Ryan Routsong, Brian C. Haynes,
Brad Hall, John Milligan, Gary J. Latham, Jessica L. Larson
Asuragen, Austin, TX, USA.
Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive
disease associated with mutations in CFTR . We have developed
a PCR/capillary electrophoresis (CE) assay that detects 67pathogenic variants including SNPs, INDELs, CNVs, and tandemrepeats covering ≥93% of carriers and ≥99% of affected
individuals by mutation prevalence determined by large-scale,
pan-ethnic population studies. Despite the accessibility of PCR/CEas an assay format, downstream analysis is tedious, manual, anderror prone. To overcome these challenges, we developed
software powered by deep learning CE analysis algorithms to
perform automated sample genotyping and QC interpretation.
Materials and Methods: Over 3600 electropherograms and
100,000 genotype peaks were used to develop automated
genotyping methods. Electropherograms were generated byAsuragen ’s prototype AmplideX ®CFTR PCR/CE assay using cell
lines, blood samples, and synthetic constructs across four CE
instruments and different extraction and assay conditions. We
trained a deep convolutional neural network to classify peakswithin the raw signal and developed assay-speci ﬁc logic to
translate peak calls into sample genotypes. Automated genotyp-
ing and QC logic was bundled into push-button reporting
software for use with the PCR/CE assay.
Results: Our automated genotyping software achieved perfor-
mance (>99.5% SNP- & INDEL-level accuracy) on par with trained
technicians. For CNVs (e.g. CFTRdele 2,3), we achieved >99%accuracy. Overall analysis time was reduced from over two hoursto <10 minutes per 96 samples.
Conclusion: The software demonstrates the potential to run
PCR/CE at scale for CF carrier screening and molecular diagnosis indecentralized laboratory settings. The approach is also extensibleto other PCR/CE-based assays.
E. Hallmark: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Asuragen. J. Ashton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Asuragen. R. Routsong: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. B.C. Haynes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. B. Hall: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. J. Milligan: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi
ﬁcant; Asuragen. G.J. Latham: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen. J.L. Larson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Asuragen.
P17.018.A Automated prediction of the clinical impact of copy
number variants: The power of combining expert andmachine learning approach
Jaroslav Budi š1,2,3, Tomá šSláde ček1, Marcel Kucharík1,2, Michaela
Gáiová1,4, Zuzana Pös1,5,6, Ondrej Pös1,5, Mário Hlava čka1, Martin
tevko1, Werner Krampl1,5, Rastislav Hekel1,3,5, Ján Radvánszky1,5,6,
Tomá Szemes1,5,2
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia,2Comenius University Science
Park, Bratislava, Slovakia,3Slovak Center of Scienti ﬁc and Technical
Information, Bratislava, Slovakia,4Department of Computer Science,
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Bratislava, Slovakia,
5Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, Bratislava, Slovakia,
6Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research
Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction: Copy number variants (CNVs) play an important role in
many biological processes, including the development of geneticdiseases, making them attractive targets for genetic analyses. Theinterpretation of the effect of structural variants is a challenging
problem due to highly variable numbers of gene, regulatory, or other
genomic elements affected by the CNV. The state-of-the-art scoringscheme proposed by the American Academy of Medical Genetics(ACMG) is a well-respected guide line for the interpretation. The
proper evaluation of the scheme is however challenging even for
experts skilled in clinical genetics.
Materials and Methods: We automated several steps of the
ACMG scoring scheme, proposing clinicians the recommended
choices along with enclosed explanatory genomic annotations. Inaddition, we implemented a novel method based on machinelearning that uses its own modeling beyond the ACMG scheme to
predict the clinical impact of CNVs.
Results: We demonstrate the high accuracy of the automated
scoring of the ACMG scheme and compare it with the accuracy ofthe machine learning approach. We show that the combination of
these two complementary methods accurately predicts the impact
of the majority of CNVs extracted from the ClinVar database.
Conclusions: Prediction of the clinical impact of CNVs can be
automated, relieving highly valued clinical professionals of tedious
annotation and interpretation processes.
J. Budi š:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.
T. Sláde ček:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton
Ltd. M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Geneton Ltd. M. Gáiová: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Geneton Ltd. Z. Pös: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Geneton Ltd. O. Pös: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Geneton Ltd. M. Hlava čka:A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. M. tevko: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. W. Krampl: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. R. Hekel: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Radvánszky: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. T. Szemes: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Geneton Ltd..
P17.019.B MGvizCNA: a precision medicine webapp with CNA
evidence scoringAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
484
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Pedro Pons-Sunyer1, Jose M. Juanes1, David Gomez-Peregrina2,
Daniel Perez-Gil3, Rodiel Martinez-Jimenez1, Juan M. Rosa-Rosa4,
Maria Ajenjo-Bauza1, Pablo Cano-Jimenez1, Daniel Gil-Conejo1,
Jaime Moreno-Martinez1, Cesar Serrano5, Ana Barbara Garcia-
Garcia6,Pablo Marin-Garcia7
1mgviz.org, Valencia, Spain,2Sarcoma Translational Research Labora-
tory (VHIO), Vall d ’Hebron, Spain,3University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,4Haematological Malignancies Clinical Research Unit,
H12O-CNIO, Valencia, Spain,5Sarcoma Translational Research Labora-
tory (VHIO), Vall d ’Hebron, Spain,6CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM) . Unidad de Genómi ca y Diabetes,
INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain,7Kanteron systems, Paterna, Spain.
Background: Copy Number Alterations (CNA) play an important role
in cancer and mendelian diseases. The current CNA detectionmethodologies using NGS are based mainly on genome reads countcoverage and its pro ﬁle. Usually, read counts present random noise
and biases, which need to be mitigated in order to accurately analyze
copy numbers. Currently there is no consensus yet for accurately
calling CNAs, resulting in many different tools calling too many CNVcandidates with little concordance between their results. Therefore
there is a need for exploring analytical consensus scoring and
interactive visualization tools in order to extract the right clinical
information from the data.
Description: MGvizCNA has its own CNA caller based on
wavelet shrinkage and total variation denoising to smoothenreadcount data while preserving high frequency information suchas breakpoints, and uses a principal component analysis and
expectation-maximization based technique to reduce undesired
biases between samples. Log2ratio segmentation is done via CBSand fused lasso techniques. MGvizCNA includes a CNVReporterapplication for interactive visualization and reporting.
Conclusions: MGvizCNA features a machine learning layer to
clusterize a given sample with similar individuals and detect CNAs asanomalies that deviate from th e assigned population. A work ﬂow for
CNA assessment and a web application for exploring and annotating
the complexity of CNA detection has been created, along by adecision support system for curating and summarizing CNAs fromdifferent callers and helping to describe alteration patterns found in
large datasets associated with different pathologies.
P. Pons-Sunyer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Kanteron Systems. J.M. Juanes: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Kanteron Systems. D. Gomez-Peregrina: None. D.
Perez-Gil: None. R. Martinez-Jimenez: None. J.M. Rosa-Rosa:
None. M. Ajenjo-Bauza: None. P. Cano-Jimenez: None. D. Gil-
Conejo: None. J. Moreno-Martinez: None. C. Serrano: None. A.B.
Garcia-Garcia: None. P. Marin-Garcia: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Kanteron Systems.
P17.020.C SavvyContaminationFinder:Identifying the source
of contamination inshort readsequence data
Matthew N. Wakeling , Rebecca Ward, Sarah E. Flanagan, Sian
Ellard, Andrew T. Hattersley
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Contamination of human DNA samples with DNA
from a different human has the potential to confound results, withmissed true variants, homozygous variants mis-called as hetero-zygous, and false positive calls. A robust approach to contamina-
tion involves both prevention (using stringent laboratory
procedures) and detection (using bioinformatic tools). Anysamples with detected contamination should be re-sequenced,after the root cause of the contamination is identi ﬁed andcorrected. However, without identifying the origin human that
provided the DNA contaminant, this can be dif ﬁcult.
Materials and Methods: We developed SavvyContamination-
Finder, which can analyse VCF ﬁles containing variant calls from
multiple samples, and identify which (if any) of the samples arethe source of the contamination in a sample. The technique works
on short read sequence data from small targeted gene panels up
to whole genome sequencing.
Results: We tested the software on samples with contamination
added in-silico, and determined that the software correctly
identi ﬁes the source and quantity of contamination, even when
multiple contaminants are used. We analysed a batch of 26 wholegenome samples where 22 were accidentally contaminated, withcontamination levels ranging from 1.9% to 30%. Results showed
that when arranging the samples in rows of 8 in the order
speci ﬁ
ed in the sample list, the contaminant was always the
neighbouring sample, indicating a robotics issue in sample
handling.
Conclusions: SavvyContaminationFinder allows the source of
contamination to be determined from short read sequence data.This enables incident response, root cause analysis, and correction
of issues causing contamination.
M.N. Wakeling: None. R. Ward: None. S.E. Flanagan: None. S.
Ellard: None. A.T. Hattersley: None.
P17.021.D Deploying mouse resources for COVID-19 and
related coronavirus research at Mouse Genome Informatics
Anna V. Anagnostopoulos , Susan M. Bello, Monika Tomczuk, David
R. Shaw, Cynthia L. Smith, Carol J. Bult, The Mouse GenomeInformatics Staff and Software Team
The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA.
The ongoing pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) emphasizes the urgent
need for preclinical mouse models to study SARS-CoV-2 biologyand pathogenesis and evaluate candidate vaccines and therapeu-tics against COVID-19. As conventional laboratory mice are
inherently resistant to SARS-CoV-2 infection, various strategies
have been adapted to deploy infection-permissive mouse modelswith a range of viral tropisms and COVID-19 clinical features.These include: transgenic and knock-in mouse strains expressing
human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) under hetero-
logous gene promoters or the endogenous mouse Ace2 promoter;
and common inbred strains transduced with hACE2-encoding
adenoviral/adenoviral-associated vectors or infected with mouse-
adapted SARS-CoV-2 strains. Improved model designs willleverage select mouse genetic tools and strains in the context ofage, gender or comorbidities to replicate pulmonary, immuno-
pathological or systemic hallmarks of severe COVID-19 and
explore genetic/other modi ﬁers of susceptibility, progression
and outcome.
In keeping with its mission as the core knowledgebase for
mouse-human comparative biology, Mouse Genome Informatics
(MGI, www.informatics.jax.org ) has implemented a Coronavirus
Information portal to streamline access to current mechanistic andtherapeutic mouse studies of COVID-19. The portal aggregates
mouse research resources for SARS-CoV-2 and other corona-
viruses, including curated publications and preprints, new andrepurposed mouse models, and human/mouse genes implicated
in coronavirus infection pathophysiology. We present recent
enhancements including: focused expansion of MammalianPhenotype ontology terms enabling enhanced and re ﬁned
retrieval of coronavirus-relevant model phenotypes and genes; a
redesigned page display; and sort/ ﬁlter functionality facilitatingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
485
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608analysis of customized datasets by model design or research
application. Supported by NIH grant HG000330.
A.V. Anagnostopoulos: None. S.M. Bello: None. M. Tomczuk:
None. D.R. Shaw: None. C.L. Smith: None. C.J. Bult: None.
P17.022.A Exploring a strategy for the development of AI-
based diagnostic tools for rare diseases
Paula Romero-Campo1, Bertha Guijarro-Berdiñas1, María Jesús
Sobrido2, Amparo Alonso-Betanzos1
1Research Center on Information and Communication Technologies
(CITIC), Universidade da Coruña, A Coruña, Spain,2Instituto de
Investigación Biomédica A Coruña (INIBIC), A Coruña, Spain.
Background : Developing Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) -based tools for
rare genetic disorders implies grasping the key elements of
medical thinking for differential diagnosis. For that purpose,
instead of using all available knowledge and data sources, pilotapplications may bene ﬁt from a reductionist approach.
Aim: To build a schematic scaffold database for autosomal
recessive genetic ataxias and spastic paraplegias (ASPs) that can
be used to pilot test an automatic diagnostic algorithm.
Methods : We selected a list of ASP entities following the
indications of expert neurologists, collected the most character-
istic terms for each entity automatically from OMIM andORPHANET, and we curated the list through expert review. Wetranslated into English two clinical cases, consisting of several
medical records spanning many years. Then, we extracted key
terms, mapped them to HPO when possible, and checked themagainst our repository to test our method.
Results : We built a pilot database with around 100 recessive
ASPs. We identi ﬁed an average of 19.3 characteristic terms per
entity. We were able to ﬁnd HPO identi ﬁers for 60% of the terms.
We detected some terms lacking discriminative power for the
diagnosis, since they appeared in almost half of the entities
studied. In contrast, 253 terms corresponded to a single entity.Finally, 25% of symptoms in patient data were matched.
Conclusion : Compiling a large knowledge base regarding rare
disorders into a reduced database of characteristics in ﬂuencing
differential diagnosis can be effective to develop computerizeddiagnostic aids. Additionally, applying these methods to realmedical data demands a previous formalization phase.
P. Romero-Campo: None. B. Guijarro-Berdiñas: None. M.
Sobrido: None. A. Alonso-Betanzos: None.
P17.023.B DIVAs: a phenotype-based machine-learning model
to assess the pathogenicity of digenic variant combinations
Federica De Paoli
1, Ivan Limongelli2, Susanna Zucca2,F e d e r i c a
Baccalini1, Valentina Serpieri3,4,F u l v i od ’Abrusco4, Marina Zarantonello5,
Giovanna Fabio6, Maria Carrabba6, Enza Maria Valente3,4, Paolo Magni1
1Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering,
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,2enGenome srl, Pavia, Italy,3IRCCS
Fondazione Istituto Neurologico Nazionale Casimiro Mondino, Pavia,Italy,4Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy,5Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy,6Internal Medicine Department,
Primary Immunode ﬁciencies Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’Granda
Ospedale Maggiore, Milan, Italy.
Background : For decades, the inheritance mechanism of genetic
disorders was explained through the “one gene-one disease ”
paradigm. Recently, more complex models were proposed to explainthose genetic disorders not solv able through a single causativemutation. Here, we propose a method (DIVAs) to assess variants
combination pathogenicity in support of digenic inheritance.
Methods: DIVAs is a machine learning model developed to
classify combinations of digenic variants with respect to patient ’s
phenotypes (provided as HPO terms). Model features capture allcharacteristics of a variant combination and its association with
patient ’s phenotypes at variant, gene and gene-pair level. The
algorithm was trained and tested on a dataset of validatedpathogenic ( http://dida.ibsquare.be ) and benign variants combi-
nations ( https://www.internationalgenome.org/ ).
Results: DIVAs identi ﬁed 64 on 78 digenic combinations when
validated on independent datasets from literature review. Moreover,the algorithm was employed to identify the pathogenic digenicvariants from WES data of three clinical cases for which a single
causative mutation was not able to explain their complex traits. Firstly,
two male siblings with complex phenotypes such as microcephaly,intellectual disability and seizures: DIVAs identi ﬁed the variant
combination involving FRMPD4 and PAK3 genes among all candidate
combinations. Secondly, a patient diagnosed in adulthood for severecombined immunode ﬁciency “leaky ”phenotype, showed a patho-
genic variant combination invol ving CARD11 and STAT3 genes that
w a ss u c c e s s f u l l yr a n k e db yD I V A si nt h et o p ﬁve. In conclusion, our
method can contribute to uncover the missing heritability of geneticdisorders by testing the digenic hypothesis and can be further
expanded to oligogenic variant combinations.
F. De Paoli: None. I. Limongelli: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; enGenome srl. S. Zucca: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; enGenome srl. F. Baccalini: None. V. Serpieri:
None. F. d ’Abrusco: None. M. Zarantonello: None. G. Fabio:
None. M. Carrabba: None. E.M. Valente: None. P. Magni: None.
P17.024.C Investigation of the role of long non-coding RNAs
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
Aigul Sharip
1, Saule Rakhimova1, Mukhtar Tuleutaev2, Baktybai
Orazbekov2, Askhat Molkenov1, Ulan Kozhamkulov1, Yuri Zhukov2,
Marat Omarov2, Ainur Akilzhanova1, Ullykbek Kairov1
1National Laboratory Astana, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan,2Multidisci-
plinary Medical Center of the akimat of Nur-Sultan city, Nur-Sultan,
Kazakhstan.
Esophageal cancer is one of the most common types of cancer
worldwide and sixth in Kazakhstan. Esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) is highly aggressive with poor survival rate. Longnon-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), transcripts longer than 200 nucleo-
tides, play important roles in tumorigenesis and lncRNAs are also
involved in the development and progression of ESCC. The aim ofthe study was to identi ﬁcation of lncRNAs from whole-
transcriptome sequencing of Kazakhstani patients and under-
standing their role in pathogenesis of disease. Tissue samples
were obtained from 25 ESCC-affected individuals immediatelyafter Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy from Oncology Center in Nur-Sultan. STAR software and DESeq2 package were used for
mapping and de ﬁning differentially expressed genes. The lncRNAs
have been identi ﬁed from the list of differently expressed genes
(DEGs) among tumor and normal esophageal tissues. The studysized 14 men and 11 women, 88% of the patients were diagnosed
with advanced stages T3-T4. Among 1197 DEGs (with adjusted
p-value <0.05), we found 61 lncRNAs, comprising 59 upregulatedand 2 downregulated genes. Identi ﬁed lncRNAs are potentially
novel and have not been previously described, so the involvement
of these lncRNAs in ESCC pathogenesis will be studied usingfunctional and enrichment analysis. The recent studies reveal thatlncRNAs may actively associate with the pathogenesis of ESCC.
The implications of novel lncRNAs for pathogenesis andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
486
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608development of potential diagnostics will be further studied.Work
was supported by grant of the Science Committee of the Ministry
of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan,
#AP09058660, and NU CRP grant 021220CRP2222.
A. Sharip: None. S. Rakhimova: None. M. Tuleutaev: None. B.
Orazbekov: None. A. Molkenov: None. U. Kozhamkulov: None.
Y. Zhukov: None. M. Omarov: None. A. Akilzhanova: None. U.
Kairov: None.
P17.025.D ILIAD project: the ERN-ITHACA online registry of
rare diseases with intellectual disability and anomalies ofdevelopment
Morris Swertz1, Klea Vyshka2,3, Fernanda de Andrade1, Joeri Van Der
Velde1, Lennart Johansson1, Dieuwke Prins1, Jill Clayton-Smith4,5,
Dorica Dan6,S oﬁa Douzgou Houge4,7, Laurence Faivre8,9, Tiziana
Franchin10, Andrew Green11, Raoul Hennekam12, Anne Hugon2,
Sylvia Huisman12, Helger Ijntema13, Tjitske Kleefstra14, David
Koolen14, Andrea Manunta15, Jukka Moilanen16, Giovanni Mosiello17,
Sarra Selatnia2, Mahsa Shabani18, Ammi Sundqvist19, Marco
Tartaglia20, Zeynep Tümer21, Birute Tumiene22, Lisenka Vissers13,23,
Dagmar Wieczorek24, Giuseppe Zampino25, Alessandra Renieri26,27,28,
Alain Verloes2,29
1Dept. of Genetics, Genomics Coordination Center, University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,2Dept. of Genetics,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Paris,France,3CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques en
Droit ”, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,4Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom,5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom,6Romanian National Alliance for Rare Diseases RONARD,
Zalau, Romania,7Avdeling for medisinsk genetikk, Haukeland
universitetssjukehus, Haukeland, Norway,8UFR Des Sciences de
Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique
des Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,
9Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference for Development
disorders and intellectual disabilities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI
Institute, University Hospital Dijon, Dijon, France,10Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,11Department of
Clinical Genetics, Temple Street Children ’s University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland,12Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,13Dept of Human
Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,14Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,15Department of Urology, University of Rennes, Rennes,
France,16Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital,
Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu, Finland,17Department of
Surgery, Urology and Neuro-Urology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric
Hospital, Rome, Italy,18Faculty of Law and Criminology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium,19RBU International SBH, Solna, Sweden,
20Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico
Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,21Department of Clinical Genetics,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Den-
mark,22Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Santariskiu,
Vilnius, Lithuania,23Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,24Institute of
Human Genetics and Anthropology, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany,25Department of Woman and
Child Health, Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Institute of
Pediatrics, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli
IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy,
26Med Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Dept of Medical
Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,27Medical Genetics,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,28Genetica Medica, AziendaOspedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,29INSERM UMR 1141
"NeuroDiderot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
European Reference Network ITHACA is developing a “meta-
registry ”called ILIAD, connecting 37 HCPs, databases, and
biobanks in 13 countries for pa tients with dysmorphic/MCA
syndromes and/or intellectual disability. Through the ERN-
ITHACA ’s expert and patient participation network, ILIAD is able
to provide an infrastructure for diagnosis, highly specialisedmultidisciplinary healthcare, evidence-based management, and
collection of secure patient data. The registry is built on
MOLGENIS open-source software, providing ﬂexible rich data
structures, user friendly data import and querying, and FAIRinterfaces for programmatic data exchange. To support the
interoperability, the registry is connected to the European Rare
Disease Registry Infrastructure E RDRI), uses the minimal dataset
of variables from JRC and uses the common Pseudonymisation
Tool (EUPID) to allow the linking of RD pati ent cohorts. ILIAD
consists of 2 components: a central, web-based registry and anetwork of linked satellite/client registries forming the ERN-ITHACA registry federation. Data is modelled adhering to
international interoperability standards from JRC and EJP-RD.
In addition to the core registry, ILIAD will include thematic sub-registries of patients with biol ogically proven monogenic or
genomic (chromosomal) diagnoses, under the supervision of
ERN-based curation teams. ILIAD has adopted a data access
policy, for requesting access to the data, Governance of theRegistry, compliance with applicable legal and regulatory
requirements on the use of Personal Data. We are well
underway to share ERN-ITHACA patient data, yielding high-quality epidemiological insigh ts and expert consensus state-
ments, informing policy decisions that impact RD patients in
general and care for ERN-ITHACA patients in particular (EU
Health Programme Grant 947617).
M. Swertz: None. K. Vyshka: None. F. de Andrade: None. J.
Van Der Velde: None. L. Johansson: None. D. Prins: None. J.
Clayton-Smith: None. D. Dan: None. S. Douzgou Houge: None.
L. Faivre: None. T. Franchin: None. A. Green: None. R.
Hennekam: None. A. Hugon: None. S. Huisman: None. H.
Ijntema: None. T. Kleefstra: None. D. Koolen: None. A. Manunta:
None. J. Moilanen: None. G. Mosiello: None. S. Selatnia: None.
M. Shabani: None. A. Sundqvist: None. M. Tartaglia: None. Z.
Tümer: None. B. Tumiene: None. L. Vissers: None.
D. Wieczorek:
None. G. Zampino: None. A. Renieri: None. A. Verloes: None.
P17.026.A A Flexible and Shared Information Fine-mapping
Approach with an application to 33 cardiometabolic traits
from a Ugandan cohort
Nicolás J. Hernández1, Jana Soenksen2,3, Paul Newcombe1,
Manjinder Sandhu4, Inês Barroso2, Chris Wallace1,5, Jennifer Asimit1
1MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,2Exeter Centre of Excellence for Diabetes Research
(EXCEED), University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom,3School of Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom,4Dept of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
5Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious
Disease (CITIID), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United King-dom.
Joint ﬁne-mapping that leverages information between related
quantitative traits could improve accuracy and precision oversingle-trait ﬁne-mapping. Using summary statistics, ﬂashfm
(FLexible And SHared information Fine-Mapping) ﬁne-mapsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
487
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608association signals for multiple traits measured in the same
sample, borrowing information between them in a Bayesian
framework. In addition, we address key challenges that arise in
real data: missing trait measurements and related individuals.Simulation studies of two traits measured in a single cohort withvarying sample size, varying trait correlation, and varying
proportion of missing data from one trait demonstrate that
ﬂashfm reduces the set of potential causal variants by 30%
compared to single-trait ﬁne-mapping when traits share a causal
variant; when there are no shared causal variants ﬂashfm has
similar results to single-trait ﬁne-mapping. In ﬁne-mapping signals
from 33 cardiometabolic traits in a Ugandan cohort, ﬂashfm
resulted in an average SNP group size reduction of 29% in 34% ofthe regions that had signals for at least two traits, compared to
single-trait ﬁne-mapping. Flashfm is able to make use of
previously generated single-trait ﬁne-mapping results and is freely
available as an R package ( https://github.com/jennasimit/ ﬂashfm ).
It is computationally ef ﬁcient and increases ﬁne-mapping accuracy
and resolution at lower cost, and is more feasible than collectinglarger samples.
Grants: MRC (MC UU 00002/4, MR/R021368/1, MC UU 00002/9),
the Wellcome Trust (107881); This work was funded in part by an
“Expanding excellence in England ”award from Research England.
N.J. Hernández: None. J. Soenksen: None. P. Newcombe:
None. M. Sandhu: None. I. Barroso: None. C. Wallace: None. J.
Asimit: None.
P17.028.C Resolving complex pathogenic alleles using HiFi
long-range amplicon data and a new clustering algorithm
John Harting , Cheryl Heiner, Ian McLaughlin, Lori Aro, Zev
Kronenberg
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
Introduction : Many genetic diseases are mapped to structurally
complex loci. These regions contain highly similar paralogousalleles (>99% identity) that span kilobases within the humangenome. Comprehensive screening for pathogenic variants is
incomplete and labor intensive using short-reads or optical
mapping. In contrast, long-range ampli ﬁcation and PacBio HiFi
sequencing fully and directly resolves and phases a wide range ofpathogenic variants without inference. To capitalize on HiFi
accuracy we designed a new amplicon analysis tool, pbAA. pbAA
can rapidly deconvolve a mixture of haplotypes, enabling precisediplotyping and disease allele classi ﬁcation.
Materials and Methods: In this experiment, we analyzed two
sets of gene-pseudogene systems, GBA and CYP, that are the
second and eighth most common carrier disease alleles,respectively. Samples tested were known to have pathogenic
variants troublesome to test with standard short-read assays. Co-
ampli ﬁed long-range PCR amplicons were generated for GBA (13
kb)/GBAP1 (16 kb), as well CYP21A2 (10 kb)/ CYP21A1P (9 kb). HiFi
reads were generated from libraries and consensus amplicons
were produced using pbAA. Variants were determined using
minimap2 alignments along with a custom SQL database forcharacterizing and reporting results.
Results: We were able to accurately call all pathogenic variants
in the test samples for all replicates, including whole-gene
deletions, gene duplication, gene fusions, recombinant exons,and phased compound heterozygotes. In one trio affected by
adrenal hyperplasia, three large structural variants were correctly
and independently attributed to the parents and proband.
Conclusions : This experiment demonstrates how PacBio HiFi
data analyzed with pbAA simpli ﬁes targeted disease allele
identi ﬁcation.J. Harting: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences. C. Heiner: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. I. McLaughlin: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. L. Aro: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. Z.
Kronenberg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc
Biosciences.
P17.029.D Bioinformatic identi ﬁcation of potential biomar-
ekers in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and their link
to lung cancer
Bayan Abdullah Mallah
1, Babajan Banaganapalli1, Noor Ahmad
Shaik1, Ramu Elango1, Jumana Al-Aama2
1King Abdulaziz University, Faculty of Medicine, Genetic Medicine
department, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,2Princess Al-Jawhara Center of
Excellence in Research of Hereditary Disorders (PACER-HD), Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia.
Introduction: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a
common respiratory disease, characterized by a progressive
obstruction of air ﬂow to the lungs. This study aims to identify
the shared differentially expressed genes (DEGs) involved in
pathogenesis of COPD in blood and lung tissue.
Methods: Two gene expression datasets generated from blood
(GSE54837) and tissue (GSE8581) were analyzed to detect sharedDEGs. We further explored the hub genes, using protein-cluster
network and functional enrichment analysis. The prioritized genes
were searched in genome wide association study databases toreveal their association with COPD risk, and were also queriedthese hub-COPD genes in several cancer expression databases for
uncovering their probable role in lung cancer.
Results: In the human lung tissue (E-GEOD-8581), and in the
COPD blood (GSE54837) datasets, we identi ﬁed 691 and 743 DEGs
respectively, and 63 shared between them. In protein network of
63 nodes found 12 hub genes with network centrality >18. Thefunctional enrichment analysis of 12 hub gene network clustersreveled that they are involved in in ﬂammation process and
protein ubiquitination. These 12 might contribute to the
pathogenesis of COPD, furthermore two genes IRAK2 and MECOMdisplayed a critical role in the development of lung cancer inpatient with COPD. In addition, we identi ﬁed 5/12 of hub COPD
genes as prognostic factor in lung cancer.
Conclusion: This study revealed novel role for few genes and
shed new light on the molecular mechanisms of COPD and lung
cancer pathogenesis, and provide potential novel drug targets for
both diseases.
B.A. Mallah: None. B. Banaganapalli: None. N.A. Shaik: None.
R. Elango: None. J. Al-Aama: None.
P17.030.A GenRisk: a tool to derive individual-level gene
scores based on the load of rare damaging variants
Rana S. Aldisi
1, Oleg Borisov1, Emadeldin Hassanin1,2, Andreas
Mayr3, Peter Krawitz1, Carlo Maj1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2MeGeno S.A, Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg,3Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
The inheritance of human traits is usually divided into two major
classes, monogenic and polygenic or complex. Monogenicphenotypes are usually rare and with high penetrance and theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
488
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608phenotypic status is driven by speci ﬁc mutations. In contrast,
complex traits are considered as the result of multiple variants
with modest effects, that are distributed over the entire genome.
An oligogenic contribution is suggested when both high impactmutations and polygenic effects are expected to contribute thegenetic susceptibility together due to the enrichment of
functional rare deleterious variants. GenRisk (Comprehensive
Gene-based Assessment) is a tool that implements differentgene-based scoring schemes to weights for deleteriousness andrareness of variants. The gene-based scores are derived from allele
frequency and functional annotations of variants of coding-region.
Additional genetic (e.g., polygenic risk scores) and non-genetic riskfactors can be integrated in GenRisk to perform gene-basedassociation analyses and model predictions. Here we computed
CADD-weighted rare-variants (<1% MAF) based gene-scores for
~50k male samples from UK-Biobank. The analysis of malebaldness phenotype in UK Biobank exome data showed a strong
association with the Androgen Receptor (AR), a gene that was also
found to be associated with the phenotype by GWAS. CodeAvailability: https://github.com/AldisiRana/GenRisk
R.S. Aldisi: None. O. Borisov: None. E. Hassanin: None. A.
Mayr: None. P. Krawitz: None. C. Maj: None.
P17.032.C Quantifying the shared genetic effects on the
regulation of expression and protein levels using related and
unrelated individuals
Théo Dupuis
1, Jose Manuel Soria2, Juan Carlos Souto1, Angel
Martinez-Perez2, Jochen M. Schwenk1, Emmanouil Theophilos
Dermitzakis3, Ewan Pearson1, Ana Viñuela4, Andrew Anand Brown1
1University of Dundee, School of Medicine, Dundee, United Kingdom,
2Unit of Genomics of Complex Diseases, Research Institute of Hospital
de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, IIB Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain,
3Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of
Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland,4. Institute of Genetic
Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle University, New-castle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Molecular experiments can be used to identify the gene/protein
which mediates GWAS genetic effects on disease risk. For instance,RNA-seq provides genome-wide quanti ﬁcations of expression and
is used to understand the consequences of GWAS variants.
However, it will not explain those that act on regulatory processes
downstream of transcription. Studies have found low correlationsbetween expression and protein levels, but these could be due to
environmental and technical factors. Here, we consider the extent
to which eQTLs have also an immediate effect on translation andquantify the degree to which regulations of expression andprotein levels share a genetic architecture. We estimated the
genetic correlations of whole-blood gene expression (RNA-seq)
and plasma proteins (Olink) using two different study designs: afamily dataset from a pedigree produced by the GAIT2 project (N=67, 90 proteins, expression of 16748 genes), and a dataset of
unrelated individuals from the DIRECT consortium (N =3029, 452
proteins, 16209 genes). We con ﬁrmed the low correlation (rP)
between the two molecular phenotypes: the median absolute rPwas ~0.10 for the 47 gene/proteins pairs tested in GAIT2 (median |
rP| ~0.04, 320 pairs (DIRECT)). However, genetic correlations (rG)
were signi ﬁcantly larger (median |rG| =0.34, Wilcoxon test p =
2.9e-8 (GAIT2), median |rG| =0.38, p =5.3e-51 (DIRECT)). One
example is RETN, for which rG =0.80, rP =0.47 (GAIT2), and the
variant rs62109837 was found to regulate both its expression andprotein levels. These results suggest that the low phenotypiccorrelation between expression and protein levels is mainly drivenby environmental and technical factors while most genetic effects
are shared.
T. Dupuis: None. J.M. Soria: None. J.C. Souto: None. A.
Martinez-Perez: None. J.M. Schwenk: None. E.T. Dermitzakis:
None. E. Pearson: None. A. Viñuela: None. A.A. Brown: None.
P17.033.D New RD-Connect GPAP features implemented in
collaboration with Solve-RD, EJP-RD and ELIXIR enable thediagnosis of rare disease patients with previously negative
WES/WGS
Leslie Matalonga
1, Davide Piscia1, Anastasios Papakonstantinou1,
Carles Hernández-Ferrer1, Alberto Corvò1, Steven Laurie1, Carles
Garcia-Linares1, Raul Tonda1, Ida Paramonov1, Daniel Picó1, Marcos
Fernandez-Callejo1, Dylan Spalding2, Thomas Keane3, Hanns Loch-
muller4, Rita Horvath5, Holm Graessner6, Alexander Hoischen7, Ivo
Gut1, Sergi Beltran1
1CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,2European
Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK., Cambridge,
United Kingdom,3European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome
Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,4Children ’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute;
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, the Ottawa Hospital;and Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,Canada., Ottawa, ON, Canada,
5Department of Clinical Neu-
roscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK., Cambridge,
United Kingdom,6Institute for Medical Genetics and Applied
Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, Tübingen,Germany,7Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands.
Introduction: The RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Analysis Plat-
form (GPAP, https://platform.rd-connect.eu/ ) is an IRDiRC recog-
nised resource for diagnosis and gene discovery in Rare Diseases(RD). The interface allows clinical scientists to collaboratively
analyse integrated genome-phenome data under controlled
access. The GPAP contains pseudonymised data from over15,000 individuals and is a key resource for Solve-RD ( http://
solve-rd.eu/ ), EJP-RD ( https://www.ejprarediseases.org/ ) and the
ELIXIR RD Community ( https://elixir-europe.org/communities/rare-
diseases ).
Material and methods: The new features have been imple-
mented on the RD-Connect GPAP, which processes and indexes
pseudonymised genome-phenome data submitted by partnersfrom Solve-RD and EJP-RD, among others.
Results: Recent developments facilitate data submission and
integration, as well as the analysis and visualisation of the data.
These development include a module to collate and exportphenotypic information using broadly used standards (e.g. HPO,ORDO, OMIM, GA4GH Phenopackets), a user-friendly tool to create
in-silico patient cohorts according to phenotypic and experimen-
tal information, and the ability to remotely visualise sequencealignments archived at the European Genome-Phenome Archive(EGA). Furthermore we have added a module providing program-
matic access to the GPAP for the automation of genomic analyses.
Some of these developments have been used to enable thediagnosis of the ﬁrst 208 patients within the Solve-RD project.
Conclusion: New developments in the GPAP have contributed
to identify hundreds of disease-causing variants in patients withRDs and con ﬁrm diagnosis hypotheses through patient match-
making approaches.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
489
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Funding: EU projects (FP7-305444, H2020-779257, H2020-
825575), ISCIII (PT13/0001/0044, PT17/0009/0019), INB and ELIXIR.
L. Matalonga: None. D. Piscia: None. A. Papakonstantinou:
None. C. Hernández-Ferrer: None. A. Corvò: None. S. Laurie:
None. C. Garcia-Linares: None. R. Tonda: None. I. Paramonov:
None. D. Picó: None. M. Fernandez-Callejo: None. D. Spalding:
None. T. Keane: None. H. Lochmuller: None. R. Horvath: None.
H. Graessner: None. A. Hoischen: None. I. Gut: None. S. Beltran:
None.
P17.034.A Systematic and automated genotype-phenotype
associations reassessment through ClinVar follow-up
Kevin Yauy1, Francois Lecoquierre2, Stephanie Baert-Desurmont2,
Detlef Trost3, Aicha Boughalem3, Armelle Luscan3, Jean-Marc Costa3,
Vanna Geromel4, Laure Raymond4, Pascale Richard5, Sophie
Coutant6, Melanie Broutin7, Raphael Lanos7, Quentin Fort7, Stenzel
Cackowski8, Quentin Testard1, Abdoulaye Diallo7, Nicolas Soirat7,
Jean-Marc Holder7, Denis Bertrand7, Anne-Laure Bouge7, Sacha
Beaumeunier7, Jerome Audoux7, David Genevieve9, Laurent Mes-
nard10, Gael Nicolas6, Julien Thevenon1, Nicolas Philippe7
1Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Centre de recherche UGA, Inserm
U 1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France,2Normandie Univ,
UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Genetics and Reference Center for Developmental Disorders,Rouen, France,3Laboratoire CERBA, Saint Ouen L ’Aumone, France,
4Laboratoire Euro ﬁns Biomnis, Lyon, France,5AP-HP, DMU BIOGEM,
UF Cardiogénétique et Myogénétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
UMR_S 1166, Sorbonne Université and ICAN Institute, HôpitalUniversitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,6Normandie Univ, UNI-
ROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department of
Genetics and Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, F 76000,
Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen,France,7SeqOne, Montpellier, France,8Inserm U1216, Grenoble
Institut Neurosciences, GIN, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France,
9Department of Medical Genetics, Rare Disease, and Personalized
Medicine, IRMB, University of Montpellier, National Institute of Healthand Medical Research, Montpellier University Hospital Center,
Montpellier, France,10Soins Intensifs Néphrologiques et Rein Aigu,
Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris-SorbonneUniversité, Paris, France.
Background: Despite the increasing accessibility of genome
sequencing, medical interpretation is restricted to the knowledgeavailable at the time of analysis. The increasing knowledge would
justify the systematic reevaluation of previous analyses, though
limitations for such manual reinterpretation renders this approachimpractical.
Methods: Here we report an automated reassessment method
of variant pathogenicity and gene-phenotype associations, called
Genome Alert!, through data-mining of ClinVar database. Thismethod highlight changes that are likely to impact geneticdiagnosis predicated on ClinVar submissions processing by
interquartile range outlier detection, reclassi ﬁcation monitoring
and agglomerative clustering. A retrospective 2-years multicentricseries (2018-2019) of 5.285 consecutive patients screened bytargeted or exome sequencing were evaluated. Variant laboratory
database or VCF ﬁles were queried by genomic positions of
Genome Alert! ’s clinically potential variant selection.
Results: Retrospective analysis of ClinVar submissions high-
lighted 107.167 signi ﬁcant changes in variant status and a
monthly median of 23 new genes associated with Mendeliandiseases between July 2017 and December 2019. Application ofour variant monitoring system in 4.929 targeted sequencing for
cancer predisposition syndromes indicated 45 potentialreclassi ﬁcations, with 42 changes subsequently expert-validated,
and pinpointed 5 previously missed diagnoses. For exome
sequencing reanalysis, 75 recently identi ﬁed in ClinVar morbid
genes were used for a selective reanalysis of 356 negatives tests.This strategy ﬂagged 42 potentially pathogenic variants and
resulting in one new diagnosis.
Conclusions: The open-source Genome Alert! method ( https://
genomealert.univ-grenoble-alpes.fr/ ) could enable the systematic
reassessment of genomic data in a clinical routine, thus improvingdiagnostic yield and robustness in genomic medicine.
K. Yauy: None. F. Lecoquierre: None. S. Baert-Desurmont:
None. D. Trost: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Cerba. A. Boughalem: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Cerba. A. Luscan: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Cerba. J. Costa: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Cerba. V. Geromel: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Euro ﬁns Biomnis. L. Raymond: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Euro ﬁns Biomnis. P.
Richard: None. S. Coutant: None. M. Broutin: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne. R. Lanos: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne. Q. Fort:
A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; SeqOne. S. Cackowski: None. Q. Testard: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Euro ﬁns Biomnis. A.
Diallo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne. N.
Soirat: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne. J.
Holder: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne. D.
Bertrand: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne.
A. Bouge: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne.
S. Beaumeunier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
SeqOne. J. Audoux: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
SeqOne. D. Genevieve: None. L. Mesnard: None. G. Nicolas:
None. J. Thevenon: None. N. Philippe: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; SeqOne.
P17.035.B HD Hub: a centralized database and interactive web
platform for high-de ﬁnition likelihood inference
Chenqing Zheng1, Ao Lan1, Zheng Ning2, Jie Zheng3, Xia Shen1,4
1Biostatistics Group, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, GuangZhou, China,2Department of
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stock-holm, Sweden,3MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit (IEU), Medical
School, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom,4Centre for Global
Health Research, Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences andInformatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
High-de ﬁnition likelihood (HDL) is a powerful method for estimating
genetic correlations between complex traits using genome-wideassociation study (GWAS) summary statistics. Compared to
individual-level genetic data, GWAS summary-level data are easier
to acquire and computationally more tractable even for very largesample sizes. However, GWAS summary statistics are typically based
on different population references and have different formats,
causing it challenging to use HDL to estimate genetic correlationsacross many different traits simultaneously. Here we introduce HDHub, a centralized database with hundreds of thousands of
heritability and genetic correlation estimates, estimated using HDL
based on harmonized summary association statistics for complextraits from LD Hub and UK Biobank (UKBB). HD Hub is a web-basedplatform that provides interactive and real-time visualizations and
analysis of HDL results. Future developments of HDL with different
extensions can also be explored via HD Hub.
C. Zheng: None. A. Lan: None. Z. Ning: None. J. Zheng: None.
X. Shen: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
490
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P17.037.D Computation of a database of interspersed repeats
in coding regions of the human genome
Doan T. L. Vo Ngoc1,2, Randy Osei1,2, Katrien Dohr1,2, Catharina
Olsen2,3, Katrien Stouffs1,2, Karen Sermon4, Sara Seneca1,2, Alexander
Gheldof1,2
1Neurogenetics Research Group, Reproduction Genetics and Regen-
erative Medicine Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,Belgium,2Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium,
3Brussels Interuniversity Genomics High Throughput core (BRIGHT-
core), VUB-ULB, Brussels, Belgium,4Department for Reproduction and
Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
Introduction: Our group recently detected a deletion of GAA
exon 9, which was ﬂanked by two repeat sequences. Based on
this, we intend to identify the frequency of similar direct repeatsspanning an exonic sequence in the coding sequences of the
genome. Our main aim is to create a publicly available repository
for this type of interspersed repeats.
Materials and Methods: We scanned the human reference
genome for all repeat sequences of a length ranging from 7-20bp,
separated by a maximum distance of 1000bp. We selected
instances where at least one repeat was found in an exon orwhen both repeats were ﬂanking an exon. The human genome
was queried 4^7 times for 7bp repeats on a high-end 24-core
computer running with 36 GB of memory.
Results: We developed a fast pipeline which queries the human
genome for instances of interspersed repeats. One scanning cycle
of the genome for a single 7bp sequence took 30 seconds, while
the gene annotations took 8 seconds. In total, the analysis of 4^7sequences in the human genome took 15 hours. This resulted in aprecompiled dataset of interspersed repeats within coding regions
of the human genome.
Conclusions: We here present a dataset for interspersed
repeats in coding regions of the human genome. Data can be
requested for a single gene or in batches through an R query. This
will be made publicly available and we aim to use our pipeline toexpand our analysis for genomes of other organisms as well.
D.T.L. Vo Ngoc: None. R. Osei: None. K. Dohr: None. C. Olsen:
None. K. Stouffs: None. K. Sermon: None. S. Seneca: None. A.
Gheldof: None.
P17.038.A Plasma: a versatile e-learning platform for teaching
interactively genomic and genetic data analysis with Jupyternotebooks
Claire Vandiedonck
1, Pierre Poulain2, Sandrine Caburet2
1Université de Paris, INSERM, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers,
F-75006 Paris, France,2Université de Paris, CNRS UMR 7592, Institut
Jacques Monod, F-75013 Paris, France.
Plasma ( “Plateforme d ’eLearning pour l ’Analyse de données
Scienti ﬁques MAssives ”) allows to interactively teach computa-
tional analysis of massive scienti ﬁc data, providing user-friendly,
reproducible and high-performance environments. Our previousexperience of teaching genomics was limited by available
academic computational resources, restricting studies to unrealis-
tically small datasets. Remote access was not possible and the useof Unix terminal was intimidating for most biology students.
Jupyter notebooks distributed by a JupyterHub were chosen to
address these limitations. In co llaboration with QuantStack, a
company strongly involved in the Jupyter ecosystem, we designedan open-source web-based solution that can be easily deployed onbare-metal or virtual servers, able to deploy numerous, simultaneousand speci ﬁc analysis environments (supporting any programming
languages and versions, and Rstudio), with a simple and intuitive
interface using con ﬁguration ﬁles hosted on Github. Plasma utilizes
tljh-repo2docker, a plugin for The Littlest JupyterHub.
A prize-winning ﬁrst instance of Plasma was set up for teachers
and students of the European Master of Genetics (Université de
Paris). It was used extensively since september 2020 and enabled
about 150 users to carry on bioinformatic training despite thepandemic. Students could connect remotely and carry out theiranalysis without installing anything on their own device. Two
widgets were also developed, ipycytoscape and ipyigv, to use
Cytoscape and the genome browser IGV in Jupyter notebooks. Afull documentation is available (plasmabio.readthedocs.io).
Thus, Plasma provides an integrated versatile solution to teach
in a user-friendly way realistic bioinformatic analyses, thus better
preparing students for their future work in research labs.
C. Vandiedonck: None. P. Poulain: None. S. Caburet: None.
P17.039.B LoFTK: a framework for ef ﬁcient and automated
prediction of loss-of-function variants
Abdulrahman Alasiri
1,2, Konrad J. Karczewsk3,4, Brian Cole5, Bao-Li
Loza6, Sander W. van der Laan1,7, Folkert W. Asselbergs1,8,9, Brendan
James Keating6, Jessica van Setten1
1Department of Cardiology, Division Heart and Lungs, University
Medical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
2Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah Interna-
tional Medical Research Center, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University
for Health Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3Program in Medical and Population Genetics,
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA,4Analytic
and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA,5Bioinformatics Core, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA,6Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA,7Central Diagnostic Laboratory,
Division Laboratories, Pharmacy, and Biomedical genetics, UniversityMedical Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
8Health Data Research UK and Institute of Health Informatics,
University College London, London, United Kingdom,9Institute of
Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences,University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Loss-of-Function (LoF) variants in human genes have drawn
attention due to their impact on clinical phenotypes and frequentoccurrence in healthy individuals ’genomes. The association of LoF
variants with complex diseases and traits may lead to the discovery
and validation of novel therapeutic targets. Current approachespredict high-con ﬁdence LoF variants without identifying the speci ﬁc
genes or the number of copies affected. We have developed the
Loss-of-Function ToolKit (LoFTK), which allows ef ﬁcient and auto-
mated prediction of LoF variants from both genotyped andsequenced genomes. LoFTK enables the identi ﬁcation of genes
that are inactive in one or two copies and provides summary
statistics for downstream analyses. LoFTK accepts input in two
standard ﬁle formats: VCF and Oxford ﬁle format (IMPUTE2 output).
Optionally, LoFTK can identify com pound heterozygotes if the user
supplies phased genotypes. LoFTK generates two tables of LoF
variants and their respective genes, listing predicted LoF variants
and their zygosity status for each individual, and LoF genes and theirinactive copy number for each individual, respectively. In addition, a
report with descriptive statistics on the variants and genes is
produced. LoFTK is command-line based that allows for integrationin existing work ﬂows and enables ef ﬁcient and automated LoF
variant and gene prediction. LoFTK is open source and freely
available at https://github.com/CirculatoryHealth/LoFTK .Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
491
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608A. Alasiri: None. K.J. Karczewsk: None. B. Cole: None. B. Loza:
None. S.W. van der Laan: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. B.J.
Keating: None. J. van Setten: None.
P17.040.C miRNA-mRNA regulatory network in testicular
tissues with idiopathic Sertoli cell-only syndrome suggest an
important role for hsa-miR-122-5p by controlling germ celldevelopment
Jorge Victor Wilfredo Cachay Wester , Alfredo Ribeiro-Silva, João
Monteiro de Pina-Neto
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
Introduction: Male factor infertility accounts for about half the cases
of couple infertility with genetic and non-genetic causes and inaround 50% of cases are idiopathic. The most severe histopatholo-
gical phenotype in male infertility is the Sertoli cell-only syndrome
(SCOS) which is characterized by to tal germ cell aplasia in testicular
tissue. Transcriptome analysis performed formalin- ﬁxed paraf ﬁn-
embedded (FFPE) of testicular tissue revealed the loss of expression
of several genes and microRNAs as sociated to cell proliferation
signaling pathways. However, still lesser is known about themolecular mechanisms involved in idiopathic SCOS. The aim of this
study was to report the interaction of hsa-miR-122-5p and its target
genes in human male testes with SCOS.
Materials and Methods: For this purpose we collected six FFPE
samples of testicular biopsy from men with obstructive azoos-
permia and Sertoli cell-only syndrome, archived since 2001 and
these were analyzed by small RNA-seq and TruSeq-RNA exome inorder to detect small non-coding RNA and mRNA expression.
Results: Our analysis detected 37 DE miRNAs and 738 DE mRNA.
We found hsa-miR-122-5p upregulated in SCOS samples and its
target genes downregulated. Functional annotation of miRNA andmRNA together corresponded to an aberrant expression of genes
associated to the cell cycle an d meiosis of male germ cells. The
regulatory network suggest an im portant role of hsa-miR-122-5p as
post transcriptional regulator of downregulated genes.
Conclusions: We concluded that hsa-miR-122-5p can be
associated to the regulation of several genes in human male
testes with idiopathic SCOS.
J.C. Wester: None. A. Ribeiro-Silva: None. J. Pina-Neto: None.
P17.041.D Correction for sample overlap, Winner ’s curse and
weak-instruments bias in two-sample Mendelian
Randomization
Ninon Mounier
1,2,Zoltán Kutalik1,2,3
1University Center for Primary Care and Public Health, Lausanne,
Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzer-
land,3Department of Computational Biology, University of Lau-
sanne, Switzerland.
Introduction: Inverse-variance weighting (IVW) two-sample Men-
delian Randomization (MR) is the most widely used method toestimate the causal effect of an exposure on an outcome.
However, the resulting causal effect estimates may suffer from
different biases due to sample overlap, Winner ’s curse and weak
instruments.
Methods: Assuming a spike-and-slab genomic architecture, we
analytically derived the bias of such estimate, which can be
quanti ﬁed using only summary statistics. Hence, we propose a
correction of the IVW-MR estimate and compared it against itsuncorrected counterpart under a wide range of simulationssettings. Finally, we performed IVW-MR based on summary
statistics for body mass index (BMI) and systolic blood pressure
(SBP) obtained from overlapping samples (N
BMI=686,128, N SBP=
340,159, N overlap=340,159) and corrected the obtained causal
effect estimates using our method.
Results: Using simulated data, we observed that when the
confounder and the causal effect are acting in the same direction,
IVW-MR effects are overestimated for fully-overlapping samplesand underestimated for non-overlapping samples. When they areacting in opposite directions, observed effects are underestimated
for all overlaps because the three sources of biases are towards
the null. In all the explored scenarios, our correction reduced bias(up to 30 folds). Using summary statistics for real data, our methodrevealed that IVW-MR causal effects of BMI on SBP and of SBP on
BMI were both signi ﬁcantly overestimated (by 15% and 10%
respectively).
Conclusions: We developed a method to correct causal effect
estimates for sample overlap, weak instrument bias and Winner ’s
curse simultaneously using only summary statistics.
N. Mounier: None. Z. Kutalik: None.
P17.042.A Intake of synbiotic alters metabolism, decision-
making and behavior
Aakash Mantri
Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Ger-
many.
A higher gut microbial diversity can be associated with improved
dietary decisions and healthier choices due to the host being ableto evaluate food options for choice and / or retain more (self-)
control over his eating decisions. We hypothesized, that a seven-
week treatment with a synbiotic dietary supplement, as comparedto a placebo treatment, will increase diversity of the gut
microbiome in human participants. Furthermore, the modulation
of the gut microbiota will alter the human metabolism.StudyDesign: The data collected were part of a dietary interventionstudy conducted between March and November 2019 at
University Hospital Bonn, Germany. The study was performed
with a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blinded studypopulation. The participants attended two sessions in whichbehavioral experiments, structural and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) data, psychophysiological as well as
metabolic parameters and gut microbiota samples were collec-ted.16S Amplicon sequencing was done on the gut microbiota
samples on the 16s region. Sequenced data was analyzed using
Qiime2 and phyloseq packages. As a manipulation check of ourintervention, we quanti ﬁed the abundance of the administered
bene ﬁcial bacteria Lactobacillus and Bi ﬁdobacterium, as it is
expected to show increased abundance post vs. pre intervention
in the intervention compared to the placebo control group. Wehave compared the change in diversity post versus pre interven-tion (T2-T1), in the intervention relative to the control group. We
also checked for association of all microbiome changes with liver
metabolism and behavioral data.
A. Mantri: None.
P17.043.B Comparison of Established Microsatellite Instability
Detection Tools in Next Generation Sequencing
Ayça Açar
1, Merve Say1, Bar ışSalman1, Mutlu Av şar Dülger2
1Gen Era Diagnostics, Bioinformatics Department, Istanbul, Turkey,
2Gen Era Diagnostics, Application Department, Istanbul, Turkey.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
492
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Repetitive microsatellite sequences are very prone to mutation
due to the slippages in homopolymer regions during replication. If
the DNA repair system is de ﬂected, these errors cannot be
corrected. Thus, the number of these repeat regions varies inpopulation and causes genomic instability. FFPE tumor tissues
taken from cancer patients were analyzed with Solid Tumor
Solution (STS) kit of Sophia Genetics. Target enrichment wasperformed with hybrid-capture method and six loci were
analyzed. The algorithm compares the homopolymer length at
each locus for each sample to an average length of microsatellite.Two different distance scores were calculated; the ﬁrst one was
determined in comparison with the other samples in the same
run, whereas the latter was compared to a global database which
contains more than 400 clinical samples. The samples with adistance score lower than six were interpreted as microsatellitestable (MSS); whereas the values between six and fourteen
indicated microsatellite instability with low con ﬁdence (MSI-LC).
The samples with scores higher than fourteen were classi ﬁed as
microsatellite unstable with high con ﬁdence (MSI-HC). These
results were validated with MSIsensor-pro and MANTIS tools with
altering the threshold values for classes. In result, unlike thestandard PCR and immunohistochemistry methods, next genera-tion sequencing (NGS) allows more than one microsatellite loci to
be analyzed more accurately without the need of matched normal
tissue. Considering that MSI-high status is becoming a pan-cancerbiomarker, using NGS combined with multigene panels will allowfor time and cost lowering of biomarker testing in cancer patients.
A. Açar: None. M. Say: None. B. Salman: None. M. Dülger:
None.
P17.044.C Digging exome sequencing data: An example of a
homozygous mobile element insertion detected in a raredisease cohort
Philippine Garret
1,2, Martin Chevarin1,3, Antonio Vitobello1,3, Simon
Verdez1,3, Cyril Fournier4,5, Alain Verloes6,7, Emilie Tisserant1,3, Pierre
Vabres1,8,9, Orlane Prevel1,9, Christophe Philippe1,3, Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon1,3,10, Ange-Line Bruel1,3, Frédéric Tran Mau-
them1,3,11, Hana Safraou1,3,10, Aïcha Boughalem2, Jean-Marc Costa2,
Detlef Trost2, Laurence Faivre1,10, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,3,11,
Yannis Duffourd1,3
1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, 21070 Dijon, France,2Laboratoire Cerba, Saint-
Ouen l ’Aumône, France,3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic
génomique des maladies rares –FHU-TRANSLAD –Dijon University
Hospital, Dijon, France,4University of Burgundy-iSITE –INSERM UMR
1231 –Faculty of Medicine, 21000 Dijon, France,5Unit for innovation in
genetics and epige netic in oncology –Dijon University Hospital, Dijon,
France,6UMR1141 INSERM –Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France,
7Genetics Department –AP-HP, Robert-Debré Unive rsity Hospital, Paris,
France,8Centre de Référence maladies ra res « maladies dermatologi-
ques en mosaïque » –service de dermatologie –FHU-TRANSLAD –Dijon
University Hospital, Dijon, France,9Service Dermatologie –Dijon
University Hospital, Dijon, France,10Centre de Référence maladies rares
« Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs » –centre de
génétique –FHU-TRANSLAD –Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France,
11Centre de Référence maladies rares « dé ﬁciences intellectuelles de
c a u s er a r e» –centre de génétique –FHU-TRANSLAD –Dijon University
Hospital, Dijon, France.
Introduction : About 27% of the human genome is composed of
mobile elements (MEs), which can cr eate genomic instability leading
to genetic diseases. The mechanism of MEs insertion has beendescribed in several pathologies. It has been estimated that about
0.3% of all variations are due to de novo insertions. Nowadays, themassive development of next-gen eration sequencing provides the
opportunity to identify new MEs insertions on large scale.
Methodology : Exome sequencing (ES) data from patients
affected with developmental and/or neurological abnormalitieshave been analyzed by MELT, a tool identifying MEs insertions.The results were ﬁltered by frequency, impacted region and gene
function.
Results : Following phenotype comparison and PCR validation,
a convincing candidate was foun d in a suspected consangui-
neous patient referred for po ikilodermia. A homozygous Alu
insertion was identi ﬁed in exon 7 of FERMT1 gene involved in
Kindler syndrome, a c ondition responsibl e for poikilodermia.
FERMT1 protein mediates anchorage between keratinocytescytoskeleton and extracellular matrix via focal adhesions. RNA-
seq analyzes showed an in-frame exon 7 skipping in proband ’s
ﬁbroblasts. This deletion is located in one of the two FERM
domains involved in localizing the protein to plasma membrane.
This work provided evidence this Alu insertion is linked to the
proband ’sp h e n o t y p e .
Conclusion : As two previous studies on ES data, this project
aims to identify new insertions in genes and highlights the
interest to include MEs detection in ES pipeline to reduce
diagnostic wavering. This work on preexisting ES data representsan additional argument in favor of Exome/Genome sequencingsuitability as a unique exam.
P. Garret: None. M. Chevarin: None. A. Vitobello: None. S.
Verdez: None. C. Fournier: None. A. Verloes: None. E. Tisserant:
None. P. Vabres: None. O. Prevel: None. C. Philippe: None. A.
Denommé-Pichon: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau-them:
None. H. Safraou: None. A. Boughalem: None. J. Costa: None. D.
Trost: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Y.
Duffourd:
None.
P17.046.A Biologically interpretable neural networks for
phenotype prediction using population-cohort multi-omics
data
Arno van Hilten , Jeroen G. J. Rooij, Wiro J. Niessen, Joyce B. J. van
Meurs, Gennady V. Roshchupkin
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background : Multi-omics analysis can provide novel insights into
underlying biological mechanisms of traits and complex diseases.
However, omics types are often analyzed in separate analyses andcombined afterwards. In this study, we propose a novel method
for analyzing multiple omics in a single, multivariate analysis,
using the ﬂexibility and computational power of neural networks.
Method : In the proposed method, interpretable neural network
architectures are constructed by using biological knowledge such
as gene annotations and meQTL data to connect gene-expression
and methylation data to their corresponding genes (nodes in thenetwork). After training, the resulting architecture allows theextraction of the most predictive CpGs, gene expression levels,
and overall genes by inspecting and visualizing the strength of the
connections.
Results : As a proof of principle, we applied the method to
predict smoking status and subject age in the Rotterdam Study
with gene-expression and methylation data from blood (n =550).
We achieved an AUC of 0.98 in the held-out test set for smokingstatus (current smoker vs never smoked) and identi ﬁed well-
replicated genes such as AHRR ,GPR15 and LRRN3 . The network
predicted age with a RSME of 4.45 years in the test set andidenti ﬁed the genes NRCAM, C19orf57 and MEG1 as most
predictive. Additionally, visualization of predictive CpGs demon-
strated that dependent CpGs are automatically pruned and thatAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
493
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608independent signals can be assigned to biologically regulatory
elements.
Conclusion: By using functional genomic annotation data to
construct its architecture, we developed an interpretable neuralnetwork to analyze multiple omics in a single analysis.
A. van Hilten: None. J.G.J. Rooij: None. W.J. Niessen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Quantib BV.. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Quantib BV.. F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; Quantib BV.. J.B.J. van Meurs: None.
G.V. Roshchupkin: None.
P17.047.B Diabetes-cancer multi-phenotype GWAS in EPIC
study: an improved power for de ﬁning genetic causes of
multi-morbidity
Ayse Demirkan
1, Liudmilla Zudina1, Igor Pupko1, Zhanna Balkhiyar-
ova1, Anna Ulrich1, Philippe Froguel2,3, Elio Riboli3, Marika Kaakinen1,
Inga Prokopenko1,2
1University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom,2Institut Pasteur de
Lille, CNRS, University of Lille, Lille, France,3Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: There are established relationships between type 2
diabetes (T2D) and cancer. In fact, cancer is the most commoncause of death in diabetes. We aimed to gain insights into thepathophysiological processes shared between T2D and four
cancers through multi-phenotype (MP) genome-wide association
study (GWAS).
Methods: We combined GWAS on 36,173 individuals from the
pan-European EPIC study, including 10,855 T2D cases, 4,126
postmenopausal breast, 2,111 colorectal, 473 pancreatic and 419
prostate cancer cases. The combined GWAS dataset was qualitycontrolled and imputed against the HRC reference panel
providing 39.3M DNA variants for analysis. We performed reverse
regression MP-GWAS as implemented in SCOPA software. Weevaluated the driving disease combinations at identi ﬁed loci using
Bayesian information criterion (BIC).
Results: Within MP-GWAS, we identi ﬁed 450 independent loci
(P < 5x10
-8) for the full ﬁve-phenotypes model. Among them, 147
belonged to established T2D/cancer loci. These includedrs35011184 ( TCF7L2 ) and rs2981578 ( FGFR2 ), previously reported
for many of ﬁve studied outcomes. In our MP-GWAS, these yielded
the best model ﬁt for T2D- and breast cancer-only, respectively.
The 239 novel signals included rs10497931 at MAP2 gene (P =
6.11x10-53) for the ﬁve-phenotype pleiotropic model. Among
novel loci, 129 highlighted single-phenotype effect as the bestmodel. The remaining 110 signals showed the best ﬁt for MP
model, having 67 of them with T2D and at least one cancer.
Conclusions: The large data and power, improved through
implementation of multi-variate GWAS analysis enabled identi ﬁca-
tion of ~1/3 of loci with shared T2D-cancer effects that mightcontribute to these diseases ’comorbidity.
Funding: WCRF-2017/1641
A. Demirkan: None. L. Zudina: None. I. Pupko: None. Z.
Balkhiyarova: None. A. Ulrich: None. P. Froguel: None. E. Riboli:
None. M. Kaakinen: None. I. Prokopenko: None.
P17.048.C Multi-omics to predict changes during cold pressor
test
Lisette J. A. Kogelman
1, Madeline Ernest2, Katrine Falkenberg1,
Gianluca Mazzoni3, Julie Courraud2, Li Peng2, Susan Svane Laursen2,
Arieh Cohen2, Jes Olesen1,Thomas Folkmann Hansen11Copenhagen University Hosital, Glostrup, Denmark,2Statens Serum
Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark,3Copenhagen University, Copenha-
gen, Denmark.
Molecular mechanisms of pain are complex and dif ﬁcult to
entangle, but important to understand to treat pain disorders. The
cold pressor test (CPT) is used as pain provocation test in pain
research. We hypothesize, that performing multi-omic analysesduring CPT gives the opportunity to home in on molecularmechanisms involved. Twenty-two females were phenotypically
assessed before and after a CPT, and blood samples were taken.
RNA-Sequencing, steroid pro ﬁling and untargeted metabolomics
were performed. Each ‘omic level was analyzed separately at both
single-feature and systems-level (e.g. principal component and
partial least squares regression analysis) and all ‘omic levels were
combined using an integrative multi-omics approach, all using thepaired-sample design. We showed that unsupervised methods
were not able to discriminate time points, while supervised
clustering did signi ﬁcantly distinguish time points using metabo-
lomics and/or transcriptomic data, but not using conventionalclinical measurements. Transcriptomic and metabolomic data
revealed at feature-, systems- and integrative- level biologically
relevant processes involved during CPT, e.g. lipid metabolism andstress response. We, therefore, conclude that multi-omics strate-gies should be exploited in pain research to gain knowledge on
the biological mechanisms involved in pain.
L.J.A. Kogelman: None. M. Ernest: None. K. Falkenberg: None.
G. Mazzoni: None. J. Courraud: None. L. Peng: None. S.S.
Laursen: None. A. Cohen: None. J. Olesen: None. T.F. Hansen:
None.
P17.049.D Phenome-wide mantis-ml: automated gene prior-
itisation across 5,000 diseases with Natural LanguageProcessing
Dimitrios Vitsios , Ioannis Melas, Andrew Harper, Quanli Wang,
Slavé Petrovski
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Leveraging the information collected from large-scale community
endeavours, such as population genomic databases, protein-protein interaction databases and preclinical phenotype databases
provides an opportunity for orthogonal evidence to accelerate the
identi ﬁcation of novel human genetic associations.
We previously published a novel machine learning method
(mantis-ml; Vitsios et al ., 2020) that showed an ability to prioritise
known and novel disease-relevant genes leveraging the biologicalcontext of a disease (including pathways, expression andliterature) given a set of seed genes for the disease of interest.
However, the original mantis-ml implementation required a
number of human-dependent manual curation steps, whichlimited phenotype/disease scalability.
Herein, we present a streamlined, automated and scalable
work ﬂow for deploying mantis-ml to thousands of diseases. We
achieve this by leveraging Natural Language Processing (NLP) toinfer both disease-relevant annotation terms and known disease-associated gene lists. We applied our method across ~5,000 rare-to-
common diseases spanning the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)
and OpenTargets (OT) resources in less than ﬁve hours. This
phenome-wide mantis-ml resource allows researchers to both
identify the top ranked genes associated with a disease of interest
(original application) and also to identify the top-ranked humanphenotypes for a given gene of interest (extended application).Subsequently, through the mantis-ml predictions, we ’ve constructed
a comprehensive atlas of prioritised genes per disease, which is ableAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
494
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608to successfully highlight clusters of similar diseases - reinforcing the
robustness of the predictions. We accompany our method with a
fully interactive web app allowing exploration, visualisation and
validation of phenome-wide mantis-ml predictions.
D. Vitsios: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. I. Melas: E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Modest; AstraZeneca. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. A. Harper: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZe-
neca. Q. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. E. Owner-
ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
P17.050.A Multivariate analysis reveals shared genetic archi-
tecture of brain morphology and human behaviour
Ronald de Vlaming
1, Eric Slob2, Philip Jansen3, Philipp Koellinger1,
Patrick Groenen2, Niels Rietveld2, Alain Dagher4
1Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Erasmus
University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,3Amsterdam UMC,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,4McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Human variation in brain morphol ogy and behaviour are related and
highly heritable. Yet, it is largely unknown if speci ﬁc features of brain
morphology and behaviour have a shared genetic architecture. Here,
we provide estimates of the heritability of grey-matter volume in 74
regions of interest (ROIs) and map ge netic correlations between these
ROIs and behavioural outcomes. Our results are afforded by a novel
method: multivariate genomic-relatedness restricted maximum like-
lihood (MGREML). This method is optimised both for precision andcomputational ef ﬁciency. We ﬁndﬁve genetically distinct clusters in
the brain that are aligned with standard anatomical subdivision in
neuroscience. Behavioural traits have distinct genetic correlations with
brain morphology that suggest trait-speci ﬁc relevance of ROIs.
R. de Vlaming: None. E. Slob: None. P. Jansen: None. P.
Koellinger: None. P. Groenen: None. N. Rietveld: None. A.
Dagher: None.
P17.051.B Short tandem repeat detection in next-generation
sequencing data
Jeroen Depreeuw1, Erika Souche1, Joke Allemeersch1, Wouter Bossuyt1,
Kristl Claeys2,3, Philippe Van Damme2,4,S i e nV a nD a e l e2,4,L i e s b e t hD e
Waele5, Nathalie Goemans5, Els Orbitus6,7, Katleen Ballon5,H i l d eV a n
Esch1,G e r tM a t t h i j s1, Sascha Vermeer1,V a l é r i eR a c e1
1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium,2Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium,3Laboratory for Muscle Diseases and Neuropathies,
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,4Depart-
ment of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology, and Leuven Brain
Institute (LBI), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,5Department of Pediatric
Neurology, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,6Center
for Developmental Disabilities, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven,Belgium,7Department of Development and Regeneration, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Introduction: Short tandem repeats (STRs) are repeated DNA
sequences with a length of 3-6 nucleotides. STR expansiondisorders are a family of neuropathological disorders linked to the
accumulation of STRs and are currently detected with PCR
techniques. By applying recent advances in Next-Generations
Sequencing (NGS), we investigated the possibility to detect STRsin targeted NGS data.
Materials and Methods: Samples were sequenced on an
Illumina HiSeq and NovaSeq (2x125 pair-end). Three targeted
capture techniques were selected, including a customized genepanel (n =732), an exome panel (n =200) and an exome panel
with extra customized probes (n =20). Expansion Hunter was
used to detect 35 relevant STRs and for 8 STRs, results were
compared with PCR.
Results: Expansion Hunter could estimate the correct number
of STRs with high accuracy (97%) in 8 loci for which PCR data was
available. Four samples with known expanded STRs were also
ﬂagged with Expansion Hunter. However, full-blown STRs have an
upper limit for their repeat estimation due to the probes and
insert size. STRs in exome data were suf ﬁciently covered for 20 out
of 35 STR regions. Intronic (e.g. C9ORF72) and high GC% STRs (e.g.FMR) were not detected, although adding probes resulted insufﬁcient coverage for 4 out of 9 intronic STRs.
Conclusions: We were able to successfully validate Expansion
Hunter as a tool to detect STR expansions in targeted NGS data.Expansion Hunter results were highly concordant with PCR-basedconclusions. However, some regions could not be detected and
therefore, results should be interpreted carefully.
J. Depreeuw: None. E. Souche: None. J. Allemeersch: None. W.
Bossuyt: None. K. Claeys: None. P. Van Damme: None. S. Van
Daele: None. L. De Waele: None. N. Goemans: None. E. Orbitus:
None. K. Ballon: None. H. Van Esch: None. G. Matthijs: None. S.
Vermeer: None. V. Race: None.
P17.052.C Bioinformatic NGS data analysis with solida-core
Matteo Massidda
1, Gianmauro Cuccuru2, Rossano Atzeni1, Rajesh
Pal1,3, Paolo Uva4,5, Giorgio Fotia1
1Centre for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia
(CRS4), Pula, Italy,2Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany,
3University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy,4IRCCS G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy,
5Italian Institute of Technology, Genova, Italy.
Introduction: We present solida-core ( https://github.com/solida-
core ), an open source collection of reproducible and extensively
validated bioinformatic analysis pipelines. The need of reprodu-cible bioinformatic analysis work ﬂows, which are usually weighed
down by complex dependency trees and con ﬁguration require-
ments, motivated the development of this resource.
Material and methods: solida-core relies on the Snakemake
framework. We de ﬁned a “scaffold ”for pipeline development,
consisting of a section with the analysis steps, named rules, and a
conﬁguration ﬁle, allowing a simple management of user
deﬁnable parameters. Pipelines portability is ensured by project-
related virtual environments including all required tools and
dependencies. Travis CI performs continuous integration, auto-
matically running the test suite whenever the codebase ischanged on Github repository.
Results: At the time of writing the collection of pipelines covers
DNA, RNA and miRNA data analysis. All the pipelines of solida-core
are built, as a ﬁrst step, following the GATK Best Practices for DNA
and RNA sequencing analysis. Further improvements and re ﬁne-
ments were then incorporated after their testing with thousands
of samples at the CRS4 Next Generation Sequencing Core Facility,one of the largest facilities that operates in Italy.
Conclusions: The solida-core open source collection is publicly
released with SOLIDA, a pipeline manager that guides the userAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
495
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608during pipeline con ﬁguration and deployment. The combination
of these resources represents a complete easy-to-use bioinfor-
matic analysis framework which can be used by both researchers
facing bioinformatics for the ﬁrst time and by experienced
bioinformaticians.
M. Massidda: None. G. Cuccuru: None. R. Atzeni: None. R. Pal:
None. P. Uva: None. G. Fotia: None.
P17.053.D GREEN-DB: a framework for the annotation and
prioritization of non-coding regulatory variants in whole-
genome sequencing
Edoardo Giacopuzzi1, Niko Popitsch1,2, Jenny C. Taylor1
1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Institute of
Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences(IMBA), Vienna, Austria.
Non-coding variants have emerged as important contributors to the
pathogenesis of human diseases, not only as common susceptibilityalleles but also as rare high-impact variants. Despite recent
advances in the study of regulatory elements and the availability
of specialized data collections, the systematic annotation of non-coding variants from genome sequencing remains challenging.
Here we present a framework for the annotation and prioritization
of regulatory variants in WGS/GWAS analysis to support thediscovery of candidate disease-associated variants in the non-coding genome. First, we integrated 24 data sources to develop a
standardized collection of 2.4 million regulatory elements in the
human genome, transcription factor binding sites, DNase peaks,ultra-conserved non-coding elements, and super-enhancers. Infor-mation on controlled gene(s), tissue(s) and associated phenotype(s)
are provided for regulatory elements when possible. Then, we
calculated a variation constraint metric for regulatory regions andshowed that genes controlled by constrained regions are more
likely to be disease-associated genes and essential genes. Finally,
we evaluated 16 non-coding impact prediction scores providingsuggestions for variant prioritization. The proposed annotationframework was able to capture previously published disease-
associated non-coding variants and its integration in a routine
prioritization pipeline increased the number of candidate genes,including genes potentially correlated with patient phenotype, andestablished clinically relevant genes.
Funded by the Wellcome Trust, Department of Health and by
the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biome-dical Research Centre (BRC). The views expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of NHS, NIHR, Department of
Health or Wellcome Trust.
E. Giacopuzzi: None. N. Popitsch: None. J.C. Taylor: None.
P17.054.A Penetrance estimation of SORL1 loss-of-function
variants using a family-based strategy adjusted on APOE
genotypes suggest a non-monogenic inheritance
Catherine Schramm
1, Camille Charbonnier1, Aline Zaréa2, David
Wallon2, Morgane Lacour2, CNRMAJ collaborators, Flora Alarcon3,
Emmanuelle Génin4, Dominique Campion1, Grégory Nuel5, Gaël
Nicolas1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University
Hospital, Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Rouen, France,
2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University
Hospital, Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, Rouen, France,
3CNRS 8145-MAP5, Paris, France,4Inserm U1078, Brest, France,5CNRS
8001 - LPSM, Paris, France.Introduction: For complex disorders, estimating the age-related
penetrance associated with rare variants of strong effect is
essential. However, rarity and co-occurrence with other risk factorsmake it dif ﬁcult to estimate. In the context of Alzheimer Disease,
we propose a family-based methodology to estimate the
penetrance of SORL1 rare (allele frequency<1%) loss-of-function
variants (LoF, odds ratios >7]) adjusted for APOE4 , the main risk
factor (allele frequency ~14%, odds ratios [3.4-14]).
Material and methods: Our survival model combines: (i) a
baseline for non-carriers of SORL1 LoF variants, strati ﬁed by APOE
genotypes derived from a large cohort study and (ii) an additiveeffect of SORL1 LoF variants estimated from our family cohort: 34
pedigrees with a proband carrying a SORL1 protein-truncating or a
missense variant with in vitro LoF evidence, onset<75 years,
information on relatives (379 phenotypes, 79 genotypes). Weembedded this survival model into an Expectation-Maximisation
(EM) algorithm to accommodate for missing genotypes. Con-
ﬁdence intervals were computed by bootstrap. To correct for
ascertainment bias, proband phenotypes were omitted.
Results: We provide penetrance estimation curves associated
with SORL1 LoF variants at the digenic level. By age 75, we
estimate SORL1 LoF variants to reach a 100% penetrance only
among homozygous APOE4 carriers (75% among APOE4 hetero-
zygous carriers and 30% among APOE33 genotype carriers).
Conclusion: This method could be applied to other diseases
where penetrance estimates are required to help clinicians in geneticcounselling or preventive treatment strategies.
Fundings: JPND-PERADES, FRM-DEQ20170336711, Fondation
Alzheimer ECASCAD, FRM-ARF201909009263, GMAJ PHRC-2008/067, CNRMAJ
C. Schramm: None. C. Charbonnier: None. A. Zaréa: None. D.
Wallon: None. M. Lacour: None. F. Alarcon: None. E. Génin:
None. D. Campion: None. G. Nuel: None. G. Nicolas: None.
P17.055.B Improved estimation of phenotypic correlations
using summary association statistics
Ting Li
1, Zheng Ning2,Xia Shen3
1Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China,2Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden,3University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.
Estimating the phenotypic correlations between complex traits
and diseases based on their genome-wide association summary
statistics has been a useful technique in genetic epidemiology and
statistical genetics inference. Two state-of-the-art strategies,Z-score correlation across null-effect SNPs and LD score regressionintercept, were widely applied to estimate phenotypic correla-
tions. Here, we propose an improved Z-score correlation strategy
based on SNPs with low minor allele frequencies (MAFs), andshow how this simple strategy can correct the bias generated by
the current methods. Comparing to LDSC, the low-MAF estimator
improves phenotypic correlation estimation thus is bene ﬁcial for
methods and applications using phenotypic correlations inferredfrom summary association statistics.
T. Li: None. Z. Ning: None. X. Shen: None.
P17.056.C Prediction of eye, hair and skin color in admixed
populations of Latin America
Sagnik Palmal
1, Kaustubh Adhikari2,3, Rolando González-José4,
Lavinia Schüler-Faccini5, Maria-Cátira Bortolini5, Victor Acuña-
Alonzo6, Samuel Canizales-Quinteros7, Carla Gallo8, GiovanniAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
496
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Poletti8, Gabriel Bedoya9, Francisco Rothhammer10,11, Pierre Faux1,
Andres Ruiz-Linares1,12,13
1UMR 7268 ADES, CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, EFS, Faculté de
médecine Timone, Marseille, 13005, France,2The Open University,
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, United Kingdom,3University College
London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom,4Instituto Patagonico
de Ciencias Sociales y Humanas, Centro Nacional Patagonico,
CONICET, Puerto Madryn, U9129ACD, Argentina,5Departamento de
Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
90040-060, Brazil,6National Institute of Anthropology and History,
Mexico City, 6600, Mexico,7UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Mexico City, 4510, Mexico,8Facultad de Ciencias y
Filosofía, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima,31, Peru,
9GENMOL (Genética Molecular), Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
5001000, Colombia,10Instituto de Alta Investigación, Universidad de
Tarapaca, Arica, 1000000, Chile,11Programa de Genetica Humana,
ICBM, Faculdad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago,
1000000, Chile,12Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environ-
ment, and UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London,WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom,13Ministry of Education Key Laboratory
of Contemporary Anthropology and Collaborative Innovation Center
of Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences and Human
Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Yangpu District, Shanghai,China.
Abstract body
There is increasing interest in the use of genetic information for
predicting physical appearance traits particularly in forensics and
palaeoanthropology. We report an evaluation of prediction
accuracy for eye, hair and skin pigmentation based on genomicand phenotypic data for over 6,500 admixed Latin Americans (theCANDELA dataset).
We examined the impact on prediction accuracy of three main
factors: (i) The methods of prediction, including classical statisticalmethods and machine learning approaches, (ii) The inclusion of
non-genetic predictors, continental genetic ancestry and pigmen-
tation SNPs in the prediction models, and (iii) Compared two setsof pigmentation SNPs: the commonly-used HIrisPlex-S set (devel-oped mainly in Europeans) and novel SNP sets that we have
deﬁned based on association results in the CANDELA samples.
Weﬁnd that Random Forest or regression are globally the best
performing methods. Although continental genetic ancestry hassubstantial power for prediction o f pigmentation in Latin Americans,
the inclusion of pigmentation SNPs increases prediction accuracy
considerably, particularly for sk in color. For hair and eye color,
HIrisPlex-S has a similar performance to the CANDELA-speci ﬁcs e t s .
This study shows that phenotypes with more variability in a
speci ﬁc ancestry population tend to show better prediction
accuracy - eye color and hair color exhibit more variability in theeuropean population but not the same for skin color. Thus
investigating in a non-European population for skin color, allowed
us to achieve better predictive power than HIrisPlex-S.
S. Palmal: None. K. Adhikari: None. R. González-José: None. L.
Schüler-Faccini: None. M. Bortolini: None. V. Acuña-Alonzo:
None. S. Canizales-Quinteros: None. C. Gallo: None. G. Poletti:
None. G. Bedoya: None. F. Rothhammer: None. P. Faux: None. A.
Ruiz-Linares: None.
P17.057.D Total genetic contribution assessment across the
human genome
Ting Li
1, Ning Zheng1,2, Zhijian Yang1, Ranran Zhai1, Chenqing
Zheng1, Wenzheng Xu1, Yipeng Wang1, Yiwen Chen1,3, Kejun Ying4,5,
Xia Shen1,2,61Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China,2Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden,3Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,4Brigham
and Women ’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA,5Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA,6University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Quantifying the overall magnitude of every single locus ’genetic
effect on the widely measured human phenome is of greatchallenge. We introduce a uni ﬁed modelling technique that can
consistently provide a total genetic contribution assessment
(TGCA) of a gene or genetic variant without thresholding genetic
association signals. Genome-wide TGCA in ﬁve UK Biobank
phenotype domains highlighted the HLA locus for medical
conditions, the bone mineral density locus WNT16 for physical
measures, and the skin tanning locus MC1R and smoking
behaviour locus CHRNA3 for lifestyle, etc. Tissue-speci ﬁcity
investigation revealed several tissues associated with total genetic
contributions, including the brain tissues for mental health. Such
associations were driven by tissue-speci ﬁc gene expressions,
which share genetic basis with the total genetic contributions.TGCA can provide a genome-wide atlas for the overall genetic
contributions in each particular domain of human complex traits.
T. Li: None. N. Zheng: None. Z. Yang: None. R. Zhai: None. C.
Zheng: None. W. Xu: None. Y. Wang: None. Y. Chen: None. K.
Ying: None. X. Shen: None.
P17.058.A Development of ﬁne-map based polygenic risk
scores: an analysis of genetic prediction models for height
and LDL cholesterol in UK Biobank
Carlo Maj
1, Christian Staerk2, Oleg Borisov1, Peter Krawitz1, Andreas
Mayr2
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics (IGSB), Faculty of
Medicine, University of Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, Bonn,
Germany,2Department of Medical Biometry, Informatics and
Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn, Germany,Bonn, Germany.
Polygenic risk scores (PRS) represent a quanti ﬁcation of the
individual genetic predisposition with respect to a given phenotype.In the last few years several approaches to compute PRS have beenimplemented, the major difference across the methods is the
modeling of the linkage disequilibrium (LD). The standard approach
is to use clumping (to ﬁlter for independent variants) while other
methods are based on the shrinkage of effect estimates according
to reference LD panels via Bayesian methods (e.g., LDpred, PRSCS) or
penalized regression (e.g., Lassosum). In the present work weapplied different statistical learning methods for variable selection inhigh-dimensional linear regression models (including the Adaptive
Subspace method, AdaSUb, and statistical boosting with probing,
SBP) to ﬁne-map the signal in signi ﬁcant genomic loci. The analysis
has been performed on UK Biobank imputed genotype counts(273,440 samples for training and 135,444 samples for test, ﬁltered
for British ancestry). Two quantitative heritable and polygenic
quantitative traits were considered, namely height and LDLcholesterol levels. Preliminary results show that both AdaSub withthe extended Bayesian information criterion for variant selection
(EBIC) and SBP reach a better accuracy than univariable clump-
based PRS (cPRS) while including a small number of variants (heightRMSE=8.928;8.755;8.951; variants in the ﬁnal model =
292;7668;26184, LDL RMSE =0.827;0.823;0.841; variants in the ﬁnal
model =105;761;1660, values are for EBIC1, SBP and cPRS
respectively). The proposed sparse ﬁne-mapped models enhance
the biological interpretability and may potentially reduce theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
497
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608confounding due to LD-heterogeneity in different cohorts when
comparing PRS across ethnicities.
C. Maj: None. C. Staerk: None. O. Borisov: None. P. Krawitz:
None. A. Mayr: None.
P17.059.B Prediction of the splicing effects of SNVs affecting
theﬁrst nucleotide G of an exon
Atefeh Joudaki , Jun-ichi Takeda, Akio Masuda, Kinji Ohno
Neurogenetics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.
Various tools have been developed to predict the splicing effects
of SNVs (Abramowicz and Gos. J Appl Genet. 2018). However, thesplicing effects of SNVs at the ﬁrst nucleotide G of exons are
complicated. It is evident that various factors signi ﬁcantly
contribute to the splicing pattern of SNVs at the ﬁrst nucleotide
G of an exon, including the AG-dependence of the 3 ’splice site
(ss) and interaction with U2AF35 (Gao et al . Nucleic Acids Res.
2011; Yoshida et al . Nat Commun. 2020).In our research, random
forest (RF) models were generated by 66 splicing-affecting SNVs in
the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) and 83 neutral SNVsin the dbSNP database [minor allelic frequency (MAF) ≥0.01] using
108 features including exon length, the number of pyrimidines in
the polypyrimidine tract (PPT), the position of predicted branch-point sequence (BPS), the sequence of predicted BPS, individualnucleotides at intron -3 and exon +1, the strength of splicing
signals at the 5 ’and 3 ’ss’s, and motifs of RNA-binding proteins to
name a few. Using ten-fold cross-validation, our models showedthat the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve(AUROC), and the area under the precision-recall curve (AUPR)
were on average 0.943 and 0.954, respectively.
A. Joudaki: None. J. Takeda: None. A. Masuda: None. K. Ohno:
None.
P17.060.C The possibilities of arti ﬁcial intelligence for the
assessment of genetic predisposition factors and the diag-
nosis of colorectal cancer
Igor Ugarov
1, Vyacheslav Chernykh2,1, Inna Sharkova1,3, Nikolay
Ivanov1, Vladimir Maslennikov1, Dmitriy Ostapenko1
1xGen Cybernetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Federal state
scienti ﬁc budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical
Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation,3Federal state scienti ﬁc
budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical Genetics»,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Colorectal cancer (or CRC) is a malignant multifactorial (polygenic)
neoplasm that occupies a leading position among all oncological
diseases in terms of prevalence in Russia and the world. Objective:to develop a genetic panel and identify molecular patterns in the
results of genetic testing for diagnosis of colorectal cancer.
Materials and methods: For a set of genes, the analysis of
genomic databases and refereed foreign scienti ﬁc articles on the
following keywords was performed: "colorectal cancer", "muta-
tion", "miRNA", "CNV", "single-nucleotide polymorphism". To
evaluate the performance of the model, we used data from TheCancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/
organization/ccg/research/structural-genomics/tcga ). Based on
the data, two groups were formed: patients with colorectal cancer
(n=233) and a cohort of patients with other nosologies acting as
a control group (n =6513).Results: A method has been developed that allows us to
identify screening patterns of multifactorial conditions, taking into
account the polygenic nature of diseases and the uncertainty of
the pathogenic effect of individual genetic variants. Epigeneticpatterns included 56 microRNAs. The Se and Sp were 98% and62%, respectively. Methylation patterns included changes in
methylation in 72 genes. The Se and Sp was 34% and 99%. The
protein patterns included 38 proteins. The Se and Sp of this modelwas 68% and 65%. The developed approach can also be used toidentify genotypes and epigenotypes characteristic of the
development of other multifactorial conditions and polygenic
diseases.
I. Ugarov: None. V. Chernykh: None. I. Sharkova: None. N.
Ivanov: None. V. Maslennikov: None. D. Ostapenko: None.
P17.061.D Polygenic risk score strategies for transcriptome-
wide association analysis in prostate cancer risk
Nicholas B. Larson , Shannon K. McDonnell, Zachary Fogarty
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Statistical methods for transcriptome-wide association studies
(TWAS) are predicated on co-localization of single-SNP associa-
tions from two distinct datasets: (1) eQTLs from gene expression
studies and (2) SNP-phenotype associations from GWAS. Apractical limitation of TWAS is the emphasis on cis-eQTL effectson expression due to limited sample sizes of eQTL datasets, which
restricts discovery power for trait-related genes whose expression
may be in ﬂuenced by aggregate trans-acting effects. An
alternative TWAS approach is to translate the genome-wideassociations from GWAS to eQTL datasets via polygenic risk scores
(PRSs). Herein, we investigated associations between gene
expression and a PRS for prostate cancer (PRCA), a highly heritableand polygenic disease. We applied Lassosum to generate a
weighted PRCA PRS with 26,539 total SNPs based on PRCA risk
GWAS summary statistics from the PRACTICAL Consortium. Usinga large normal prostate tissue eQTL dataset (N =471) with RNA-
Seq and genotyping data, we tested the Kendall ’s tau rank
correlation between normalized gene expression and the PRCA
PRS across the full transcriptome. To accommodate moreﬂexibility, we explored variance-component testing via SKAT
using PRS-weighted linear kernels. We also compared these PRS-
based results with TWAS ﬁndings from FUSION applied to the
same datasets. No individual PRS-expression correlations werestatistically signi ﬁcant (FDR < 0.05), although KEGG and REAC-
TOME GSEA results revealed signi ﬁcant associations with relevant
gene-sets, including GnRH and phosphatidylinositol signalingpathways. SKAT-based testing resulted in 11 signi ﬁcant genes
(FDR < 0.05), notably none of which were identi ﬁed via FUSION.
Future efforts will further evaluate statistical considerations of
complementary polygenic approaches to traditional TWAS.
N.B. Larson: None. S.K. McDonnell: None. Z. Fogarty: None.
P17.062.A Longitudinal MicroRNA Signature of Conversion to
Psychosis
Anton Iftimovici1,2, Qin He2, Chuan Jiao2, the ICAAR study group,
Edouard Duchesnay1, Marie-Odile Krebs2, Oussama Kebir2, Boris
Chaumette2
1NeuroSpin, CEA, Paris, France,2Université de Paris, Institute of
Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris (IPNP), INSERM U1266, GDR3557-Institut de Psychiatrie, Paris, France, Paris, France.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
498
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Epigenetics are key to the gene x environment
interactions leading to psychosis. We postulated that longitudinal
changes in microRNAs could be a signature of psychotic transition.
Material and methods: Next-generation high-throughput
sequencing of microRNAs was done at two time-points in 81 at-risk subjects (of whom 35 transited). MicroRNA variation across
time ( Δmirna) was computed as the difference between baseline
and follow-up microRNA measures, divided by the subject ’s
follow-up time. Three methods were combined to ﬁndΔmirna
associated with psychosis: 1) a differential expression analysis of
Δmirna after stringently ﬁltering microRNAs sequenced in all
samples at all times (77 among 2479 detected in total); 2) asupervised algorithm with a ridge classi ﬁer applied to all 2479
Δmirna to identify the variations in expression most relevant for
prediction; 3) a differential network analysis applied to all Δmirna
to identify interactions speci ﬁc to converters or non-converters.
Results: miR-150-5p variation across time differed signi ﬁcantly
between groups, after FWER correction. The machine-learning
strategy predicted psychosis with an area-under-the-curve of 66 %(non-parametric p =0.009), and 207 Δmirna were con ﬁdently
leveraged for prediction, with bootstrapped 95% con ﬁdence
intervals excluding zero. There were 276 Δmirna with interactions
speci ﬁc to either converters or non-converters.
Discussion: Combining three different strategies, we reduced
the risk of methodological biases associated with any single
method. Crossing machine-learning and network analyses, we
identi ﬁed 25 microRNAs. Their 438 gene targets were enriched in
schizophrenia GWAS genes and synaptic processes. All analyses
highlighted miR-150-5p, a microRNA involved in cognition.
A. Iftimovici: None. Q. He: None. C. Jiao: None. E. Duchesnay:
None. M. Krebs: None. O. Kebir: None. B. Chaumette: None.
P17.063.B Phenotype-Tissue Expression and Exploration
(PTEE) facilitates RNA-seq-based Mendelian disease diagnosis
Akhil Velluva
1,2, Maximillian Radtke3, Susanne Horn2, Konrad
Pltazer3, Erind Gjermeni4, Johannes R. Lemke3, Torsten Schöneberg2,
Janet Kelso1, Rami Abou Jamra3, Diana Le Duc1,3
1Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig,
Germany,2Rudolf Schönheimer Institute of Biochemistry, Medical
Faculty, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,3Institute of Human
Genetics, University Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany,4Department
of Electrophysiology, Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.
RNA-seq has gained more visibility by holding the promise to
improve the diagnostic yield in unresolved cases of rareMendelian diseases. However, RNA tissue speci ﬁcity complicates
the landscape, especially when given a phenotype, the tissue of
interest (e.g. brain) cannot be accessed. Based on data from
Genotype-Tissue Expression Project we developed a web tool -PTEE https://bioinf.eva.mpg.de/shiny/PTEE/ , which allows clini-
cians to decide on the most appropriate tissue to inquire for a
patient ’s phenotype and a tissue of interest. As a sanity check we
prove that the most suitable accessible tissue to investigate heartarrhythmias is skeletal muscle. We show that for NDD, skin has thebest correlation to the central nervous system (CNS) (r =0.99) and
shares 75% of the transcripts expressed in the brain. While the
correlation of blood and brain expression for NDD genes isacceptable (r =0.87), only 47% of the brain transcripts are shared.
Interestingly, 19 of the NDD genes are not expressed in the CNS,
but are expressed in at least one of the accessible tissues. Thesegenes cluster in GO terms related to cell cycle and cell division (p< 0.01), suggesting they are involved in developmental processes.
Thus, for RNA-seq there is no single tissue, which assures thediscovery of the causative/candidate gene for a phenotype.
Clinicians can bene ﬁt from our tool to make an informed decision
on which accessible tissue is most suitable for RNA-seq and
increase the diagnostic chances.
Grant references: Clinician Scientist Program, University Medical
Faculty Leipzig/German research foundation project SCHO 624/13-1
A. Velluva: None. M. Radtke: None. S. Horn: None. K. Pltazer:
None. E. Gjermeni: None. J. R. Lemke: None. T. Schöneberg:
None. J. Kelso: None. R. Abou Jamra: None. D. Le Duc: None.
P17.064.C De novo variants within constrained coding regions
are a major source of pathogenicity for rare diseases
Hywel J. Williams
1, Chris Odhams2, Genomics England2
1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom,2Genomics England,
London, United Kingdom.
De novo (Dn) variants affecting protein-coding DNA are a well-
established cause of Rare Diseases (RDs) in patients with aneurological/neurodevelopmental (NND) phenotype but their
evaluation across the full-spectrum of clinical RD phenotypes
has not been performed at scale. Constrained coding regions(CCRs) are speci ﬁc segments of coding DNA that are devoid of
functional variants in healthy individuals but enriched for
pathogenic mutations.
We have sought to evaluate the utility of incorporating CCRs
into the diagnostic ﬁltering cascade of RD patients that have
undergone genomic sequencing and, speci ﬁcally, determined the
contribution Dns play in improving diagnostic rate.
We have used data from 6144 trios that have undergone
diagnostic evaluation as part of the Genomics England 100,000
Genomes Project, including 2715 trios analysed with an advanced
Dn identi ﬁcation pipeline.
We show in the full dataset, 12% of patients classed as solved
have a variant within a CCR while, in the subset of patients that
have undergone Dn evaluation, this rises to 18%. Enrichmentanalysis of the individual phenotype classi ﬁcations shows highly
signi ﬁcant but contrasting results. For example, pathogenic Dn
variants intersecting a CCR were overrepresented in the NND
group (p =8.13x10
-06) but underrepresented in the Ophthalmo-
logical group (p =2.47x10-07).
Our results demonstrate the potential clinical utility of
performing bespoke Dn analyses of RD patients and for
incorporating CCR information into the ﬁltering cascade. However,
questions remain about why different phenotypic classi ﬁcations
differ so markedly in their enrichment of pathogenic Dn variants
in CCRs.
H.J. Williams: None. C. Odhams: None. G. England: None.
P17.065.D Rare diseases have many faces: The road to
diagnostic success
Simona Denise Frederiksen , Vladimir Avramovic, Maja Tarailo-
Graovac
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
Introduction: In the Silent Genomes project, we seek to improve
the diagnostic success for Indigenous children with geneticdiseases. One obstacle we are facing is that many patients remain
undiagnosed even after whole-genome sequencing. We hypothe-
size that the genetic diseases in some of these patients stem frommore complex genetic scenarios than single gene defects. The aimof this study is to better understand the rare disease spectrum.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
499
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: We identi ﬁed rare diseases using
Orphadata (orientdb version) and categorized them into 3
categories based on prevalence, borderline-common (1-9 cases
per 10,000), rare (1-9 cases per 100,000 and 1,000,000) and ultra-rare (less than 1 case per 1,000,000). Each of these categories weredissected focusing on variables such as associated phenotypes
and genes.
Results: A total of 145 borderline-common, 412 rare and 2967
ultra-rare diseases constituted the rare disease spectrum. Differ-ences between the disease categories were observed for multiple
variables including inheritance mode and associated phenotypes
and genes. We found that when diagnosed with a borderline-common disease, patients are more likely to experience pheno-typic variability, which may complicate data analysis methods
focused on single gene defects. In agreement, our results showed
a higher proportion of borderline-common rare diseases causedby DNA sequence changes in multiple genes or involvement of
multiple factors compared with the other categories.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings will help triage ’difﬁcult-to-
diagnose ’rare disease patients to better de ﬁned sub-categories
and devise appropriate statistical approaches to determine
underlying disease causes (e.g. search for more than one
damaged gene).
S.D. Frederiksen: None. V. Avramovic: None. M. Tarailo-
Graovac: None.
P17.066.A The Regulatory Mendelian Mutation (ReMM) score
for GRCh38
Lusiné Nazaretyan
1,2, Max Schubach1,2, Martin Kircher1,2
1Charité –Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,2Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
Despite catalogs of more than 7,000 known Mendelian disorders,
very few non-coding variants have been identi ﬁed as disease
causative so far. While there is a consensus that regulatorymutations play an important role, computational tools thatsupport their identi ﬁcation are still lacking. Here, we rebuild the
ReMM score (Smedley D. et al. AJHG 2016) for prioritizing non-
coding mutations in the GRCh38 genome assembly. We contrast acurated set of 406 regulatory variants causative for Mendeliandisorders and millions of human-derived sequence alterations (as
proxy for non-pathogenic variation) in the human genome. We
use a set of 26 genomic features combining epigenetic pro ﬁles,
species conservation and density of disease and population
variants to train the hyper-ensemble random forest model
hyperSMURF (Petrini A. et al. Gigascience 2020). Our work ﬂow
from acquiring the raw data up to calculating model scores isbased on Snakemake (Köster and Rahmann, 2012). This improves
reproducibility and facilitates adaption of the model for future
genome releases and inclusion of new features. We achieve anaverage precision of 0.57 on our data, which compares favorablyto the original ReMM version of the GRCh37 build (0.50). We
observe moderate correlation of scores (0.72) between genome
builds, which we ascribe to the changes in the feature sets as wellas adjustments in feature importance. Our work offers a reliabletool for scoring pathogenicity of human regulatory variants and
will facilitate further research in the ﬁeld of prioritizing variants in
the non-coding genome.
L. Nazaretyan: None. M. Schubach: None. M. Kircher: None.
P17.067.B TGG-Viewer: Web-based Interactive Genome-wide
Visualization of RNAseq DataBen Weisburd
Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Visualizations of RNAseq splice junctions and expression levels can
help users manually review candidate disease-causing loci andidentify patterns and technical error modes. To address limitations
of existing visualization tools, we created an online viewer based
on IGV.js that enables sashimi-like visualizations of splice junctionsand coverage that are interactive, genome-wide, and support any
zoom level. The viewer is freely available at http://tgg-viewer.
broadinstitute.org and includes the features listed below.
- splice junction and coverage tracks for 1 or more samples can
be displayed along-side gene tracks, BAM/CRAM data, SNP or CNV
callsets, normalized coverage tracks such as those generated by
gCNV, and other kinds of genomic feature tracks.
- new reference tracks are provided for GTEx muscle, blood and
ﬁbroblast tissues to summarize all splice junctions in all GTEx
samples from these tissues, and allow comparison to rare disease
samples.
- splice junctions can be ﬁltered or shown in different colors
based on read support, strand, whether the junction is novel, and
other criteria.
- to visualize their own data, users don ’t need to upload it to a
tgg-viewer server or create a user account. Instead, they upload
their data to their own Google bucket, log in to tgg-viewer with
their Google account.
- to enable ef ﬁcient visualization at any zoom level, and to allow
arbitrary numbers of samples to be combined into a single input
ﬁle, we use BED as the underlying format instead of BAM/CRAM.
B. Weisburd: None.
P17.069.D Comparison of methods of genotyping short
tandem repeats (STRs) from whole genome sequences
John W. Oketch , Louise V. Wain, Edward J. Hollox
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Short tandem repeats (STRs) are repeated regions of genomes that
consist of a simple sequence motif 2-6 bp tandemly-repeated
multiple times. Variations in STRs c ause over 40 monogenic disorders
including Huntington disease. In addition, STRs are known to affect
gene expression levels and have been implicated in complex
diseases for example autism. How ever, STRs remain understudied
owing to dif ﬁculties and precision of genotyping STRs at a large
scale. Recently, new tools to genotype STRs from short read genome
sequences have become available, including STRetch, GangSTR and
HipSTR. To assess their applicability to large cohorts of genomesequences sequenced at ~30x, this pilot study compared the toolsusing seven gold standard huma n genome sequences from the
Genome in a Bottle consortium, inc luding two parent-child trios.
These individuals have also been sequenced using long readtechnologies.First, STR calls were made at initial genome coverage
of 100x or 300x using the recommended tool-speci
ﬁcs e to f
reference STRs. Secondly, we downsampled the genomes to 30x-coverage and repeated our analys is.The number of genotypes calls
made by Stretch varied by coverage from as low as 2310 (at 30x
coverage) to ~16,000 (300x) . HipSTR and GangSTR reported
consistent number of calls ~1.4x1 0^6 at each coverage with about
70% overlaps between the calls. A bout 92% of calls made by HipSTR
and 97% by GangSTR followed Mendelian inheritance patterns
indicating high robustness in genotype calls.We aim to use the
selected tools on large case-control cohorts, by investigating thegenomewide association of STRs with complex respiratory disease.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
500
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608J.W. Oketch: None. L.V. Wain: None. E.J. Hollox: None.
P17.070.A scMuf ﬁn: an R package for resolving solid tumor
heterogeneity from single-cell data
Noemi Di Nanni, Cinzia Cocola, Valentina Nale, Eleonora Piscitelli,
Alice Chiodi, Ingrid Cifola, Ileana Zucchi, Rolland Reinbold, LucianoMilanesi, Alessandra Mezzelani, Paride Pelucchi, Ettore Mosca
Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council,
Segrate (Milan), Italy.
Introduction: ingle cell (SC) analysis is crucial to study the complex
cellular heterogeneity of solid tumors, which is one of the main
obstacles for the development of effective cancer treatments. Suchtumors typically contain a mixture of cells with aberrant genomicand expression pro ﬁles affecting speci ﬁc sub-populations that have
a pivotal role in cancer progression, whose identi ﬁcation eludes bulk
approaches. We present a MUlti-Features INtegrative approach forSC data analysis (scMuf ﬁn) that characterizes cell identity on the
basis of multiple and complementary criteria.
Materials and Methods: Cell markers sources: CSEA, Pan-
glaoDB. Pathways sources: NCBI Biosystems, MSigDB. Gene setexpression is assessed by a fast algorithm that uses comparable
control-gene sets. CNVs are estimated using adjacent genes.
Lineage analysis is computed by Monocle; multipotency isassessed by LandScent. The association between the variousfeatures and cell clusters is assessed by chi-squared and
enrichment-based approaches.
Results: scMuf ﬁn provides functions to calculate a series of
qualitative and quantitative scores, such as: expression of markersfor normal and tumor conditions, pathway activity, cell hierarchy,
multipotency state, copy number variations and cell cycle state.
Cell-level scores are used for cell cluster annotation and combinedto obtain alternative cell clusters. scMuf ﬁn integrates any type of
cell- or cluster-associated data, and can be used for single-cell
multi-omics analyses (e.g. mutations, gene expression). As a proof-of-principle, we studied a public dataset of human gliomas.
Conclusions: scMuf ﬁn combines several tools to shed light on
the identity of tumors cells and spot subtle cell types. Funding:
MIUR INTEROMICS PB05.
N. Di Nanni: None. C. Cocola: None. V. Nale: None. E. Piscitelli:
None. A. Chiodi: None. I. Cifola: None. I. Zucchi: None. R.
Reinbold: None. L. Milanesi: None. A. Mezzelani: None. P.
Pelucchi: None. E. Mosca: None.
P17.071.B Benchmarking deep learning splice prediction tools
using functional splice assays
Tabea V. Riepe
1, Mubeen Khan2, Susanne Roosing1, Frans P. M.
Cremers1, Peter A. C. ’t Hoen1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Uni-
versity Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Hereditary disorders are frequently caused by
genetic variants that affect pre-mRNA splicing. Whilst geneticvariants in the canonical splice motifs are almost always disrupting
splicing, the pathogenicity of variants in the non-canonical splice
sites (NCSS) and deep intronic (DI) regions are dif ﬁcult to predict.
Multiple splice prediction tools have been developed for thispurpose, with the latest tools employing deep learning algorithms.
We benchmarked established and deep learning splice prediction
tools on gold standard sets of variants in the ABCA4 and MYBPC3
genes associated with Stargardt disease and cardiomyopathy,respectively, with functional assessment splice assays.Methods: Twelve freely available splice prediction tools that
either use deep learning or are widely applied in routine
diagnostics were applied to 71 ABCA4 NCSS, 81 ABCA4 DI and
61MYBPC3 NCSS variants. Receiver operator curves, accuracy,
sensitivity, speci ﬁcity, positive predictive value, negative predictive
value and Mathew ’s correlation coef ﬁcient were used to evaluate
the performance of each tool on the different datasets.
Results: Based on the receiver operator curves the ﬁve best
performing tools for each dataset were determined. For ABCA4
NCSS variants those tools were SpliceAI, DSSP, S-CAP, Spidex and
MaxEntScan. The best performing tools for the ABCA4 DI variants
were SpliceAI, SpliceRover, MaxEntScan, NNSplice and Alamut 3/4.For MYBPC3 NCSS variants, SpliceSiteFinder-like, Alamut 3/4
MaxEntScan, NNSplice and GeneSplicer achieved the highest AUC.
Conclusions: The choice of splice prediction tool depends on
the dataset. SpliceAI, the Alamut 3/4 consensus approach,NNSPLICE and MaxEntScan perform well on all three datasets.
T.V. Riepe: None. M. Khan: None. S. Roosing: None. F.P.M.
Cremers: None. P.A.C. ‘t Hoen: None.
P17.072.C SVInterpreter: a web-based tool for structural
variants inspection and identi ﬁcation of possible disease-
causing candidate genes
Joana Fino
1, Bárbara Marques1, Zirui Dong2, Dezso ̈David1
1National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal,
2Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Introduction: With the advent of genomic sequencing, the
identi ﬁcation of structural variants (SVs), including copy number
variants, is no longer a challenge: recent studies showed that is
possible to detect up to 9 K SVs per individual. Contrarily, the
annotation of the genome is incomplete, and the data is scatteredalong different databases, making SV manual evaluation almost
impossible. Also, the available tools are limited in their scope.
Thus, to address the need of a comprehensive application to assistevaluation of clinical outcome of SVs, we developed StructuralVariant Interpreter (SVInterpreter).
Methods: SVInterpreter is a free Python-CGI developed Web
application able to analyze SVs using Topologically AssociatedDomains as genome units, within which genome browsers data,medically actionable genes, virtual gene panels and HPO similarity
results, among other, is retrieved.
Results: First, we reanalysed 222 published SVs, of which about
58% were previously classi ﬁed as VUS. SVInterpreter corroborated
the previous classi ﬁcation in about 84% of the SVs. In about 5% of
the SVs, SVInterpreter gave indication of possible position effect,through phenotype similarity, disrupted chromatin loops orgenome wide association studies. Then, we show the applicability
of SVInterpreter in the clinical context, by inspecting 20 cases
analysed by chromosomal microarray or genome sequencing.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, SVInterpreter is the most
comprehensive TAD based tool to assist prediction of clinical
outcome of SVs. Based on gathered information, identi ﬁcation of
possible disease-causing candidate genes and SVs is easilyachievable. SVInterpreter is available at http://dgrctools-insa.min-
saude.pt/cgi-bin/SVInterpreter.py
J. Fino: None. B. Marques: None. Z. Dong: None. D. David: None.
P17.073.D iROAR: a computational algorithm for multiplex
PCR bias detection and correction in TCR repertoires datasets
Anastasia O. Smirnova
1,2, Yuri B. Lebedev2, Ilgar Z. Mamedov2,3,
Alexander Y. Komkov2,3Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
501
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chem-
istry, Moscow, Russian Federation,3Dmitry Rogachev National
Medical and Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow,Russian Federation.
Introduction: High-throughput sequencing of T-cell receptor
(TCR) repertoires is widely used to investigate adaptive immunitygenomics. Multiplex PCR is most reliable and cost-effectivemethod for TCR library preparation. The main unsolved challenge
in such methods is enormous ampli ﬁcation bias which signi ﬁ-
cantly complicates the downstream analysis. Here we describe aﬁrst fully computational algorithm for PCR bias removing in TCR
repertoires called iROAR.
Material and methods: 15 low biased 5 ’-RACE based TCR
repertoires and 30 highly biased multiplex PCR based TCRrepertoires downloaded from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra
were used for this study. Based on statistical features of
nonfunctional TCR rearrangements in low biased TCR repertoireswe formulated the Over Ampli ﬁcation Rate (OAR) measure as a
ratio of observed and expected frequency of a V and a J gene
among nonfunctional rearrangements. OAR is equal to 1 in the
absence of PCR bias and deviates from 1 if distinct V or J gene isover- or under-represented in library.
Results: Using OAR concept, we developed an original
algorithm to reduce PCR bias. The idea is based on iterative clone
count compensation by dividing of each clone count by normal-ization coef ﬁcient - OAR(Vi)*OAR(Ji) - for each particular V-J
combination. Ef ﬁcacy of iROAR was successfully validated on 5 ’-
RACE TCR dataset with in silico introduced bias, and by
comparison of two methods: 5 ’-RACE and two-side multiplex.
Conclusion: The developed algorithm was implemented as
command-line software which is openly available for research use
athttps://github.com/smiranast/iROAR . This work was supported
by RSF grant 20-75-10091.
A.O. Smirnova: None. Y.B. Lebedev: None. I.Z. Mamedov:
None. A.Y. Komkov: None.
P17.074.A KidneyNetwork: Using kidney-derived gene expres-
sion data to predict and prioritize novel genes involved in
kidney disease
Floranne Boulogne
1, Laura R. Claus2, Henry Wiersma1, Roy Oelen1,
Floor Schukking1, Niek de Klein1, Shuang Li1, Harm-Jan Westra1, Bert
van der Zwaag2, Franka van Reekum2, Dana Sierks3, Ria Schönauer3,
Jan Halbritter3, Nine V. A. M. Knoers1, Genomics England Research
Consortium, Patrick Deelen1, Lude Franke1, Albertien M. van Eerde2
1UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,2UMC Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands,3University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Ger-
many.
Introduction: Genetic testing in patients with suspected heredi-
tary kidney disease may not reveal the genetic cause for the
disorder as potentially pathogenic variants can reside in genes
that are not known to be involved in kidney disease. To helpidentify these genes, we have developed KidneyNetwork, in whichtissue-speci ﬁc expression is utilized to predict kidney-speci ﬁc gene
functions.
Material and Methods: KidneyNetwork is a co-expression
network built upon a combination of 878 kidney RNA-sequencing
samples and a multi-tissue dataset of 31,499 samples. It uses
expression patterns to predict which genes have a kidney-relatedfunction and which phenotypes might result from mutations inthese genes. As proof of principle, we applied KidneyNetwork toprioritize rare variants in exome-sequencing data from 13 kidney
disease patients without a genetic diagnosis.
Results: KidneyNetwork can accurately predict kidney-speci ﬁc
gene functions and (kidney disease) phenotypes for disease-associated genes and applying it to exome-sequencing data ofkidney disease patients allowed us to identify a promising
candidate gene for kidney and liver cysts: ALG6.
Conclusion: We present KidneyNetwork, a kidney-speci ﬁc co-
expression network that accurately predicts which genes havekidney-speci ﬁc functions and can result in kidney disease. We
show the added value of KidneyNetwork by applying it to kidney
disease patients without a molecular diagnosis. KidneyNetworkcan be applied to clinically unsolved kidney disease cases, but itcan also be used by researchers to gain insight into individual
genes in order to better understand kidney physiology and
pathophysiology. Grant references: This research was supportedby the Dutch Kidney Foundation (18OKG19).
F. Boulogne: None. L.R. Claus: None. H. Wiersma: None. R.
Oelen: None. F. Schukking: None. N. de Klein: None. S. Li: None.
H. Westra: None. B. van der Zwaag: None. F. van Reekum: None.
D. Sierks: None. R. Schönauer: None. J. Halbritter: None. N.V.A.
M. Knoers: None. P. Deelen: None. L. Franke: None. A.M. van
Eerde: None.
P17.075.B Deciphering the role of trasposable elements in
CD4
+tumor-in ﬁltrating lymphocytes at single cell resolution
Valeria Ranzani1, Benedetto Polimeni2,1, Annarita Putignano1,
Samuele Notarbartolo1, Valeria Bevilacqua1, Serena Curti1, Sergio
Abrignani1,3, Federica Marasca1, Beatrice Bodega1
1Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare, Milano, Italy,2University of
Milano-Bicocca, Medicina Traslazionale e Molecolare (DIMET),
Milano, Italy,3University of Milan, Department of Clinical Sciences
and Community Health, Milano, Italy.
Many TE families have a role in the regulation of the epigenome, 3D
genome organization and the transcriptional output of the cell. Whilethe roles of TEs in embryogenesis and development is already
documented, their contributi on to adult cell commitment and
differentiation is still poorly investigated. Hence, we sought todecipher the role of TEs in regulating tumour-in ﬁltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) plasticity and their impact in the heterogeneity of T cell subsets
in the tumour microenvironment. Preliminary results on RNA-FISH
showed that TE-derived RNAs are more enriched in TILs compared toadjacent normal tissue. Here, we apply a custom pipeline for the
quanti ﬁcation of TE expression from 5 ’-end 10X Genomics scRNA-seq
data of circulating, colorectal cancer (CRC) and normal tissue-inﬁltrating CD3
+T cells. We unveiled a hidden heterogeneity within
subpopulations of CD3+T cells, characterized by expression patterns
of distinct TE families speci ﬁc for circulating or in ﬁltrating lympho-
cytes. We detected cell clusters enriched in either evolutionarily old oryoung TE families, supporting the inclusion of TEs at the 5 ’-end of
genes or the autonomous expression of TEs. These results suggest
that TEs contribute to the identity of T lymphocytes in response to the
exposure to the tumour microenvironment. We will expand thisanalysis by discovering signatures of TEs in subpopulations of TILs andproﬁling the TCR clonotypes of the same cells.
V. Ranzani: None. B. Polimeni: None. A. Putignano: None. S.
Notarbartolo: None. V. Bevilacqua: None. S. Curti: None. S.
Abrignani: None. F. Marasca: None. B. Bodega: None.
P17.076.C Treatabolome database: towards enhancing Rare
Diseases ’treatment visibilityAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
502
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Carles Hernandez-Ferrer1, Alberto Corvó1, Leslie Matalonga1, Rachel
Thompson2, Leigh Carmody3, Davide Piscia1, Alfons Macaya4, Angela
Lochmuller5, Alex Manta2, Bertrand Fontaine6, Sabine Vicart7, Jean-
François Desaphy8, Concetta Altamura8, Karim Wahbi9, Annachiara
De Sandre-Giovannoli10, Corinne Vigouroux11, Birte Zurek12, Carola
Rheinard13, David Gómez-Andrés4, Katherine Schon5, Laura Over14,
Norbert Brüggemann14, Katja Lohmann14, Matthew J. Jennings5,
Matthis Synofzik15, Olaf Riess13, Rabah Ben Yaou6, Teresinha
Evangelista16, Thiloka Ratnaike17, Virginie Bros-Facer18, Gulcin
Gumus18, Rita Horvath5, Patrick Chinnery5, Holm Graessner13, Peter
Robinson3,Antonio Atalaia6, Hanns Lochmuller2, Gisèle Bonne19,
Sergi Beltran1
1CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,2Children ’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Canada, Ottawa, ON,Canada,3The Jackson Laboratory For Genomic Medicine, Farm-
ington, CT 06032, USA, Farmington, CT, USA,4Paediatric Neurology,
Vall d ’Hebron University Hospital and VHIR (Euro-NMD, ERN-RND),
Barcelona, Spain,5Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University
of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge BiomedicalCampus, Cambridge, United Kingdom,6Sorbonne Université - Inserm
UMRS 974, Center of Research in Myology, Institut de Myologie, G.H.
Pitié-Salpêtrière Paris, France, Paris, France,7Sorbonne Université,
INSERM, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de Recherche
en Myologie-UMR 974, Reference center in neuro-muscular channe-
lopathies, Institute of Myology, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière,Paris, France,8Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human
Oncology, School of Medicine, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari,
Italy,9APHP, Cochin Hospital, Cardiology Department, FILNEMUS,
Centre de Référence de Pathologie Neuromusculaire Nord/Est/Ile deFrance, Université de Paris, Paris, France,10AP-HM, Department of
Medical Genetics, and CRB-TAC (CRB AP-HM), Children ’s Hospital La
Timone, Marseille, France,11AP-HP Saint-Antoine Hospital, Reference
Centre of Rare Diseases of Insulin Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity(PRISIS), Departments of Molecular Biology and Genetics and of
Endocrinology, 75012, Paris, France,12Institute of Medical Genetics
and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen, Germany, Tubingen,Germany,13Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
University of Tuebingen, Tubingen, Germany,14Institute of Neuroge-
netics, University of Lübeck, Lubeck, Germany,15Department of
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical BrainResearch and Center of Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tubingen,Germany,
16Unité de Morphologie Neuromusculaire, Institut de
Myologie, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière; Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, INSERM,
Centre de référence Des Maladies Neuromusculaires Nord/Est, Ile deFrance, Paris, France,17Department of Paediatrics, Cambridge
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust; Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United King-dom,18EURORDIS –Rare Diseases Europe, Paris, France,19Sorbonne
Université - Inserm UMRS 974, Center of Research in Myology, Institut
de Myologie, G.H. Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Introduction: Although next-generation sequencing (NGS) has
drastically improved diagnosis for patients with rare diseases
(RDs), access to knowledge of effective treatments is still sparse
and often unclear. The large number of RDs (>7,000 estimated)and their genetic heterogeneity make the identi ﬁcation of existing
treatments dif ﬁcult for clinicians. Herein we report Treatabolome
DB, a database of RD-speci ﬁc treatments mapped at gene and
variant level to allow easy identi ﬁcation of published therapies.
Materials and methods: A relational database was developed
to collect variant-to-treatment mappings from systematic litera-
ture reviews (SLRs) produced by disease experts. To date, 8 SLRshave been completed on congenital myasthenic syndromes,laminopathies, muscular channelopathies, mitochondrial disorders
(Leigh syndromes), hereditary peripheral neuropathies, geneticforms of Parkinson´s disease, and metabolic myopathies; addi-
tional participation from RD experts is welcomed.
Results: A data model based on the use of public ontologies and
international recommendations was de ﬁned by the Treatabolome
working group to enable system interoperability. The TreatabolomeDB schema is based on data submission and allows discoverability of
information from the SLRs. Treatabolome DB will be publicly
accessible through programmatic interfaces and a web portalsupporting queries of terms including diagnostic (ORDO, OMIM, andHPO), gene, variant, and treatment (ChEBI, UMLS or MeSH).
Conclusion: Treatabolome DB enables identi ﬁcation of existing
treatments for RD patients at the time of diagnosis. Futuredevelopments include its connection with genomic analysis toolssuch as the RD-Connect GPAP. Funding : Solve-RD project (H2020
#779257), ERN for Neuromuscular Diseases (#870177) ERN for Rare
Neurological Diseases (#739510).
C. Hernandez-Ferrer: None. A. Corvó: None. L. Matalonga:
None. R. Thompson: None. L. Carmody: None. D. Piscia: None. A.
Macaya: None. A. Lochmuller: None. A. Manta: None. B.
Fontaine: None. S. Vicart: None. J. Desaphy: None. C. Altamura:
None. K. Wahbi: None. A. De Sandre-Giovannoli: None. C.
Vigouroux: None. B. Zurek: None. C. Rheinard: None. D. Gómez-
Andrés: None. K. Schon: None. L. Over: None. N. Brüggemann:
None. K. Lohmann: None. M.J. Jennings: None. M. Synofzik:
None. O. Riess: None. R. Ben Yaou: None.
T. Evangelista: None.
T. Ratnaike: None. V. Bros-Facer: None. G. Gumus: None. R.
Horvath: None. P. Chinnery: None. H. Graessner: None. P.
Robinson: None. A. Atalaia: None. H. Lochmuller: None. G.
Bonne: None. S. Beltran: None.
P17.077.D Exploring the causality of epidemiological relation-
ships between Type 2 Diabetes and cancers using pathway-
speci ﬁc genetic instruments
Zhanna Balkhiyarova1, Anna Ulrich1, Ayse Demirkan1, Liudmila
Zudina1, Igor Pupko1, Jared G. Maina2, Philippe Froguel2, Marika
Kaakinen1, Inga Prokopenko1
1University of Surrey, Guilford, United Kingdom,2University of Lille,
Lille, France.
Introduction: Epidemiological studies suggest that people with
type 2 diabetes (T2D) are at risk for various cancers. T2D and
postmenopausal breast (BrC), colorectal (CrC), prostate (PrC) and
pancreatic (PanC) cancers share many risk factors, but potentialbiological links between them are incompletely understood. We
aimed at investigating causality by pathophysiological process
between these diseases using the Mendelian Randomisation (MR)approach.
Materials and Methods: Weﬁrst used agglomerative hierarchical
clustering to group T2D-associated a nd four cancers risk-contributing
SNPs by biological pathways based on their effects on 45 metabolic-/inﬂammatory-/tumour-/obesity-related phenotypes. The cardiovas-
cular cluster comprised 74 variants with effects on insulin secretion
and cardiovascular risk. The hormo nal-lipid cluster grouped 85 SNPs
with shared effects on hormone and lipid levels. The glycaemiccluster highlighted 28 T2D SNPs with effects on glycaemia. Weapplied a two-sample MR framework to investigate the role of these
three pathways in developing cancer. Effect estimates for the same
or proxy variants (r
2> 0.8) on T2D and cancers were obtained from
the largest-to-date respective GWAS.
Results: The hormonal-lipid pathway of T2D showed evidence
of positive causal relationships with CrC ( βMR=0.099[SE =0.269],
P-value =2.32x10-4) and BrC ( βMR=0.0937[SE =0.0354], P-value
=0.008), and a negative causal effect on PanC ( βMR=-0.476[SE =
0.182], P-value =0.00872). Our analysis further suggested a causalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
503
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608relationship between increased T2D risk via the glycaemic
pathway and PrC ( βMR=0.131[SE =0.066], P-value =0.0464).
Conclusions: Dissection of T2D risk variants into distinct
pathways improved our ability to detect causal relationshipsbetween speci ﬁc T2D pathways and cancers and highlighted
hormonal-lipid- and glycaemia-related mechanisms underlying
these relationships.Funding: WCRF-2017/1641, LongITools H2020-
SC1-2019-874739
Z. Balkhiyarova: None. A. Ulrich: None. A. Demirkan: None. L.
Zudina: None. I. Pupko: None. J.G. Maina: None. P. Froguel:
None. M. Kaakinen: None. I. Prokopenko: None.
P17.078.A Leveraging omic features with F3UTER enables
identi ﬁcation of unannotated 3 ’UTRs for synaptic genes
Siddharth Sethi1,2, David Zhang2,3,4, Sebastian Guel ﬁ2,5, Zhongbo
Chen2,3,4, Sonia Garcia-Ruiz2,3,4, Mina Ryten2,3,4, Harpreet Saini1, Juan
A. Botia2,6
1Astex Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Department
of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, London, United Kingdom,3NIHR Great Ormond
Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, University CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom,4Genetics and Genomic Medicine,
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College
London, London, United Kingdom,5Verge Genomics, South San
Francisco, CA, USA,6Department of Information and Communica-
tions Engineering, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
The 3 ’untranslated regions (3 ’UTRs) of protein-coding messen-
ger RNAs (mRNAs) play a crucial role in regulating geneexpression at the post-transcriptional level. There is growing
evidence for the importance of 3 ’UTR dependent regulatory
processes, particularly in large p olarised cells such as neurons.
However, 3 ’-end RNA-sequencing datasets have identi ﬁed a
large number of novel polyadenylation sites, many of which are
located outside of annotated exo ns, suggesting that our current
3’UTR catalogue in human is incomplete. These insights are
complemented by an increasing recognition of the functional
importance of transcriptional a ctivity outside of known exons,
particularly in human brain tissues. In this study, we developed amachine learning-based framework, leveraging both genomicand tissue-speci ﬁc transcriptomic features to predict previously
unannotated 3 ’UTRs. We identify unannotated 3 ’UTRs associated
with 1,513 genes across 39 human tissues, with the greatestabundance found in brain. These unannotated 3 ’UTRs were
signi ﬁcantly enriched for RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and
exhibited higher human lineage-speci ﬁcity than expected by
chance. We found that brain-speci ﬁc unannotated 3 ’UTRs were
enriched for the binding of important neuronal RBPs such as
TARDBP and RBFOX1 , and their associated genes were involved
in synaptic function and brain-related disorders. Our data isshared through an online resource F3UTER ( https://astx.
shinyapps.io/F3UTER/ ), which allows users to both easily query
unannotated 3 ’UTRs and inspect the omic features driving the
classi ﬁer’s prediction. Overall, our data improves 3 ’UTR annota-
tion and provides novel insights into the mRNA-RBP interactomein the human brain, with implications for our understanding of
neurological and neurodevelopmental diseases.
S. Sethi: None. D. Zhang: None. S. Guel ﬁ:None. Z. Chen:
None. S. Garcia-Ruiz: None. M. Ryten: None. H. Saini: None. J.A.
Botia: None.
P17.079.B NGS-based detection of uniparental disomy in rare
disease patientsRobert Schwieger , Anett Marais, Joe Rayner, Antonio Romito,
Paknia Omid, Volkmar Weckesser, Peter Bauer, Krishna Kumar
Kandaswamy
Centogene, Berlin, Germany.
Uniparental disomy (UPD) is a copy-neutral genetic defect where
both chromosomal homologs originate from a single parent. UPDs
are relatively rare (Nakka et al. 2019;Robinson 2000). However,increased prevalence was observed in patients with certain rare
diseases (King et al. 2014). Here, we assess the pertinence of UPD-
events in the context of rare disease diagnostics. Even though UPDs
do not necessarily have a pathogeni c effect an increased disease risk
due to imprinting effects is reported. Iso-UPDs may encompass
homozygous pathogenic variants . Furthermore, UPDs can indicate
chromosomal aberrations due to incomplete rescue. We integratedautomated UPD detection in our rare disease diagnostic work ﬂow for
Whole exome sequencing (WES) samples. We investigate the UPD
distribution among rare disease patients. In particular, we are
interested in predominant occurrence with respect to chromosomallocation as well as expanding the direct diagnostic links for raregenetic disorders (Del Gaudio et al. 2020). Detection of UPDs is based
on different methods such as MLPA-methylation, detection of
Mendelian inheritance errors (MIEs ) in family-trios (Yauy et al. 2020)
or on the detection of ROHs (Magi et al. 2014). Here we combine
d i f f e r e n ta p p r o a c h e sa n de x t e n dt h ed e t e c t i o nm e t h o db a s e do n
MIEs using approaches from Baysian machine learning. So far wetested around 3000 WES-trio samples and identi ﬁed four previously
unknown diagnostically relevant UPD events, three iso-UPDs on
chromosomes 9, 15 and 16 and one hetero-UPD on chromosome 21.
Furthermore, we developed a method for detection of UPDs in WES-solo cases and recently integrated it into the diagnostic pipeline.
R. Schwieger: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Centogene. A. Marais: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Centogene. J. Rayner: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Centogene. A. Romito: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Centogene. P. Omid: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Centogene. V. Weckesser: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; Centogene. P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Centogene. K.K. Kandaswamy: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene.
P17.080.C ConVarT: a new search engine for orthologous
variants for functional inference of human genetic variants
Mustafa S. Pir
1, Halil I. Bilgin1, Ahmet Say ıcı1, Fatih Co şkun1, Furkan
M. Torun1, Pei Zhao2, Yahong Kang2, Sebiha Çevik1, Oktay I. Kaplan1
1Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri, Turkey,2SunyBiotech Co., Ltd,
Fuzhou, China.
Introduction: Next-generation sequencing technologies have
facilitated the sequencing of genomes of human and non-human organisms, leading to an immense amount of variant data.
All of these variant data are stored in organism-speci ﬁc databases,
but ﬁnding equivalent variants called orthologous variants
(OrthoVars) between organisms remains dif ﬁcult.
Materials and Methods: We conducted over 500000 multiple
sequence alignments, accompanied by the incorporation of variant-
speci ﬁc annotations. We determined OrthoVars between human,
mouse or C. elegans and inserted them into corresponding positions.
Result: Here, we developed a no vel integrated search engine
ConVarT ( http://www.convart.org/ ), which includes human variants
together with variants from mouse and C. elegans .B e s i d e s ,C o n V a r T
incorporated variant-speci ﬁc annotations including pathogenicity
and phenotypic consequences, thus helping to infer the functionalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
504
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608implications of human variants from phenotypic OrthoVars from
non-human species. Furthermore, phenotypic variants without
human OrthoVars from mouse and C. elegans may provide ready
to use empirical evidence wh en human OrthoVars emerge.
Conclusion: ConVarT is a new search engine for OrthoVars
between humans and non-human species, allowing the functional
inference of human genetic variants from phenotypic OrthoVars
and variants from non-human organisms.
M.S. Pir: None. H.I. Bilgin: None. A. Say ıcı:None. F. Co şkun:
None. F.M. Torun: None. P. Zhao: None. Y. Kang: None. S. Çevik:
None. O.I. Kaplan: None.
P17.081.D Systematic benchmarking of multiple variant call-
ing pipelines identi ﬁes major factors affecting accuracy of
coding sequence variant discovery
Yury A. Barbitoff1,2, Ruslan Abasov1, Varvara E. Tvorogova1,3,
Andrey S. Glotov2, Alexander V. Predeus1
1Bioinformatics Institute, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation,2Dpt. of
Genomic Medicine, D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics,
Gynaecology, and Reproductology, St. Petersburg, Russian Federa-
tion,3Dpt. of Genetics and Biotechnology, St. Petersburg State
University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Accurate detection of genetic variants is a key
requirement for molecular diagnostics of Mendelian disorders.Efﬁciency of variant discovery from NGS data depends on multiple
factors, including the performance of read alignment and variant
calling algorithms.
Methods: In this work, we systematically evaluated the
performance of 4 short read aligners (bowtie2, BWA, Isaac, and
Novoalign) and 6 variant calling and ﬁltering methods (based on
DeepVariant, GATK, FreeBayes, and Strelka) using a set of 10 “gold
standard ”WES and WGS datasets.
Results: Our results suggest that bowtie2 performs signi ﬁcantly
worse than other aligners and should not be used for medicalvariant calling. When other aligners were used, the accuracy ofvariant discovery mostly depended on variant caller and not read
aligner. Among the tested callers, DeepVariant consistently
showed the best performance and the highest robustness onboth WES and WGS data. All tested variant callers performedworse in regions with higher fraction of multimapping reads, and
mappability and GC content were the greatest sequence-based
confounders for all variant callers. At the same time, tools thatshowed best performance also displayed lower dependence on
sequence-based confounders, sequencing technology (WES vs
WGS), and coverage.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings suggest that recent developments in
variant caller software could compensate for most of the inherent
limitations of short read sequencing methods.
This work was supported by the Systems Biology Fellowship to
Y.A.B., Presidential Fellowship (grant no. SP-4503.2021.4) to Y.A.B.,and D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and
Reproductology, project 558-2019-0012 ( АААА -А19119021290033-
1) of FSBSI.
Y.A. Barbitoff: None. R. Abasov: None. V.E. Tvorogova: None.
A.S. Glotov: None. A.V. Predeus: None.
P17.082.A GenOtoScope: Automated annotation of variants
associated with hereditary hearing loss
Christian Landgraf
1, Damianos P. Melidis2, Gunnar Schmidt1, Anja
Schöner-Heinisch1, Sandra von Hardenberg1, Bernd Auber1, Wolf-
gang Nejdl21Hannover Medical School (MHH), Hannover, Germany,2L3S
Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
The establishment of next generation sequencing (WES/WGS) in
clinical routine has opened the diagnostic ﬁeld for common
disorders associated with a vast genetic heterogeneity like hearing
loss (HL). The introduction of the "Expert Speci ﬁcation of ACMG/
AMP Variant Interpretation Guidelines for Genetic Hearing Loss"(Oza et al., 2018) paved the way for a more standardizedassessment. However, congruent interpretation of a large number
of genomic variants remains a key challenge in today ’s molecular
genetics, which also stands true for HL. Thus, automated variant(pre-)assessment could be an important structural bene ﬁt, as
analyses are still time-consuming and prone to inconsistent
interpretation. Here we present GenOtoScope , a software pipeline
that accepts the patient genomic variants (vcf ﬁle) as input and
computes the ACMG class for each variant, using Python
programming language. Currently, we have implemented 15 out
of 24 ACMG/AMP rules speci ﬁed for HL on different strength levels
including the re ﬁned recommendations for PVS1 interpretation
(Tayoun et al., 2018). We have successfully tested GenOtoScope for
exonic variants of 16 individuals with HL. Further, we aim to test
and evaluate the pipeline for a broader set of patients. Finally, theproject aims to provide a well-documented and easy-to-runpipeline, which automatically assigns a class to each variant and
presents only a handful set of the relevant variants to the human
curator. Thus, we aim that GenOtoScope will standardize the
process and signi ﬁcantly decrease the time of variant assessment
and interpretation for HL. Funded by Volkswagen Foundation.
C. Landgraf: None. D.P. Melidis: None. G. Schmidt: None. A.
Schöner-Heinisch: None. S. von Hardenberg: None. B. Auber:
None. W. Nejdl: None.
P17.083.B Variant Interpretation Pipeline: a modular pipeline
that integrates best practice methods to prioritize genetic
variants causal for a patient ’s phenotype
Lennart F. Johansson , K. Joeri van der Velde, Dennis Hendriksen,
Bart Charbon, Mariska K. Slofstra, Robert Sietsma, Sander Van den
Hoek, Martine T. Meems-Veldhuis, Henny H. Lemmink, Mariëlle E. van
Gijn, Cleo C. Van Diemen, Morris A. Swertz
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands.
Thus far, almost 7000 diseases with a molecular basis are de ﬁned,
of which almost 6000 single gene disorders, and around 4000
genes are known to harbor the pathogenic variants causal for the
patient ’s phenotypes. Still, the diagnostic yield of genetic testing
varies between 24-68%, depending on patient inclusion criteria,whether trio ’s are studied, patient ’s phenotype(s) and analysis
strategies. Fortunately new methods are published frequently,
however their timely implementation necessitates a ﬂexible
analysis work ﬂow. Therefore we present MOLGENIS Variant
Interpretation Pipeline (VIP), a ﬂexible system to prioritize genetic
variants in a VCF on the likelihood to be causal for a patient ’s
phenotype. VIPs main added value is that it is modular andconﬁgurable, integrating best in class software, such ENSEMBL
Variant Effect Predictor, SpliceAI, CADD, gnoMAD, CAPICE and
VIBE, with validated decision protocols from routine diagnosticspractice and integrating inputs from experts from EU Solve-RD,EJP-RD and CINECA projects. VIP provides annotation, prioritiza-
tion and ﬁltering of variants through GENMOD-based inheritance
matching and HPO-based phenotype matching, including SV, low-penetrance and GRCh38 pilots. Using these options and annota-tions users can create custom ﬁlter trees to classify variants.
Moreover, interactive HTML reports can be generated to ﬁlter andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
505
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608select variants of interest. We believe VIP helps get the best
analysis methods to patients, faster. VIP is open source, and we
welcome community contributions to add novel tools and create
new pipeline con ﬁgurations suited to different use-cases. Find the
latest release here: https://github.com/molgenis/vip/releases and
https://github.com/molgenis/vip-report/releases .
EU Grant agreements: 779257, 825575 and 825775; NWO VIDI
917.164.455.
L.F. Johansson: None. K.J. van der Velde: None. D.
Hendriksen: None. B. Charbon: None. M.K. Slofstra: None. R.
Sietsma: None. S. Van den Hoek: None. M.T. Meems-Veldhuis:
None. H.H. Lemmink: None. M.E. van Gijn: None. C.C. Van
Diemen: None. M.A. Swertz: None.
P17.085.D MobiDetails: online DNA variants interpretation
David BAUX1,2, Charles Van Goethem1, Olivier Ardouin3, Thomas
Guignard4, Anne Bergougnoux1,5, Michel Koenig1,5, Anne-Françoise
Roux1,2
1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Université
de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,2Institute for Neurosciences of
Montpellier (INM), Univ Montpellier, INSERM, Montpellier, France,
3Plateau de Médecine Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU Montpellier,
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,4Unité de Génétique
Chromosomique, CHU Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, Mon-tpellier, France,5PhyMedExp, Univ Montpellier, INSERM, Montpellier,
France.
MobiDetails is an online expert tool dedicated to clinicians and
researchers assessing DNA variants pathogenicity. This complextask is rendered even more dif ﬁcult by the requirement to use
several websites and tools to obtain exhaustive and appropriate
data (i.e population genomics, missense and splicing predictors,literature citations …). In addition, some tools do not have a
dedicated web interface or can be time consuming for the end-
user. The aim of MobiDetails is to gather in a single web page foreach variant the most signi ﬁcant data, with a particular focus on
splicing prediction tools. It is based on publicly available resources
and/or on open-source academic software (e.g. VariantValidator to
generate the HGVS nomenclatures). It is able to annotate anysmall DNA variant (substitutions or small insertions/deletions),either exonic or intronic, lying within 18,500 human genes.
MobiDetails annotations are dynamic, as they either rely on local
ﬁles updated on a regular basis (e.g. ClinVar data) or on live API
calls (e.g. to LOVD, LitVar for literature queries, Intervar or
MetaDome). Therefore, updates of these tools are re ﬂected in
MobiDetails results and regular visits to key variant pages canbring new insights and help re ﬁne classi ﬁcation. MobiDetails is
totally free for use to academics and does not require any account
to annotate a new variant and browse the results. However
registered users can record ACMG classi ﬁcations for the variants,
and trigger the automated submission of the variant to the GlobalVariome Shared LOVD instance, ensuring a persistent sharing of
the variants. https://mobidetails.iurc.montp.inserm.fr/MD
D. Baux: None. C. Van Goethem: None. O. Ardouin: None. T.
Guignard: None. A. Bergougnoux: None. M. Koenig: None. A.
Roux: None.
P17.086.A Phenotype based prediction of WES outcome using
machine learning
Alexander J. M. Dingemans
1, Max Hinne2, Sandra Jansen1, Jeroen
van Reeuwijk1, Nicole de Leeuw1, Rolph Pfundt1, Bregje W. van Bon1,Anneke T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, Tjitske Kleefstra1, David A. Koolen1,
Marcel A. J. van Gerven2, Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers1, Bert B. A. de Vries1
1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Radboud University, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands.
Although the introduction of whole exome sequencing (WES) has
led to the diagnosis of a signi ﬁcant portion of patients with
intellectual disability (ID), the yield in actual clinical practice hasremained stable in the last few years at approximately 30%. We
hypothesize that improving the selection of patients to test based
on their phenotypic presentation will increase diagnostic yield andtherefore reduce unnecessary genetic testing. In the current study,we tested four machine learning methods to predict the
probability of a positive WES. From these, we developed PredWES:
a statistical model predicting the probability of a positive WESresult solely based on the phenotype of a patient. We ﬁrst trained
the tool on 1,431 patients with ID using nested cross-validation.
We subsequently show that diagnostic WES on the top 10% of
patients with the highest probability of a positive WES resultwould provide a diagnostic yield of 57%, leading to a notably 86%increase. On the other end of the spectrum, the 90% of patients
with the 10% lowest scores were correctly predicted to have a
negative WES result. Inspection of our model revealed that forpatients with ID, comorbid abnormal (lower) muscle tone
positively correlated with the prediction for a conclusive WES
diagnosis, whereas autism was negatively associated with amolecular diagnosis. In conclusion, PredWES allows prioritizingpatients eligible for diagnostic WES testing based on their
phenotypic presentation to increase the relative diagnostic yield
for intellectual disability, as such, making a more ef ﬁcient use of
health care resources.
A.J.M. Dingemans: None. M. Hinne: None. S. Jansen: None. J.
van Reeuwijk: None. N. de Leeuw: None. R. Pfundt: None. B.W.
van Bon: None. A.T. Vulto-van Silfhout: None. T. Kleefstra:
None. D.A. Koolen: None. M.A.J. van Gerven: None. L.E.L.M.
Vissers: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None.
P17.087.B High-de ﬁnition likelihood inference of heritability
and genetic correlation on the X chromosome
Jiantao Chen
1, Zheng Ning2, Xia Shen1
1Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China,2Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Estimating heritability and genetic correlation is of essential
importance for understanding the genetic architecture of complextraits. Without accessing individual-level data, the state-of-the-artmethods can infer these parameters using summary statistics from
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), including linkage
disequilibrium score regression (LDSC) and recently developedmore powerful high-de ﬁnition likelihood (HDL) methods. Most
applications of these methods were limited to analyzing the
autosomal variants, while the X chromosome was often neglected.
Here we develop an extended HDL method, HDL-X, to analyzeheritability and genetic correlation on the X chromosome. Weapplied HDL-X on 30 complex traits measured in about 155,000
unrelated British men and 180,000 unrelated British women from
the UK Biobank (UKBB). In contrast to women, we found that menhave enriched heritabilities across most phenotypes on the X
chromosome. While for both sexes, the genetic correlations on the
X chromosome are comparable to the autosomal estimates.
J. Chen: None. Z. Ning: None. X. Shen: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
506
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P18 Personalized Medicine and Pharmacogenomics
P18.002.D THL Biobank, an infrastructure for multi-omics
systems biology and personalized medicine studies
Heidi Marjonen , Anni Joensuu, Katri Kantojärvi, Kaisa Silander,
Markus Perola, Sirpa Soini
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
Introduction: Genomics-based knowledge is revolutionizing the
practice of medicine by leading it to more effective diagnosis and
treatment. Here biobanks can provide a valuable resource ofsamples to be linked with detailed descriptions of diseasephenotypes and genetic data to support the research era of
personalized medicine. THL Biobank is a remarkable biorepository
of both population and disease-speci ﬁc research collections to be
used in research aiming to develop new solutions for health
promotion and disease prevention.
Material and methods: Precision medicine research requires
access to suf ﬁcient numbers of samples and data. THL Biobank
provides access to >200 000 samples from population-based
cohorts with standardized life style, anthropometrics and biomar-
ker data as well as availability of clinical follow-up data form healthregisters. By combing this to genomic data (chip/imputed data>100 000 individuals, WES >15 000 individuals and WGS >5000
individuals) and other omics data of metabolome, methylome,
transcriptome and telomeres we provide a fundamental scienti ﬁc
infrastructure for personalized medicine.
Results: THL Biobank serves both academic and company
researchers worldwide and also offers a possibility for recallstudies. Over 130 biobank projects have been initiated since 2015and >94% included genomic data such as the large public-private
genetic research study FinnGen.
Conclusions: Identi ﬁcation of disease speci ﬁc biomarkers for
diagnosis and prognosis is the key feature of precision medicine.THL Biobank is a resource for extensive data collections that offer
tremendous research opportunities from gene-environment inter-
actions and polygenic risk scores to new diagnostics.
H. Marjonen: None. A. Joensuu: None. K. Kantojärvi: None. K.
Silander: None. M. Perola: None. S. Soini: None.
P18.003.A Association of bradikinin receptor genes (ins / del
(9b)), chimase 1 (1903A> G), and FTO (rs9939609) with obesity
in children and adolescence
Olga V. Bocharova
1, Elena D. Teplyakova1, Tatyana P. Shkurat2,
Maria A. Amelina2
1Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,
2Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Genetic predisposition plays an important role in the develop-
ment of obesity, but the relationship between obesity loci andgene polymorphisms associated with cardiometabolic disorders in
the child and adolescent population has not been established.
Aim of this work was to study the relationship between
polymorphisms of the genes BDKRB2 ins/del (9b) ,CMA1/B
1903A>G , and the gene associated with obesity FTO rs9939609
in the child and adolescent population Rostov region (Russia).
Methods: The survey involved 370 obese children and
adolescents from 3 to 17 years old with a body mass index
(BMI > 30), as well as 123 children and adolescents of the same
age without obesity (BMI ˂20). Genomic DNA samples were
isolated from whole blood of patients using the standard phenol-chloroform method. Single nucleotide polymorphism wasdetermined using polymerase chain reaction. MDR was used to
assess gene-gene relationships. Distribution of genotypes and
allelic variants/genotypes was analyzed using the χ2 test.
Results: An increased risk of obesity is shown for carriers of
polymorphisms rs1800875 of the CMA1 gene and rs9939609 of the
FTO gene. Analysis of the two- and three-locus relationships
showed an increased risk of obesity when all studied gene
polymorphisms were included in its development. An antagonisticcharacter was also established between all studied genes andcombinations of combined genotypes of obesity risk in the child
and adolescent population were identi ﬁed.This study was funded
by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the RussianFederation №0852-2020-0028 .
O.V. Bocharova: None. E.D. Teplyakova: None. T.P. Shkurat:
None. M.A. Amelina: None.
P18.004.B Personalising breast cancer prevention
Sowmiya Moorthie
1,2, Hilary Burton1,Chantal Babb de Villiers1,
Tanya Brigden1, Alison Hall1, Laura Blackburn1, Mark Kroese1
1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Cambridge Public
Health, University of Cambridge, Cambrige, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Developing precision public health and persona-
lised prevention is an ambition for many health systems asevidenced by government policy documents. This has becomeincreasingly possible through the convergence of information
technology and advances in our knowledge about risk, enabling
more accurate risk estimation. Breast cancer is no exception andmajor scienti ﬁc advancements have been made in risk prediction
and the tools used. However, the pace at which this research is
occurring is signi ﬁcantly quicker than implementation.
Aim and method: Our aim was to understand the opportunities
for personalisation and how new knowledge from breast cancer
prevention research could best be integrated into personalised
prevention pathways.We reviewed the scienti ﬁc and policy
literature to gain an understanding of the present. We thenconvened an expert workshop to develop a vision of the future,
enabling us to examine opportunities for implementation and
identi ﬁcation of issues relevant to individuals, health systems and
society. We used our knowledge gathering and policy analysis todevelop recommendations that inform policymakers on persona-
lised breast cancer prevention pathways.
Conclusion: Our report, Personalising breast cancer prevention -
bridging the gap between research and policy summarises the
overarching implications for breast cancer prevention pathways
for policymakers, those working in health promotion, andhealthcare providers. We provide recommendations for importantareas of decision-making and considerations for advancing
personalised breast cancer prevention pathways. Recommenda-
tions included relate to: Accelerating the use of new tools inpreventing hereditary breast cancer, the use of these tools inbreast cancer prevention pathways, and moving towards risk-
strati ﬁed population screening.
S. Moorthie: None. H. Burton: None. C. Babb de Villiers: None.
T. Brigden: None. A. Hall: None. L. Blackburn: None. M. Kroese:
None.
P18.005.C Detection of pathogenic mutations in breast cancer
genes by GSAMD and PMDA array platforms
Annemieke J. M. H. Verkerk , Jeroen van Rooij, Jard de Vries, Ans M.
W. van de Ouweland, Maartje J. Hooning, Linda Broer, Willemina R.
R. Geurts-Giele, Robert M. van der Helm, Robert M. W. Hofstra,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
507
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Marieke F. van Dooren, J Margriet Collée, E H. Hoefsloot, Andre G.
Uitterlinden, Joyce B. van Meurs
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: At our EMC we have initiated the GOALL project
(Genotyping On All Patients), in which we investigate the use of
high throughput SNP arrays for improving clinical care and
making personalized medicine available to a larger public. In thispilot we compared the performance of array-based genotyping
with previously clinically determined pathogenic mutations, for
240 breast cancer cases. Diagnostic results were based on Sangersequencing (SNVs and small indels ≤50 bp) and MLPA (deletions
or duplications > 50 bp) for the associated genes BRCA1, BRCA2,
CHEK2, PALB2 and ATM.
Materials and Methods: Cases were selected who carried
mutations that were present on the arrays and then genotyped onthe Illumina GSAMD and Thermo ﬁscher PMDA arrays, without
prior knowledge for the research group which mutations would
be included. After data processing and QC, samples were calledfor SNVs using the manufacturer ’s software and analyzed by
PENNCNV and NEXUS (Biodiscovery) to assess larger deletions or
duplications.
Results: Overall 90% of the present diagnostic mutation results
were con ﬁrmed by array. No false positives were detected.
Mutations that were missed were mainly due to technical issues
on probe design or resolution and will we further discussed.
Conclusion: We evaluate the suitability of SNP arrays for
detecting rare pathogenic mutations in breast cancer genes.
Although new small mutations will be missed, this is a low cost
and effective way to screen for mutations in larger populations.Additionally these arrays can be customized to include extravariants for a higher detection rate.
A.J.M.H. Verkerk: None. J. van Rooij: None. J. de Vries: None.
A.M.W. van de Ouweland: None. M.J. Hooning: None. L. Broer:
None. W.R.R. Geurts-Giele: None. R.M. van der Helm: None. R.M.
W. Hofstra: None. M.F. van Dooren: None. J.M. Collée: None. E.
H. Hoefsloot: None. A.G. Uitterlinden: None. J.B. van Meurs:
None.
P18.006.D Carrier frequency of four common recessive
diseases in a Russian population
Anna Kiseleva
1, Evgeniia Sotnikova1, Alexandra Ershova1, Vladimir
Kutsenko1, Marina Klimushina1, Mikhail Divashuk1, Olga Skirko1,
Olga Kurilova1, Anastasia Zharikova1,2, Vasily Ramensky1,2, Irina
Eﬁmova1, Petr Slominsky3, Svetlana Shalnova1,Alexey Meshkov1,
Oxana Drapkina1
1National Medical Research Center for Therapy and Preventive
Medicine, Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics,
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation,
3Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Genetic carrier screening is an advanced tool for
reducing recessive disease burden. In order to ensure its effective
work it is important to improve the knowledge of population
genetic structure. Therefore, the aim of this study was to conductcomparison of carrier frequency for cystic ﬁbrosis (CF), phenylk-
etonuria, alpha-1 antitrypsin de ﬁciency, and sensorineural hearing
loss (SNHS) in two geographically close Russian regions.
Materials and Methods: The custom panel consisting of 116
variants in CFTR, PAH, SERPINA1 , and GJB2 genes was designed
and tested on two population-based cohorts that included 1858ESSE-Ivanovo and 1244 ESSE-Vologda participants. Genotypes
were determined by NGS sequencing on Nextseq 550 and by Real-
Time PCR with TaqMan OpenArray assays, respectively.
Results: Detected carrier frequencies (DCFs) differed signi ﬁ-
cantly between two regions only for CF: 0.0156 in ESSE-Ivanovoand 0.0299 in ESSE-Vologda (p =0.009). For phenylketonuria DCFs
were 0.0226 and 0.0239; for alpha-1 antitrypsin de ﬁciency - 0.0436
and 0.0497; for SNHS - 0.0576 and 0.0696, respectively. Contribu-tion to the DCFs differences for CF was made by the mostcommon CFTR variant (p.F508del) with allele frequency 0.5% in
ESSE-Ivanovo and 0.9% in ESSE-Vologda, and by rare variants.
Conclusions: Carrier frequencies for these common recessive
diseases were obtained for the ﬁrst time in two cohorts of the
Russian population. The obtained frequencies con ﬁrm the
feasibility of genetic carrier screening for all four studied diseases.
A. Kiseleva: None. E. Sotnikova: None. A. Ershova: None. V.
Kutsenko: None. M. Klimushina: None. M. Divashuk: None. O.
Skirko: None. O. Kurilova: None. A. Zharikova: None. V.
Ramensky: None. I. Eﬁmova: None. P. Slominsky: None. S.
Shalnova: None. A. Meshkov: None. O. Drapkina: None.
P18.008.B ELOVL7 gene region as s potential risk locus for
adalimumab response in Slovenian patients with Crohn ’s
disease
Mario Gorenjak
1, Mateja Zupin1, Gregor Jezernik1, Pavel Skok2,1,
UrošPoto čnik1
1Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia,2University Clinical Centre
Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
Introduction: Response to anti-TNF therapy is of pivotal
importance in patients with Crohn ’s disease. We integrated
previously reported and our PBMC derived transcriptomic andgenomic data for identi ﬁcation of genetic biomarkers for
discrimination between responders and non-responders to anti-
TNF therapy.
Materials and Methods: 84 Crohn ’s disease patients naïve to
adalimumab treatment were enrolled in the present study. DNA
and RNA were extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
RNA-seq with deconvolution was performed using BGISEQ-500.Genotyping was performed using In ﬁnium Global Screening Array.
Association regressions were carried out with 12-week response to
adalimumab as an outcome variable, adjusted to age at diagnosis,
sex, concomitant treatment and principal components. Mendelianrandomization was performed using association and eQTL results.
Results were subsequently validated using RT-qPCR.
Results: ELOVL7 gene region was con ﬁrmed using integration
of RNA-seq (q =0.035; Log
2FC: 1.55) and analysis of single
nucleotide variants in ± 100kb ELOVL7 region. Functional analysis
has shown that most signi ﬁcant rs78620886 (p =3×1 0-4) is listed
at H3K9ac_Pro histone modi ﬁcation epigenetic mark in HaploReg
database. Moreover, mendelian randomization with eQTL integra-tion has con ﬁrmed the involvement of ELOVL7 (p=0.046) with
adalimumab response. RT-qPCR validation additionally con ﬁrmed
statistically signi ﬁcant higher expression of ELOVL7 in non-
responders (p =0.016; FC: 1.43).
Conclusions: The present study con ﬁrmed ELOVL7 involvement
in anti-TNF response and revealed that the regulation of genes in
adalimumab response may be a part of a complex interplay of-omics. Funding: This work was ﬁnancially supported by the
project ID J3-9258 from the Slovenian Research Agency and
Ministry of Education, Science and Sport C3330-19-952026.
M. Gorenjak: None. M. Zupin: None. G. Jezernik: None. P.
Skok: None. U. Poto čnik: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
508
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P18.010.D CTNNA1 as a Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer
predisposing gene
Silvana Lobo1,2,3, Carla Oliveira1,2,4
1Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (I3s), Porto, Portugal,
2Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia da Universidade do Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal,3Programa Doutoral em Biotecnologia
Molecular e Celular Aplicada às Ciências da Saúde do Instituto deCiências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal,4Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto
(FMUP), Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) predis-
poses for diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) and/or lobular breast cancer
(LBC). HDGC is mainly caused by CDH1 /E-cadherin loss of function.
Recently CTNNA1 , encoding α-E-catenin, an E-cadherin adherens-
junctions partner became a HDGC-associated gene.
M&M: We systematically reviewed the literature searching for
CTNNA1- germline variant carriers. We classi ﬁed carriers based on
HDGC clinical criteria and variants according to CDH1 /ACMG/AMP
guidelines and performed genotype-phenotype analysis.
Results: 41 families with 105 family-members were found to
carry CTNNA1 -germline variants. All probands from 13 HDGC-
families presented DGC (average ≈40yo), as most relatives. 10/13
(76.9%) carried pathogenic (P) variants. Most probands from 28
non-HDGC-families developed unspeci ﬁed BC (average ≈51yo) as
their relatives (average ≈56yo). 4/28 (14.3%) carried P, while 11/28
(39.3%) carried likely P (LP) variants. When considering pheno-
types in P and LP variant carrier families, independently of clinical
criteria, we found that 100% of DGC and unspeci ﬁed-GC (32/32)
clustered in the P-variant group, while 84% (21/25) of unspeci ﬁed-
BC clustered in the LP variant group. Only 2/105 of the full cohort
presented LBC. Non-HDGC-families presented a truncating variant
cluster in CTNNA1 last exon.
Discussion: Herein, we con ﬁrm the association between
CTNNA1 P variants and early-onset GC, mainly DGC, but not LBC;
the lack of HDGC-related phenotypes in LP variant carriers; andsuggest a limited deleteriousness for truncating variants inCTNNA1 last exon. Our results support using CDH1 /ACMG/AMP
guidelines for CTNNA1 variant classi ﬁcation and considering
restricting clinical actionability to CTNNA1 variants classi ﬁed as P.
Funding: Research funded by PTDC/BTM-TEC/30164/2017
project; SL supported by 2020.05773.BD-FCT.
S. Lobo: None. C. Oliveira: None.
P18.011.A Preemptive targeted pharmacogenomic testing
with Axiom PharmacoFocus Array
Carsten Bruckner , Manasi Shah, Debbie Black, Mirjana Marjanovic
Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, Santa Clara, CA, USA.
Introduction: Understanding common variations in genes coding
for drug metabolism and transport proteins can provide insight in
medication management research to reduce adverse drug
reactions and improve health outcomes. Early integration ofpharmacogenomic (PGx) information in clinical research enablesbetter understanding of participant drug response, leading to
optimal research outcomes. The Applied Biosystems ™Axiom™
PharmacoFocus ™Array provides a targeted, high throughput and
cost-ef
ﬁcient solution for preemptive PGx research in labs,
academic hospitals and health care centers. It offers comprehen-
sive coverage of high-evidence functional variants (Pharmacoge-
nomics Knowledge Base annotation levels of evidence 1A-2B) thatinﬂuence absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion
(ADME) of common medications.Materials and Methods: A veri ﬁcation study tested approxi-
mately 1000 DNA samples across three sites from multiple DNA
sources including blood, saliva, and buccal swabs. A novel
multiplex PCR step was incorporated into the Axiom ™work ﬂow
to address the genotyping challenges of key variants that are partof highly homologous multi-gene families such as CYP2D6. A new
analysis algorithm was used to more accurately measure copy
number changes in pharmacogenomically relevant genes. Axiom ™
Analysis Suite was used to convert genotype calls to recognizedstar nomenclature and predicted phenotype.
Results: Analytical performance was evaluated on overall call
rate (>99%) and concordance to independent genotypes (>99.8%vs 1000 Genomes Project Phase III). Copy number changes inpharmacogenomically relevant genes were compared to con-
sensus calls for those regions, with concordance >99.7%.
Conclusions: The Axiom PharmacoFocus Array can accurately
genotype even technically challenging ADME variants in complex
genes.
C. Bruckner: None. M. Shah: None. D. Black: None. M.
Marjanovic: None.
P18.012.B Full-length sequencing of CYP2D6 locus with HiFi
reads increases genotyping accuracy
Lei Zhu , Aaron Wenger, Josiah Wilcots, Primo Baybayan
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA.
Introduction: The highly polymorphic CYP2D6 gene impacts the
metabolism of 25% of the mostly prescribed drugs. Thus, accurateidenti ﬁcation of variant CYP2D6 alleles in individuals is necessary
for personalized medicine. PacBio HiFi sequencing produces long
and accurate reads to identify variant regions. Here, we describe
an end-to-end work ﬂow for the characterization of full-length
CYP2D6 by HiFi sequencing.
Materials and Methods: The 2-step long-range PCR was
developed for the ampli ﬁcation of CYP2D6 locus and applied to
22 samples from a pharmacogenomics reference panel. Barcodedamplicons were pooled together for the preparation of a SMRTbell
library, which was sequenced on the PacBio Sequel II and IIe
Systems. HiFi reads were demultiplexed and a consensus of eachhaplotype was generated, mapped to the human referencegenome, and assigned a diplotype.
Results: More than 700,000 full-length HiFi reads with an
average read length of 8.2 kb at a mean accuracy ≥99.9% were
generated per sequencing run. Nearly all (>99%) demultiplexed
reads were on target to CYP2D6 . For 21 of 22 samples, the
diplotypes revealed from HiFi reads matched the referencegenotypes, while providing full resolution of each allele. For onesample characterized previously as *1/*41 by microarray, PacBio
HiFi data produced a corrected type of *33/*41. In addition, for 4
of 22 samples HiFi sequencing identi ﬁed duplications missed by
microarray or real-time PCR.
Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that SMRT Sequencing
generates full-length HiFi reads, providing high resolution for
accurate detection of the polymorphic CYP2D6 locus.
L. Zhu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci
ﬁc
Biosciences. A. Wenger: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. J. Wilcots: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. P. Baybayan: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences.
P18.013.C Phasing of the entire CYP2D6 locus with CRISPR-
Cas9 enriched Nanopore sequencingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
509
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Laurentijn Tilleman , Kaat Rubben, Filip Van Nieuwerburgh
Ghent University, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Ghent, Belgium.
Introduction :CYP2D6 is a highly polymorphic gene, with more than
hundred star(*)-allele haplotypes and more than a dozen structural
variants, including copy number variation, gene deletions, and gene
hybrids. Today, many genotyping and sequencing platforms aredeveloped to determine these variants. However, none of them can
detect all possible star-allele haplotypes and structural variants
without introducing PCR or hybridization mediated errors. In thisstudy, a PCR-free enrichment method is used to sequence the entireCYP2D6 locus, including surrounding genes.
Material and methods : To target the CYP2D6 locus, nine guide
RNAs were designed: four were located upstream of CYP2D6 , three
in the region between CYP2D6 and CYP2D7 , and two downstream
ofCYP2D7 . The performance of these guide RNAs was tested on
DNA from the NA12878 cell line. CRISPR-Cas9 enrichment was
performed according to the Cas-mediated PCR-free enrichmentProtocol from Oxford Nanopore Technologies and sequenced onan R9.4.1 ﬂowcell. Sequencing data was basecalled with Guppy 4
and mapped with minimap2. Downstream analysis was done
using custom python scripts.
Results :T h e CYP2D6 locus was enriched 130 times, with a mean
coverage of 290X. Eight reads span the entire CYP2D6 locus. All
known variants were called correctly and could be phased correctly aswell. One additional INDEL and three additional SNPs were detected.
Conclusion : This technique offers a high-throughput method
for accurate haplotype and structural variant detection of known
and unknown variants of CYP2D6 and CYP2D6-CYP2D7 hybrids.
L. Tilleman: None. K. Rubben: None. F. Van Nieuwerburgh:
None.
P18.014.D Very rare or yet unknown CFTR variants in pediatric
patients suspicious for Cystic Fibrosis
Julia Hentschel
1, Constance Henn2, Maike Karnstedt1, Simon
Gräber3,4, Freerk Prenzel2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany,2Hospital for
Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig Medical Center,Leipzig, Germany,3Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Immunol-
ogy and Critical Care Medicine and Cystic Fibrosis Center, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,4Berlin Institute of Health
(BIH), Berlin, Germany.
Despite enhanced knowledge about CFTR genetic con ﬁrmation of
diagnosing Cystic Fibrosis (CF) sometimes remain dif ﬁcult due to
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS). We present four patients
clinically or in newborn screening (NBS) conspicuous for CF with
very rare or unknown CFTR variants. Index 1 is a male newborn
with meconium plug syndrome showed normal values in NBS.After failure to thrive and severe hypochloremic alkalosis sweat
chloride (SC) was found pathologic. CFTR sequencing revealed
compound-heterozygous pathogenic variants F508del and p.(Ala1087Pro). The 2
ndvariant was described only once, a dominant
negative effect was assumed but not proven. In index 2, a female
newborn with positive NBS and pathologic/intermediate SC,
genetics revealed compound-heterozygosity for p.(Arg1162*)and a duplication of uncertain signi ﬁcance of exon 22 of
CFTR . Besides a decreased pancreatic function no further CF-
typical symptoms occurred to date. Index 3 was clinically
conspicuous for CF at the age of 2 years with failure to thriveand severe exocrine pancreatic insuf ﬁciency. SC was intermediate/
normal but we detected the variable variant 5T-12TG and acompound-heterozygous unknown VUS p.(Ile231Thr). Index 4 was
diagnosed with CF after pulmonary infections, pathologic SC and
compound heterozygosity for F508del and p.(Ala1319Glu). The 2
nd
variant is highly likely to cause CF, but still remain as VUS due to
lacking functional data. In VUS functional analyses of CFTR channelis of importance not only to prove the diagnosis but also to give
perspective to parents and clinicians, especially regarding to the
possibility of CFTR modulator therapy.
J. Hentschel: None. C. Henn: None. M. Karnstedt: None. S.
Gräber: None. F. Prenzel: None.
P18.015.A Integrated left ventricular global microRNA and
mRNA pro ﬁling in human idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilek Colak1, Olfat Al-Harazi1, Ibrahim H. Kaya2, Nzioka P. Muiya1,
Namik Kaya1, Nduna Dzimiri1
1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
Introduction: The triggering factors for the disease pathways
leading to idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are stillelusive. MicroRNAs are short non-coding endogenous messenger
RNAs that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. Hence,
alterations in their expression may in ﬂuence DCM disease
pathways. In the present study, we sought to identify signi ﬁcantly
altered miRNAs and genes involved in DCM by integrating left
ventricular myocardial genome-wide microRNA and mRNA
expression pro ﬁling and explore the mechanisms underlying the
disease.
Materials and Methods: We performed expression pro ﬁles of
DCM (n =15) and control (n =12) samples from left ventricle (LV)
using array-based techniques and integrated the differentiallyexpressed miRNAs with the global mRNA expression pro ﬁling. The
gene signature was then validated using independent datasets of
gene expression pro ﬁling data. Moreover, functional, gene
ontology and network analyses were performed.
Results: We identi ﬁed 33 signi ﬁcantly altered miRNAs in DCM
and performed unsupervised principal component analysis and
hierarchical clustering using the target genes that resulted fromthe integration of differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs. Wethen explored relevant transcriptomic and molecular networks
and validated the diagnostic value of the microRNA signature
using independent datasets.
Conclusions: Our study revealed several miRNAs that may be
involved in various gene regulatory functions in DCM, which may
provide robust biomarker panels for the disease.
Acknowledgement: This study is funded by the Research Grant
(RAC#2110006, 2180031 to DC). We would like thank Ms. Sukina
Qanbar for her administrative support.
D. Colak: None. O. Al-Harazi: None. I.H. Kaya: None. N.P.
Muiya: None. N. Kaya: None. N. Dzimiri: None.
P18.016.B Direct-to-consumer genetic tests providing health
information: A systematic review of consequences for con-sumers and healthcare services
Joshua J. Nolan
1,2, Elizabeth Ormondroyd3,4
1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United
Kingdom,2University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
3University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,4Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
510
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Direct-to-consumer genetic tests (DTC-GT) can
provide health-related information outside clinical care pathways
and are widely available. Using systematic review methodology,
we have sought to understand the consequences of commerciallyavailable genetic tests on consumers, patients, and healthcareservices.
Methods: We conducted a systematic review of the literature,
including qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-methods, in addi-tion to case reports published since November 2015. PRISMAguidelines and a prospectively registered review protocol were
used. A thematic synthesis was undertaken to identify major
analytical themes.
Results: Forty-three papers met full inclusion criteria. Most
consumers are satis ﬁed with DTC-GT and trust their results, but do
not complete as many post-test actions (sharing results, accessing
healthcare, and changing behaviours) as they intended to. A smallproportion of consumers are left dissatis ﬁed, have negative
experiences or are adversely impacted. Consumers are increas-
ingly accessing third-party interpretation software to have theirraw data re-analysed. False positive rare genetic variants are asigni ﬁcant problem. Healthcare professionals (HPs) feel a duty
towards DTC-GT consumers as patients, yet some feel managing
patients with DTC-GT is not an appropriate use of their time,impacts resource allocation and adds to HP workload. Some HPsfeel DTC-GT could be of bene ﬁt for ancestry, but less so for health-
related information. Some HPs perceive consumer/patients ’
understanding of genetics and trust in genetic professionalscould be compromised by DTC-GT.
Conclusions: DTC-GT health-related information presents
diverse challenges to consumers and healthcare services andmay contribute to healthcare inequities. Third-party interpretationplatforms further challenge stakeholders.
J.J. Nolan: None. E. Ormondroyd: None.
P18.017.C A molecular approach to precision medicine in
South African children with epilepsy: towards a genetics-
based diagnostic service for epilepsy in childhood
Caitlin Mary McIntosh
1, Karen Fieggen1, Jo M. Wilmshurst2,3, Alina I.
Esterhuizen1,4
1Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, Institute of
Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town, South Africa,2School of Child and Adolescent Health,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa,3Paediatric
Neurology and Neurophysiology, Red Cross War Memorial Children ’s
Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa,4National Health Laboratory
Service, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
Introduction: Epilepsy is a neurological disorder characterised by
unprovoked, recurring seizures, which affects more than 70 million
people worldwide, the vast majority of which are residents oflower- and middle-income countries. Many cases of epilepsypreviously deemed idiopathic have now been found to have a
genetic cause, and genetic diagnosis of epilepsy can have a major
impact on treatment and improve prognoses. A means of geneticdiagnosis for epilepsy is unavailable to many people in the SouthAfrican public health system.
Materials and Methods: A next-generation sequencing-based
gene panel was designed making use of relevant literature andinformation from commercially available gene panels. A total of 78
genes were selected for inclusion in the gene panel. A cohort of 40
children with complex epilepsy had been previously recruited, andthey underwent sequencing using Ion Torrent sequencingtechnology. Results from NGS were con ﬁrmed using traditional
Sanger sequencing methods.Results: Next-generation sequencing of the gene panel was
successful and identi ﬁed 24 variants in 20 probands for further
analysis. Preliminary Sanger results have con ﬁrmed that the NGS
panel is identifying true variants, but substantial drop off of putativevariants was observed after segregation analysis. Variants wereprimarily identi ﬁed in autosomal dominant and X-linked genes.
Conclusion: Preliminary results suggest this panel is success-
fully identifying potentially pathogenic variants in children withcomplex epilepsy. The low prevalence of variants in autosomalrecessive genes suggests further research in African populations is
necessary to identify non- de novo epilepsy-causing variants in
those populations.
C.M. McIntosh: None. K. Fieggen: None. J.M. Wilmshurst:
None. A.I. Esterhuizen: None.
P18.020.B Genetically based personalized approach to
patients with metabolic and eating disorders - a case study
Victoria L. Spasova
1,2, Boryana Gerasimova2,Olga S. Antonova1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria,2Re:Gena, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background: For the last 20 years a large amount of data has
been gathered showing the genetic predisposition to overweight
and obesity. The aim of this study is to demonstrate thepersonalized, genetic-based approach to normalize patients ’
weight and eating habits.
Materials & Methods: Eight patients were enrolled in the study
aged 28-51. A set of 11 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)related to lipid metabolism, absorption, insulin sensitivity, regula-tion of postprandial glucose level, sweet tooth, eating disorders
and addictions: APOA2 (rs5082), ADIPOQ , (rs17300539), FTO
(rs9939609), KCTD10 (rs10850219), LIPC (rs1800588), MMAB
(rs2241201), PPARG (rs1801282), ANKK1/DRD2 (rs1800497),
TAS2R38 (rs1726866), LEPR (rs2025804) and SLC2A2 (rs5400). Based
on the genetic results, the type of diet: balanced, Mediterranean,low-fat and low-carbohydrate is determined. The predisposition tounhealthy eating habits is described. The genetic counselling is
performed prior to dietitian advice to build a personalized diet.
Results: The BMI of the studied patients ranges from 17.58 to
38.95 kg/m
2. According to the BMI they are divided into four
groups –underweight (n =2), normal weight (n =2), overweight
(n=2), and obesity (n =2). The results obtained, show that the
patients ’diet is so far equivocally different from the genetically
determined one. ll patients, except one, have predispositions to
particular unhealthy eating habits.
Conclusion: This small cohort demonstrates well established
personalized approach that could be used not only for the dailynutritional habits optimization but also for prevention of the
polygenic-multifactorial socially signi ﬁcant diseases.
Acknowledgements: BG NSF NoKP-06-OPR01/3-2018, Re:Gena,
Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science “Young Scientists and
Postdoctoral Students. ”
V.L. Spasova: None. B. Gerasimova: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Modest; Re:Gena, LTD. O.S. Antonova: None.
P18.021.C Using correlation information in precision medicine
Palle Duun Rohde1, Peter Sorensen2
1Section for Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience,
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark,2Centre for Quantitative
Genetics and Genomics, Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
511
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Precision medicine has been forecasted to change modern
healthcare aiming to provide treatment options targeted towards
the patient ’s genomic pro ﬁle. During the last decade an enormous
effort has been in developing disease speci ﬁc genetic risk scores
(GRS). Until recently, GRS was constructed using information onthe disease itself; however, as the human genome has abundant
pleiotropy the accuracy of risk strati ﬁcation may be improved by
constructing multi-trait (MT) GRS.
This study investigated whether leveraging correlated informa-
tion when constructing GRS elevate the predictive accuracy
compared with single-trait (ST) GRS. We constructed ST- and MT-
GRS for seven common diseases in the UK Biobank using aweighted (by selection index) MT-SBLUP genetic predictor. Foreach disease the correlated information was obtained from the
other six diseases and/or body weight, BMI, smoking status and
overall medication-use.
In summary, in four of seven diseases MT-GRS increased the
disease prediction accuracy considerable. These results clearly
demonstrate the bene ﬁt of incorporating correlated information.
The added bene ﬁt of including correlated information largely
depends on the number of observations, type of trait and degree
of pleiotropy. In particular, incorporating accurate, easy obtainable
information –like BMI and medication-use –seems as an
untapped resource.
Disease No. cases
(% of all)1Heritability2Best model %-improved
performance (bymodel)3
LDpruning
(r2)P-value
thresholdNagelkerke
R2
Allergic rhinitis 22,116 (7%) 0.20 0.9 0.05 0.012 25% (MT-dis)
Asthma 45,154
(13%)0.20 0.9 0.05 0.028 -12% (ST)
CAD 25,998 (8%) 0.12 0.9 0.20 0.022 14% (MT-all)
Diabetes T2 18,809 (6%) 0.28 0.1 0.999 0.036 16% (MT-quant)Hyperlipidemia 35,097
(10%)0.15 0.9 0.999 0.21 20% (MT-all)
Hypertension 112,213
(33%)0.20 0.9 0.999 0.048 -5% (ST)
Osteoarthritis 59,833
(18%)0.17 0.5 0.999 0.014 -5% (ST)
1: Among unrelated, white-British individuals (n =335,744). 2:
LDSC estimates converted to the liability scale using disease
prevalence from UK. 3: %-increased in variance explained fromsingle-trait to multi-trait GRS. ST: single trait model, MT-dis: multi-
trait by other diseases, MT-quant: multi-trait by quantitative traits,
MT-all: diseases and quantitative traits
PDR has received funding from the Lundbeck Foundation
(R287-2018-735).
P.D. Rohde: None. P. Sorensen: None.
P18.022.D Gene set enrichment analysis of basal and in vitro
irradiation gene expression differentiates breast cancer
patients with late skin radiotherapy toxicity
Ester Aguado-Flor1, María J. Fuentes-Raspall2, Ricardo Gonzalo3,
Carmen Alonso4, Teresa Ramón y Cajal4, David Fisas4, Alejandro
Seoane5, Álex Sánchez Pla3, Jordi Giralt6, Orland Díez1,7, Sara
Guitérrez-Enríquez1
1Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology
(VHIO),Vall d ’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain,
2Radiation Oncology Department, Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital,
Barcelona, Spain,3Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d ’Hebron
Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Vall d ’Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall
d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain,4Medical
Oncology Department, Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona,
Spain,5Medical Physics Department, Vall d ’Hebron HospitalUniversitari, Vall d ’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona,
Spain,6Radiation Oncology Department, Vall d ’Hebron Hospital
Universitari, Vall d ’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona,
Spain,7Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics Vall d ’Hebron Hospital
Universitari, Vall d ’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona,
Spain.
Radiotherapy-induced late effects are determined in part by genetic
susceptibility and are a common cause of morbidity amongstcancer survivors. The purpose of this study was to elucidate the
molecular basis underlying the radiotherapy-induced late skin
toxicity in breast cancer patients. Peripheral blood mononuclearblood cells of 10 patients with severe late complications fromradiotherapy and 10 patients without symptoms were mock-
irradiated or irradiated with 8-Gy. The 48-h response was analysed
by gene expression pro ﬁling with Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST
arrays. Irradiated and non-irradiated gene expression pro ﬁles were
compared between both groups of patients. Gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) was performed to identify the biological pathwaysassociated with the expressed genes. Regardless of patient toxicitystatus, the 8-Gy irradiation leads to a signi ﬁcant gene expression
signature. Although the group of differentially expressed mRNAs
did not reach a signi ﬁcant adjusted p-value between patients with
or without clinical toxicity, the discriminative power was enhancedby using GSEA approach. Thus, in basal conditions, the differentially
expressed genes were mainly involved in transcription and
interferon signalling pathways. In contrast, after 8Gy the geneswere enriched in cell cycle and G protein-coupled receptor
signalling process. Posterior qPCR analysis revealed that APOBEC3H
(a ssDNA deoxycytidine deaminase with antiretroviral activity) wassigniﬁcantly overexpressed after 8Gy in the non-toxicity patients. In
conclusion, the functional pro ﬁle retrieved from GSEA indicates that
immune and DNA biological signatures are associated with
radiotherapy-induced late toxicity. Carlos III Institute funded byFEDER-a way to build Europe- [PI05/2181]; ERAPerMed JTC2018(ERAPERMED2018-244, SLT011/18/00005).
E. Aguado-Flor: None. M.J. Fuentes-Raspall: None. R. Gon-
zalo: None. C. Alonso: None. T. Ramón y Cajal: None. D. Fisas:
None. A. Seoane: None. Á. Sánchez Pla: None. J. Giralt: None. O.
Díez: None. S. Guitérrez-Enríquez: None.
P18.023.A Unmasking a case of Hereditary Angioedema
without C1-INH de ﬁciency in a misdiagnosed type I patient
Alejandro Mendoza-Alvarez
1, Adrian Muñoz-Barrera2, Itahisa
Marcelino-Rodriguez1, Eva Tosco-Herrera1, Beatriz Guillen-Guio1,
Almudena Corrales1, Antonio Iñigo-Campos2, Ariel Callero3, Rafaela
González-Montelongo2, Jose Miguel Lorenzo-Salazar2, Carlos
Flores1,2,4
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria,
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Genomics Division, Instituto
Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife,Spain,3Deparment of Allergy, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora
de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,4CIBER de Enferme-
dades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction : Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare disease
caused by C1 inhibitor (C1-INH) de ﬁciency or dysfunction or
dysregulation of the kinin cascade (HAE-nC1-INH). Despite HAEmanagement guidelines recommend relying on genetic tests,
most HAE patients continue to be diagnosed based on protein
serum levels. Here, we describe the genetic analysis of an HAEpatient from an affected Spanish family who was misdiagnosed asa type I patient.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
512
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Material and methods: Biochemical determination of protein
levels and activity were carried out. Whole-exome sequencing
(WES) data were obtained from six individuals belonging to the
same family. Results were analyzed with the Hereditary Angioe-dema Database Annotation (HADA) tool for causal variantprioritization.
Results: The index patient was a 25-year female with facial and
cutaneous attacks, which worsened after the administration of oralcontraceptives. Diagnosis based on biochemical analysis sup-ported an HAE type I patient (C4 =11.3 mg/dl; C1-INH =17 mg/dl;
C1-INH activity =69%). However, WES detected the F12 variant
affecting function c.983G>T (p.Thr328Lys) in the index and herasymptomatic father. This variant is frequently reported in HAE-nC1-INH patients and is considered pathogenic under ACMG
classi ﬁcation guidelines.
Conclusion: Genetic analysis changed the diagnosis of an HAE
patient provided by biochemical assays. Variant prioritization by
HADA helped to reach a fast and precise identi ﬁcation of the
underlying causes. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación(RTC-2017-6471-1; AEI/FEDER, UE); ITER agreement OA17/008;SEAIC Foundation (18_A01); FIISC (FPIFIIS19/48); ACIISI
(TESIS2020010002) co-funded by European Social Fund; Instituto
de Salud Carlos III (CD19/00231); ECIT CGIEU0000219140.
A. Mendoza-Alvarez: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. I.
Marcelino-Rodriguez: None. E. Tosco-Herrera: None. B. Guil-
len-Guio: None. A. Corrales: None. A. Iñigo-Campos: None. A.
Callero: None. R. González-Montelongo: None. J. Lorenzo-
Salazar: None. C. Flores: None.
P18.026.D Extracellular vesicle enriched miRNAs as prognostic
biomarkers in malignant mesothelioma
Katja Goricar
1, Marija Holcar1, Nina Mavec1, Viljem Kovac2, Metka
Lenassi1, Vita Dolzan1
1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,2Institute of
Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Introduction: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a rare cancer
characterized by poor prognosis and short survival. Extracellularvesicles (EVs) are membrane-bound particles released from cellsinto various body ﬂuids and their molecular composition re ﬂects
the characteristics of the origin cell. Blood EVs or their miRNA
cargo might serve as new minimally invasive biomarkers oftreatment response. Our aim was thus to evaluate miRNAs
enriched in serum EVs as potential prognostic biomarkers in MM
patients.
Materials and Methods: We performed a pilot longitudinal study
that included 20 MM patients. EVs were isolated from serum
samples obtained before and after t reatment using ultracentrifuga-
tion on 20% sucrose cushion. Expression of EV-enriched miR ‐103‐3p,
miR‐126‐3p and miR ‐625‐3p was quanti ﬁed using qPCR. Nonpara-
metric tests and survival analysis were used in statistical analysis.
Results: After treatment, expression of miR-625-3p and miR-
126-3p increased only in MM patients with poor treatmentresponse (P =0.012 and P =0.036, respectively), while no
differences were observed in patients with good response (P =
0.173 and P =0.374, respectively). A relative increase in miR-625-
3p expression after treatment for more than 3.2% was associatedwith much shorter progression-free survival (7.5 vs 19.4 months, P
=0.024) and overall survival (12.5 vs 49.1 months, P =0.043) of
MM patients. Bioinformatic analysis identi ﬁed 33 miR-625-3p
targets that were enriched in eight biological pathways.
Conclusions: EV-enriched miR-625-3p could serve as a prog-
nostic biomarker in MM and could contribute to a morepersonalized treatment in these patients. Research grants: ARRS
L3-8203, L3-2622 and P1-0170.
K. Goricar: None. M. Holcar: None. N. Mavec: None. V. Kovac:
None. M. Lenassi: None. V. Dolzan: None.
P18.027.A miR-29b inhibition in triple negative cells activate
apoptosis and autophagy related mechanisms
Cornelia Braicu
1, Raduly Lajos1, Vlad Morhan1, Zsó ﬁPapi2, Ancuta
Jurj1, Oana Zanoaga1, Roxana Cojocneanu1, Alin Moldovan1,
Cristina Ciocan1, Ioana Berindan-Neagoe1
1Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania,2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
Introduction: The lack of receptors in triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) restricts therapeutic options used in clinicalmanagement. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding tran-scripts affecting cellular mechanisms by regulating gene expres-
sion at post-transcriptional level. The study aims to investigate the
therapeutic potential of miRNA inhibitors designed for silencingmiR-29b, transcript overexpressed in TNBC and correlated with the
overall survival in TNBC.
Materials and methods : As TNBC models were used BT549 and
MDA-MB-231 cells. The biological effect of the transient miR-29binhibition was evaluated at cellular and molecular level.
Results: miR-29b inhibition promoted a reduction of cell
proliferation and colony forming a bility, along with apoptosis and
autophagy assessed by confocal mic roscopy. At molecular-level miR-
29b inhibition caused alteration on miRNA pattern (11 down-
regulated and 8 overexpressed) assessed using microarray technol-
ogy on BT549. An important downregulated miRNA is representedby miR-185 a biomarker of therapy response targeting MAPK
signalling. Additional qRT-PCR, reveals inhibition of Bcl-2 and TP53 ,
along with the overexpression of TGFβ1, for both cell lines.
Conclusion: miR-29b modulates the crosstalk between apoptosis
and autophagy signalling, in same time were activated the drug
resistance mechanism, where an important role is related to TGF β
signalling. Our data suggest that miR-29b inhibition act on multiplemechanisms that regulated cell f ate, and therefore may serve as a
therapeutic target in TNBC.
Acknowledgement: This study was ﬁnanced by PCE grant
“Testing small molecule targeting mitogen activated protein
kinases: Successes, challenges and opportunities in triple negative
breast cancer systems- ORIENT ”.
C. Braicu: None. R. Lajos: None. V. Morhan: None. Z. Papi:
None. A. Jurj: None. O. Zanoaga: None. R. Cojocneanu: None. A.
Moldovan: None. C. Ciocan: None. I. Berindan-Neagoe: None.
P18.028.B Genetic factors implicated in the response to
ﬁngolimod treatment in multiple sclerosis patients: results
from a pharmacogenetic meta-analysis
Laura Ferrè
1,2,3, Elisabetta Mascia2, Ferdinando Clarelli2, Tina
Roostaei4, Beatrice Pignolet5,6, David Brassat5, Roland Liblau5,
Howard L. Weiner7,8, Philip L. De Jager4, Massimo Filippi9,10,3,
Federica Esposito1
1Neurology and Neurorehabilitation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele
Hospital, Milan, Italy,2Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurological
Disorders, IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy,3Vita-Salute San
Raffaele University, Milan, Italy,4Center for Translational and
Computational Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, CUMC,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
513
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608New York, NY, USA,5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Toulouse,
Toulouse, France,6Institut Toulousain des Maladies Infectieuses et
Inﬂammatoires (In ﬁnity), INSERM UMR1291 - CNRS UMR5051 -
Université Toulouse III, Toulouse, France,7Brigham and Women ’s
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA,8Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA,9Neurology, Neurorehabilitation and Neurophisiology Unit,
IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy,10Neuroimaging Research
Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy.
Introduction: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a complex disease with
high heterogeneity in terms of clinical presentation and treatment
response. Pharmacogenetics can help to develop a morepersonalized approach and to improve disease management.We report the results of a GWAS on ﬁngolimod-treated relapsing-
remitting MS patients.
Methods: We included 4 cohorts of ﬁngolimod-treated MS
patients from San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy (OSR1: 246
patients, OSR2: 98 patients), Brigham and Women ’s Hospital,
Boston, USA (USA: 136 patients) and the Centre HospitalierUniversitaire de Toulouse, France (CHUT: 81 patients). Weclassi ﬁed treatment response according to the NEDA (no evidence
of disease activity) criterion at 2 years and time to ﬁrst relapse
(TFR). We performed a GWAS separately on each cohort and meta-analyzed them using a ﬁxed-effect model.
Results: three genome-wide signi ﬁcant variants were asso-
ciated with TFR: rs9397818A on chr6 increases the risk of an earlier
relapse and has an eQTL effect in whole blood on TFB1M , key to
mitochondrial gene expression, and TIAM2 , implicated in endothe-
lial function and cell migration; rs2071572A is a risk allele intronic
to synaptotagminV, involved in exocytosis of secretory vesicles,with an eQTL effect in brain cortex; ﬁnally the risk allele
rs6124768A maps to CD40 locus and increases its expression
according to a public eQTL database. No signi ﬁcant variants were
identi ﬁed in the NEDA analysis.
Conclusions: genetic variants possibly implicated in cell
migration, neuronal functions and immune response were
associated with response to ﬁngolimod. Functional studies are
ongoing. This study was supported by “Fondazione Italiana
Sclerosi Multipla ”[project 2013/R/13].
L. Ferrè: None. E. Mascia: None. F. Clarelli: None. T. Roostaei:
None. B. Pignolet: None. D. Brassat: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen. R. Liblau: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Pierre Fabre, GlaxoSmithKline,
BMS. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, andexpert witness); Modest; Sano ﬁ-Genzyme, Novartis, Servier, Biogen. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Sano ﬁ-Genzyme, Novartis, Ser-
vier, Biogen. H.L. Weiner: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
c o l l a b o r a t o ro rc o n s u l t a n ta n dp e nding grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; National Institutes of Health, National
Multiple Sclerosis Society, Verily Li fe Sciences, Teva Pharmaceuticals,
Sano ﬁ
Genzyme, Novartis, Biogen, E MD Serono, Genentech, Tilos
T h e r a p e u t i c s ,I n c .F .C o n s u l t a n t / A d v i s o r yB o a r d ;M o d e s t ;B i o g e n ,E M DSerono, Genentech, Tilos Therapeut ics, Inc, Everest Medicines Ltd,
Magnolia Therapeutics, Tiziana Life Sciences, IM Therapeutics,
MedDay Pharmaceuticals, vTv Therapeutics. P.L. De Jager: B.
Research Grant (principal investi gator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Eisai, Roche, Biogen, Lundbeck. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; GlaxoS-mithKline. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Celgene, Roche,Sano ﬁ/Genzyme. M. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
c o l l a b o r a t o ro rc o n s u l t a n ta n dp e nding grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Idec, Merc k-Serono, Novartis,
Roche, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Bayer,
Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Takeda,Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
M o d e s t ;B a y e r ,B i o g e nI d e c ,M e r c k - S e r o n o ,N o v a r t i s ,R o c h e ,S a n o ﬁ
Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expertwitness); Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁGenzyme, Almirall, TEVA, Merck-
Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁ
Genzyme, Almirall, TEVA, Merck-Serono.
P18.029.C Newborn Screening in Unselected Children Using
Genomic Sequencing
Min Jian
1, Xiaohong Wang2, Yuanyuan Sui3, Mingyan Fang1,Y a
Gao1, Ruidong Guo1, Yingping Huang2, Chunhua Liu3, Chenchen
Feng1, Yuanning Guan2, Yuxiao Gao3, Zhiwei Wang2, Shuli Li4,
Bochen Cheng1, Lina Sun2, Fenghua Cui5, Jia Guo1, Ying Zhan6, Jiayu
Chen7, Qian Zhao7, Lingyao Guan7, Haorong Lu8, Chao Nie1, Karsten
Kristiansen9, Lennart Hammarström1, Xiaojing Jiang3, Junnian Liu2,
Fang Chen1
1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China,2BGI-Qingdao, Qingdao, China,
3Maternal and child health and family planning service center of
Huangdao District, Qingdao, China,4Traditional Chinese medical
hospital of Huangdao District, Qingdao, China,5The af ﬁliated
hospital of Qingdao university, Qingdao, China,6Qindgao west
coast new area central hospital, Qingdao, China,7China National
GeneBank, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China,8China National Gene-
Bank, BGI-Shenzhen;Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory ofGenome Read and Write, Shenzhen, China,9University of Copenha-
gen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction: The aim of this study is to investigate potentially
curable or treatable medical conditions in unselected newborns
using genomic sequencing (GS).
Materials and Methods: 321 newborns from a cohort of
pregnant women from Qingdao, China, underwent high-depth GS
with the approval of the ethics committee. 61 Mendelian Diseases,
151 Primary Immunode ﬁciency Diseases and 5 DPWG recom-
mended Essential pharmacogenetic genes were analyzed.
Results: All 321 newborns carried at least one variant at the ﬁve
DPGW recommended PGx genes. Codeine and clopidogrel require
more attention in giving prescription for 25% and 8% of newbornshaving a decreased function of CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 enzymesrespectively. 121 Mendelian pathoge nic or likely pathogenic variants
associated with 31 inherited diseases were detected. Three children
with compound heterozygous variants at GJB2 and PAH were
conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. Fo llow-up of the three families
conﬁrmed one child was diagnosed with PKU and two children with
GJB2 variants were scheduled to undergo hearing loss testing every
six months after genetic counseling due to the nature of incompletepenetrance of hearing loss. 11 het erozygous pathogenic / likely
pathogenic variants in eight PID genes were identi ﬁed in 11 infants.
Conclusions: Our study is the largest to date using GS to
sequence unselected newborns. The results suggest that using GSmay be a suitable method for screening newborns for variants in a
large number of disease associated genes.This study was
supported by Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of GenomeRead and Write (No. 2017B030301011) and Shenzhen MunicipalGovernment of China (JCY20170817145047361).
M. Jian: None. X. Wang: None. Y. Sui: None. M. Fang: None. Y.
Gao: None. R. Guo: None. Y. Huang: None. C. Liu: None. C. Feng:
None. Y. Guan: None. Y. Gao: None. Z. Wang: None. S. Li: None.
B. Cheng: None. L. Sun: None. F. Cui: None. J. Guo: None. Y.
Zhan: None. J. Chen: None. Q. Zhao: None. L. Guan: None. H. Lu:
None. C. Nie: None. K. Kristiansen: None. L. Hammarström:
None. X. Jiang: None. J. Liu:
None. F. Chen: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
514
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P18.030.D Pharmacogenetics of chemotherapy response in
osteosarcoma: a genetic variant in SLC7A8 is associated with
progressive disease
Evelien G. E. Hurkmans1, Johanne M. G. Groothuismink1, Hanneke I.
Vos1, Winette T. A. van der Graaf1, Uta Flucke1, Yvonne M. H.
Versleijen-Jonkers1, Melissa H. S. Roeffen1, Jan B. Koenderink1, Jeroen
J. M. W. van den Heuvel1, Bart W. B. Schreuder1, Melanie M.
Hagleitner1, Hans Gelderblom2, Anne-Marie Cleton-Jansen2, Judith V.
M. G. Bovée2, Eveline S. J. M. de Bont3, Leontien C. M. Kremer4,
Johannes Bras5, Huib Caron4, Rachael Windsor6, Jeremy Whelan6,
Ana Patiño-García7, Anna González-Neira8, Geoff McCowage9,
Sumanth Nagabushan9, Federica Saletta9, Daniel Catchpoole9,
Henk-Jan Guchelaar2, Han G. Brunner1, D. Maroeska W. M. te Loo1,
Marieke J. H. Coenen1
1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,3University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,4Emma Children ’s
Hospital/Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,5Aca-
demic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,6University College
Hospital, London, United Kingdom,7University Clinic of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain,8Spanish National Cancer Research Center, Madrid,
Spain,9The Children ’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia.
Introduction: Despite (neo)adjuvant chem otherapy with cisplatin,
doxorubicin and methotrexate in primary osteosarcoma, somepatients progress during ﬁrst-line systemic treatment and have a
poor prognosis. In this study, we investigated whether patients with
progressive disease, have a dist inctive pharmacogenetic pro ﬁle.
Methods: Germline DNA from 287 Dutch high-grade osteosar-
coma patients was genotyped using the DMET Plus array(containing 1,936 genetic markers in 231 drug metabolism and
transporter genes). Associations between genetic variants and
progressive disease were assessed using logistic regressionmodels and associated variants (P < 0.05) were validated in
independent cohorts of 146 (from Spain and UK) and 28 patients
(from Australia). The functional relevance of the most importanthits were explored in an immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining andan in vitro HEK293 overexpression model.
Results: In the association analyses of genetic variants and
progressive disease, SLC7A8 rs1884545 and SLC7A8 rs8013529
were signi ﬁcantly associated with progressive disease and were
independently validated in the validation cohorts (meta-analysis:
OR 0.22 [0.07-0.63], P =0.005 and OR 0.19 [0.06-0.55], P =0.002,
resp.). SLC7A8 encodes for the L-type amino acid transporter 2
(LAT2) and LAT2 immunohistochemistry of osteosarcoma tissue
suggested improved prognosis for patients with higher LAT2
expression (p =0.082). The in vitro LAT2 overexpression model
showed no transport inhibition by cisplatin, doxorubicin ormethotrexate, however substrate experiments are still ongoing.
Conclusion: This study identi ﬁed two genetic variants in
SLC7A8 to be associated with progressive osteosarcoma. These
results will provide new evidence that could give opportunities toimprove treatment of osteosarcoma patients.
E.G.E. Hurkmans: None. J.M.G. Groothuismink: None. H.I.
Vos: None. W.T.A. van der Graaf: None. U. Flucke: None. Y.M.H.
Versleijen-Jonkers: None. M.H.S. Roeffen: None. J.B. Koender-
ink: None. J.J.M.W. van den Heuvel: None. B.W.B. Schreuder:
None. M.M. Hagleitner: None. H. Gelderblom: None. A. Cleton-
Jansen: None. J.V.M.G. Bovée: None. E.S.J.M. de Bont: None. L.
C.M. Kremer: None. J. Bras: None. H. Caron: None. R. Windsor:
None. J. Whelan: None. A. Patiño-García: None. A. González-
Neira: None. G. McCowage: None. S. Nagabushan: None. F.
Saletta: None. D. Catchpoole: None. H. Guchelaar: None. H.G.
Brunner: None. D.W.M. te Loo: None. M.J.H. Coenen: None.P18.032.B Gene co-expression network analysis of blood-
derived transcriptomic data from Parkinson ’s disease patients
implicates immune responses in disease progression
Ana-Luisa Gil-Martinez1,2, Aine Fairbrother-Browne1,2,3, John
Hardy1, Juan-Antonio Botia1,4, Mina Ryten1,2,5
1Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United
Kingdom,2Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Great Ormond Street
Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United
Kingdom,3Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of
Basic and Medical Biosciences, King ’s College London, London,
United Kingdom,4Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y la
Comunicaciones, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,5NIHR Great
Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, University
College London, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Parkinson ’s disease (PD) is the second most
prevalent age-related neurodegenerative disorder worldwide. In
its most common, sporadic form, it is characterised by progressivesymptoms, which include dementia. However, progression inParkinson ’s disease (PD) is heterogeneous suggesting the
existence of genes and pathways speci ﬁcally involved in this
process, which could be novel therapeutic targets. In this study,we aimed to identify such genes by analysing data released by the
Parkinson ’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI), a longitudinal
observational study with 1,610 case-control participants.
Material and Methods: We used transcriptomic data from the
PPMI database, which was generat ed from 4,690 longitudinal blood
samples from 1,610 case/control patients. Gene-level expression data
was accessed from the AMP-PD portal and the CoExpNets packagewas used to generate a co-expression network.
Results: The resulting gene co-expression modules were
annotated using the WGCNA R package and gpro ﬁler2 to identify
modules enriched for cell type-speci ﬁc markers and biological
functions of interest as de ﬁned by the Gene Ontology and KEGG
databases. Using this approach, we identi ﬁed two modules of
interest, “red”and “turquoise ”, whose expression (as summarised
by the module eigengene) was signi ﬁcantly correlated with case/
control status. Both modules, together containing 5,755 genes,
were signi ﬁcantly enriched for terms relating to immune
responses including “myeloid leukocyte activation ”,“neutrophil
activation ”and “adaptive immune response ”.
Conclusions: These ﬁndings are consistent with the growing
evidence implicating in ﬂammatory responses in the aetiology and
progression of PD.
Funding: A.L.G.M. is funded by Fundación Séneca (grant
reference: 21230/PD/19).
A. Gil-Martinez: None. A. Fairbrother-Browne: None. J.
Hardy: None. J. Botia: None. M. Ryten: None.
P18.033.C Enrollment engagement strategies for a preemp-
tive genomic screen
Michelle Marie Moore , Alexander van Gerrevink, Bethany Tucker,
Murat Sincan, Catherine Hajek
Sanford Health, Sioux Falls, SD, USA.
Introduction: Preemptive genomic screening can further perso-
nalize medical management and care. Engaging enough patientsto implement these initiatives can be dif ﬁcult. Enrollment rates for
our health system ’s preemptive genomic screening program vary
from 2% for patient portal invites to greater than 50% with in-person engagement in the cardiology department.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
515
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Background: In September 2017, Sanford health launched a
preemptive genomic screening program by inviting a small cohort
of patients already enrolled in our Biobank to participate without
payment, resulting in a 37% enrollment rate. The clinical, publiclaunch had a much lower uptake of approximately 2%. Eligiblemilitary veterans received mailed ﬂyers, online invitations, and a
coupon code for gratis participation, resulting in an enrollment
rate of approximately 8%. In-person enrollment in a cardiologyclinic initially had enrollment rates greater than 50%, but thisnumber dropped to 30% after changes in the enrollment process
increased enrollment time demands.
Conclusions: In-person engagement has the highest patient
enrollment, but this option is often dif ﬁcult to implement broadly
due to the time and resource demands. The increased uptake of
the veterans and the initial biobank cohort could indicate that cost
is a contributing factor. The actual reason may not be cost, but theperceptual difference between selling the genomic screen versus
presenting it as an option to improve patient care. The
development of algorithms to predict which patients are mostlikely to participate may further improve overall engagement inthis genomic screen.
M.M. Moore: None. A. van Gerrevink: None. B. Tucker: None.
M. Sincan: None. C. Hajek: None.
P18.034.D Comprehensive analysis of actionable pharmaco-
genes based on mining of large-scale data from the Saudipopulation
Dorota Monies
1,2, Ewa Goljan1,2, Mohamed Abouelhoda1,2, Brian
Meyer1,2
1KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,2Saudi Human Genome Program,
King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
Introduction: It is well documented that drug responses are
related to Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion(ADME) characteristics of individual patients. Many studies haveidenti ﬁed genetic variability in many pharmacogenes that are
either directly responsible for or are associated with ADME, giving
rise to the performance of personalized medicine. Our objectivewas to provide a comprehensive overview of pharmacogeneticvariations in the Saudi population.
Materials and methods : We undertook Next Generation Sequen-
cing data mining of 13,817 unrelated Saudi nationals to identifyfunctional SNP variants in 8 clinically relevant pharamcogenes
recommended by the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation
Consortium (CPIC). We used Stargaz er (bioinformatics tool) to enable
complex analysis of NGS based pharmacogenetics data.
Results and conclusion: We identi ﬁed 59 alleles in 8
pharmacogenes ( CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A5, CYP4F2, VCORC1,
DPYD, TPMT and NUDT15 ). Functional consequences of pharma-
cogenetic haplotypes were found to be prevalent especially inCYP genes (with the exception of CYP3A5 ); 10%-44.4% of variants
were predicted to be inactive or had decreased activity. In CYP3A5
we found the highest number (87.5%) of inactive alleles. Only1.5%, 0.7% and 0.1% of NUDT15 ,TMPT and DPYD variants,
respectively, were predicted to affect gene activity. In contrast,
VKORC1 was found to be functionally, highly polymorphic with
53.7% of Saudi individuals harbour variants that are predicted toresult in decreased activity and 31.3% of the population having
variants leading to increased metabolic activity. Based upon this
study, 99.8% of individuals carry at least one actionablepharmacogenetic variant.
D. Monies: None. E. Goljan: None. M. Abouelhoda: None. B.
Meyer: None.P18.035.A Detection of relevant pharmacogenetic informa-
tion through exome sequencing in oncology
simon verdez
1,2, Juliette Albuisson3,4, Yannis Duffourd1,2, Romain
Boidot3,4,5, Manon Reda3,5,6, Christel Thauvin-Robinet2,4,7, Jean-David
Fumet6, Sylvain Ladoire6, Sophie Nambot2,7, Maxime Luu8, Patrick
Callier1,2, Laurence Faivre2,4,7, Francois Ghiringhelli3,4,5,6, Nicolas
Picard9
1UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, Dijon,
France,2UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche
Comté, Dijon, France,3Platform of Transfer in Cancer Biology,
Georges François Leclerc Cancer Center - UNICANCER, Dijon, France,
4Genomic and Immunotherapy Medical Institute, Dijon, France,
5Department of Tumour Biology and Pathology, Georges François
Leclerc Cancer Center - UNICANCER, Dijon, France,6Department of
Medical Oncology, Georges François Leclerc Cancer Center -UNICANCER, Dijon, France,7Centre de Référence maladies rares «
Anomalies du Développement et syndromes malformatifs », Centre
de Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,
8Centre d ’Investigation Clinique, module Epidémiologie Clinique/
Essais cliniques, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France,9Inserm U1248,
service de pharmacologie et toxicologie, université de Limoges, CHU
de Limoges, F-87042, Limoges, France.
Introduction: Pangenomic sequencing plays an important role in
cancer treatment, and has the potential to reveal germlinegenomic variations with therapeutic impact. Variant alleles inpharmacogenes are responsible for adverse drug reactions in
relation with chemotherapy, antiemetic or pain treatments.
Material and Methods: To evaluate the interest of such
pharmacogenetic information, we applied a dedicated pipeline toidentify relevant alleles among a list of 67 variants. We extracted
these variants from the genomic data of a cohort of 445 solid cancer
patients who previously bene ﬁted from exome sequencing (ES) for
therapeutic issues. After clinical history and bioinformatic analyses,
we retained 2 genes known to have an impact on cancer therapy,
namely DYPD (dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene) and
CYP2D6 . We retrospectively analysed drug plasma concentrations
and treatment outcomes in patients bearing at least one variant
allele with high clinical relevance based on PharmGKB resources.
Results: Six patients treated with 5- ﬂuorouracil carrying one
level 1A PharmGKB variant in DPYD showed a decrease in drug
mean clearance over the follow-up period (p < 0.05). The
proportion of patients with vomiting episodes post-
chemotherapy differs between ultra-metabolisers for CYP2D6
and normal metabolisers (40% vs 16%). All patients (n =5) with
poor or ultra-metabolisers status presented adverse drug reactions
in relation with opioid therapy.
Conclusion: In patients with solid tumor, pangenomic germline
sequencing can provide relevant information about common
pharmacogenetic alleles likely to be useful to guide therapeutic
drug decision as described in this study for drugs interacting withthe CYP2D6 and DPD enzymes.
S. verdez: None. J. Albuisson: None. Y. Duffourd: None. R.
Boidot: None. M. Reda: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. J.
Fumet: None. S. Ladoire: None. S. Nambot: None. M. Luu: None.
P. Callier: None. L. Faivre: None. F. Ghiringhelli: None. N. Picard:
None.
P18.036.B Understanding of pharmacogenomic testing,
adverse drug reactions, and implementation barriers
Bernard Esquivel, Ghada Elnashar , Ellie Jhun, Jessica Savieo, Elimear
O’Mahony, Victor Tam, Kurt Wiersma, Julie EnglandAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
516
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608OneOme, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Introduction: Life-threatening adverse drug reactions (ADRs) pose
a signi ﬁcant health care burden. A study focused on Stevens-
Johnson Syndrome (SJS), Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN), andSJS/TEN showed a mean hospitalization cost of $128 million/year.3
When compared to an average hospital admission, costs were
found to be 5-fold higher for aforementioned conditions.3 Ourgoal was to assess understanding of pharmacogenomic testing,life-threatening ADRs and potential barriers.
Materials and Methods : A survey of 11 questions was created
on Survey Monkey and distributed via LinkedIn (duration: 5 days).Questions covered pharmacogenomic knowledge, life-threateningADRs (speci ﬁc to SJS (abacavir and HLA-B*57:01; carbamazepine
and HLA-B*15:02)), and perspectives on pharmacogenomic
implementation barriers. A retrospective analysis of 13994 de-identi ﬁed patients that ordered OneOme ’s RightMed Test during
2019-2020 was conducted in order to identify HLA-B risk allele
frequency.
Results: A total of 29 survey responses were received. 55% of
respondents indicated the main barrier to implementing pharma-
cogenomics is price and reimbursement. The retrospective
analysis showed a frequency of patients positive for HLA-B*57:01and HLA-B*15:02 alleles to be 6% and 0.8%, respectively.
Conclusion: Pharmacogenomic testing may decrease health
care burden by identifying patients with risk variants that may
lead to potential life-threatening ADRs. In our assessment, thebiggest barrier to implementation is pricing and reimbursement.
Up to 6% of the risk variant frequency was observed in our cohort,
highlighting the prevalence of high-cost ADRs. More studies areneeded to understand the impact on total cost of care.
B. Esquivel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
OneOme. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Modest; OneOme. G. Elnashar: None.
E. Jhun: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; OneOme. J.
Savieo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; OneOme. E.
O’Mahony: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
OneOme. V. Tam: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
OneOme. K. Wiersma: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; OneOme. J. England: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; OneOme.
P18.037.C Genetic pro ﬁling to inform therapeutic decisions in
primary care, A qualitative meta-synthesis of barriers and
enablers
Sadaf Qureshi
1, Laura Condon2, Ralph K. Akyea2, Joe Kai2, Nadeem
Qureshi2
1NHS Derby & Derbyshire Clinical Commissioning Group, Derby,
United Kingdom,2Division of Primary Care, Nottingham, United
Kingdom.
Introduction: Pharmacogenomic tests are available to guide
treatment. In the UK, there are plans to introduce pharmacoge-nomic panels into primary care. The purpose of this systematic
review was to explore what factors are preventing pharmacoge-
nomics being implemented in primary care, and what factors mayovercome these barriers.
Materials and Methods: MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO and
CINAHL databases were searched through to July 2020 for studies
that reported primary qualitative data of primary care cliniciansand patient views. The Critical Appraisal Skills Programme criteria
for quality appraisal was undertaken. Data was then extracted
thematically and synthesised to uncover descriptive themes andto generate analytical themes related to barriers and enablers toprimary care implementation.Results: From 1659 citations, 17 eligible studies identi ﬁed
across 7 countries, with a sample size of 440 participants
comprising of both primary care clinicians and patients views
were included in the thematic synthesis. There were 119 barriersthat were classi ﬁed across 7 themes including lack of pharmaco-
genomic knowledge or awareness, cost of pharmacogenomic
testing and con ﬁdentiality, privacy and employment discrimina-
tion issues. Further “enablers ”that would facilitate implementa-
tion into practice included recognition of the potential to reduceadverse drug reactions, improve patient motivation and, from the
patients ’perspective, alignment with a general interest in genetic
testing.
Conclusions: the review highlights several relevant barriers to
the application of pharmacogenomics in primary care, as well as
factors that would facilitate the Introduction: These should be
considered before introducing a pharmacogenomic panel inprimary care. Funding: NIHR School of Primary Care Research
S. Qureshi: None. L. Condon: None. R.K. Akyea: None. J. Kai:
None. N. Qureshi: None.
P18.038.D Plant extracts as anti in ﬂammatory alternatives at
the gene expression level of cytokines
AZIZ ALKHADDOUR
Southern Federal University, ROSTOV ON DON, Russian Federation.
Introduction: This paper explores the impact of phytochemical
compounds found in various amounts in pomegranate, grape
seeds and garlic extracts on the levels of gene expression ofinﬂammatory cytokines (IL1b, IL6, IL10) and the variation of this
reaction to the genotypes of polymorphism of these cytokines and
the relation of this effect to concentration of free radicals.
Material and methods : Culture of human peripheral blood
leukocytes was used. Pomegranate extract (1.2, 2.4 %), garlic (0.5,
1.2 %), grape seeds (1.2, 2.4 %) were used. Chemiluminescence
was used to detect fast ﬂash values and by using real time PCR
was detected ct values. Cytokine gene polymorphisms wereanalyzed using allele-speci ﬁc PCR.
Results: Pomegranate extract (2.4%) reduces the levels of IL1b
gene transcription by 16 times relative to control. There is also asigni ﬁcant decrease in the expression of the IL6 gene compared to
the control after the addition of grape seed extract (1.2%) by 100
times. This in ﬂuence of IL10 gene polymorphism is more
pronounced in people with the CC genotype. In parallel, by thelevels of gene expression (IL10), the anti-in ﬂammatory function of
grape seeds (1.2%) extract is increased. Finally, with the effect of
grape seed extract, we have seen elevated free radical concentra-tions improve interleukin (IL10) gene expression levels.
Conclusion . The phytochemical compounds in pomegranate
and grape seed extracts play the role of anti-in ﬂammatory
through their effect by decreasing the gene expression of (IL1b,IL6) and increasing (IL10).
A. Alkhaddour: None.
P18.039.A The GOALL and SENSE of clinical implementation of
high-throughput genotyping arrays
Jeroen van Rooij , Annemieke Verkerk, Bahar Sedaghati-khayat,
Linda Broer, Jard de Vries, Gaby van Dijk, Joyce van Meurs, Andre
Uitterlinden
Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
517
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Genetic testing is increasingly used in clinical
practice. Genotyping arrays cover a large portion of clinically
relevant genetic variation and provide a cost-effective (30 euro per
sample), high-throughput standardized alternative to measuremany tests in a single assay. In the GOALL project, we pilot speci ﬁc
clinical utilities and applications of arrays at the Erasmus
academical hospital. In the SENSE multidisciplinary consortium,
we investigate implementation of genetic predictions in variousclinical and societal settings. Both efforts extensively collaboratewith national and international efforts.
Methods: We investigate the clinical utility of genotyping arrays
by: 1) technical validation of common and rare variants 2) offeringpolygenic risk scores (PRS) as primary utility in clinical practice, 3)prospectively counseling and eligibility of feeding back secondary
ﬁndings (pharmacogenomics, ACMG mutations) using arrays.
Furthermore, we develop a framework needed for FAIR andethical implementation.
Results: Preliminary results suggest that >90% of clinical
genetic variants can be determined by arrays. Comparison ofarray vs. WES of 197 samples shows an non-reference con-
cordance of 95% for singletons. Population studies demonstrate
signi ﬁcant case strati ﬁcation by PRS for breast cancer, coronary
artery disease, major depression, osteoarthritis and age-relatedmacular degeneration. Preliminary investigation shows that 95%of all patients carry medically relevant pharmacogenetic variants.
Discussion: Our preliminary results suggest that a portion of
genetic testing can cost-effectively be performed by array-basedgenotyping. In addition, array-based genotyping allows additional
reporting of PRSs and pharmacogenomics. Various pilots are
ongoing on the return of these results to patients or citizens.
J. van Rooij: None. A. Verkerk: None. B. Sedaghati-khayat:
None. L. Broer: None. J. de Vries: None. G. van Dijk: None. J. van
Meurs: None. A. Uitterlinden: None.
P18.040.B Improving the Polygenic Score (PGS) Catalog:
updates to submissions, ancestry representation, and score
harmonization
Samuel Lambert
1,2,3,4, Laurent Gil1,2,5, Aoife McMahon3, Emily
Tinsley3, Shirin Saverimuttu3, Richard Houghton1,2,5, Michael Chap-
man1,2,5, Laura W. Harris3, Jacqueline A. L. MacArthur3, John
Danesh1,2,5,6, Helen Parkinson3,2, Michael Inouye1,2,6,4,7
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Health Data
Research UK - Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,3European
Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,4Cambridge
Baker Systems Genomics Initiative, Baker Heart and DiabetesInstitute, Melbourne, Australia,5Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome
Genomics Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,6National Institute for
Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre at the
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge,United Kingdom,7The Alan Turing Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
The use of polygenic [risk] scores (PGS) for research and clinical
applications is often hindered by incomplete reporting and sharingof scores, as well as heterogeneous evaluation and performance in
populations of non-European ancestry. To overcome these
challenges we developed the PGS Catalog ( www.PGSCatalog.org ),
an open resource of published PGS (including variants: alleles and
weights) and consistently curated metadata. The PGS Catalog
currently contains >720 published PGS for >190 traits.
The PGS Catalog is accessible through our website, API and FTP,
providing a platform for PGS dissemination, research, andtranslation. Here, we describe novel features to improve the
Catalog:
-
Users can directly submit data for inclusion in the Catalog.
Submitters have the option to embargo pre-publication resultsuntil publication.
-PGS that employ multi-ancestry development samples or have
been evaluated in different ancestry populations are now easily
identi ﬁable through
improvements to the handling and display of
participant ancestry within each stage of PGS studies (GWAS,
development, evaluation). We also show that European ancestry
participants are more overrepresented in PGS studies than what
has been previously observed for GWAS, and outline futuresystematic curation efforts.
-Variants in PGS are often heterogeneously described, lacking
chromosomal positions and non-effect alleles necessary to re-
calculate the score. We describe an adapted pipeline to
distribute
harmonized versions of PGS in the GRCh37 and 38 genome builds
using data from Ensembl Variation.
We invite PGS submissions and user feedback to ensure the
continued development and expansion of the PGS Catalog tomeet the community ’s needs.
S. Lambert: None. L. Gil: None. A. McMahon: None. E. Tinsley:
None. S. Saverimuttu: None. R. Houghton: None. M. Chapman:
None. L.W. Harris: None. J.A.L. MacArthur: None. J. Danesh: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁ, Astra Zeneca.
H. Parkinson: None. M. Inouye: None.
P18.042.D Clinical pharmacogenetic analysis in 5,001 indivi-
duals with diagnostic whole exome sequencing data
Javier Lanillos1, Marta Carcajona2, Paolo Maietta2, Sara Alvarez2,
Cristina Rodriguez-Antona1
1Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Human Cancer Genetics
Programme, CNIO, Madrid, Spain,2NIMgenetics, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) is utilized in
routine clinical genetic diagnosis. The technical robustness ofrepurposing large-scale next generation sequencing data for
pharmacogenetics has been demonstrated, supporting the
implementation of preemptive pharmacogenetics. However, fewstudies with limited sample size or limited to speci ﬁc pharmaco-
genes have explored the clinical utility of adding clinical
pharmacogenetics interpretation to diagnostic WES. Aim: We
performed a systematic analysis of a large cohort of individualswith diagnostic WES, to provide with global and gene-speci ﬁc
clinical pharmacogenetic utility data, population speci ﬁc differ-
ences and rare loss-of-function variation.
Methods: 809 pharmacogenetic alleles, distributed through 19
genes, de ﬁned in a Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation
Consortium guideline were interrogated in 5,001 individuals with
a standard diagnostic WES testing (57% Spain; 27% Colombia;11% Brazil; 5% other). Analysis included variant retrieval, qualitydata analysis, genotype to diplotype convertion and pharmaco-
genetic phenotype classi ﬁcation.
Results: We established that 302 alleles in 11 genes could be
used to inform of pharmacogenetic phenotypes that changeddrug prescription. Each individual carried in average 2.2 alleles and
93% of the cohort could be informed of at least one actionable
pharmacogenetic phenotype. Differences in variant allele fre-quency were observed among the populations studied and the
corresponding gnomAD population for 9.4% of the variants.
Regarding novel rare variants, we uncovered 453 in 34 PharmGKBVery Important Pharmacogenes.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
518
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusion : We provide with the landscape of preemtive
actionable pharmacogenetic information using diagnostic WES
data, together with population-speci ﬁc allele variations.
Funding: MEIC/AEI and ERDF (RTI2018-095039-B-I00). “la Caixa ”
INPhiNIT Retaining Doctorate Fellowship Programme (LCF/BQ/DR19/11740015).
J. Lanillos: None. M. Carcajona: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; NIMgenetics. P. Maietta: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIMgenetics. S. Alvarez: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; NIMgenetics. C. Rodriguez-Antona:
None.
P18.043.A Polygenic Risk Prediction Ability of Gender-
strati ﬁed Coronary Heart Disease
Bahar Sedaghati-khayat1, Maxime Bos2, Jingyi Tan3, Joyce B.J. van
Meurs1,2, Andre Uitterlinden1,2, Catherine Hajek4, Jerome I. Rotter3,
Maryam Kavousi2, Jeroen van Rooij1
1Department of Internal medicine, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Depart-
ment of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
3Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, The
Lundquist Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA,USA,4Department of Internal Medicine, Sanford School of Medicine,
University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD, USA.
Introduction: Coronary heart disease (CHD) causes 13% of global
mortality. Early risk detection could reduce the incidence,
morbidity, and mortality of the disease. With an estimated
heritability of 40-60%, genetic factors could be suitable forprimary prevention. This study evaluated a polygenic risk score(PRS) for the CHD in Rotterdam study cohorts (RS) for
implementation in the clinical setting.
Methods : The CHD-PRS was constructed of 177 variants and
analyzed in 11,375 participants of the RS. Relative risks of the outer
quartiles compared to the middle 50% were determined.
Additional analyses are ongoing for various PRS distribution bins,age at onset, the impact of lipid-lowering medication use, andintegration of PRS with clinical risk prediction.
Results : The PRS signi ﬁcantly predicted CHD in both women
(OR=1.28; p =1×1 0
-11) and men (OR =1.28; p =9.7 × 10-14).
Compared to the middle 50% of the population, the upperquartile had 41% increased risk and the lower quartile had a 24%
decreased risk. The PRS signi ﬁcantly predicted the age of onset in
women ( β=-1.32; p =7.0x10-2) and men ( β=-1.03; p =1.6 × 10-
4). The results are being compared and meta-analyzed with those
in the MESA cohort and the Sanford Health System.
Conclusion : The PRS predicts CHD in both men and women
and impacts age at CHD onset. These results suggest that addingPRS to clinical risk evaluation could improve primary prevention,
for example by preventively treating individuals at the upper tail
of the PRS distribution with lipid-lowering medication. Integrationof the PRS into clinical risk prediction is currently ongoing todetermine exact thresholds and guidelines.
B. Sedaghati-khayat: None. M. Bos: None. J. Tan: None. J. van
Meurs: None. A. Uitterlinden: None. C. Hajek: None. J. Rotter:
None. M. Kavousi: None. J. van Rooij: None.
P18.044.B Idé ﬁx: Identifying accidental sample mix-ups in
biobanks using polygenic scores
Robert Warmerdam
1, Pauline Lanting1, LifeLines Cohort Study,
Patrick Deelen1,2, Lude H. Franke11Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,2Department of
Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Identifying sample mix-ups in biobanks is essential to allow the
repurposing of genetic data for clinical pharmacogenetics.
Pharmacogenetic advice based on the genetic information of
another individual is potentially harmful. Existing methods foridentifying mix-ups are limited to datasets in which additionalomics data (e.g. gene expression) is available. Cohorts lacking such
data can only use sex, which can reveal only half of the mix-ups.
Here, we describe Idé ﬁx, a method for the identi ﬁcation of
accidental sample mix-ups in biobanks using polygenic scores.
In the Lifelines biobank we calculated polygenic scores (PGSs)
for 25 traits for 32,786 population-based participants. Idé ﬁx then
compares the actual phenotypes to PGSs and uses the relativediscordance that is expected for mix-ups, compared to correct
samples.
In a simulation, using induced mix-ups, Idé ﬁx reaches an AUC of
0.90 using 25 polygenic scores and sex. This is a substantialimprovement over using only sex, which has an AUC of 0.75. Idé ﬁx
therefore is not yet able to identify every sample mix-up. However,
this will likely improve soon, with highly powered GWAS summarystatistics that will likely become available for more commonlymeasured traits.
Nevertheless, Idé ﬁx can already be used to identify a high-
quality set of participants for whom it is very unlikely that theyreﬂect sample mix-ups, and therefore could be offered a
pharmacogenetic passport. For instance, when selecting the
10% of participants for whom predicted phenotypes adhere bestto the actually measured phenotypes, we estimate that theproportion of sample mix-ups is reduced 250-fold.
R. Warmerdam: None. P. Lanting: None. P. Deelen: None. L.H.
Franke: None.
P18.045.C BGLT3 and BCL11A variants associated with sickle
sell disease phenotype in Angolan children
Miguel Brito
1,2, Mariana Delgadinho1, Catarina Ginete1, Brigida
Santos2,3
1H&TRC - Escola Superior de Tecnologia da Saúde de Lisboa, Instituto
Politécnico de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal,2Centro de investigação em
Saúde de Angola, Luanda, Angola,3Hospital Pediátrico David
Bernardino, Luanda, Angola.
Introduction: Despite being a monogenic disease, Sickle cell
disease (SCD) shows a remarkably high clinical heterogeneity.Understanding this heterogeneity could provide valuable insightsfor prognostic markers. The aim of this study was to assess the
frequency and in ﬂuence of polymorphisms in BGLT3 and BCL11A
genes in SCD severity.
Materials and Methods: 192 SCD Angolan children were
selected. A blood sample was used for hematological and
biochemical analyses, fetal hemoglobin quanti ﬁcation and
sequencing. Genotype was obtained for 5 SNPs: rs4671393,rs11886868, rs1427407, rs7557939, in BCL11A and rs7924684 inBGLT3.
Results: BCL11A variants frequency ranged between 6.2 to
9.4%, and BGLT3 variant was 2.1%. HbF was statistically associatedwith the SNPs studied in BCL11A. Three SNPs presented signi ﬁcant
values in neutrophil count and in gamma chains ratio. The last also
inﬂuenced by the variant in BGLT3 gene. This variant also
associates with HbF levels, although not signi ﬁcantly.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
519
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Discussion: We report for the ﬁrst time a correlation between a
polymorphism in BGLT3 gene (rs7924684) and the gamma G and
A globin ratio. Alterations in this ratio are normally indicative of a
molecular defect at the level of the HbF synthesis. We con ﬁrmed
in this population the importance of BCL11A variants in SCDphenotype. SCD has a different clinical presentation between
populations of different origins. There are several polymorphisms
being discovered every day that could explain the HbF variationbetween different geographic regions. The results emphasize theimportance of personalized health care for SCA patients. Funding
FCT/Aga Khan (nº330842553) and FCT/MCTES (UIDB/05608/2020
and UIDP/05608/2020)
M. Brito: None. M. Delgadinho: None. C. Ginete: None. B.
Santos: None.
P18.047.A PathWAS analysis sheds a new light on the biology
of complex traits
Sebastian Marcus May-Wilson , Erin Macdonald-Dunlop, SCALLOP
Consortium, James F. Wilson, Nicola Pirastu
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Rationale: With the aim of understanding complex traits and
multifactorial disease, there has be en an increasing focus on studying
omics alongside genetic data from GWAS. These studies could,however, be potentially limited by ex amining the effects of individual
genes acting in isolation and not in the context of broader biological
networks. Incorporating multiple genes, grouped by pathways, has
the potential to increase power o f discovery while improving our
understanding of the underlying biology.
Method: We selected genes from known biological pathways
and then created polygenic risk scores (PRS) from available QTL
data. The relative contribution of each gene on overall pathwayfunctionality is estimated by ﬁtting a multivariable Mendelian
randomisation (MR) using the *QTLs as exposures against a
measured protein “end-point ”from the SCALLOP consortium. The
PRS and MR results are then combined to create an overallpathway PRS, validated in an independent sample. The signi ﬁcant
pathway scores were then tested, using PheWAS, against disease
traits in UK Biobank.
Results: Our method successfully predicted the end-point
protein level in 8 pathways. These pathways are primarily immune
response pathways, such as NOD-like receptor signalling and Toll-
like receptor signalling. From these results, PheWAS identi ﬁed
numerous associations between these pathways and traits in UK
Biobank such as lymphocyte and leukocyte count but also height,
weight and lung-function traits.
Conclusion: Pathway scoring offers the prospect of more
powerful and holistic analysis of GWAS results, with the potential
to discover relevant causal pathways for complex traits.
S.M. May-Wilson: None. E. Macdonald-Dunlop: None. J.F.
Wilson: None. N. Pirastu: None.
P18.049.C Hereditary diseases and hereditary cancer-
predisposing syndromes mutations ﬁndings in «healthy
individuals» whole genome study in Russia
Gaukhar Zobkova
1, Ekaterina Kuznetsova1, Maria Makarova1,
Olesya Sagaydak1, Elena Baranova1,2, Maksim Belenikin1
1LLC Evogen, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Federal State Budgetary
Educational Institution of Further Professional Education “Russian
Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education ”of theMinistry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Analyzing whole genome sequencing of nearly
healthy individuals allows assessing inherited diseases occurrencefrequency in different populations. The present study was aimed
to analyze the Russian ’s population inherited diseases structure.
Materials and methods: The study involved 1195 individuals
(625 males), mean age 43. Peripheral blood tests and preliminaryquestionnaires were taken from each participant.
Results: We identi ﬁed 265 participants (22,1%) with hereditary
diseases carriage, among them 30 were cases with carriage of twoor more hereditary diseases (2,5%). The most frequent weremutations in genes: GJB2 - 16 cases, DHCR7 - 11, PAH -9 ,NEB -7 ,
AIRE -6 ,ATP7B -6 ,C 9-6 , DUOX2 -6 ,HADHA -6 ,MPO -6 ,CFTR -5 ,
GALT -5 , IDUA -5 , PKHD1 - 5. Also, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
kyphoscoliotic type 2 ( FKBP14 ) carriage case was found. It was ﬁrst
described in 2018 for the Russian population. Hereditary cancer-
predisposing syndromes were found in 31 participants (2,5%),among them 12 individuals in the questionnaire indicatedpersonal or family cancer history. Mutations were found in genes:
BLM -8 ,ATM -4 ,NBN -3 ,PALB2 -2 ,NTHL1 -2 ,MUTYH -2 ,MITF -2 ,
CHEK2 -2 ,BRCA1 -1 ,BRCA2 -1 ,PMS2 -1 ,RAD51C -1 ,BARD1 -1 ,
SDHC -1 .
Conclusions: Whole-genome sequencing of nearly healthy
individuals could be useful in the early prevention of cancer
development and in offspring planning.
G. Zobkova: None. E. Kuznetsova: None. M. Makarova: None.
O. Sagaydak: None. E. Baranova: None. M. Belenikin: None.
P18.050.D Effect of clinical and biochemical evidence on the
success rate in the diagnosis of inherited metabolic diseases
using WES
Laura Gort1,2, Joan Anton Puig-Butillé3,2, José Luís Villanueva-
Cañas3, Frederic Tort1,2, Antonia Ribes1,2, Judit Garcia-Villoria1,2
1Div of Inborn Errors of Metab. Dep Bioch Molec Genet. Hospital
Clínic, Barcelona, Spain,2CIBERER, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain,
3Molecular biology CORE. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: With the implementation of the NGS sequencing,
the process of diagnosing inherited metabolic diseases (IMD) has
undergone a substantial change. From clinical and biochemical
suspicion to genetic diagnosis performed during decades, tostarting directly with the molecular study in the face of a clinical
suspicion of nowadays. This powerful tool, however, does not
always provide a diagnosis if it is not supported by clear clinicaland/or biochemical markers. In this study we checked the successrates when reaching the diagnosis, according to the available
clinical and/or biochemical data of patients.
Material and methods: We analyzed 205 patients with
suspected IMD using Whole Exome sequencing (WES). Data wereanalyzed using virtual gene panels based on available clinical and
biochemical data from patients.
Results: A total of 205 patients were analyzed, clinical data were
available in 64% of cases (132/205) and the genetic diagnosis wasreached in 34% of the patients (45/132). In 121/205 (59%) of the
patients we had clear biochemical markers that indicated a
possible IMD, and in these cohort the genetic diagnosis wasachieved in 55% (67/121) of cases. A particular mention are the
samples of patients referred from the neonatal screening program,
in which newborns still don ’t show symptoms but they present
biochemical markers of pathology. We studied 45 cases of thiscohort and genetic diagnosis was reached in 71% of newborns.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
520
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: When using NGS sequencing, clinical symptoms
and positive biochemical markers, greatly improves the percen-
tage of genetic diagnosis in patients with suspected IMD.
L. Gort: None. J.A. Puig-Butillé: None. J.L. Villanueva-Cañas:
None. F. Tort: None. A. Ribes: None. J. Garcia-Villoria: None.
P19 Population Genetics and Evolutionary Genetics
P19.001.A Genotype of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease using a custom gene panel in Malta
Natalie Ciantar1, Emanuel Farrugia2, Jean Calleja Agius1, Christo-
pher Barbara3, Graziella Zahra4, Edith Said1
1University of Malta, Faculty Medicine and Surgery, Anatomy and
Cell Biology Department, Msida, Malta,2Nephrology and General
Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Mater Dei Hospital,
Malta, Msida, Malta,3Pathology Department, Mater Dei Hospital,
Malta, Msida, Malta,4Molcecular Diagnostics Laboratory, Pathology
Department, Mater Dei Hospital, Malta, Msida, Malta.
Introduction: Polycystic Kidney Disease (PKD) is the commonest
form of inherited kidney disorder. The disease can be inherited inan autosomal dominant (AD) or autosomal recessive (AR) manner.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is
characterized by the development of multiple renal cysts causingrenal enlargement and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in 50% of
patients by 60 years of age.
Methodology: A total of 49 unrelated patients with clinical
features of ADPKD were studied using a customized gene panelfor genes associated with polycystic kidney disease (PKD) using
next generation sequencing (NGS). The genes studied were PKD1,
PKD2, GANAB, DNAJB11, PKHD1 and DZIP1L.
Results: Bioinformatic analysis has identi ﬁedﬁve different
pathogenic variants in ﬁfteen subjects. Two different novel frameshift
pathogenic variants and three other previously reported frameshift,
nonsense and splicing pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed. The novel
pathogenic variants, c.4651delC (p.Leu1551SerfsTer12) andc.1645dupG (p.Glu549GlyfsTer24) were identi ﬁed in PKD1 and
PKD2 respectively. Other variants of unknown clinical signi ﬁcance
have been identi ﬁed through sequencing.
Conclusion: This study helps to show that a customized gene
panel is the method of choice for studying patients with ADPKD
and further emphasizes the genetic variability of this condition.Further functional analysis of these novel variants is necessary tounderstand the mechanism underlying the development of
ADPKD in the Maltese population. This research is being funded
by the LifeCycle Malta Foundation through the University of MaltaResearch, Innovation & Development Trust (RIDT) and by theTertiary Education Scholarship Scheme.
N. Ciantar: None. E. Farrugia: None. J. Calleja Agius: None. C.
Barbara: None. G. Zahra: None. E. Said: None.
P19.002.B Community-based countrywide analysis of variants
of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene and their pathologicalcorrelates in Libya
Ariej Mohammed
1,Inas M. Alhudiri1, Hamza Ben Zeglam1,
Abdenaser A. Mohamed1, Hafsa Al-Emam1, Halla Elshwekh1, Nabil
S. Enattah1,2
1Biotechnology Research Centre, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
2University of Tripoli, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Introduction : Lactose intolerance is the most common genetic
enzyme de ﬁciency in humans. It results from a decline in theactivity of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase enzyme in intestinal
cells. Several nucleotide polymorphisms (C/T-13910, G/C-14010, T/
G-13915, C/G-13907 and T/C-13913) upstream of the lactase-
phlorizin hydrolase gene have been associated with lactasepersistence in European, African and Middle Eastern populations.The aim was to study the prevalence of lactose-persistence
associated variants of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene in
Libyan population and its correlation with digestive symptoms.
Methods: Buccal DNA swabs were collected from 242 adults
from the western, southern and eastern regions of Libya. A DNA
region spanning the C/T-13910 variant was analyzed.
Results: New variants (T/A-13883, A/C-13921, T/C-13961 and C/
A-13962) were detected in the analyzed region in addition to thepreviously described C/T-13910 and T/G-13915 variants. The
prevalence of the lactose persistence phenotype was associated
with variants C/T-13910 and T/G-13915, which were collectivelydetected in 30% of the study participants. The allele frequency of
the lactose persistence G_13915 variant was 0.133 (SD ± 0.016),
whereas the frequency of the T_13910 allele was 0.029 (SD ±0.008). The most common was the Arab variant T/G-13915 in theeastern region followed by the European C/T-13910 variant. The T/
G-13915 variant was associated with the presence of abdominal
symptoms (p =0.005).
Conclusions: Both new and well-known variants of the lactase-
phlorizin hydrolase gene associated with lactose persistence are
common in Libyans. Further studies are needed to con ﬁrm the
association of the newly discovered variants with lactosepersistence.
A. Mohammed: None. I.M. Alhudiri: None. H. Ben Zeglam:
None. A.A. Mohamed: None. H. Al-Emam: None. H. Elshwekh:
None. N.S. Enattah: None.
P19.003.C Association of archaic introgression tracts to
modern human facial features
Pierre Faux
1, Betty Bonfante1, Javier Mendoza-Revilla2,3, Rolando
Gonzalez-José4, Lavinia Schüler-Faccini5, Maria-Catíra Bortolini5,
Victor Acuña-Alonzo6, Samuel Canizales-Quinteros7, Carla Gallo3,
Giovanni Poletti3, Gabriel Bedoya8, Francisco Rothhammer9, Kaus-
tubh Adhikari10,11, Andres Ruiz-Linares1,11,12
1UMR7268 ADES, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France,2Unit of
Human Evolutionary Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France,
3Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru,4Instituto Patagónico de Ciencias
Sociales y Humanas, Centro Nacional Patagónico, CONICET, Puerto
Madryn, Argentina,5Departamento de Genética, Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil,6Molecular
Genetics Laboratory, National School of Anthropology and History,Mexico City, Mexico,7Unidad de Genomica de Poblaciones Aplicada
a la Salud, UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico
City, Mexico,8GENMOL, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colom-
bia,9Instituto de Alta Investigación, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica,
Chile,10School of Mathematics and Statistics, The Open University,
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom,11Department of Genetics, Evolution
and Environment, and UCL Genetics Institute, University CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom,12Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology and Collaborative
Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
Introduction: Evidence of the functional legacy of archaic
hominids in modern humans is still limited to a few genes andphenotypes. Here, we performed scans of archaic (Neanderthaland Denisovan) introgression in modern humans on regions
signi ﬁcantly associated with facial features and tested whether theAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
521
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608(archaic/modern) origin of alleles is signi ﬁcantly associated to
these phenotypes or not.
Material and methods: Genotype data from about 6,200
admixed individuals from 5 Latin American countries was imputedusing 1000 Genome Phase III data and locally phased at 34 regionssigni ﬁcantly associated with facial features. Then, keeping only
SNPs with high con ﬁdence of sequencing on either Denisovan or
Altai Neanderthal samples, we modelled each chromosomal phaseof each individual as the most likely sequence of modern (usingthe 1000 Genome YRI population as the reference for modern
human) and archaic segments. At each SNP, we eventually coded
each individual genotype as the number of alleles falling into ahigh-con ﬁdence (>99%) archaic tracts and tested that SNP for
association with phenotypes.
Results. We found signi ﬁcant associations between the so-
coded genotype and various facial features. Our most prominent
result involves the TBX15-WARS2 region, in which a 25-Kb tract
likely inherited from Denisovans was previously found to be
highly frequent in East-Asian an d Native Americans populations.
We associated that tract with lip thickness ratio in modernhumans.
Conclusions: The strategy followed in this study shows
potential to understand why archaic tracts remained in modernhumans and to predict phenotypic features of archaic humans.
P. Faux: None. B. Bonfante: None. J. Mendoza-Revilla: None.
R. Gonzalez-José: None. L. Schüler-Faccini: None. M. Bortolini:
None. V. Acuña-Alonzo: None. S. Canizales-Quinteros: None. C.
Gallo: None. G. Poletti: None. G. Bedoya: None. F. Rothhammer:
None. K. Adhikari: None. A. Ruiz-Linares: None.
P19.005.A Population structure and selection analysis from
Cameroon next-generation sequencing data
Sonia Olaechea-Lázaro
1, Neskuts Izagirre1, Saioa López2, Óscar
García3, Krishna R. Veeramah4, Garrett Hellenthal5, Mark Thomas5,
José Miguel Lorenzo-Salazar6, Carlos Flores6,7,8, Santos Alonso1
1University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain,2Wellcome Trust,
London, United Kingdom,3Ertzaintza, Erandio, Spain,4Stony Brook
University, New York, NY, USA,5University College London, London,
United Kingdom,6Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables,
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,7Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas
(Universidad de La Laguna), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,8Hospital
Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
Spain.
Introduction: Cameroon is considered an “Africa-in-miniature ”
not only due to its high genetic,ecological, and linguistic diversity,but also due to the wide variety of subsistence strategiesadoptedby its inhabitants. Here we assess whole-exome and
whole-genome sequencing data to understandhow environmen-
tal factors shape human genomic diversity.
Materials and Methods: We analysed 100 whole-exomes and
10 genomes from Cameroonsampling 30 ethnic groups (including
Fulani, Bassa, Kotoko, Mambila). We evaluated populationstructure
and diversity (PCA, Fst) and signatures of selection (Tajima ’sD ,
PBS). Given that buccalswabs were the DNA source and aproportion of the reads were unmapped (~1%), these have
beenused to identify the oral microbiome.
Results: Our analysis suggest that Cameroonians might be
genetically subdivided into three mainpopulation clusters that
locate to the North, West, and coast regions of the country.
Moreover, weidentify putative region-speci ﬁc selection signals
associated to environmental factors. For example,our initial resultssuggest that there is evidence of balancing selection in TARBP1 ,a
gene involvedin the development of AIDS.Conclusions: We identify population structure and signatures
of natural selection in the genomes ofCameroonian peoples.
Whole-exome sequencing has proved an adequate tool to assess
thesephenomena.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (CGL2017-89021-
P), the Basque Government (GV-IT1138-16), Doctoral Fellowship to
S.O.L. (PRE_2018_1_0068), and Cabildo Insular de Tenerife
(CGIEU0000219140).
S. Olaechea-Lázaro: None. N. Izagirre: None. S. López: None.
Ó. García: None. K. Veeramah: None. G. Hellenthal: None. M.
Thomas: None. J. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None. S.
Alonso: None.
P19.006.B Childhood maltreatment as a modi ﬁer of genetic
risk for cardiovascular disease: cross-sectional and prospec-tive analysis of UK Biobank
Helena Urquijo
1,2, Ana L. G. Soares1,2, Abigail Fraser1,2, Laura D.
Howe1,2, Alice R. Carter1,2
1MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom,2Population Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Rationale: Childhood maltreatment is consistently associated with
CVD and may modify genetic susceptibility to adverse cardiovas-cular phenotypes.
Objective: To investigate whether childhood maltreatment
modi ﬁes the genetic susceptibility to a range of cardiovascular risk
factors and diseases.
Methods and Results: We used genetic and phenotypic data
from 100,833 UK Biobank participants. A questionnaire adminis-
tered in mid-life was used to assess exposure to childhood
maltreatment. We regressed nine CVD risk factors and subtypes ontheir respective polygenic scores (PGS) and exposure to childhood
maltreatment using linear and logistic multivariate regression,
adjusted for sex, age and 40 genetic principal components. Effectmodi ﬁcation by exposure to child maltreatment was tested on the
additive and multiplicative scales through the inclusion of a
product term (PGS*maltreatment) in the regression models. On
the additive scale, childhood maltreatment modi ﬁed genetic
susceptibility to higher BMI, with an increase of 0.099 SD (95% CI:0.038-0.160) in BMI per unit increase in maltreatment score (P
effect
modi ﬁcation : 0.003). On the multiplicative scale, similar results were
obtained for BMI though these did not withstand to Bonferronicorrection (P
effect modi ﬁcation : 0.015). There was little evidence of
effect modi ﬁcation on the other eight cardiovascular traits or of
sex-speci ﬁc effects. Sensitivity analyses adjusting for childhood
socioeconomic position and covariate interactions yielded similarresults.
Conclusions: Individuals exposed to childhood maltreatment
may have an exacerbated genetic susceptibility to a higher BMI.Replication and validation using larger cohorts may clarifywhether childhood maltreatment modi ﬁes genetic risk for other
adverse cardiovascular phenotypes.
H. Urquijo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collabora-
tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Signi ﬁcant; Medical Research Council, British Heart
Foundation. A.L.G. Soares: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Medical Research Council,
National Institute for Health Research. A. Fraser: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Medical
Research Council, National Institute for Health Research. L.D.
Howe: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
522
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Signi ﬁcant; Medical Research Council. A.R. Carter: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Medical Research Council.
P19.008.D Circadian rhythm gene polymorphisms and sus-
ceptibility to metabolic syndrome: a meta-analysis
Ivana Škrlec1, Jasminka Talapko1, Snjeana Dijan1, Hrvoje Lepedu š2,3
1Faculty of Dental Medicine and Health, Osijek, Croatia,2Faculty of
Dental Medicine and Health Osijek, Osijek, Croatia,3Faculty of
Humanities and Social Sciences, Osijek, Croatia.
Introduction: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a set of cardiovas-
cular risk factors associated with type 2 diabetes, obesity, and
cardiovascular diseases. Research ﬁndings of the association
between circadian rhythm gene polymorphisms and MetS andits comorbidities are not consistent. This meta-analysis wasperformed to quantify the relationships between circadian rhythm
genes and the risk of MetS.
Materials and Methods: The PubMed and Scopus databases
were searched for studies reporting on the association between
circadian rhythm gene polymorphisms ( ARNTL, BMAL1, CLOCK,
CRY, PER, NPAS2, ROR α, REV-ERB α, and REV-ERB β) and MetS, and its
comorbidities type 2 diabetes, obesity, and hypertension. Arandom-effect model was used to calculate the pooled odds ratio
and 95% con ﬁdence interval by comprehensive meta-analysis
software.
Results: Eleven independent studies were analyzed with 16,431
subjects in total. The meta-analysis revealed a signi ﬁcant
association between circadian rhythm gene polymorphisms and
MetS (OR =1.19, 95% CI: 1.04-1.38, p =0.013). The subgroup
analysis on comorbidity related to MetS revealed that type 2
diabetes was associated with circadian rhythm genes (OR =1.07,
95% CI: 1.00-1.14, p =0.04). Furthermore, the subgroup analyses
revealed that BMAL1 and CLOCK genes were associated with MetS
(OR=1.26, 95% CI: 1.05-1.52, p =0.014, and OR =1.49, 95% CI:
1.23-1.80, p < 0.001, respectively) with signi ﬁcant heterogeneity (I
2
=75.3%, p =0.001).
Conclusion: This study suggests that circadian rhythm gene
polymorphisms might be associated with MetS and its comorbid-
ity and potentially cause cardiovascular diseases. Grant no. IP8-
FDMZ-2020
I.Škrlec: None. J. Talapko: None. S. Dijan: None. H. Lepedu š:
None.
P19.009.A Clinical consequences of rare variants in cerebral
small vessel disease genes in UK Biobank
Amy C. Ferguson1, Konrad Rawlik1, Rainer Malik2, Sophie Thripple-
ton1, David Henshall1, Martin Dichgans2, Albert Tenesa1, Cathie
Sudlow1, Kristiina Rannikmae1
1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,2University of
Munich, Munich, Germany.
Introduction : An emerging minority of cases with cerebral small
vessel disease (cSVD) are monogenic, with some cases manifestingadditional extra-cerebral phenotypes. Currently, variant penetrancedata predominantly comes from small disease cohorts and biased
case studies. We investigated this in a large population-based study.
Methods : We identi ﬁed previously-reported pathogenic rare
variants in COL4A1 ,COL4A2 ,TREX1, CTSA and HTRA1 and their
reported phenotypes, mapping phenotypes to hospital admissionand primary care codes. We identi ﬁed the proportion of
pathogenic variant carriers with at least one relevant phenotype,
to estimate penetrance among 199,945 exome-sequenced UK
Biobank participants. We created phenotype clusters for eachgene, assigning participants a phenotype score based on theirnumber of cluster phenotypes. We tested for signi ﬁcant differ-
ences in phenotype scores between carriers and non-carriers.
Results : We identi ﬁed 1,143 carriers (Table). Penetrance across
genes ranged from 4% to 25% based on hospital data, and 8% to74% when including primary care. COL4A1 carrier-status was
signi ﬁcantly associated with a greater hospital-based phenotype
score compared to non-carriers (OR 1.053, p 0.007). There were nosigni ﬁcant associations between carrier-status and phenotype
scores for other genes, or in primary-care subgroup analyses.
Conclusion : Our data suggest incomplete penetrance of
pathogenic variants in cSVD genes in a population-based dataset.COL4A1 carrier-status is associated with a greater phenotype
score, highlighting the importance of the wider spectrum of
phenotypic manifestations in cSVD.
Grants : MR/S004130/1;RE/18/5/34216
Phenotype
clusterData
sourcesVariant carriers
With ≥1 cluster
phenotype (%)With no cluster
phenotypes (%)Total
number of
carriers
TREX1-
associated
phenotypesaHospital 11 (17%) 53 (83%) 64
Primary
care11 (58%) 8 (42%) 19
Hospital &
primary
care11 (58%) 8 (42%) 19
CTSA- associated
phenotypesbHospital 7 (25%) 21 (75%) 28
Primary
care4 (44%) 5 (56%) 9
Hospital &
primary
care4 (44%) 5 (56%) 9
HTRA1-
associated
phenotypescHospital 25 (11%) 209 (89%) 234
Primary
care63 (74%) 22 (26%) 85
Hospital &
primary
care63 (74%) 22 (26%) 85
COL4A1-
associated
phenotypesdHospital 94 (20%) 388 (80%) 482
Primary
care80 (48%) 86 (52%) 166
Hospital &
primary
care84 (51%) 82 (49%) 166
COL4A2-
associated
phenotypeseHospital 14 (4%) 322 (96%) 336
Primary
care7 (7%) 93 (93%) 100
Hospital &
primarycare8 (8%) 92 (92%) 100
Number of participants with both exome and hospital admis-
sion data =199,945 Number of participants with both exome and
primary care data =67,764 Number of participants with exome,
hospital admission and primary care data =67,764. a: retinal
vasculopathy, nephropathy, anaemia, Raynaud ’s phenomenon,
liver disease, migraine, stroke, and vascular dementia b: hyperten-
sion, muscle cramp, dry mouth, migraine, stroke, and vascularAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
523
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608dementia c: hair loss, degenerative spine disease, backpain,
anaemia, migraine, stroke, and vascular dementia d: cataracts,
anterior segment dysgenesis, kidney cyst, haematuria, muscle
cramp, myalgia, arrhythmia, Raynaud ’s phenomenon, haemolytic
anaemia, migraine, stroke, and vascular dementia e: stroke andvascular dementia
A.C. Ferguson: None. K. Rawlik: None. R. Malik: None. S.
Thrippleton: None. D. Henshall: None. M. Dichgans: None. A.
Tenesa: None. C. Sudlow: None. K. Rannikmae: None.
P19.010.B Pharmacogenetic defects in CYP 1, 2 & 3 gene
families, detected by NGS in Bulgarian individuals
Svetlana Yovinska , Kalina Mihova, Kunka Kamenarova, Radka
Kaneva, Rumen Nikolov, Ivanka Dimova
Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction : Cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily is the major
determinant of drug pharmacokinetic and therapeutic responses.Families CYP 1, 2, and 3 are responsible for the biotransformation
of most xenobiotics, including 70-80% of all drugs in clinical use.
Evidence is constantly accumulating for the clinical signi ﬁcance of
these CYPs in terms of adverse reactions, drug ef ﬁcacy, and drug
dose determination. Multiallelic genetic polymorphisms, which are
highly dependent on ethnicity, play a major role in the function ofCYPs and lead to various pharmacogenetic phenotypes dividedinto poor, intermediate, extensive, and ultrarapid metabolizers.
Materials and methods : We have collected sequence data
from 200 Bulgarian patients, which have been attending our labfor diagnostics, using NGS by TrueSighOne platform. Twenty-twogenes belonging to CYP 1, 2 and 3 families were sequenced
among others. Using this data, we can determine the type and
frequency of pharmacogenetic defects in Bulgarian populationwith high impact on prediction of adverse drug reactions and
health care consequences.
Results and discussion : The most frequent drug response
associated polymorphisms were discovered in CYP2D6 (c.506-
1G>A) and CYP2B6 (c.516G>T), followed by CYP2D6 (c.100C>T),
CYP2B6 (c.785A>G) and CYP2C9 (c.1075A>C). Data from our
research indicates highest frequency of abnormal variants formetabolizing debrisoquine and methadone in Bulgarians. CYP2D6polymorphism is most often inherited in an autosomal recessive
fashion (two nonfunctional alleles for the CYP2D6 gene). Many
other drugs are inef ﬁciently metabolized in these patients,
including antidepressants (Doxepin, Trimipramine, Imipramine),
and selective estrogen receptor modulator Tamoxifen, used for
treatment and prevention of breast cancer.
S. Yovinska: None. K. Mihova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. R.
Kaneva: None. R. Nikolov: None. I. Dimova: None.
P19.011.C Impact of host genetic variation on cytokine
response variability upon BCG vaccination in children from
Guinea-Bissau
Collins Kwadwo Boahen
1, Simmone J. C. F. Moorlag1, Kristoffer
Jarlov Jensen2, Vasiliki Matzaraki1, Ivan Monteiro3, Charlotte de
Bree1, Peter Aaby4, Mihai G. Netea1,5, Christine Stabell Benn6, Vinod
Kumar1,7
1Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious
Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, NIJMEGEN, Nether-
lands,2Center for Clinical Research and Prevention, Frederiksberg
and Bispebjerg Hospital, Frederiksberg, Denmark,3Bandim Health
Project, Indepth Network,codex 1004, Bissau, Guinea-Bissau,4BandimHealth Project, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen S, Denmark,
5Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and Medical
Sciences Institute,University of Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany,
6Danish Institute for Advanced Study, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark,7University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen,
Netherlands.
Introduction: Over 25% of tuberculosis (TB) deaths occur in the
African Continent. Bacillus Calmette-Guerín (BCG) being TB
vaccine also provides non-speci ﬁc protective effects against other
infections through “trained innate immunity ”. However, which
genetic mechanisms modulate cytokine responses upon BCGvaccination and how they vary between Africans and Europeans
are unknown.
Materials and Methods: An African cohort (Guinea-Bissau) of
low-birth-weight (<2.5 kg) infants (~500 samples) was randomized
to BCG vaccination or no BCG-vaccination. In vitro stimulation of
whole blood using ﬁve different stimuli was followed by seven
different cytokine measurements. We performed genome-wideSNP cytokine QTL (cQTL) mapping followed by pathway enrich-
ment and functional annotation. The results were compared using
a European BCG adult cohort (n =300).
Results: We identi ﬁed 9 independent cQTLs (P < 5 x 10
-8)
affecting cytokine responses speci ﬁcally in the BCG group;
unidenti ﬁed in the control group. Interestingly, these cQTLs show
pleiotropic effects. Only one locus out of 9 showed association in theEuropean BCG cohort. Also, nominal cQTLs (p < 0.05) between
European and African samples showed very limited overlap (1.4% to
1.5%), indicating either age or ethnicity-associated genetic effects.We identi ﬁed several causal genes at these loci and implicated
complement pathway in regulating cytokine response after BCG
vaccination. We demonstrate that SNPs in C1RL locus affect
topologically associated domain by regulating long non-codingRNA expression, which also affects other co-expressed genes.
Conclusion: Our study shows that distinct genetic loci affect
cytokine response in African infants with and without BCG-
vaccination as well as in European BCG-vaccinated adults.
C.K. Boahen: None. S.J.C.F. Moorlag: None. K.J. Jensen: None.
V. Matzaraki: None. I. Monteiro: None. C.D. Bree: None. P. Aaby:
None. M.G. Netea: None. C.S. Benn: None. V. Kumar: None.
P19.012.D Natural selection analysis for GWAS SNPs in
cytokine genes
Maryam B. Khadzhieva
1,2,3, Dmitry S. Kolobkov2,4, Alesya S.
Gracheva1,2, Artem N. Kuzovlev1, Serikbay K. Abilev2, Lyubov E.
Salnikova1,2
1Federal Research and Clinical Center of Intensive Care Medicine and
Rehabilitology, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Vavilov Institute of
General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian
Federation,3Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federa-tion,4Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
Cytokines are proteins and glycoproteins implicated in innate and
acquired immunity, embryogenesis, hematopoiesis, in ﬂammation
and regeneration processes, and proliferation. We applied natural
selection tests to identify GWAS cytokine SNPs under positive
selection. We generated a list of human genes encoding proteinswith cytokine/chemokine and cytokine/chemokine receptor activ-
ity employing the QuickGO database (n =314). A total of 3077
associations for 1760 unique SNPs were found for these genes inthe NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog. Fst (Fixation index) and iHS(Integrated Haplotype Score) for GWAS SNPs were analyzed with
the use of 1000 Genome Selection Browser 1.0 ( http://hsb.upf.edu/Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
524
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608). This resource provides statistics on natural selection as the
absolute scores and rank scores representing −log10( P-value) at
0.01 FDR for the SNP compared to others in the whole-genome
context. SNPs with Fst scores ≥0.5 or iHS scores ≥2.0 are
considered to be under positive selection. SNPs under selectionpressure were more often associated with different types of
measurements in comparison with other GWAS SNPs: 85.09%
(348/409 associations) vs. 70.27% (1865/2654 associations), P=
6.9E−10; the most pronounced differences were related to
anthropometric measurements ( P=1.4E−10). A total of 75 SNPs
had global Fst rank scores >2 (scores 0.404 −0.668). Only ten SNPs
had rank scores >2 for the iHS CEU score. Natural selectionanalysis identi ﬁed top SNPs in the GDF5 (conﬁrmatory informa-
tion) and IL18R1 (new data) genes subjected to positive selection
(table 1).
Table 1. Natural selection statistics for the GWAS SNPs in the
GDF5 and IL1RL1/IL18R1 genes
*GWAS signals for the rs143384 and rs224333 were reported for
European and mixed ancestry populations. GWAS signals for the
rs2001461, rs1420103 and rs6419573 were reported for European
ancestry individuals.
M.B. Khadzhieva: None. D.S. Kolobkov: None. A.S. Gracheva:
None. A.N. Kuzovlev: None. S.K. Abilev: None. L.E. Salnikova:
None.
P19.013.A The gene encoding the viral sensor, RIG-1, contains
African-speci ﬁc regulatory variants
Darisia Moonsamy , Nikki L. Gentle
School of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of the Witwaters-
rand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
Introduction: RIG-1, plays an important role in the detection of
RNA viruses. Susceptibility to viral infection and disease progres-sion is known to vary between geographically distinct popula-tions. Despite this, African populations are often underrepresented
in immunogenetic studies. We therefore sought to identify and
characterise African-speci ﬁc regulatory variants within DDX58 , the
gene encoding RIG-1.
Materials and Methods: Phased single nucleotide polymorph-
ism data from the Phase 3 release of the 1000 Genomes Project (n=2504) were analysed using VCFtools v (0.1.16), in order to
identify bi-allelic variants within DDX58 that are unique to African
populations. Regulatory variants were then annotated using
ANNOVAR v (2018-04-16) to identify those with potential effectson RIG-1 expression, splicing and/or function. Known disease-
associated variants were prioritised and the haplotype structure
surrounding these variants was characterised.
Results: Our analysis revealed 120 variants across the regulatory
regions in and around DDX58 . Of these, 39 were unique to African
populations. The patterns of linkage disequilibrium surrounding
these variants were also shown to be distinct between population
groups. Variants of interest identi ﬁed include rs540969727, which
lies within an H3K4 methylation site, and the minor allele (A) ofwhich is present at frequencies approaching 2% in African
populations.
Conclusions: African populations harbour population-speci ﬁc
genetic variants that may alter the expression of the RNA sensor,RIG-1. The potential effects of these variants on susceptibility to
viral infection and/or disease progression warrant further inves-
tigation. DM and NG are supported by the National ResearchFoundation (grant numbers 123456 and 122000)
D. Moonsamy: None. N.L. Gentle: None.
P19.014.B NGS survey for rare genetic variants, associated
with diabetes mellitus, in Bulgarian individuals
Ivanka Dimova
1, Kalina Mihova1, Kunka Kamenarova1, Ivelina
Mihaleva2, Pavlina Gateva2, Radka Kaneva2
1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,
2Department of Pharmacology, Medical University So ﬁa, So ﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Introduction : Advances in sequencing technology enabled
focused explorations on the contribution of rare variants (MAF <1%) to human traits. Rare variants in or near genes display larger
effects on phenotype compared with regulatory and common
genetic variants. However, population strati ﬁcation poses unique
challenges in studies of rare variants. Systematic differences in
allele frequencies due to ancestry are more pronounced for rare
variants. In our study we aimed in NGS (Next generationsequencing) searching for rare /pathogenic variants in genes,connected to diabetes mellitus (DM), in Bulgarian individuals.
Materials and methods : The sequencing data from clinical
exome sequencing of 100 Bulgarians, mostly under the age of 25years, was analysed for rare/pathogenic genetic variants in 68genes, known for its association with DM.
Results : We discovered rare/pathogenic variants in three genes,
listed in the Table.
The variant in GCGR was detected with a higher frequency of
6% in Bulgarian individuals. The gene encodes receptor for
glucagon, which exerts insulin opposite effect on glucose
metabolism. There is recent evidence for potential targetingglucagon receptor to improve glycemic control.
Conclusion : We demonstrated population/ethnic difference in
the frequency of previously announced rare genetic variants,suggesting higher contribution risk effect of GCGR to DM. Genetic
detection of DM sub-phenotypes could be useful to personalize
screening and care. Acknowledgement: BSNF, Contract No КП-06-
Н33/10, 2019.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
525
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608I. Dimova: None. K. Mihova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. I.
Mihaleva: None. P. Gateva: None. R. Kaneva: None.
P19.015.C Inferring Effective Population Size and Divergence
Time in the Lithuanian Population According to High ‐Density
Genotyping Data
Alina Urnikyte1, Alma Molyte1, Erinija Pranckevi čienė1, Zita Aurel ė
Kučinskien ė2, Vaidutis Ku činskas1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
2Department of Physiology, Biochemistry, Microbiology and Labora-
tory Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The analysis of geographically speci ﬁc regions and the characteriza-
tion of ﬁne-scale patterns of The prehistory of the Lithuanian
population and genetic relationship to other populations are poorlystudied. Thus, the Lithuanian population, as an object of study, isinteresting due to its partial isolation with genetic distinctiveness
within the European context and with preserved ancient genetic
composition. The main objects of this study was to inferdemographic parameters, effective population size ( Ne), and
divergence time using high ‐density single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) genotyping data generated with the Illumina HumanOmmiEx-press ‐12v1.1 array in 295 individuals from the Lithuanian population
and to compare our data with other populations from the Human
Genome Cell Line Diversity Panel (HGDP ‐CEPH). We also aimed to
reconstruct past events between the main ethnolinguistic regions —
Auk štaitija and Žemaitija of Lithuania. Historically, these regions
probably developed as two independent Baltic tribes. Our results of
Nein the Lithuanian population through time demonstrated a
substantial reduction of Neover the 150,000 –25,000 years before
present (YBP). The estimated long ‐term Neof the Lithuanian
population is quite low —it equals 5404, which likely is a
consequence of the bottlenecks as sociated with the last glacial
period of 25,000 –12,000 YBP in Europe. The obtained divergence
time estimates between the study populations are in agreement with
recent studies. The recons tructed past events in Auk štaitija and
Žemaitija showed signi ﬁcant differences between these two regions
of Lithuania. This study is a part of the ANELGEMIA project, which hasreceived funding from the Research Council of Lithuania (LMTLT),
agreement No. S-MIP-20-34.
A. Urnikyte: None. A. Molyte: None. E. Pranckevi čienė:None.
Z. Ku činskien ė:None. V. Ku činskas: None.
P19.016.D Evidence of a mediating role of fasting insulin,
bioavailable testosterone and sex hormone-binding globulin
in the relationship between body mass index and endometrial
cancer risk: A Mendelian randomization study
Emma Hazelwood , James Yarmolinsky, Richard M. Martin
MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom.
Endometrial cancer is the fourth most commonly diagnosed
cancer in women in the UK. Elevated body mass index (BMI) is anestablished risk factor and is estimated to confer a larger effect onendometrial cancer risk than any other cancer site. However, the
mechanisms underpinning this association remain unclear.
We performed two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) toevaluate the causal effects of BMI and 14 previously hypothesisedmolecular risk factors (including fasting insulin (FI), bioavailable
testosterone, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)) on endome-
trial cancer risk (12,906 cases, 108,979 controls). Multivariable MR
was used to evaluate and quantify the mediating role of the riskfactors in the relationship between BMI and endometrial cancerrisk. In MR analysis, BMI (per SD (4.6 kg/m
2) increase: OR =1.86,
95% CI =1.60-2.17, P=2.68x10-15), FI (per natural log transformed
pmol/L increase: OR =3.42, 95% CI =2.02-5.80, P=4.55x10-6),
bioavailable testosterone (per inverse normal transformed nmol/Lincrease: OR =1.47, 95% CI =1.30-1.66, P=3.82x10-10) and SHBG
(per inverse normal transformed nmol/L increase: OR =0.71, 95%
CI=0.59-0.85, P=1.71x10-4) increased endometrial cancer risk. In
the mediation analysis, we found evidence for a mediating role ofFI (30% mediated, 95% CI =10-50%, P =3.11x10-3), bioavailable
testosterone (12% mediated, 95% CI =7-16%, P =1.92x10-6), and
SHBG (7% mediated, 95% CI =2-12%, P =2.72x10-3). Our
comprehensive analysis provides insight into potential causal
mechanisms linking BMI with endometrial cancer risk and
suggests pharmacological targeting of insulinemic and hormonaltraits as a promising strategy for endometrial cancer prevention.This research was completed in the MRC Integrative Epidemiology
Unit at the University of Bristol (MC_UU_00011/4) and supported
by Cancer Research UK (C18281/A29019).
E. Hazelwood: None. J. Yarmolinsky: None. R.M. Martin:
None.
P19.017.A Using genetics to understand the biological and
non biological factors that in ﬂuence susceptibility to EBV
infection
Marisa D. Muckian
1, Helen R. Stagg1, Graham S. Taylor2, James F.
Wilson1,3, Nicola Pirastu1
1University of Edinburgh, Usher Institute, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
2University of Birmingham, Institute of Immunology and Immu-
notherapy, Birmingham, United Kingdom,3University of Edinburgh,
Institute of Genetics and Cancer, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) infects >90% of the population. EBV
infection is life-long and has been linked to autoimmune
conditions as well as cancer. Risk factors for EBV infection arenot well understood and the current literature is con ﬂicting.
In order to establish the true EBV risk factors we conducted a
GWAS on serostatus along with the measured antibody levels for
infectious diseases including EBV in a sample of 9,724 participantsof UKBiobank. The results of the GWAS were then used to perform
mendelian randomization (MR) to assess the robustness of
previously identi ﬁed EBV risk factors.
Signi ﬁcant associations were found between the HLA locus and
all tested EBV antibody levels, con ﬁrming previous studies. Of the
four loci (all novel) associated with EBV susceptibility, none were
located in the HLA region suggesting that being infected with EBVand the immune response to the virus are independentphenomena. MR analysis con ﬁrmed several previously hypothe-
sised risk factors such as socioeconomic status, however we found
little evidence for many of the others.
We have identi ﬁed several novel loci associated with EBV that
will better our understanding of the biology behind infection and
give us potential insight into why some people remain
seronegative. Our results show that applying MR to infectiousdisease studies can help verify the risk factors that are truly
associated with serostatus, especially when traditional epidemio-
logical studies provide opposing results.
M.D. Muckian: None. H.R. Stagg: None. G.S. Taylor: None. J.F.
Wilson: None. N. Pirastu: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
526
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P19.018.B Rare variants in the FZD4 gene in patients with
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy
Sofya Garifullina1, Andrey Marakhonov1, Vitaly Kadyshev1, Tatyana
Vasilyeva1, Elizaveta Geraskina2, Sergey Kutsev1, Rena Zinchenko1
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,
2Helmholtz National Medical Research Center of Eye Diseases,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is a hereditary eye
disease caused by mutations in 7 genes ( CTNNB1, TSPAN12, EVR3,
ZNF408, LRP5, FZD4, NDP ) (OMIM PS133780). The aim of the study
was to analyze the pathogenic variants in the frizzled-4 gene
(FZD4 ), which is localized on 11q14.A cohort of 34 patients aged
up to 18 years with a 2:3 sex ratio (men:women) with FEVR andcharacteristic clinical picture (disorders of retinal vascularization,ﬁbrotic changes in the vitreous body, and secondary retinal
detachment) was screened for the presence of variants in the
FZD4 gene. Two of 34 patients have heterozygous variants - one
novel variant NM_012193.4:c.1486del which leads to frameshiftresulting in the formation of a premature translation termination
site, p.(Trp496Glyfs*17), and one previously described pathogenic
variant c.205C>T leading to a missense substitution p.(His69Tyr)causing incorrect folding of the FZD4 protein. This variant is
registered in the Human Mutation Database and is associated with
FEVR1.In our study of Russian cohort, two pathogenic variantswere identi ﬁed, one of which was novel. The frequency of FZD4
pathogenic alleles in our cohort is 2%. That indicates that FZD4
variants could explain small number of FEVR cases among Russian
population, in contrast to other European populations with 20%explained by FZD4 variants cases. The study suggests seeking for
the causes in other genes.The study was supported by the RFBR
grant№19-015-00122 and was carried out as part of the State
assignment of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of theRussian Federation.
S. Garifullina: None. A. Marakhonov: None. V. Kadyshev:
None. T. Vasilyeva: None. E. Geraskina: None. S. Kutsev: None.
R. Zinchenko: None.
P19.019.C Molecular spectrum of PCSK9 -based FH in France,
the French p.(Ser127Arg) founder variant
Yara Azar
1,2,3, Yara Abou-Khalil1,2,3, Mathilde Di-Filippo4,5, Alain
Carrié6, Sophie Béliard7, Catherine Boileau1,3,8, Marianne Abi-Fadel1,2,
Jean-Pierre Rabès1,9, Mathilde Varret1,3
1LVTS, Inserm U1148, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France,2Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Therapies (LBTM), Faculty of Pharmacy,Pôle Technologie- Santé, Saint Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon,
3Paris University, Paris, France,4Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Louis Pradel Cardiovas-
cular Hospital, Bron, France,5INSERM U1060, INSA de Lyon, INRA
U1235, Univ Lyon-1, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, Oullins, France,
6Sorbonne University, UMR_1166 & ICAN; Department of Biochem-
istry, APHP. Sorbonne University, La Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris,France,7Department of Nutrition, APHM, La Conception Hospital,
Faculty of Medicine, Aix-Marseille University, INSERM, INRAE, C2VN,
Marseille, France,8Genetics department, APHP, Bichat Hospital, Paris,
France,9Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, AP-HP.,
Université Paris-Saclay, Ambroise Paré Hospital, Boulogne Billancourt;UVSQ, UFR Simone Veil - Santé, Montigny-Le-Bretonneux, France.
Introduction: PCSK9 is the third gene involved in familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH). The ﬁrst FH-causing PCSK9 variant, p.
(Ser127Arg), is almost exclusively reported in French patients andrepresents 67% of the PCSK9 variants in France. This study aims to
characterize the molecular spectrum of PCSK9 -based FH in France
to analyze genotype/phenotype correlations and p.(Ser127Arg)
founder effect.
Methods :PCSK9 variants were searched through a diagnostic
approach using Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS)
genes panels. Five families and 22 probands carrying p.
(Ser127Arg) were selected for genotyping. Haplotypes wereconstructed with (1) 12 microsatellites spanning 20 Mb aroundPCSK9 (GeneMapper ®Software was used to determine the alleles
length (pb)) and (2) SNPs in exon 1: p.(Leu21dup), exon 4: c.524-
68G>C; c.524-90G>C; c.657 +82 A>G (Sanger sequencing) and
SNPs in exon 3: c.400-201 A>G, exon 9: c.1664G>A (TaqMan
®SNP
Genotyping Assays).
Results: Through NGS in FH probands, we identi ﬁed new PCSK9
rare variants: p.(Arg215Cys), p.(Asp367His), p.(Glu410Lys), p.(Arg495Trp), p.(Gly516Val), p.(Ala676Gly), all are predicted deleter-
ious, but functional studies are needed to establish their real
causative effect. The L11 allele p.(Leu21tri) associated with familialcombined hyperlipidemia was found in 17 probands with varyingphenotypes, but normal triglycerides levels indicate that this
PCSK9 variant can also lead to bona ﬁde FH. For all p.(Ser127Arg)
carriers, a common haplotype of 1.4 Mb was detected with theSNPs and the ﬁrst 3 microsatellites analyzed. Genotyping the rest
of microsatellites is ongoing.
Conclusion: These preliminary results show that p.(Ser127Arg)
gain-of-function variant in PCSK9 could be due to the founder
effect in France.
Y. Azar: None. Y. Abou-Khalil: None. M. Di-Filippo: None. A.
Carrié: None. S. Béliard: None. C. Boileau: None. M. Abi-Fadel:
None. J. Rabès: None. M. Varret: None.
P19.020.D Exome sequencingof 1293patientsin Russia: new
knowledge aboutthestructureo ﬁnherited diseases in Russia
Oxana Ryzhkova , Olga Mironovich, Polina Gundorova, Anna
Orlova, Tatiana Cherevatova, Alyona Chukhrova, Viktoria Zabnen-kova, Olga Schagina, Varvara Kadnikova, Nailya Galeeva, AlexanderPoliakov
Research Centre for Medical Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Whole and clinical exome sequencing (WES/CES) are the most
popular diagnostic methods. This analysis gives us information
about causes of pathologies, diseases structure in differentpopulations and frequencies of variants.
Materials and Methods: DNA of 1293 patients were analyzed
by WES (711) or custom CES (582), which included 6300 genes.
Results: Pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in 198 (15,3%)
cases, likely pathogenic in 386 (29,7%) and variants of uncertain
clinical sugni ﬁcance in 548 (46,0%). Mutation types and frequen-
cies in most of the genes were as expected. Four diseases notdiagnosed before using WES/CES in Russia are of particularinterest. Five patients homozygous for c.362dup variant in FKBP14
gene were found. The variant was identi ﬁed in 21/5495 healthy
controls. Frequency of FKBP14 -related disease is 1:250000 in
Russia. Spastic paraplegia 47 was identi ﬁed in 4 patients with
homozygous variant c.1160_1161del[PG1]. This variant was found
in patients with epilepsia/mental retardation and wasn ’t found in
128 patients with spastic paraplegia. Eight patients had differentvariants in GNE gene. Thus, Nonaka myopathy frequency the same
the most frequent in Russia CAPN3 -related myopathy. Neuromyo-
tonia and axonal neuropathy were observed in three patients withhomozygous variant c.110G>C[PG2] in the HINT1 gene. 30
additional cases of homozygous or compound-heterozygous
c.110G>C were found in 316 patients with hereditary motor andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
527
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608sensory neuropathy (HMSN) type 2. Thus, HINT1 -related pheno-
types are the most frequent form of autosomal-recessive HMSN in
Russia.
Conclusions: CES/WES data are helpful for investigation of a
population and for clari ﬁcation of the burden and structure of
hereditary pathology.
O. Ryzhkova: None. O. Mironovich: None. P. Gundorova: None.
A. Orlova: None. T. Cherevatova: None. A. Chukhrova: None. V.
Zabnenkova: None. O. Schagina: None. V. Kadnikova: None. N.
Galeeva: None. A. Poliakov: None.
P19.021.A association of FTO (rs9939609), LIPC 250 G>A and
LPL Ser447Ter gene polymorphisms with obesity in children
and adolescents
Lyudmila Valerievna Gutnikov1, Alaa H. Abd A.2, Tatiana Pavlovna
Shkurat1, Galina Vladimirovna Karantysh3, V N. Prokofev3
1Research Institute of Biology, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,
2academy biology and biotechnology, Rostov-on-Don, Russian
Federation,3Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian
Federation.
The importance of metabolic and genetic factors in the
development of childhood obesity remains relevant.The aim of
this work was to study the association of the polymorphisms LPL
Ser447ter (C-G) ,-250 LIPC G>A and FTO rs9939609 with obesity in
children and adolescents from the Rostov region (Russia).
Methods : The case-control study involved 520 children and
adolescents aged 3 to 17 years. The main group consisted of 370obese children and adolescents and 150 non-obese children andadolescents (control). Genomic DNA samples were isolated from
whole blood of patients using the standard phenol-chloroform
method. Genotyping of polymorphisms FTO T/A rs9939609 ,LIPC G/
A-250 , and LPL Ser447Ter was performed using fragments
ampli ﬁed by PCR. The MDR method was used to assess gene-
gene relationships.
Results: Using MDR, models of intergenic interactions of FTO
rs9939609 ,LPL Ser447ter , and LIPC -250 G>A polymorphism with
obesity were constructed. When analyzing the duhlocus interac-
tion between FTO re9939609 T> A and LPL Ser447Ter C>G ,a n
antagonistic character is shown; between loci FTO re9939609 T> A
and LPL Ser447Ter C> G , the nature of the interaction is synergistic,
and with the LIPC-250 G>A polymorphism, it is antagonistic at loci
FTO re9939609 T>A and LPL Ser447Ter C>G .Findings. Depending on
the inclusion of different loci in the development of obesity, the
nature of the relationship between the polymorphisms of these
genes can change. This study was funded by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of the Russian Federation №0852-2020-0028 .
L.V. Gutnikov: None. A.H. Abd A.: None. T.P. Shkurat: None.
G.V. Karantysh: None. V.N. Prokofev: None.
P19.023.C An exome-wide analysis of natural genetic variation
in the Canary Islands population
Ana Díaz-de Usera
1, Luis A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, Adrián Muñoz-
Barrera1, Beatriz Guillen-Guio2, Almudena Corrales2,3, Antonio Íñigo-
Campos1, David Jáspez1, Itahisa Marcelino-Rodriguez2,4, Antonio
Cabrera de León2, Rafaela González-Montelongo1, Jose M. Lorenzo-
Salazar1, Carlos Flores1,2,3
1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables
(ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Research Unit, Hospital
Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Universidad de La Laguna, SantaCruz de Tenerife, Spain,3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Institutode Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,4Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas,
Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
Introduction : In order to provide the basis for an unbiased
understanding of traits and diseases, many countries are developingtheir own catalogs of genetic variation. The Canary Islands (Spain)
population exhibits the largest genetic proportion of North African
ancestry among the Southwestern European populations. Here weprovide, for the ﬁrst time, an exome-wide analysis of their genetic
variation.
Materials and Methods : DNA from 629 unrelated control
donors were sequenced by commercial whole-exome enrichmentcapture kits and a HiSeq 4000 (Illumina) using 75 bp paired-endreads. BWA-GATK v3.8 Best Practices were followed for germline
variant calling using the GRCh37/hg19 human genome as the
reference. ANNOVAR, Ensembl VEP, and InterVar tools were usedfor functional annotation.
Results: A total of 340,913 variants were identi ﬁed by whole-
exome sequencing in the target regions, of which 70.1% wereexonic. A quarter of them (i.e., 59,883) were absent from the 1000Genomes Project, gnomAD, and TopMed, and 97.4% of those
presented an allele frequency below 0.5%. Out of these, 3,276
were classi ﬁed as pathogenic/likely pathogenic according to
InterVar. Nearly 90% of those had high impact predictions orwere loss-of-function variants, being frameshift the most common
variation.
Conclusions: The high percentage of novel exome-wide
genetic variation in Canary Islanders highlights the need for a
speci ﬁc catalog to improve the pathogenicity classi ﬁcation of
variants in this population.
Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (RTC-2017-6471-1;
AEI/FEDER,UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER, Spanish Ministry of
Education and Vocational Training (FPU16/01435); Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (CD19/00231); Cabildo Insular de TenerifeCGIEU0000219140 .
A. Díaz-de Usera: None. L.A. Rubio-Rodríguez: None. A.
Muñoz-Barrera: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. A. Corrales: None.
A. Íñigo-Campos: None. D. Jáspez: None. I. Marcelino-Rodri-
guez: None. A. Cabrera de León: None. R. González-Monte-
longo: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None.
P19.025.A Percentage of explained variance in alcohol
consumption by genetic risk score in the UK Biobank
Xiyun Jiang
1, He Gao2, Paul Elliott2,3, Raha Pazoki1,2
1Brunel University London, London, United Kingdom,2Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom,3Health Data Research-
UK London substantive site, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
identi ﬁed over 100 alcohol consumption-associated genetic
variants. We investigated variance of alcohol consumptionexplained by genetic factors in various population subgroups
including sex, age, and in relation to central tendency.
Materials and Methods: We created an alcohol consumption
genetic risk score (GRS) using 105 previously published alcoholconsumption genetic variants in GWAS. Using data from 295,189
UK Biobank (UKB) participants, we calculated percentage variance
in alcohol consumption (g/day) explained by the GRS insubpopulations including participants with alcohol consumption
levels within (1) mean ± 1 standard deviation (SD) of alcohol
consumption distribution, (2) mean ± 2 SD and (3) within thewhole sample. We additionally investigated explained variance inage and sex-speci ﬁc subgroups.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
528
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: GRS was associated with alcohol consumption (0.122;
95% CI =0.117-0.126) within the UKB. GRS explained less variation
in alcohol consumption among participants whose alcohol
consumption fall in the centre of the population distribution ofalcohol consumption and explained more variation in participantswith higher alcohol consumption. Table 1. Additionally, alcohol
GRS explained more variation in men compared to women.
Alcohol GRS also showed tendency to capture more variation inalcohol consumption of younger participants.
Conclusions: Our results show that variation in alcohol
consumption that is explained by alcohol GRS differs in population
subgroups and the location of participants in population ’s alcohol
consumption distribution. MRC Rutherford fund (MR/R0265051/2).
Table 1. Percentage variance of alcohol consumption explained
by genetic risk score.
Subgroup Sample size
(%)Adjusted
R2(%)Adjusted R2
(proportion of the
whole sample)
Whole sample 295,189 (100) 0.92 1
Alcohol
consumptionmean ± 1 SD204,384 (69) 0.45 0.49
Alcohol
consumptionmean ± 2 SD278,689 (94) 0.89 0.97
Alcohol
consumptionquintile 159,025 (20) 0.004 -
Alcohol
consumptionquintile 259,196 (20) 0.037 -
Alcohol
consumptionquintile 361,121 (20.7) 0.00 -
Alcohol
consumptionquintile 456,428 (19.1) 0.03 -
Alcohol
consumptionquintile 559,419 (20.1) 0.15 -
Men 134,169 (45) 1.29 -
Women 161,020 (55) 1.07 -Age group 1(38-
52)97,698 (33) 1.05 -
Age group 2 (53-
60)89,294 (30) 0.94 -
Age group 3 (61-
72)108,197 (37) 0.79 -
X. Jiang: None. H. Gao: None. P. Elliott: None. R. Pazoki: None.
P19.026.B Establishing the Hungarian Genomic Data Ware-
house for studying the genetics of healthy ageing andlongevity
Vera Várhegyi1, Viktor Molnár1, András Gézsi1,2, Péter Sárközy2,
Péter Antal2, Mária Judit Molnár1
1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare
Disorders, Budapest, Hungary,2Budapest University of Technology
and Economics, Department of Measurement and InformationSystems, Budapest, Hungary.Introduction: Population health research is increasingly focused
on the genetic determinants of healthy ageing. Until now there
was no public resource of whole genome sequences and
phenotype data from healthy elderly individuals in Hungary.
Materials and Methods: The Institute of Genomic Medicine
and Rare Disorders of the Semmelweis University set up a data
collection, the Hungarian Genomic Data Warehouse, by cataloging
and analyzing complete genome sequences and related pheno-type data of 100 healthy volunteers. The structure of the datawarehouse allows interoperability with the most important
international research projects on ageing.
Results: 49% of the participants were between 70-80 years old,
36% between 81-90, 14% over 90 years old. The gender ratio was44-56% between men and women. The proportion of people with
higher education is high (46%), 61% of participants played sports
for a long time, and 70% never smoked. The parents of theparticipants also lived a high age, with an average age at death of
74.3 years for fathers and 80.47 years for mothers.
Conclusions: The Hungarian Genomic Data Warehouse pro-
vides insight into molecular diagnostics, from individual commonpolymorphisms, through population-speci ﬁc variants, to private,
individual-speci ﬁc mutations. This repository is the ﬁrst public full
genome map in Hungary. The data will be available to the publiceither providing aggregated genetic statistic data or sharing theanonymazied individual genomic and phenotypic data within
scienti ﬁc collaboration using privacy-preserving data analysis
methods.The implementation of the project was supported bythe National Bionics Program ED_17-1-2017-0009.
V. Várhegyi: None. V. Molnár: None. A. Gézsi: None. P.
Sárközy: None. P. Antal: None. M.J. Molnár: None.
P19.027.C Exploring the causal connection between sleep
traits and pain diagnoses
Martin Broberg , Juha Karjalainen, FinnGen, Hanna M. Ollila
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Previous studies have found signi ﬁcant links between insomnia
and pain symptoms including both general pain and speci ﬁc
diseases such as migraine. As genome-wide association studies(GWAS) have identi ﬁed disease speci ﬁc associations, so too has
the possibility of bioinformatically exploring the comorbidity and
causality between risk-factors and diseases and the in ﬂuence of
genetics. Here, we aimed to elucidate the causality between sleepand pain, and performed both two-sample and one-sample
mendelian randomization analyses using GWAS summary statis-
tics. We tested insomnia as a risk factor based on a self-reportedcohort (N =1 331 010) against cohorts associated with different
types of pain; general pain (N =218 379, inverse-variance
weighting (IVW) odds ratio (OR) [95% con ﬁdence interval (CI)] =
1.47 [1.38-1.58], P=4.12x10
-28), multi-site chronic pain (MCP, N =
387 649, IVW OR [95% CI] =1.36 [1.32-1.41], P=2.04x10-81),
neuropathic pain (mono +polyneuropathies, N =269 141, IVW OR
[95% CI] =1.14 [1.09-1.18] P=7.80x10-10) and trigerminal neur-
algia (N =246 228, IVW OR [95% CI] =1.18 [1.06-1.31], P=0.003).
Conversely, general pain and MCP exhibited a signi ﬁcant
increased risk for insomnia (IVW OR [95% CI] =1.04 [1.01-1.07],
P< 0.05 and IVW OR 1.32 [1.26-1.38], P=1.58x10-36, respectively).
Results were consistent in sensitivity analyses. Our ﬁndings
support a bidirectional causal relationship between insomnia
and pain. These data support further clinical investigation into the
utility of insomnia treatment as a strategy for pain managementand vice versa.
M. Broberg: None. J. Karjalainen: None. H.M. Ollila: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
529
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P19.028.D Hereditary haemochromatosis mutations, brain
iron imaging and dementia risk in the UK Biobank cohort
Janice L. Atkins1, Luke C. Pilling1, Christine J. Heales1, Sharon
Savage1,2, Chia-Ling Kuo3, George A. Kuchel3, David C. Steffens3,
David Melzer1,3
1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,2University of New-
castle, New South Wales, Australia,3University of Connecticut,
Farmington, CT, USA.
Background: Brain iron deposition occurs in dementia. In
European ancestry populations, the HFE p.C282Y variant can
cause iron overload and haemochromatosis, mostly in homo-
zygous males. The aim was to estimate p.C282Y associations with
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features plus incidentdementia diagnoses during follow-up in a large communitycohort.
Methods: UK Biobank European ancestry descent participants
(n=335,909, 40-70 years) were followed up from baseline (2006-
2010) via hospitalization records (mean 10.5 years). Participantsincluded 2,890 p.C282Y homozygotes. MRI was available in a
subset of 28,860 participants (206 p.C282Y homozygotes), includ-
ing T2* measures (lower values indicating more iron).
Results: Male p.C282Y homozygotes had lower T2* measures in
areas including the putamen, thalamus, and hippocampus,
compared to no HFE mutations. Incident dementia was morecommon in p.C282Y homozygous men (Hazard Ratio HR =1·83;
95% CI 1·23 to 2·72, p =0.003), as was delirium (HR =1·82, 95% CI
1·21 to 2·72, p =0·004) compared to those without the mutations.
There were no associations in homozygote women or inheterozygotes.
Conclusion: Men with the HFE p.C282Y homozygous mutation
developed substantially more marked brain iron deposition in
dementia relevant brain areas and were more likely to bediagnosed with dementia during follow-up in hospitalization
data. Studies are needed of whether early ascertainment of
haemochromatosis and iron reduction in HFE p.C282Y homo-
zygotes may prevent or limit associated dementia related brainpathologies. Grant details - UK Medical Research Council award
MR/S009892/1 (Principal investigator David Melzer).
J.L. Atkins: None. L.C. Pilling: None. C.J. Heales: None. S.
Savage: None. C. Kuo: None. G.A. Kuchel: None. D.C. Steffens:
None. D. Melzer: None.
P19.029.A Wide spectrum of F9variants in hemophilia B
families from the Portuguese population
Isabel Moreira
1, Maria J. Diniz2, Alice Tavares3, Sara Morais4, Bruno
Freitas5, Fernando Araújo6, Teresa Gago7, Ema M. Antunes2, Cristina
Catarino3, Manuel Campos4, Teresa Almeida8, Sara B. Santos8,
Raquel Maia8, Paula Kjollerstrom8, João Lavinha1, João Gonçalves1,
Dezso David1
1Departamento de Genética Humana - Instituto Nacional de Saúde
Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal,2Serviço de Imuno-
Hemoterapia, Hospital de S. José, Centro Hospitalar de LisboaCentral EPE, Lisboa, Portugal,3Serviço de Imuno-Hemoterapia,
Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Norte EPE,
Lisboa, Portugal,4Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Hospital de
Santo António, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal,
5Serviço de Sangue e Medicina Transfusional, Hospital Central do
Funchal, Funchal, Portugal,6Serviço de Imuno-Hemoterapia,
Centro Hospitalar de São João EPE, Porto, Portugal,7Serviço de
Patologia Clínica, Hospital de São Francisco Xavier, CentroHospitalar de Lisboa Norte EPE, Lisboa, Portugal,8Serviço deHematologia Pediátrica, Hospital D. Estefânia, Centro Hospitalar
de Lisboa Central EPE, Lisboa, Portugal.
Introduction: Hemophilia B is an X-linked bleeding disorder
caused by molecular defects in the Factor IX gene ( F9), leading
to either de ﬁciency or functional abnormality of Factor IX. Actual
data indicate a high heterogeneity of variants in F9. Over 1000
different variants have been reported, including pathogenicsingle nucleotide variants (SNPs ), indels and complex variants.
Materials and Methods: 86 index patients and 313 relatives
were studied. F9variant analysis was performed from total
genomic DNA by PCR followed either by SSCP and DNAsequencing or direct DNA sequencing. When no variant wasdetected by sequencing, F9analysis by MLPA was performed.
Segregation studies were performed in each family.
Results: Overall, 52 different F9variants have been identi ﬁed,
including 49 SNPs or small indels, a gross duplication (exons 2-6)
and two deletions of the entire gene. Ten of the variants had been
ﬁrstly reported by us and three are novel: c.391 +5G>T; c.432T>G,
p.(Phe144Leu) and c.749C>A, p.(Ala250Glu). This approachallowed establishing the carrier state of over 300 women and 12
prenatal diagnoses were performed.
Conclusions: The spectrum of F9variants identi ﬁed in the
Portuguese population signi ﬁcantly overlaps that observed in
other populations. Identi ﬁcation of F9gene variants in patients
allows genotype-phenotype correlations and carrier detection, as
well as prenatal diagnosis. Sanger sequencing of the codingregion and adjacent intronic sequences of F9still remains a valid
and effective tool for the molecular study of hemophila B,
providing information for appropriate genetic counseling and newinsights regarding the molecular basis of the pathology.
I. Moreira: None. M.J. Diniz: None. A. Tavares: None. S.
Morais: None. B. Freitas: None. F. Araújo: None. T. Gago: None.
E.M. Antunes: None. C. Catarino: None. M. Campos: None. T.
Almeida: None. S.B. Santos: None. R. Maia: None. P. Kjoller-
strom: None. J. Lavinha: None. J. Gonçalves: None. D. David:
None.
P19.030.B Biochemical, epigenetic and genetic components of
high altitude adaptation in Tibetans
Nipa Basak
1,2, Juan Castillo-Fernandez3, Tsering Norboo4, Lomous
Kumar1, Mohammed S. Mustak5, Jordana T. Bell3, Kumarasamy
Thangaraj1,2,6
1CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India,
2Academy of Scienti ﬁc and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, India,
3Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King ’s
College London, London, United Kingdom,4Ladakh Institute of
Prevention, Leh, India,5Department of Applied Zoology, Mangalore
University, Mangalore, India,6Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India.
The Tibetan population is well-known for high altitude adaptation.
We studied two groups of Tibetans, one from high altitude (4500
meters above sea level (masl)); another migrated to low altitude(~880 masl) about ~60 years ago. After migration, the secondgroup had been subjected to ‘relative hyperoxia ’because of
environmental shift. We studied various hematological and
epigenetic signatures of these two groups. Additionally, wesearched for loci that are under natural selection. Hematological
parameters of 89 low and 79 high altitude Tibetans were evaluated
by automated hematology analyzer and manual methods. Serumerythropoietin was measured by ELISA. GraphPad Prism was usedfor statistical analysis. We carried out whole genome bisul ﬁte
sequencing (WGBS) of 10 Tibetans (5 from each altitude) andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
530
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608analyzed data in R. XP-EHH and iHS tests were performed after
genotyping of 36 Tibetans (18 from each altitude) to detect natural
selection. We observed signi ﬁcant differences (P < 0.05) between
these two groups in various hematological parameters, such asRBC, HCT, Hb, MCV, MCH, and MCHC, however, serum erythro-poietin level was not signi ﬁcantly different. WGBS revealed 71
signiﬁcantly differentially methylated regions between high and
low altitude Tibetans (FDR < 0.05) with methylation level differ-ences > 15%. Interestingly, several differentially methylatedregions map to GWAS genes associated with various hematological
parameters ( DUSP22 ,CIZ1,TMPRSS6 ,PF4V1 ,LRCOL1 etc). Selection
tests revealed genetic variants under natural selection including inTMEM247 ,EPAS1 ,ATP6V1E2 etc. To summarize, our study reveals
biochemical, epigenetic and genetic components of high altitude
adaptation in Tibetans.
N. Basak: None. J. Castillo-Fernandez: None. T. Norboo: None.
L. Kumar: None. M.S. Mustak: None. J.T. Bell: None. K.
Thangaraj: None.
P19.031.C Interactions between STAT3 IL10 and IL12B genes
polymorphism with viral load among women with human
papillomavirus
Abbas Hadi Hammadi Albosale
southern Federal University, Rostov-on-don, Russian Federation.
Introduction: HPV infection leads to imbalance in pro-and anti-
inﬂammatory cytokines which promotes for long-term persistence
of the virus in the infected cells.
Materials and methods: In our work, we assessed the
association of the polymorphic variants STAT3 G>C (rs2293152),
IL-10 -1082G>A (rs1800896) and IL-12B +1188A>C (rs3212227)
genes with high-risk HPV infection among of women 30 years andolder (104 women with HPV load more than 3 lg and 110 women
without HPV). Genotyping for polymorphic variants IL-10
-1082G>A, IL-12B +1188A>C were conducted by allele-speci ﬁc
PCR and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) for theSTAT3. Intergenic interactions analysis was carried out by multi-
factor dimensionality reduction (MDR).
Results: The study of individual SNP STAT3 G>C, IL-10
-1082G>A and IL-12B +1188A>C did not reveal signi ﬁcant
differences in the frequencies of genotypes and alleles between
two groups of women. At the same time, the MDR analysis
revealed signi ﬁcance of intergenic interactions for allelic variants
(OR=3.19, 95% CI =1.82-5.58; p =0.0001). A statistically signi ﬁ-
cant difference revealed among two groups women for genotype
frequencies of STAT3 GG / IL12B 1188CC / IL-10 -1082GA. Thisgenotype considered as a protective factor (OR =0.19, 95% CI =
0.05-0.67; p =0.01) at HPV infection. Genotype STAT3 GC / IL12B
+1188CC / IL-10 -1082GA potentially increase the risk of high HPV
load (OR =3.54, 95% CI =1.24-10.07; p =0.02).
Conclusions: signi ﬁcant associations between the three SNPs
with a high HPV load indicate that these polymorphisms are
potential candidates for predicting risk factors or protective
factors for women infected with HPV.
A.H.H. Albosale: None.
P19.032.D Wright and Malékot assessments of Inbreeding in
the populations of North Ossetia with subdivided structure
Galina I. Elchinova , Tatyana A. Vasilyeva, Rena A. Zinchenko
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.Inbreeding is the most important population-genetic character-
istic. That in ﬂuences on the load and spectrum of hereditary
pathology and the nature of genetic and demographic processes
in populations. The multidimensional real-life genetic space isdifﬁcult to observe. Its various projections. for example. on the
space of surnames or of migrations. allow us to obtain numerical
characteristics comparing populations.In the study we used
533313 surnames from the voter lists and a total sample ofmarriage records for 1990-2000 throughout the Republic of NorthOssetia. the North Caucasus. Russia. 13935 of them were included
in the analysis. Random inbreeding was evaluated by the Wright
method based on the frequency distribution of surnames forpopulations of the "district" rank. The estimation of localinbreeding was calculated using the Malékot ’s distance isolation
model based on the lengths of mating migrations also for
populations of the "district" rank. Table. Random and Localinbreeding
Population Random inbreeding Local inbreeding
Sity Vladikavkaz 0.00029 0.000024
Pravoberezhniy raion 0.00058 0.000152
Аrdоnskiy raion 0.00069 0.000327
Digorskiy raion 0.00088 0.000394Irafskiy raion 0.00120 0.000587
Prigorodniy raion 0.00101 0.000084
Alagirskiy raion 0.00076 0.000192Кirovskiy raion 0.00095 0.000333
Моzdokskiy raion 0.00018 0.000095
Random inbreeding ranged from 0.00018 in Моzdokskiy to
0.00120 in Irafskiy raion with average 0.00073. Local inbreedingvaried from 0.000024 to 0.000587 with average 0.000242. The
coefﬁcient of linear correlation was 0.72 and rank correlation was
0.58. Such a high and signi ﬁcant correlation coef ﬁcient between
the two estimates obtained in different ways indicates at theagreement of the conducted studies. The results were obtained
within the RSF grant №17-15-01051.
G.I. Elchinova: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. R.A. Zinchenko:
None.
P19.033.A Identi ﬁcation of new genetics variants in inter-
leukin 6 in admixed populations from south-western
Colombia
Cristian Fong
1, Laura Cifuentes2
1Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Santa Marta, Colombia,
2Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Pasto, Colombia.
Introduction: Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is important gen in the immune
response. Variability within this gene has not been assessed in the
Colombian population, or if there are unique variants in thepopulation.
Materials and method: Blood samples (4ml) were taken from
150 individuals from three localities in south-western Colombia
(Pasto, Policarpa, Magüí Payán) were analyzed. DNA extractionwas performed followed by sequencing of all exons and 700 bp ofthe promoter region of the IL-6 gene. The Blast tool was used to
align the resulting sequences with those reported in the GenBank.
The allele and genotypic frequency of each variant were used toestablish its distribution among the three locations.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
531
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: twenty variants were identi ﬁed, of which seven have
not been reported in the databases. These new polymorphisms
had a frequency between 1-2% in the total population. Five
variants including rs1800796 had Fis negative, indicating anexcess of heterozygotes. Magüí Payán differed from Pasto andPolicarpa (Fst =0.015, 0.014 respectively), while for Pasto and
Policarpa there was no major difference.
Conclusions: This study reports seven new polymorphisms for
the IL-6 gene and its promoter region. These polymorphisms maybe recent due to the low frequency in the population. Some
polymorphisms have a tendency of increasing heterozygosity
which may be due to genetic drift or natural selection. Similarly,genetic differences between an Afro-descendant population(Magüí Payán) and mestizo populations (Pasto and Policarpa)
may be the result of historical processes or natural selection. This
research was funded by Colciencias contract FP44842-122-2016.
C. Fong: None. L. Cifuentes: None.
P19.034.B A rare missense variant of the hemojuvelin gene as
a founder effect and cause of juvenile hemochromatosis in a
First Nation population in Alberta, Canada
Sherryl A. M. Taylor
1,2, Jeffrey M. Patterson3,4, Malcolm Wells5,4,
Juan Gonzalez-Abraldes5,4, Matthew Smith5,4, Farshad Niri2, Lisa
Prat2, Alison Eaton1,4
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada,2Genetics and Genomics, Alberta Precision Laboratories,
Edmonton, AB, Canada,3Department of Medicine, Division of
Haematology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada,
4University of Alberta Hospital, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton,
AB, Canada,5Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
Juvenile hemochromatosis is a rare recessive iron overload
disorder (incidence less than 1 in 1 million) with most caused by
pathogenic variants of the hemojuvelin (HJV) gene. We haveascertained three individuals, with clinically established iron
overload, who are homozygous for a rare missense variant of
the HJV gene (gnomAD frequency 1/100,000). This variant, HJVc.442T>A, results in the substitution of a conserved cysteine atposition 148 with a serine (p.Cys148Ser, NM_213653.3). When
assessed using ACMG criteria it was determined to be Likely
Pathogenic. The literature suggests this residue participates inintrachain disulphide bonds necessary for correct protein folding.The affected individuals are Cree from First Nation settlements in
northern Alberta (population approx. 1500). These individuals
were ascertained as separate kindreds without evidence ofconsanguinity, suggesting HJV c.442T>A is a founder variant.Homozygotes develop early onset iron overload. As teenagers and
young adults they exhibit elevated ferritin levels, as high as 1600
ug/L. Ferritin levels can be normalized by routine phlebotomy.Compliance with treatment is complicated by the remote location.
One proband developed cirrhosis and hemachromatosis as a
teenager and now as an adult has progressed to hepaticcarcinoma. Heterozygous individuals tested to date do not showevidence of increased iron stores. Cascade genetic testing and
assessment has been undertaken to identify other affected
individuals. These ﬁndings provide an opportunity to assess the
clinical impact of a rare variant of the HJV gene and to provideassessment and counselling to affected individuals in this
Canadian First Nation population.
S.A.M. Taylor: None. J.M. Patterson: None. M. Wells: None. J.
Gonzalez-Abraldes: None. M. Smith: None. F. Niri: None. L. Prat:
None. A. Eaton: None.P19.035.C The association between lactotransferrin genetic
variants and dental caries in Libyan students
Fakhri F. Aljedaemi , Inas M. Alhudiri, Ghada M. Salem, Hamza Ben
Zeglam, Nabil S. Enattah
Biotechnology Research Centre, Tripoli, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Background: Dental caries is a complex, multifactorial disease and
one of the most common diseases worldwide, resulting from the
interaction of bio ﬁlm, cariogenic diet and host response factors.
Lactotransferrin (LTF) is a main salivary glycoprotein, whichmodulates the host immune-in ﬂammatory and antibacterial
response. Recent evidence suggests a role of LTF in caries. The
aim of this study was to investigate the association between LTF
gene single nucleotide polymorphisms in amino acid positions 29and 47 and dental caries.
Material and methods: Forty-two 12-years-old Libyan students
were selected; 20 with dental caries (DMFT ≥1) and 22 without
caries (DMFT =0). DNA samples were analyzed by Sanger
sequencing in the region spanning rs# 1126477 and rs#1126478variants.
Results: The variant rs#1126477 at codon position 29 showed
signi ﬁcant association with dental caries (p =0.04). There was also
a positive correlation with milk intake and diabetes. The G Allele
frequency in patients with caries was 70.5% compared with 44.7%
in caries-free students; while A allele frequency was 21% caries-free and 13% in students with dental caries. No signi ﬁcant
association between LTF rs#1126478 variant, and risk of dental
caries was observed.
Conclusions: LTF rs#1126477 variant may in ﬂuence the risk of
caries in. In addition, the positive relation with diabetes and milkdrinking might contribute to the understanding of the genetic
susceptibility of dental caries in humans.
F.F. Aljedaemi: None. I.M. Alhudiri: None. G.M. Salem: None.
H. Ben Zeglam: None. N.S. Enattah: None.
P19.036.D Investigation of a nonsense mutation located in the
complex KIV-2 copy number variation region of apolipopro-
tein(a) in 10,910 individuals
Silvia Di Maio
1, Rebecca Grüneis1, Gertraud Streiter1, Claudia
Lamina1, Manuel Maglione1, Sebastian Schoenherr1, Dietmar Öfner1,
Barbara Thorand2, Annette Peters2,3, Kai-Uwe Eckardt4,5, Anna
Köttgen6, Florian Kronenberg1, Stefan Coassin1
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,2German
Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany,
3German Centre for Cardiovascular Research, Partner Site Munich
Hearth Alliance, München, Germany,4Friedrich-Alexander Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,5Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany,6University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Introduction: Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is highly atherogenic and
mainly genetically determined by the LPAgene. Up to 70% of LPA
is encoded in a hypervariable copy number variation (CNV) named“kringle IV type 2 ”(KIV-2) CNV. Genotyping variants within the KIV-
2 region requires highly sensitive and costly technologies.
Therefore, large epidemiological studies on the previously
reported LPA KIV-2 p.Arg21Ter mutation are missing.
Material and Methods: We typed p.Arg21Ter in three German
populations (GCKD, KORA-F3, KORA-F4, n =10,910) using multi-
plex allele-speci ﬁc TaqMan PCR. Allelic location was determined
after allele separation by pulsed- ﬁeld gel electrophoresis (PFGE).Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
532
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608We identi ﬁed a proxy SNP in GWAS data, con ﬁrmed linkage
disequilibrium (LD) experimentally (PFGE) and determined p.
Arg21Ter frequencies in the 1000 Genomes project (1000G).
Results: p.Arg21Ter (carrier frequency: 1.6-2.1%) occurs on
medium sized LPA alleles and associated with lower Lp(a) ( β
=-11.7 mg/dL [-15.5;-7.8], p =3.39e-32) in a ﬁxed-effect linear
regression meta-analysis. In the 1000G data, carrier frequency was
≈0.024 and ≈0.019 in Europeans and South-Asians, with no
carriers in Africans and East-Asians. Strikingly, the best proxy SNPwas another LPAloss-of-function mutation (rs41272114, D ’=0.958,
R2=0.281, MAF =2.6%). D ’was close to 1 also in all 1000 G
populations but frequencies diverged drastically.
Conclusions: p.Arg21Ter associates with lower Lp(a) and is in
LD with the more frequent LPA loss-of-function mutation
rs41272114 in all investigated populations. Despite its clear
molecular function, the p.Arg21Ter genotype does not provideadditional phenotypic information beyond rs41272114 genotype.
This underscores the importance of linkage disequilibrium
patterns even for seemingly clear-cut loss-of-function mutations.Austrian Science Fund (FWF) P31
S. Di Maio: None. R. Grüneis: None. G. Streiter: None. C.
Lamina: None. M. Maglione: None. S. Schoenherr: None. D.
Öfner: None. B. Thorand: None. A. Peters: None. K. Eckardt:
None. A. Köttgen: None. F. Kronenberg: D. Speakers Bureau/
Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Novartis, Amgen, Kaneka. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Amgen, Kaneka. S. Coassin: None.
P19.037.A Discordant phenotype sequencing of LPAproposes
a cumulative impact of multiple genetic variants in determin-ing extraordinary high lipoprotein(a) concentrations
Rebecca Grüneis
1, Claudia Lamina1, Peter Zöscher1, Sebastian
Schönherr1, Monika Summerer1, Patricia Döttelmayer1, Lukas Forer1,
Kai-Uwe U. Eckardt2,3, Anna Köttgen4, Florian Kronenberg1, Stefan
Coassin1
1Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Genetics and
Pharmacology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,
2Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Friedrich-Alexander
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg and German Chronic Kidney Diseasestudy, Erlangen, Germany,3Department of Nephrology and Medical
Intensive Care, Charité –Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
4Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine and Medical
Center, University of Freiburg, Innsbruck, Austria.
Introduction: The LPA gene encodes apolipoprotein(a) and is the
main genetic regulator of lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] concentrations. Itconsists of a CNV, resulting in >40 protein isoforms. Short isoformsshow a 5-10 times higher median Lp(a) concentration than long
isoforms and doubled cardiovascular disease risk. However, every
isoform group presents by isoform unexplained Lp(a) ranges.
Methods: To identify variants associated with extraordinary
high Lp(a), a selection based only on concentrations is ineffective,
given their dependency on isoforms. After excluding known Lp(a)
modifying variant carriers, 96 individuals from the German ChronicKindey Disease study with high Lp(a) in the top 10% of residualsfrom a multivariable linear model on Lp(a) including age, sex,
eGFR and shorter isoform were selected. 96 controls from the
middle 20% residuals were matched and LPA was sequenced.
Three Lp(a)-SNP scores capturing effects of up to 2,462 SNP over a
2 MB region around LPA were computed.
Results: Multiple frequent variants (MAF: 0.167 [IQR: 0.157,
0.167]), that are mostly absen t in imputed genome datasets,
show stronger effects on Lp(a) in cases ( β=31.91 mg/dL [IQR:
28.34, 47.79]). These effects were, however, due to LD withisoforms, while no variant segregated with case-control status.
In contrast, cases show higher SNP scores compared to controls
(p=0.0045).
Conclusion: Results indicate increased Lp(a) levels as a
cumulative effect of multiple variants. The discrepancy betweensequencing data and SNP score may suggest still unknown
regulatory regions located more far apart from LPA.
Grants: Austrian Science Fund (FWF) projects P31458/P266600,
AAS research grant 2018
R. Grüneis: None. C. Lamina: None. P. Zöscher: None. S.
Schönherr: None. M. Summerer: None. P. Döttelmayer: None. L.
Forer: None. K.U. Eckardt: None. A. Köttgen: None. F. Kronen-
berg: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia,
and expert witness); Modest; Novartis, Amgen, Kaneka. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Amgen, Kaneka. S. Coassin:
None.
P19.038.B MRE11A locus rs533984 - A marker of selective
survival up to the age 85 +in Croatian population
eljka Celin ćak, Maja etinc, Luka Bo čkor, Anita Stojanovi ćMarkovi ć,
Matea Zajc Petranovi ć, Marijana Peri čićSalihovi ć, Tatjana kari ć-Juri ć
Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction: Human longevity is a multifactorial characteristic,
inﬂuenced by both genetic and environmental factors. This study
aimed to explore whether any difference in longevity genes ’
makeup could be found in two extreme age cohorts originating
from the same population.
Materials and Methods: 42 SNPs, selected due to their strong
and replicated relation to human longevity and their involvement
in different metabolic pathways, were genotyped in a Croatian
study sample consisting of 411 individuals. Allele and genotypefrequencies were compared between 314 individuals aged 85 +
and 97 individuals aged 20-35 years.
Results: The allele (p =0.002) and genotype (p =0.006)
frequencies differed only in the rs533984 of the MRE11A gene
belonging to the DNA repair pathway, with the longevity allele G
being more frequent in the old cohort. A marginal difference is
also found for the ApoE rs7412 allele frequency (p =0.049), with
the longevity allele T (determining ε2 isoform) being more
frequent in the old cohort. The G allele of rs533984 has been
previously con ﬁrmed as favourable for surviving to very old age in
Danish females. However, this is the ﬁrst time to our knowledge
that the allele and genotype frequencies of rs533984 have been
found to differ between old and young cohorts.
Conclusions: The differences in allele and genotype distribu-
tion between two extreme age groups of the Croatian populationopen a possibility that the G allele of the MRE11A gene rs533984
locus might contribute to positive age-related selective survival.
Funding: Croatian Science Foundation (IP-01-2018-2497).
Celin ćak:None. M. etinc: None. L. Bo čkor: None. A. Stojanovi ć
Markovi ć:None. M. Zajc Petranovi ć:None. M. Peri čićSalihovi ć:
None. T. kari ć-Juri ć:None.
P19.039.C Two frequent variants hidden in the LPAKIV-2 copy
number variation lower lipoprotein(a) concentration and
protect against coronary artery disease
Johanna Franziska Schachtl-Riess
1, Azin Kheirkhah1, Rebecca
Grüneis1, Silvia Di Maio1, Sebastian Schoenherr1, Gertraud Streiter1,
Jamie Lee Losso1, Bernhard Paulweber2, Kai Uwe Eckardt3,4, Anna
Köttgen5, Claudia Lamina1, Florian Kronenberg1, Stefan Coassin1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
533
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,2Paracelsus
Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria,3Friedrich-Alexander
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,4Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,5University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.
Introduction: Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a major genetic risk factor
for coronary artery disease (CAD). The LPA gene (encoding
apolipoprotein(a)) explains >90% of Lp(a) variance. 30-70% isexplained by a large coding copy number variation ( “KIV-2
repeat ”) encompassing up to 70% of LPA. It generates >40
isoforms. Little is known about the role of variants in the KIV-2.
Methods: We typed a novel putative splicing mutation ( “KIV-2
4733G>A ”) in the German Chronic Kidney Disease study (n =
4,673) by allele-speci ﬁc real-time PCR and created minigenes.
Proxy SNPs were used to analyze impact on CAD in UK Biobank (n=440,234). Frequencies in 1000Genomes were determined. The
effect of compound heterozygosity with another frequent KIV-2
splicing mutation (4925G>A) was assessed.
Results: 4733G>A (38.3% carriers) is the second strongest
genetic factor besides the CNV already explaining 10% of Lp(a)
variance. It reduces isoform expression without preventing protein
production and lowers Lp(a) by 14.0 mg/dL ([95%CI:15.3-12.6], p=4.82e-184). Minigenes propose splicing modi ﬁcation. Frequen-
cies differ notably between ethnic groups. Compound hetero-
zygosity with 4925G>A (4.6%) lowers Lp(a) by 41.6 mg/dL. By
blunting both alleles it narrows the inter-quartile range from 41.1to 4.6 mg/dL. In UK Biobank, 4733G>A and compound hetero-
zygosity with 4925G>A are associated with a lower hazard ratio for
CAD (9% [95%CI:7-11%] and 12% [95%CI:716%] (both p < 0.001)).
Conclusions: Functional variants hidden in the LPA KIV-2 CNV
have a profound impact on Lp(a) concentrations and CAD risk. A
moderate but lifelong genetic Lp(a) reduction translates to a
noticeable CAD risk reduction.
Grants: Austrian Science Fund (FWF) projects P31458 and W-
1253DK-HOROS.
J.F. Schachtl-Riess: None. A. Kheirkhah: None. R. Grüneis:
None. S. Di Maio: None. S. Schoenherr: None. G. Streiter: None.
J.L. Losso: None. B. Paulweber: None. K.U. Eckardt: None. A.
Köttgen: None. C. Lamina: None. F. Kronenberg: D. Speakers
Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit-
ness); Modest; Novartis, Amgen, Kaneka. F. Consultant/AdvisoryBoard; Modest; Amgen, Kaneka. S. Coassin: None.
P19.041.A Identi ﬁcation of genetic variants associated with
blood miRNA expression levels in children
Geòrgia Escaramís
1,2, Marta Vives-Usano3,4,5, Carles Hernandez-
Ferrer3,4,5, Léa Maitre3,5,2, Sandra Andrusaityte6, Ángel Carracedo7,8,
Maribel Casas3,5,2, Leda Chatzi9, Regina Grazuleviciene6, Kristine B.
Gutzkow10, Solène Cadiou11, Johanna Lepeule11, Dan Mason12,
Gillian Santorelli12, Rémy Slama11, Marina Vafeiadi13, Xavier
Estivill4,5,2, Juan R González3,5,2, Eulàlia Martí1,2, Martine Vrihjeid3,5,2,
Mariona Bustamante3,5,2
1Departament de Biomedicina, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,2CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain,3ISGlobal, Barcelona, Spain,4Centre for
Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain,5Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona, Spain,6Department of Environmental Sciences, Vytautas
Magnus University, Kaunas, Lithuania,7Grupo de Medicina Xenó-
mica, Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), SERGAS,Santiago de Compostela, Spain,8Centro de Investigación en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) y Centro Nacional de Genotipado
(CEGEN-PRB3-ISCIII), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela,Santiago de Compostela, Spain,9Department of Preventive Medicine,
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA,10Department of Environmental Health, Norwegian
Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway,11University Grenoble Alpes,
Inserm, CNRS, Team of Environmental Epidemiology Applied toReproduction and Respiratory Health, IAB, Grenoble, France,
12Bradford Institute for Health Research, Bradford Royal In ﬁrmary,
Bradford, United Kingdom,13Department of Social Medicine,
University of Crete, Crete, Greece.
Genetic and environmental factors in ﬂuence complex phenotypes
in humans; but they are dif ﬁcult to identify. Molecular endophe-
notypes such as miRNA expression levels, which are more speci ﬁc
and closer to the genomic effects, might facilitate the identi ﬁca-
tion of genetic determinants. However, cell type heterogeneity
within a tissue is an important source of variation of suchendophenotypes and it has to be taken into consideration. The
objective of this project is the identi ﬁcation of genetic poly-
morphisms associated with blood miRNA expression levels in cis(miQTLs - quantitative trait loci in a 2 Mb window) in children, andto identify the speci ﬁc blood cell-types driving the observed
associations. The project is built on existing data of 924 European
children from the The Human Early-Life Exposome (HELIX) Project.Expression levels of >1000 miRNAs in blood were assessed withthe Agilent SurePrint Human miRNA rel21 array, and genotyping
was conducted with the Illumina GSA array plus imputation up to
7 million common SNPs with the Haplotype Reference Consortium(HRC) panel. In a preliminary analysis with MatrixQTL we identi ﬁed
10 cis miQTLs at 5% False Discovery Rate, all localized in the hsa-
miR-197-5p locus. Blood cell deconvolution will be conductedusing gene expression and DNA methylation data, and cell-interacting miQTLs will be identi ﬁed using the TensorQTL tool. The
dissection at molecular level proposed in this project will help to
elucidate genetic mechanisms of complex diseases.FUNDING:ISCIII-ERDF (PI17/01225); EU FP7/2007-206 (no 308333: HELIX)
G. Escaramís: None. M. Vives-Usano: None. C. Hernandez-
Ferrer: None. L. Maitre: None. S. Andrusaityte: None. Á.
Carracedo: None. M. Casas: None. L. Chatzi: None. R. Grazule-
viciene: None. K.B. Gutzkow: None. S. Cadiou: None. J. Lepeule:
None. D. Mason: None. G. Santorelli: None. R. Slama: None. M.
Vafeiadi: None. X. Estivill: None. J. González: None. E. Martí:
None. M. Vrihjeid: None. M. Bustamante: None.
P19.043.C Analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequences from the
peoples of Daghestan living at different altitudes
Maria V. Golubenko
1, Alexey A. Zarubin1, Nadezhda P. Babushkina1,
Natalia V. Tarasenko1, Ramil R. Salakhov1, Magomed O. Radzha-
bov2,3, Vadim A. Stepanov1
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation,2Institute of Ecological
Medicine, Daghestan State Medical University, Makhachkala, RussianFederation,3Institute of Physics, Daghestan Federal Research Center,
Makhachkala, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Some mtDNA polymorphisms may be signi ﬁcant for
adaptation to hypoxic conditions, such as living at high altitudes.
Daghestan Republic is region of Russia with high ethnic diversity,
and some populations are located at the heights up to 2500 m.The aim of the study was to compare mtDNA polymorphism in the
people living at different heights.
Materials and methods: Mitochondrial DNA was sequenced
(Illumina technology) in 170 individuals belonging to differentDaghestani ethnicities. The samples were divided into two groups:
“highland ”(N=80; 1900 m and more above sea level), andAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
534
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608“lowland ”(N=90; 600-1850 m). The Elson neutrality test was
carried out in the mtPhyl program.
Results: In the highlands, haplogroups T2 and H13 were the
most frequent (12.5% and 11.25%), and in the lowlands, the mostabundant were the haplogroups H15 and H* (14.44% each). Thedifferences were signi ﬁcant (p < 0.05) for the haplogroups H13,
HV4b, and H*. Haplogroups HV4b, I, U1, R2, C4a, W* were
registered only in the highland samples. The Elson neutrality testdid not reveal any deviations from neutrality in the “highland ”;i n
the“lowland ”sample, the test revealed a deviation from neutrality
for the MTND6 (p =0.007) and MTCO2 (p =0.02) genes. For the
conservation indices of the missense substitutions, no signi ﬁcant
differences were found.
Conclusion: The mtDNA polymorphism differences between
the highland and lowland inhabitants suggest that high altitude
adaptation might play a role in the substantial genetic differentia-tion of the Daghestani populations. The study was supported by
RFBR grant 19-04-01322-A.
M.V. Golubenko: None. A.A. Zarubin: None. N.P. Babushkina:
None. N.V. Tarasenko: None. R.R. Salakhov: None. M.O.
Radzhabov: None. V.A. Stepanov: None.
P19.044.D A billion-year trend of amino acid substitutions in
the mitochondrial genome
Alina A. Mikhailova
1,2, Alina G. Mikhailova2,3, Victor Shamanskiy2,
Kristina Ushakova2, Alima Galieva2, Valeria Lobanova2, Valeria
Timonina2, Valerian Yurov2, Maria Olyanich2, Dmitry Iliushchenko2,
Aleksandr Smirnov4, Ilya Mazunin5,6, Leonard Polishchuk7, Dmitry
Knorre7, Konstantin Khrapko8, Konstantin Gunbin9,10,11, Jacques
Fellay12, Masashi Tanaka13, Konstantin Popadin2,12
1University of Münster, Münster, Germany,2Immanuel Kant Baltic
Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russian Federation,3Vavilov Institute
of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,4Kaliningrad State
Technical University, Kaliningrad, Russian Federation,5Skolkovo
Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Russian Federation,
6Fomin Women ’s Health Clinic, Moscow, Russian Federation,
7Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation,
8Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA,9Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France,10Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,11Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Novosibirsk,
Russian Federation,12Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,13Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
It has been shown that the rates of reciprocal amino acid
substitutions in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms are notbalanced leading to the long-term increase (i.e. ‘gainers ’)o r
decrease (i.e. ‘losers ’) in the frequency of some amino acids.
However, the evolutionary driving forces establishing this trend
are still unknown. Here, focusing on the strongly asymmetricalmutational spectrum of the mitochondrial genome (an excess of Gto A and T to C, light chain notation), we predicted the preferential
direction of amino acid substitutions from losers (LeuTT, Phe, Cys,
Trp, Gly, and Val) to gainers (Pro, His, Gln, Asn, Lys, and Thr).Analyzing collections of nonsynonymous mtDNA mutations fromhuman cancers (PCAWG), human pathogenic mutations (MitoMap
database), human population polymorphisms, and mtDNA poly-
morphism from hundreds of vertebrate species, we observedthat the vast majority of substitutions are indeed in the expected
direction: from losers to gainers. Moreover, the observed bias
is the most pronounced in datasets where mutagenesis isstronger than selection (cancer and human pathogenic mutationsfor example). Comparing the amino acid composition of
mtDNA genes between orthologs of mitochondrial genes inalpha-proteobacteria, fungi, plants, invertebrates, and ﬁve classes
of vertebrates, we observed a global billion-year trend: losers
become rarer while gainers become more frequent among these
taxa. These results are in line with the accumulation of slightly-deleterious variants (i.e. from losers to gainers) in mtDNA from themoment of endosymbiosis emergence till the current days due to
genetic drift which becomes stronger from bacteria to vertebrates.
A.A. Mikhailova: None. A.G. Mikhailova: None. V. Shamans-
kiy: None. K. Ushakova: None. A. Galieva: None. V. Lobanova:
None. V. Timonina: None. V. Yurov: None. M. Olyanich: None. D.
Iliushchenko: None. A. Smirnov: None. I. Mazunin: None. L.
Polishchuk: None. D. Knorre: None. K. Khrapko: None. K.
Gunbin: None. J. Fellay: None. M. Tanaka: None. K. Popadin:
None.
P19.047.C Association between genes LPL Ser447Ter and FTO
rs9939609 polymorphisms with obesity in children and
adolescents
Alaa Hashim Abd Ali
1,2, Olga Vladimirovna Bocharova3, Tatiana
Pavlovna Shkurat4
1South Federal University, Academy of Biology and Biotechnology,
Rostov-on-Don, Rostov, Russian Federation,2Al-Furat Al-Awsat
Technical University, College of Health and Medical Techniques,
Department of Medical Laboratory Techniques, Kufa, Iraq,3Rostov
State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation,4South
Federal University, Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Rostov-
on-Don, Russia, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Due to the high prevalence of obesity-related
diseases, the importance of researching the relationship between
gene polymorphisms and obesity does not lose importance. This
study aimed correlation between of the LPLand FTO genes with
obesity in children and adolescents from the Rostov region (Russia).
Methods: In a case-control study, we studied the relationship
between the FTO and LPLgenes with obesity in 520 children and
adolescents of both sexes aged 3 to 17 years: the main groupconsisted of 370 obese and control - 150 in children and
adolescents. Genotyping of the FTO and LPL genes were
performed using PCR-ampli ﬁed fragments. These genes in DNA
samples were typed by the electrophoretic method using systemsfrom the Litekh research and production company (Russia).
Results: Differences (P <0.05) were revealed between the obesity
and control groups in the frequency of the AA genotype (P =0.0079;
OR 0.53; 95% CI 0.36-0.79) and allele A (P =0.005; OR 0.67; 95% CI
0.51–0.88) of the FTO gene. While the frequencies genotypes of LPL
gene did not differ in the both groups: the CC genotype wasdetected in 313 (84.6%) obese and in 125 children and adolescents inthe control group (83.3%) (P =0.779; OR 1,10; 95% CI 0.66 - 1.83).
Also, We found of the GG genotype was not found in both groups
risk in the child and adolescent population of Rostov-on-Don were.
Conclusions: The relationship between the gene FTO
rs9939609 polymorphism and obesity was revealed.
A.H. Abd Ali: None. O.V. Bocharova: None. T.P. Shkurat:
None.
P19.048.D Genetic variants of FTO, MAO-A and COMT and
personality traits in children with obesity and with normalweight from Yucatán, Mexico
Lizbeth González-Herrera
1,2, Luis A. Vázquez-Pérez1, Andrés Guz-
mán-Aguilar1, María José López-González3, Gerardo Pérez-Mendoza1,
Gloria Arankowsky-Sandoval1, Monica Hattori-Hara4, Rodrigo Rubi-
Castellanos1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
535
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Merida, Mexico,2DIMYGEN
Laboratorio S.C.P., Mérida, Mexico,3DIMYGEN Laboratorio S.C.P.,
Merida, Mexico,4Secretaria de Educación del Gobierno del Estado de
Yucatán (SEGEY), Merida, Mexico.
Introduction: Genetic variations that control the availability of
dopamine are involved in intake of palatable foods in children and
being associated to obesity through loss of control of satiety,impulses and the manifestation of addictive eating behaviors,including personality traits. The 3R-MAOA low-activity allele was
associated with body mass index (BMI). Carriers of the variant
Val158Met- COMT showed high consumption of foods high in
lipids. Children with at least one risk allele for SNP rs9939609-FTO
showed more frequent episodes of loss of control over food and
chose foods rich in energy.
Material and Methods: We genotyped rs9939609-FTO ,VNTR-
MAOA , and rs4680-COMT in children with and without obesity.
Food preferences were determined with Child Eating Behavior
Questionnaire (CEBQ). Personality traits: anxiety and impulsivenesswith Conner ’s test, pursuit of high (PH) and low (PL) intensity
pleasure with Temperament in Middle Childhood Questionnaire
(TMCQ).
Results: Frequency of heterozygous FTO-rs9939609 (p=0.013)
and COMT-rs4680 (p=0.02), as well as homozygous 3R/3R MAO-A
(p=0.03) we signi ﬁcantly higher in girls with obesity. For
personality traits, mean scale of PL was signi ﬁcantly higher in
homozygous AA rs9939609-FTO girls (p =0.001) whereas mean
scale of PH was signi ﬁcantly higher in homozygous boys (p =
0.034). Mean scale of impulsiveness was also higher for boys (p =
0.010) carrying 3R allele of low transcriptional MAO-A activity.
Conclusion: SNPs rs9939609-FTO ,VNTR-MAOA , and rs4680-
COMT are associated to the risk of obesity only in girls.
rs9939609-FTO is associated to PL in girls and to PH in boys,
whereas 3R allele-MAOA is associated to impulsiveness only in
boys from Yucatán, Mexico.
L. González-Herrera: None. L.A. Vázquez-Pérez: None. A.
Guzmán-Aguilar: None. M. López-González: None. G. Pérez-
Mendoza: None. G. Arankowsky-Sandoval: None. M. Hattori-
Hara: None. R. Rubi-Castellanos: None.
P19.049.A Causality between physical activity, sedentary
behavior and obesity: A Mendelian randomization study
Germán D. Carrasquilla
1, Mario García-Ureña1, Tove Fall2, Thorkild
I. A. Sørensen1,3, Tuomas O. Kilpeläinen1
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,Copenhagen, Denmark,2Molecular Epidemiology, Department of
Medical Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University,
Upssala, Sweden,3Department of Public Health, Section of
Epidemiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Introduction: Observational evidence suggest that physical
inactivity leads to weight gain, but some studies indicate reversecausality where weight gain leads to inactivity. As observationalstudies suffer from confounding and reverse causality, it is
challenging to assess the true causal effect direction. We aim to
assess the causality between physical activities, sedentarybehavior and body mass index (BMI) in adults by bidirectional
Mendelian randomization analyses.
Methods : We used results from the largest genome-wide
association studies of European ancestry for accelerometer-basedphysical activity and sedentary time in up to 91,105 individuals,
and for BMI in up to 694,649 individuals. We implementedMendelian randomization analyses using CAUSE method instru-
menting full genome-wide association loci. In addition, when
using only genome wide signi ﬁcant loci, we obtained estimates
using IVW, MR-Egger, weighted median, and weighted modemethods.
Results : We found evidence with causal effects of higher
vigorous and moderate physical activity, and less sedentary time
on reducing BMI (P =2x10-5, P =0.002 and P =0.02, respectively).
Genetically predicted BMI was linked to more sedentary time (P =
6x10-4), indicating bidirectional causality. We did not ﬁnd
evidence of a causal association between higher BMI and lower
levels of vigorous physical activity (P =0.11) or moderate physical
activity (P =0.25).
Conclusions : Our results suggest that higher levels of physical
activity and less sedentary time are causally associated with lower
BMI in adults, supporting the view that lifelong programs forincreasing physical activity and reducing sedentary time are
bene ﬁcial for weight management. Grants : Horizon 2020
(No846502), Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF18CC0034900,NNF17OC0026848), Danish Diabetes Academy (NNF17SA0031406).
G.D. Carrasquilla: None. M. García-Ureña: None. T. Fall: None.
T.I.A. Sørensen: None. T.O. Kilpeläinen: None.
P19.050.B Are highly pleiotropic variants of human traits
enriched in genomic regions with strong background
selection?
Irene Novo , Eugenio López-Cortegano, Armando Caballero
Centro de Investigación Mariña, Universidade de Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
Introduction: Pleiotropic variants, i.e. those that affect more than
one trait, have been found to be abundant in the human genome.
It has been observed that rare variants tend to be less pleiotropicthan common ones, which suggests that highly pleiotropic
variants with large effect sizes are subjected to strong purifying
selection. However, highly pleiotropic variants are found to havelarger effect sizes than less pleiotropic ones, what seems to becontradictory with the purifying selection hypothesis. Thus, we
investigated if highly pleiotropic variants are enriched in regions
with stronger levels of background selection.
Methods: We evaluated pleiotropy variants affecting 41 human
complex traits using data from the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, and
also data from other studies. We analyzed the relationship
between the degree of pleiotropy of variants and the intensityof background selection (selection against deleterious mutations)
across the human genome.
Results: We found that 23% of the variants analyzed are
pleiotropic and that there is a positive correlation between thedegree of pleiotropy and the frequency and effect sizes of
variants. Our results suggest that the degree of pleiotropy is
negatively correlated with the strength of background selection.However, more extensive data from other studies suggest theopposite trend.
Conclusions: Although some of the results found are contra-
dictory, it appears that highly pleiotropic variants are subjected tohigher levels of purifying selection than less pleiotropic ones.Funding: AEI (CGL2016-75904-C2-1-P), FPU grant (Ministerio de
Universidades, Spain), Xunta de Galicia (ED431C 2020/05) and
Fondos Feder.
I. Novo: None. E. López-Cortegano: None. A. Caballero: None.
P19.051.C Molecular Landscape of different RASopathies in
the Cypriot populationAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
536
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Ouranio Anastasiou1, Andri Miltiadous1, Petroula Gerasimou1,
Jason Chi1, Yiannos Kyprianou1, Andri Mitsidou1, Aimilia Athana-
siou2, Irene Savvidou2, Violetta Christophidou Anastasiadou2, Paul
Costeas1
1Karaiskakio Foundation, Nicosia, Cyprus,2Archbihsop Makarios III
Children ’s Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
The RASopathies are a group of genetic condition caused by
germline and/or somatic mutations in genes associated with
MAPK pathway. Alterations in these genes result in the develop-
ment of a group of well-characterized syndromes with over-lapping features known as RASopathies. The RASopathies are oneof the largest known groups of malformation syndromes and
affect approximately 1:1000 individuals worldwide. Here we
present the ﬁrst study in the Cypriot population with respect to
different RASopathies. NF1 is excluded from this study since anexclusive study of this gene in the Cypriot population has been
previously performed. 43 patients with suspected or con ﬁrmed
clinical diagnosis of RASopathies, were screened with NGS andMLPA in an attempt to elucidate the underlying genetic etiologyof their condition. Of these, 60% had a clinical diagnosis of
Noonan syndrome, whereas 12% had a clinical diagnosis of either
Costello, NF2, Swannomatosis, Legius or cardio-facio-cutaneoussyndromes. Mutations in PTPN11, SOS1 and SOS2 genes were also
detected in the 31% of the patients with Noonan syndrome.
Mutations in HRAS and NRAS gene were identi ﬁed in the 7%,
mutations in NF2 and SPRED1 in the 7% and mutations in MAF,RIT1, BRAF, SASH1, RASA1, LZTR1, WRN and mTOR genes were
detected in the remaining 31% of the patients. This is the ﬁrst
study of the molecular landscape of patients with RASopathies inCyprus performed with major aim to shed light on the molecularcharacterization of these patients and the deeper understanding
of their precise phenotypic characteristics.
O. Anastasiou: None. A. Miltiadous: None. P. Gerasimou:
None. J. Chi: None. Y. Kyprianou: None. A. Mitsidou: None. A.
Athanasiou: None. I. Savvidou: None. V. Christophidou
Anastasiadou: None. P. Costeas: None.
P19.052.D Longer telomeres are not a positive indicator of
extreme longevity (95 years and above) in long-livedindividuals
Maja Šetinc , eljka Celin ćak, Luka Bo čkor, Nina Smolej Naran čić,
Tatjana kari ć-Juri ć
Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia.
Introduction: Telomere shortening is one of the best researched
causes of cellular aging, and a positive relation of longer telomereswith human longevity is found in many studies. This study aimed
to explore whether relative telomere length (RTL) is a good
biomarker for extreme longevity in long-lived individuals (85 +
years). Additionally, the relation of RTL and longevity genes is
tested.
Materials and Methods: RTL was measured for 314 Croatian
individuals aged 85 years and upwards, and their ages at deathwere determined 10 years later. 42 SNPs were selected due to
their prior association with human longevity and genotyped for
this sample.
Results: In this group of elderly individuals a negative
correlation of RTL and age at death (r =-0.114; p =0.043) is
found, and binary logistic regression indicates longer RTL as a
negative predictor (p =0.024) for reaching 95 years of age. The
multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that 42 selectedlongevity genes ’loci explained 34.4% of RTL variance. It alsopointed to SH2B3 rs3184504 (p =
0.007) and LPArs10455872 (p =
0.027) being signi ﬁcantly related to RTL. This relation was
conﬁrmed by t-test showing signi ﬁcant differences in mean RTL
among genotypes: both the TT homozygote of rs3184504 and AAhomozygote of rs10455872 were related with shorter RTL.
Conclusions: For long-lived individuals telomere length is not a
positive predictor for the age of death, especially for the oldest old
category. Further studies are needed to explore the impact ofvarious longevity genes on RTL in elderly individuals. Funding:
Croatian Science Foundation (IP-01-2018-2497).
M.Šetinc: None. . Celin ćak:None. L. Bo čkor: None. N. Smolej
Naran čić:None. T. kari ć-Juri ć:None.
P19.054.B Heterozygote selection against ID alleles may
shape the landscape of autosomal-recessive pathogenicvariants in European populations
Hila Fridman
1,2,3, Helger G. Yntema4, Reedik Mägi5, Reidar
Andreson5, Andres Metspalu5, Massimo Mezzavila6, Chris Tyler-
Smith7, Yali Xue7, Shai Carmi2, Ephrat Levy-Lahad1,3, Christian
Gilissen4, Han G. Brunner4,8
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,2Braun School of
Public Health and Community Medicine, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,3Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,4Department of Human
Genetics, and Donders Center for Neuroscience, Radboud UniversityMedical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Estonian Genome Centre,
Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,6Institute for
Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,7The
Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,United Kingdom,8Department of Clinical Genetics and GROW-School
for Oncology and Developmental Biology, and MHeNS School for
Neuroscience, Maastricht University and Maastricht UniversityMedical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Background: In consanguineous populations autosomal-recessive
(AR) mutations are a major cause of intellectual disabilities (ID), butin outbred populations new mutations explain the majority of
cases. Here we investigated this phenomenon by studying the
distribution of alleles and the effect of consanguinity in differentgroups of disorders.
Methods: We used 6447 exome-sequences of healthy, geneti-
cally unrelated Europeans of two distinct ancestries (Dutch and
Estonian), and calculated the at-risk couples (ARCs) rates for 1929AR genes. We compared these rates to expected ARCs rates in
ﬁrst-cousin couples.
Results: We estimate that 0.8-1% of European couples are at-
risk of having a child affected with a severe AR genetic disorder.This overall risk is 16.5-fold higher for ﬁrst-cousins, but the
increase varies for different disorders. Notably, the risk is much
more increased for skeletal disorders (120x) and ID (40x) incomparison to all other disorders. We ﬁnd that this signi ﬁcant
increase re ﬂects a distinct genetic architecture of pathogenic
alleles. In 1000-Genomes data, we found stronger patterns of
negative selection on ID and skeletal disorders than on otherrecessive disorders. Simulations show that even a modest effecton heterozygote ﬁtness could explain this distinct genetic
architecture of ID and skeletal pathogenic alleles.
Conclusions: Our results show that ID and skeletal disorders
have a unique genetic architecture compared to other disorders.
Modeling suggests that this architecture could be explained by a
small negative effect on ﬁtness for heterozygous carriers of
pathogenic variants in the genes underlying these disorders.
H. Fridman: None. H. Yntema: None. R. Mägi: None. R.
Andreson: None. A. Metspalu: None. M. Mezzavila: None. C.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
537
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Tyler-Smith: None. Y. Xue: None. S. Carmi: F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; MyHeritage. E. Levy-Lahad: None. C.
Gilissen: None. H. Brunner: None.
P19.055.C Genetic markers associated with Alzheimer ’s
disease and schizophrenia demonstrate deviation from
selective neutrality in populations of North Eurasia
Anna Bocharova , Vadim Stepanov
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Positive selection during human dispersal was,
probably, one of the mechanisms that led to the accumulation ofhigh frequencies of risk alleles for common complex diseases.Along with genetic functional-related effect, population-related
differences also may play important role in the genetic variability
of common complex diseases (such as Alzheimer ’s disease and
schizophrenia). Due to the lack of information on geneticvariability in native populations of North Eurasia for genes
associated with psycho-neurological diseases, they are of great
scienti ﬁc interest.
Materials and Methods: Thirty SNPs associated with Alzhei-
mer’s disease and schizophrenia were genotyped by MALDI-TOF
mass-spectrometry using MassARRAY Analyzer 4 (AgenaBioscience) in sixteen populations of North Eurasia (Russians,Udmurts, Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Kyrgyz, Yakuts, Kets, Northern Altaians,
Southern Altaians, Evenks, Buryats, Khants, Tuvinians, Khakass,
Chukchi, Nivkhs, Koryaks). Selective neutrality was evaluated usingthe Ewens-Watterson test.
Results: According to the data of the Ewens-Watterson test for
the neutrality of SNP-markers associated with psycho-neurological
diseases, 10 loci showed a deviation from neutrality in 16populations of North Eurasia: CNTNAP2 rs10273775, NCAPD3
rs1031381, SNX29 rs12922317, DCHS2 rs1466662, CLU rs1532278,
LSM1 rs16887244, CD33 rs3826656, ACSM1 rs433598, PICALM
rs561655, NECTIN2 rs6859. The maximum number of natural
selection signals was noted for Tuvinians, Udmurts and Khants.
Genetic marker rs1031381 at gene NCAPD3 demonstrated
deviation from selective neutrality in 10 populations of NorthEurasia.
Conclusions: Natural selection contributes to the genetic
diversity for schizophrenia and Alzheimer ’s disease genes in the
North Eurasia populations. This work was supported by theRussian Foundation for Basic Research (project 18-29-13045).
A. Bocharova: None. V. Stepanov: None.
P19.056.D Evaluating the causal role of serum phosphate on
bone mineral density: a Mendelian randomization study
Haotian Tang , Jie Zheng, Tom R. Gaunt, Jonathan H. Tobias
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Rare genetic disorders leading to phosphate de ﬁciency are
associated with defective mineralization, but it is unclear whether
serum phosphate is related to bone mineral density (BMD) in the
wider population.
We conducted observational and Mendelian randomization
(MR) analyses to evaluate the relationship between serum
phosphate and BMD. Linear regression was used to examine
associations between phosphate and BMD estimated from heelultrasound (eBMD), adjusted for age, sex, BMI and albumin-corrected calcium, in 199,228 UK Biobank participants. Inunivariate MR analysis, instruments were single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with phosphate level in a GWAS
of UK Biobank 431,510 participants. The outcome data were dual-
energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA)-based BMD at four body sites
from the GEFOS consortium (gefos.org). Multivariable MR wasconducted to estimate the independent effect of phosphate on
BMD conditioning on calcium. To further identify causal genes
linking phosphate with BMD, we conducted a gene-based MR byselecting eight phosphate associated genes (including α-klotho).
Observational analysis suggested a negative association
between phosphate and eBMD ( β=-0.048, 95%CI: -0.051~-
0.044). Univariate MR showed weak evidence of a causal effectof phosphate on total body BMD ( β=0.080; SD change in total
body BMD per SD change in phosphate; 95%CI: 0.001~0.160).
However, multivariable MR showed a causal effect of phosphate
on forearm BMD ( β=-0.140; -0.277~-0.002), conditioning on
calcium. Gene-based MR suggested that genetic signals of
phosphate in α-klotho region were associated with forearm
BMD. These results imply that increasing serum phosphate maycause decreased forearm BMD, which are less likely to re ﬂect
horizontal pleiotropy.
H. Tang: None. J. Zheng: None. T.R. Gaunt: None. J.H. Tobias:
None.
P19.057.A The Trisomy 21 Prevalence in the Moscow Region
of Russia
Nataliya Demikova
1,2, Elizaveta E. Zayaeva2, Marina Podolnaya1,
Aleksandra Lapina1, Aliy Asanov3
1Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named Academician
Yuri Veltischev of the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical
University of the Russian Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian
Federation,2Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional
Education of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation,
Moscow, Russian Federation,3I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Trisomy 21 (T21) or Down syndrome is one of the most common
chromosomal diseases. A well-known risk factor for having a child
with T21 is the increased age of the mother. Since the 70s of thecentury, in Russia there has been an increase in the averagematernal age. Monitoring the T21 prevalence is necessary due to
changes in mothers age structure and the impact of preventive
measures.
The aim: To analyze dynamics of T21 prevalence in the Moscow
region - one of the largest regions of the Russian Federation for
the period from 2011 to 2019.
Materials: The total number of newborns in the Moscow region
from 2011 to 2019 was 771681; cases of T21, including newborns
and eliminated fetuses, was 1490. The prevalence rate is
calculated for 10,000 newborns.
Results: Total prevalence T21 in Moscow region was 19,31,
while T21 prevalence among live born was 7,36. For the analyzed
period, there is an increase in T21 total prevalence: from 18,30 in
2011 it increased to 23,33 in 2019. At the same time, T21prevalence among live born decreased from 9,41 to 6,65 and theproportion of eliminated fetuses with T21 increased from 48,57%
to 71,51%, which indicates the suf ﬁcient effectiveness of prenatal
diagnosis.
Conclusion: In recent years T21 incidence rate tends to
increase, one of the reasons for which is the increase in proportion
of older women among pregnant women. At the same time, dueto of prenatal screening, T21 prevalence in the Moscow region isdecreasing.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
538
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608N. Demikova: None. E. Zayaeva: None. M. Podolnaya: None.
A. Lapina: None. A. Asanov: None.
P19.058.B Preliminary study of association of tuberculosis
forms with polymorphisms in IFN-γ, IL-1 β, NOS2, MARCO and
TLR8 genes
Ainur Akhmetova1,2, Ulan Kozhamkulov1, Dauren Yerezhepov1,
Ainur Akilzhanova1,2
1Laboratory of Genomic and Personalized Medicine, National
Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan,
2Department of General Biology and Genomics, L.N.Gumilyov
Eurasian National University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
Introduction: Kazakhstan is one of 30 countries with high
incidence of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in the
world. Various studies reveal association of polymorphisms of IFN-
γ, IL-1 β, NOS2, MARCO and TLR8 genes with development of
different forms of tuberculosis.Aim of this study is to evaluateassociation of IFN-γ, IL-1 β, NOS2, MARCO and TLR8 gene
polymorphisms with development of different forms of tubercu-
losis (sensitive-TB, mono-resistant TB, poly-resistant TB, MDR-TB) inKazakhstani patients.
Materials and Methods: 80 TB patients from 3 regions of
Kazakhstan were involved in this research. Genotyping of sampleswas conducted on Applied Biosystems 7900HT using TaqManprobes rs2430561, rs16944, rs2274894, rs17009726 and rs3764880
for SNP markers of IFN-γ, IL-1 β, NOS2, MARCO and TLR8 ,
respectively. Drug resistance of M. tuberculosis isolates to ﬁrst-
line anti-TB drugs - isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol andstreptomycin was determined by Sanger sequencing of katG,
rpoB, embB and rpsL genes responsible for resistance to the drugs,
respectively.
Results: Association of AT and AA genotypes of IFN-γand TLR8
with development of poly-resistant TB (85.7% and 57.1%,
respectively); GA and AA genotypes of IL-1βand NOS2 with
development of MDR-TB (65.2% and 73.9%, respectively); AAgenotype of MARCO with development of mono-resistant TB
(100%) were detected. However, the obtained results were not
statistically signi ﬁcant showing p-value 0.367, 0.786, 0.097, 0.458
and 0.314 respectively.
Conclusions: Association between polymorphisms of the genes
and infection with different forms of tuberculosis were not
identi ﬁed in our research. In future, sample size should be
increased to con ﬁrm the obtained results.
A. Akhmetova: None. U. Kozhamkulov: None. D. Yerezhepov:
None. A. Akilzhanova: None.
P19.059.C Genome Diversity in Ukraine
Taras K. Oleksyk
1,2, Khrystyna Shchubelka1,2, Walter W. Wolfsber-
ger1,2, Yaroslava Hasynets2, Olga T. Oleksyk3, Volodymyr Smolanka2
1Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA,2Uzhhorod National
University, Uzhhorod, Ukraine,3A. Novak Transcarpathian Regional
Clinical Hospital, Uzhhorod, Ukraine.
The main goal of this collaborative effort is to provide genome
wide data for the previously underrepresented population inEastern Europe, and to provide cross-validation of the data from
genome sequences and genotypes of the same individuals
acquired by different technologies. We collected 97 genome-grade DNA samples from consented individuals representingmajor regions of Ukraine that were consented for the public datarelease. The genome data has been searched for genomic
variation represented in this population, and a number of variants
have been reported: large structural variants, indels, CNVs, SNPs
and microsatellites. This study provides the largest to-date surveyof genetic variation in Ukraine, creating a public referenceresource aiming to provide data for historic and medical research
in a large understudied population. While most of the common
variation is shared with other European populations, this survey ofpopulation variation contributes a number of novel SNPs andstructural variants that have not been reported in the gnomAD/
1KG databases representing global distribution of genomic
variation. These endemic variants will become a valuable resourcefor designing future population and clinical studies, help addressquestions about ancestry and admixture, and will ﬁll a missing
place in the puzzle characterizing human population diversity in
Eastern Europe. Our results indicate that genetic diversity of theUkrainian population is uniquely shaped by the evolutionary and
demographic forces, and cannot be ignored in the future genetic
and biomedical studies.
T.K. Oleksyk: None. K. Shchubelka: None. W.W. Wolfsberger:
None. Y. Hasynets: None. O.T. Oleksyk: None. V. Smolanka:
None.
P19.060.D Thrombosis during pregnancy and postpartum
period in Georgian women with inherited thrombophilia:
comparative analysis
Ketevan Kartvelishvili
1,2, Nino Pirtskhelani1,2, Nino Kochiashvili2,
Levan Makhaldiani3
1Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Levan Samkharauli
National Forensics Bureau, Tbilisi, Georgia,3National Surgery Center ’s
Clinic "Akhali Sitsotskhle", Tbilisi, Georgia.
Introduction: Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) is one of the
leading causes of maternal mortality. The increased risk of
thrombosis ﬁrst appears in the beginning of pregnancy and
reaches its maximum in the postpartum period. About 50% ofpregnancy-associated VTE occurs during pregnancy itself and 50%
in the “critical period ”within six weeks after delivery; thus the risk
of postpartum thrombosis is about 5 times higher than duringpregnancy itself. Hereditary thrombophilia increases the risk ofpregnancy associated VTE up to 34-fold.
Aim: The aim of this study was to analyze maternal VTE during
pregnancy and postpartum period in Georgian women withinherited thrombophilia.
Materials and Methods: 421 Georgian women with pregnancy
complications (Miscarriages, stillbirth, VTE and etc.) were investi-gated for detection of FV Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, MTHFRC677T mutations by PCR analysis.
Results: Out of 421 women 43(10.22%) had VTE, 17(4.04%)
during pregnancy and 26(6.18%) postpartum. Out of 17 patientswith VTE during pregnancy, thrombophilia gene mutations weredetected in 6(35.39%) cases (FVL-4, Pr-3, MTHFR-1), Compare to 26
patients with VTE during postpartum period - in 15(57.69%) cases
(FVL-9, Pr-5, MTHFR-2). The combined double and triple mutationswere detected in 3 cases. Family history of thrombosis waspositive in 13(76.47%) patients with VTE during pregnancy, in 19
(73.08%) patients with VTE during postpartum period.
Conclusion : According to our data, signi ﬁcant prevalence of
VTE in association with thrombophilia was detected in postpartum
period, compare to VTE during pregnancy. These data resembles
the results of other populations.
K. Kartvelishvili: None. N. Pirtskhelani: None. N. Kochiashvili:
None. L. Makhaldiani: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
539
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P19.061.A Investigating the origin of the Ottoman dynasty
based on Y Haplogroup-related markers
Zsolt Bánfai1,2, Attila Gyenesei2, Judit Bene1,2, Norbert Pap3, Attila
Miseta4, Miklós Kásler5, Béla Melegh1,2
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary,
2Szentágothai Research Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary,
3Department of Political Geography, Development and Regional
Studies, Faculty of Sciences, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary,
4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical School, University of
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary,5National Institute of Oncology, Budapest,
Hungary.
Introduction: The four most common Y chromosome hap-
logroups in Turkey are J2, R1b, G and E3b. R1a is the sixth mostcommon haplogroup among the male members of the Turkishpopulation. The actual haplogroup of the House of Osman is still
controversial, the Ottoman dynasty might belong either the J2, or
the R1a haplogroup. The J2 haplogroup is supported by theconventional analysis of a known recent descendant on the directmale line of H.I.H. Prince ( Şehzade) Yusuf Izzeddin (1857-1916), the
ﬁrst-born son of Sultan Abdülaziz (1830-1876) and the older
brother of Abdulmejid II (1868-1944). This test revealed the J2a (J-M410) haplogroup.
Materials and Methods: Whole genome sequencing was
performed on a DNA sample belonging to a male descendant ofthe Ottoman dynasty, H.I.H. Prince ( Şehzade) Mahmud Nam ık
Osmano ğlu, a member of the direct male lineage of Sultan
Mehmed V Re şâd (1844-1918). The BCFtools package was used for
variant calling and the AMY-tree algorithm was applied todetermine the relevant set of Y haplogroup markers.
Results: The analysis identi ﬁed 84 markers and indicated that
the sample belongs to the J2a2 (J-L581) haplogroup.
Conclusion: Results revealed that the J2 is the common
haplogroup of the Ottoman dynasty. This haplogroup is known
to be common on the Anatolian peninsula and can be found also
in the Caucasus region and in Central Asia. Relationship of thesepools should be further investigated.
This study was supported by the NKFIH K119540 grant and by
the University of Pécs “A stronger Hungary, a self-conscious
nation ”project.
Z. Bánfai: None. A. Gyenesei: None. J. Bene: None. N. Pap:
None. A. Miseta: None. M. Kásler: None. B. Melegh: None.
P19.062.B The Dutch Y-chromosomal landscape from theEarly
Middle Agesto present day
Eveline Altena
1, Risha Smeding1, Eileen Vaske1, Paul Reusink1, Oscar
Lao2,3,4, Kristiaan J. van der Gaag1,5, Rick H. de Leeuw1, Thirsa
Kraaijenbrink1, Yoan Diekmann6, Manfred Kayser2, Mark G. Thomas6,
Peter de Knijff1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,2Erasmus MC
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
3Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain,
4Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,5Netherlands Forensic
Institute, The Hague, Netherlands,6University College London,
London, United Kingdom.
Epidemiological, forensic and historical studies can greatly bene ﬁt
from detailed information on historical and present-day geo-
genetic patterns and population continuity. We present this
information for the Netherlands for Y-chromosomal SNPs basedon an historical dataset of over 300 early and late medieval and
Early Modern Period males and a present-day dataset of over 2000
males. The historical samples were collected from excavations at
13 locations, the present-day dataset contains samples from 99locations, evenly spread across the country. Using differentmethods we observed statistically signi ﬁcant differentiation
between periods in general, between locations within both the
historical periods and present day and between periods withinlocations. We could, however, not reject population continuity,which is relevant to future (paleo)epidemiological and selection
studies in the datasets presented here. Visualization of genetic
distances between locations and periods indicated a decrease ofreduced genetic distance over time between locations but wasfound to not be statistically signi ﬁcant with formal testing. In
conclusion, the changes in geo-genetic patterns for the
Y-chromosome in the Netherlands from the Early Middle Agesto present day indicate that the modern patterns formed recently.
Since we cannot reject population continuity, drift needs to be
considered as a key factor in these changes, besides demographicevents. We should therefore be careful to assign observations inpresent-day data to speci ﬁc historical events.
E. Altena: None. R. Smeding: None. E. Vaske: None. P.
Reusink: None. O. Lao: None. K.J. van der Gaag: None. R.H. de
Leeuw: None. T. Kraaijenbrink: None. Y. Diekmann: None. M.
Kayser: None. M.G. Thomas: None. P. de Knijff: None.
P19.063.C New insights into the evolution of a human Y
chromosome singleton palindrome
Maria Bonito
1, Eugenia D ’Atanasio2, Francesco Ravasini1, Selene
Cariati1, Biancamaria Bonucci1, Andrea Finocchio3, Andrea Novel-
letto3, Fulvio Cruciani1,2,4, Beniamino Trombetta1
1Department of Biology and Biotechnology “Charles Darwin ”,
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy,2Institute of Molecular
Biology and Pathology, CNR, Rome, Italy,3Department of Biology,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy,4Istituto Pasteur -
Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Rome, Italy.
Introduction: About 25% of the euchromatic portion of the male-
speci ﬁc region of the human Y chromosome consists of large
duplicated sequences, organized in eight palindromes (P1-P8)which undergo arm-to-arm gene conversion, a proposed mechan-
ism for maintaining their sequence integrity. Despite the relevance
of gene conversion in palindrome evolution, its dynamic is stillnuanced.
Materials and Methods: We reanalysed the genetic diversity of
3.3 Mb of the X-degenerate region in 157 Y chromosomes toreconstruct an unambiguous phylogeny. Subsequently, for thesame samples we performed a high depth (>50×) targeted NGS of
P6, the largest Y chromosome singleton palindrome.
Results: We identi ﬁed 118 new paralogous sequence variants
and 80 gene conversion events that shaped the diversity of P6arms during recent human history. We also estimated a Y-Y gene
conversion rate of 6.01 × 10
-6conversions/base/year.
Conclusions: We found that: 1) Y-Y gene conversion is not
biased towards the ancestral state, 2) the establishment of amutation/conversion balance drives the evolution of P6 arms, 3)
gene conversion, in spite of maintaining the palindrome structural
integrity, can be involved in the loss of genetic material from thearms, 4) the higher mutation rate of the spacer compared to the
arms may explain the observed lower divergence between the
orthologous duplicated sequences of the palindrome comparedto its haploid portion, without invoking any conversion bias.“Programmi di Ricerca 2018-2020 ”, Istituto Pasteur —FondazioneAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
540
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Cenci Bolognetti (to F.C.); “Progetti per Avvio alla Ricerca - Tipo 1 ”,
Sapienza University of Rome (to E.D ’A.).
M. Bonito: None. E. D ’Atanasio: None. F. Ravasini: None. S.
Cariati: None. B. Bonucci: None. A. Finocchio: None. A.
Novelletto: None. F. Cruciani: None. B. Trombetta: None.
P20 Functional Genomics and Epigenomics
P20.001.D Investigating the meaning of age-related changes
in DNA methylation by studying the correlation between
epigenetic age acceleration and progressive human appear-
ance traits
Rezvan Noroozi1, Aleksandra Pisarek1, Joanna Rudnicka1, Micha ł
Boro ń2, Kamila Migacz-Gruszka3, EPIGENOME Consortium, Aneta
Sitek4, Andrzej Ossowski5, Wojciech Branicki1,2, Magdalena Spól-
nicka2, Ewelina Po śpiech1
1Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University,
Kraków, Poland,2Central Forensic Laboratory of the Police, Warsaw,
Poland,3Department of Dermatology, Collegium Medicum of the
Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland,4Department of Anthropol-
ogy, Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of
Łódź,Łódź, Poland,5Department of Forensic Genetics, Pomeranian
Medical University in Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland.
Introduction: DNA methylation markers have been proposed as a
predictor of biological age. At the same time, phenotypic aging isa potential model for exploring the molecular mechanisms of
aging. By investigating the correlation between epigenetic age
acceleration (EAA) and externally visible phenotypes we aim toinvestigate molecular pathways involved in aging processes anddisclose promising targets for antiaging therapies.
Materials and Methods: A cohort of about 1000 individuals of
European descent with described physical phenotype andcollected lifestyle information will be examined using In ﬁnium ®
Global Screening Array and In ﬁnium ®MethylationEPIC 850K
microarray. DNA methylation data will be examined using various
age prediction models to calculate EAA. The EAA values will befurther correlated with phenotypic traits including hair loss, hairgreying, and wrinkles formation as well as with genetic variation.
Results and Conclusion: The study will improve our under-
standing of the role of interactions between genes, DNAmethylation, and EAA in determining age-related appearance
traits. We will assess the heritability of the aging rate and measure
the importance of environmental factors for accelerated aging.The role of individual CpG and SNP markers will be tracked inenrichment analysis. The study will have practical value in
forensics by developing prototype predictive models for speci ﬁc
age-related features based on genetic and epigenetic information,as well as may ﬁnd practical application in the cosmetic industry
by developing products to prevent or slow down phenotypic
aging. This research was supported by the grant from the National
Centre for Research and Development no DOB-BIO10/06/01/2019.
R. Noroozi: None. A. Pisarek: None. J. Rudnicka: None. M.
Boro ń:None. K. Migacz-Gruszka: None. A. Sitek: None. A.
Ossowski: None. W. Branicki: None. M. Spólnicka: None. E.
Pośpiech: None.
P20.002.A A multi-omics approach to study monozygotic
twins discordant for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Martina Tosi
1, Miriam Zuccalà1, Francesco Favero1, Lucia Corrado1,
Roberta Croce1, Chiara Basagni1, Nadia Barizzone1, Laura Follia2,
Fabiola De Marchi3, Elena Chinni4, Letizia Mazzini3, Davide Corà1,
Maurizio Leone4, Sandra D ’Alfonso11University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, Novara, Italy,2University of
Torino, Torino, Italy,3ALS Center AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara,
Italy,4SC Neurologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative
disease, characterised by progressive death of upper and lower
motor neurons. The majority of ALS cases are sporadic, while 10%are familial. ALS aetiology is still not completely understood. Toinvestigate genetic and epigenetic factors underlying ALS, we
studied a monozygotic twin pair discordant for ALS with a multi-
omics approach combining whole exome sequencing withgenome-wide methylome- and transcriptome data from wholeblood and PBMCs. For methylation, we used the Illumina
EPICArray which covers 850,000 methylations sites and the
ChaAMP software for the analyses, while for gene expressionstudy, Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA sequencing was per-
formed. The results were considered independently and in
combination to identify disease-relevant methylation changesand their downstream impact. Twins tested negative for muta-tions in main ALS-genes. We identi ﬁed 59 differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) (p.adj < 0.1; |log2FC| >1) involved in immune system
pathways. After QC, we found 2 differentially methylated probes(pvalue adj ≤0.1) in CACNA1G, expressed mostly in brain, and
VAX1 genes; while ﬁltering by delta beta ( Δβ) values, we identi ﬁed
2 probes with Δβ≤- 0.25 (in an intergenic region and RUSC1-AS1)
and 2 probes with Δβ≥0.25 (in AARS and KPNA4). None of them
fell into the highlighted DEGs. Finally, mRNA-seq results were
compared with larger literature datasets. Further comparative
analyses on external epigenetic datasets as well as CNV and SNVanalyses on exome data are ongoing to elucidate possibleepigenetic and somatic genetic factors that could underlie
susceptibility to sporadic ALS.
M. Tosi: None. M. Zuccalà: None. F. Favero: None. L. Corrado:
None. R. Croce: None. C. Basagni: None. N. Barizzone: None. L.
Follia: None. F. De Marchi: None. E. Chinni: None. L. Mazzini:
None. D. Corà: None. M. Leone: None. S. D ’Alfonso: None.
P20.003.B Resistance pro ﬁle and genetic diversity among
selected ESBL-producing Escherichia coli isolates from urocul-
tures in a portuguese hospital
Isabel Carvalho
1,2,3,4,5, José António António Carvalho6, Ana Paula
Castro6, Sandra Martínez-Álvarez5, Gilberto Igrejas2,3,4, Carmen
Torres5, Patrícia Poeta1,4
1Microbiology and Antibiotic Resistance Team (MicroART), Depart-
ment of Veterinary Sciences, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto-Douro), Vila Real, Portugal,2Department of Genetics and Biotechnol-
ogy, UTAD, Vila Real, Portugal,3Functional Genomics and Proteomics
Unit, UTAD, Vila Real, Portugal,4Laboratory Associated for Green
Chemistry (LAQV ‐REQUIMTE), New University of Lisbon, Monte da
Caparica, Portugal,5Area Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of La Rioja, Logroño, Spain,6Medical Center of Trás-os-
Montes e Alto Douro E.P.E., Vila Real, Portugal.
Introduction: Antimicrobial-resistant bacteria are contributing to
mortality and morbidity worldwide. The Extended-Spectrum
β-lactamase-producing E. coli is considered one of the great
concerns regarding the public health issue. The purpose of thiswork was to determine prevalence and genetic characteristics of
selected ESBL-producing E. coli isolates from urinary infections.
Materials and Methods: Twenty cefotaxime/ceftazidime-resis-
tant E. coli isolates were obtained aleatory from urocultures in a
Portuguese hospital, during June 2017-July 2018. Identi ﬁcation
was performed by MALDI-TOF MS. Antimicrobial susceptibilityAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
541
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608against 13 antibiotics was analyzed by disk diffusion test.
Screening of ESBLs was performed and resistance genes were
analyzed by PCR/sequencing. Phylogenetic grouping was also
performed by multiplex-PCR.
Results: ESBL-production was detected in 90% of the isolates
(18/20), mostly associated with CTX-M-15 (n =13) and CTX-M-1 (n
=1) enzymes. Tetracycline resistance was associated with tetA( n
=5) and tetB( n=3). The most common phylogenetic group
among ESBL-producers was B2 (n =13), followed by D (n =2), C
(n=1) and A (n =1). The isolates carrying the blaCTX-M-15 gene
were ascribed to phylogroups B2 and D, and the blaCTX-M-1 -
carrying isolate was typed as phylogroup C. The two ESBL-negative E. coli isolates also carried a CTX-M gene (which variant
was not determined).
Conclusions: These ﬁndings indicate that the CTX-M-15
enzyme is the main mechanism of ESBL-production amongurinary infections isolates in our hospital, being these isolates of
the phylogroups B2 and D.
Acknowledgments: First author - FCT through PhD grant SFRH/
BD/133266/2017 (Medicina Clínica e Ciências da Saúde); ProjectSAF2016-76571-R from AEI (Spain) and FEDER of EU; LAQV - FCT/
MCTES (UIDB/50006/2020 and UIDP/50006/2020).
I. Carvalho: None. J.A. Carvalho: None. A.P. Castro: None. S.
Martínez-Álvarez: None. G. Igrejas: None. C. Torres: None. P.
Poeta: None.
P20.004.C E6 and E7 HPV16 oncogenes in ﬂuence gene
transcription trough the genome-wide pattern deposition of
MBD2,3 components of NuRD nucleosome remodelingcomplex
Anca Botezatu , Adriana Plesa, Iulia V. Iancu, Marinela Bostan, Mirela
Mihaila, Adrian Albulescu, Alina fudulu, Carmen C. Diaconu, GabrielaAnton
Instute of Virology "St.S.Nicolau", Bucharest, Romania.
Human papilloma virus (HPV) is the etiologic agent of cervical
cancer and the third most commonly diagnosed type of cancer
in women worldwide. The nucleosome remodelling and
deacetylation complex (NuRD) is a group of associated proteinswith ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling and histonedeacetylase activities. MBD2/3 proteins from NuRD complex
exhibit methyl-CpG-binding domains, which mediate an inter-
action with methylated DNA. The current study aims to assessthe viral oncogenes in ﬂuence on the MBDs overall binding
pattern to CpG islands. ChIP-Seq for MBD2/3 genome wide
DNA binding pattern (e.g. promoters, gene control region,transcriptional enhancers, etc.) in untreated and HPV 16 E6/E7shRNAs treated CaSki cell culture was performed and the
results were analysed using Base Space Illumina apps. MBD2/3
proteins were localized at the leve l of intron, intergenic regions
and TSS. After ChIP-Seq peak score analysis, a cut-off of 9 wasestablish and 54 gene loci were identi ﬁed. The corresponding
genes were further analysed in qRT-PCR and their expression
was found to be deregulated. When both oncogenes (E6 andE7) were silenced, we noted an enrichment of MBD2/3 proteinsat CDK6, DLC1, NRIP1 gene loci i nvolved in oestrogen receptor
(ER) signalling pathway. Another interesting gene loci involved
in mRNA processing and cancer growth and metastasis wereidenti ﬁed (EIF4G3 and DCP2). Viral oncogenes
act synergistically on the gene transcription pattern by
interacting with the MBD2/3 proteins of NuRD complex.Epigenetic gene control is a complex phenomenon that isguided by internal, cellular and external factors as well as viral
infections. Acknowledgments: TE39/2020A. Botezatu: None. A. Plesa: None. I.V. Iancu: None. M.
Bostan: None. M. Mihaila: None. A. Albulescu: None. A. fudulu:
None. C.C. Diaconu: None. G. Anton: None.
P20.005.D New cis-regulatory elements modulate CFTR
expression
Mégane COLLOBERT
1, Ozvan Bocher1, Anaïs Le Nabec1, Emma-
nuelle Génin2, Claude Férec1,3, Stéphanie Moisan1,3
1Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France,2Inserm, Univ
Brest, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France,3Univ Brest, CHRU Brest,
UMR 1078, Brest, France.
8% of the human genome is covered with candidate cis-regulatory
elements (cCREs). Anomalies of CREs at distance from a gene havebeen identi ﬁed as being involved in various genetic diseases.
Although, more than 2100 variants have been detected in Cystic
Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR ) gene,
responsible of Cystic Fibrosis (CF) or CFTR -related disorders, some
patients have an incomplete genotype or present extremes
phenotypes. Development of chromatin conformation study
techniques identi ﬁed several long-range regulatory elements of
CFTR gene. Our aim is to highlight the role and involvement of
regulatory elements on the architecture and conformation of the
CFTR gene.GWAS3D score application allowed us to highlight
involvement of four CFTR introns in gene regulation, introns 26
(4374+1,3 kb), 24 (4095 +7,2 kb), 1 (185 +10 kb) et 12 (1811 +
0,8 kb). Introns 1 and 12 have already been described as two main
cooperative CFTR CREs in intestinal cells. Activity tests in Caco-2
intestinal cells show strong cooperative effects of the fourpredicted introns on CFTR promoter activity. Chromatin immuno-
precipitation analyses demonstrate enrichment of a large network
of keys transcription factors (TFs) in intestinal cells, such HNF1a,p300, FOXA1/A2, CDX2 and TCF4, in introns 24 and 26 enhancers.
In conclusion, two new CREs with cooperative enhancer activities
have been identi ﬁed, enriched with important TFs, rede ﬁning the
3D regulation model of the CFTR gene in intestinal cells. Ongoing
studies of chromatin conformation and CRISPR interference will
further characterize the role of these new enhancers.
M. Collobert: None. O. Bocher: None. A. Le Nabec: None. E.
Génin: None. C. Férec: None. S. Moisan: None.
P20.006.A Functional characterisation of GJB2 cis regulatory
elements and WGS of heterozygous patients with NSHL
Anaïs LE NABEC
1, Mégane Collobert1, Alicia Quillévéré1, Cédric Le
Maréchal1,2, Claude Férec1,2, Stéphanie Moisan1,2
1Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, brest, France,2Univ Brest,
CHRU Brest, UMR 1078, Brest, France.
Three-dimensional chromatin organization plays a key role on
gene expression. Gene regulation depends on cis-regulatory
elements which can interact with gene promoter by chromatinloop. Alteration of chromatin architecture and/or cis-acting
elements can lead to enhanceropathies . Several unelucidated
nonsyndromic hearing loss and deafness 1 ( DFNB1) cases carrying
out only one heterozygous pathogenic mutation on Gap JunctionBeta 2 ( GJB2 ) gene, led to strongly suggest the presence of distant
cis-regulation. Thanks to chromatin conformation study, we
previously identi ﬁed several cis-regulatory elements which have
enhancer action and silencer effect on GJB2 expression. Analysis of
CTCF binding allowed to purpose a DFNB1 3D looping model. We
identi ﬁed cooperative effects between enhancers. To con ﬁrm anAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
542
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608endogenous enhancer activity, we develop CRISPR interference
(CRISPRi), new approach for targeted silencing of transcription in
human cells. We target GJB2 cis -acting elements with dCas9-KRAB.
Preliminary results show a decrease of GJB2 expression. Then, we
focus on 10 patients with incomplete genotype. We realize awhole genome sequencing with HiSeq 4000 by IntegraGen
Genomics. WGS analysis allowed to redress three genotype.
Moreover, we realize functional assays to analyse a variant in GJB2
promoter and continue analyses for the others genotypes. Thiswork is supported by grants from the French foundation “La
Fondation pour l ’Audition ”, the “Région Bretagne ”and the
association “Gaétan Salaün ”.
A. Le nabec: None. M. Collobert: None. A. Quillévéré: None. C.
Le Maréchal: None. C. Férec: None. S. Moisan: None.
P20.007.B The level of myeloperoxidase gene methylation in
peripheral blood leukocytes is an epigenetic marker of
coronary artery disease
Olga Bushueva
1, Ekaterina Barysheva2, Anton Markov3, Iuliia
Koroleva3, Egor Churkin3, Vladislav Soldatov4, Alexey Polonikov1,
Vladimir Ivanov2, Maria Nazarenko3
1Research Institute for Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology, Kursk
State Medical University, Kursk, Russian Federation,2Department of
Biology, Medical Genetics and Ecology, Kursk State MedicalUniversity, Kursk, Russian Federation,3Institute of Medical Genetics,
Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation,4Department of Pharmacology
and Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of medicine, Belgorod StateNational Research University, Belgorod, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the leading cause
of death worldwide. Despite the evidence for the role of oxidativestress in the development of CAD, there are few studies on site-
speci ﬁc DNA methylation of genes involved in the regulation of
vascular redox homeostasis. We aimed to analyze a possibleassociation of DNA methylation levels of oxidative-stress-relatedgenes with CAD.
Materials and Methods: DNA methylation patterns in the
promoter or regulatory regions of 4 genes ( GCLM ,GSTP1 ,TXNRD1 ,
and MPO ) in peripheral blood leukocytes of 45 patients with CAD
and in 83 sex- and age-matched healthy controls were analysed.
Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of the bisul ﬁte-treated
DNA was performed by pyrosequencing on a PyroMark Q24(Qiagen, Germany).
Results: Statistically signi ﬁcantly lower methylation levels were
registered at a CpG site (chr1:94374293, GRCh37 [hg19]) in GCLM
in patients with CAD compared with the control group (6,1%[4,8%; 7.6%] (median and interquartile range) versus 14.5% [10.4%;
21,7%], respectively, p =1.49 × 10
-11). The most pronounced
differences between the patients and controls were uncoveredin the analysis of myeloperoxidase gene methylation. In theleukocytes of patients with CAD, the methylation level of CpG sites
in the analyzed region of MPO (chr17:56356470, GRCh3 [hg19]) on
average was signi ﬁcantly lower (26.5% [24.5%; 32.3%]) than that in
the control group (35.4% [30.3%; 42.6%], p =3.83 × 10
-7).
Conclusions: Thus, hypomethylation of CpG sites in MPO in
blood leukocytes can be considered a diagnostically signi ﬁcant
epigenetic marker of coronary artery disease. Further epigeneticstudies of the oxidative-stress-related genes in CAD are required.
O. Bushueva: None. E. Barysheva: None. A. Markov: None. I.
Koroleva: None. E. Churkin: None. V. Soldatov: None. A.
Polonikov: None. V. Ivanov: None. M. Nazarenko: None.P20.009.D Polymorphism of methyl group metabolism gene
as a modi ﬁer of Cystic Fibrosis phenotype
Eka Kvaratskhelia1,2, Tinatin Tkemaladze1, Mariam Ghughunish-
vili3, Maia Gagua2, Sandro Surmava1, Maia Zarandia1, Elene
Abzianidze1
1Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Tbilisi State Medical
University, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Bakhutashvili Institute of Medical
Biotechnology, Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,3Tbilisi
State Medical University, G.Zhvania Pediatric Academic Clinic, Tbilisi,
Georgia.
Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is a common, life-limiting
monogenic disease, which typically manifests as progressive
bronchiectasis, exocrine pancreatic dysfunction, and recurrentpulmonary infections. Modi ﬁer genes and epigenetic factors play
important roles in determining the severity of disease. Identifying
these factors is crucial in personalized treatment approaches. In a
previous study, we demonstrated that global DNA methylationwas signi ﬁcantly decreased in CF individuals with MTHFR gene
T677C variant. In this study we analyzed phenotypes of CF
individuals with TT and CC genotypes of MTHFR gene.
Methods: The study was approved by the ethical committee of
the TSMU. We selected CF patients homozygous or compound
heterozygous for CFTR mutations. We analyzed MTHFR gene using
PCR-RELP method. In 4 patients with MTHFR TT genotypes we
analyzed severity of CF and compared with 4 patients CCgenotypes.
Results: We observed that three CF patients (homozygotes or
compound heterozygous for a class I-II) with TT genotypes hadfailure to thrive, chronic bronchopulmonary infection, bronchiec-tasis and pancreatic insuf ﬁciency. Four subjects homozygotes or
compound heterozygous for a class I-II mutations of CFTR gene
and with MTHFR CC genotypes had a less severe phenotypic
expression with milder lung in ﬂammation without pancreatic
insuf ﬁciency.
Conclusion: There is strong correlation between the general
type of CFTR mutation and clinical phenotype. However, among
patients carrying two mutations with no residual function, there is
also a very broad range of lung disease severity maybe due to
modi ﬁer genes involved in methyl group metabolism.
E. Kvaratskhelia: None. T. Tkemaladze: None. M. Ghugh-
unishvili: None. M. Gagua: None. S. Surmava: None. M.
Zarandia: None. E. Abzianidze: None.
P20.010.A Genetic and epigenetic alterations in Pituitary
Neuroendocrine Tumors (PitNETS) with different clinical out-come: the role of X-linked genes
Luca Morandi
1,2, Stefania Evangelisti1, Caterina Tonon1,2, Matteo Zoli3,
Diego Mazzatenta3, Federica Guaraldi4,A l b e r t oR i g h i5,S oﬁaA s i o l i6
1Department of Biomedical and Neur omotor Sciences, University of
Bologna, Functional and Molecular Neuroimaging Unit, IRCCS Istituto
delle Scienze Neurologiche d i Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2IRCCS Istituto
delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy,3Department
of Biomedical and Neuromotor Science s, University of Bologna, Pituitary
Unit, IRCCS Istituto Delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna,
Italy,4Pituitary Unit, IRCCS Istituto Delle Scienze Neurologiche di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy,5Service of Anatomic Pathology, IRCCS Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy,6Department of Biomedical and
Neuromotor Sciences, Univers ity of Bologna, Unit of Anatomic
Pathology "M. Malpighi", Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
543
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Pituitary neuroendocrine tumours(PitNETS) can show
an aggressive clinical behaviour presenting local invasion, post-
surgical recurrence and resistance to treatment. This study aimed to
identify novel biomarkers of pro gnosis and postsurgical outcome.
Materials and Methods: 59 non recurrent, 17 recurrent
PitNETS and 5 pituitary carcinomas were investigated for
mutation and DNA methylation analysis in 15 and 32 driver
genes respectively.
Results: 9/59(15.3%) non recurrent and 10/17 recurrent(58.8%)
PitNETS showed at least one mutation. TP53 (13/76), NOTCH1 (6/76)
and EGFR (4/76) are the most frequently mutated genes. An
increasing trend of DNA methylation was detected starting fromnormal tissue, through non recurrent adenomas, recurrent PitNETsto carcinoma in PARP15 and MIR193a .PDCD1 and AIPshowed the
highest levels in non recurrent PitNETs, an intermediate level in
recurrent PitNETS and lower levels in carcinoma. X-linked geneswere analysed differentiating males and females: in females,
MAGEA2, MAGEA3, MAGEA4, UXT and FLNA displayed the highest
methylation levels in non recurrent PitNETS, lower levels inrecurrent PitNETS and no methylation in carcinoma. MAGEA11
showed the opposite behaviour. In males, carcinomas were found
hypomethylated in MAGEA1, MAGEA11 and FLNA , while UXT and
MAGEC1 were hypermethylated.
Conclusions: pituitary carcinoma, recurrent and non recurrent
PitNETS can be strati ﬁed by MIR193a, PARP15, PDCD1 and AIP.
X-linked genes belonging to MAGEA family, FLNA and UXT showed
a different methylation pattern depending on the gender. Thecombination of epigenetic and somatic pro ﬁling allows for the
identi ﬁcation of a subset of more aggressive PitNETs that should
be useful for prognostic strati ﬁcation.
L. Morandi: None. S. Evangelisti: None. C. Tonon: None. M.
Zoli: None. D. Mazzatenta: None. F. Guaraldi: None. A. Righi:
None. S. Asioli: None.
P20.011.B Disease interpretation of non-coding genomic
elements with the GeneCards Suite
Ruth Barshir
1, Simon Fishilevich1, Tsippi Iny-Stein1, Ofer Zelig2,
Yaron Guan-Golan2, Marilyn Safran1, Doron Lancet1
1Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel,2LifeMap Sciences
Inc, Alameda, CA, USA.
Interpreting whole genome sequencing (WGS) data is a major
challenge in genetics, since 98% of variants reside in non-codinggenomic “dark matter ”which includes regulatory elements,
introns, untranslated regions, and non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs).
The GeneCards®Suite ( https://www.genecards.org/ ) encom-
passes ~270k annotated coding and non-coding genes inGeneCards (PMID:27322403), and ~20k annotated diseases in
MalaCards (PMID:27899610). VarElect (PMID:27357693), the Suite ’s
NGS phenotype interpreter, leverages this knowledgebase toprioritize associations between genes and phenotype terms.We’ve made signi ﬁcant strides towards optimizing our Suite for
effective interpretation of non-coding variants.
GeneHancer (PMID:28605766) is a database of regulatory
elements encompassing 400k enhancers and promoters, covering18% of the genome, and annotated with functional information,
including accurate genomic coordinates, target genes, and tissue
activity patterns. It integrates information from key epigeneticresources and is included as a native regulation track at the UCSC
genome browser.
GeneCaRNA (Barshir et al, under review) is a novel gene-centric
ncRNA database, integrating data from RNAcentral, a comprehen-sive ncRNA transcript database with 20 expert databases, andfrom the major gene resources HGNC, Ensembl and NCBI Gene.
GeneCaRNA provides a comprehensive non-redundant view of
220k human ncRNAs of 17 functionally diverse types such as
lncRNAs and miRNAs.
Our novel non-coding compendia GeneHancer and GeneCaRNA
provide an indispensable augmentation for VarElect, powering the
prioritization of variant-containing enhancers, promoters and
ncRNAs with respect to diseases via direct and target-genemediated links. These capabilities facilitate deciphering the clinicalsigni ﬁcance of non-coding variants identi ﬁed by WGS, often
elucidating unsolved clinical cases (PMID:32506582).
Support: LifeMap Sciences grantR. Barshir: None. S. Fishilevich: None. T. Iny-Stein: None. O.
Zelig: None. Y. Guan-Golan: None. M. Safran: None. D. Lancet: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
LifeMap Sciences.
P20.012.C Lifestyle-dependent epigenetic signatures and the
impact of lifestyle on epigenetic age acceleration
Joanna Rudnicka
1, Rezvan Noorozi1, Aleksandra Pisarek1, Micha ł
Boro ń2, Aleksander Masny2,B o żena Wo źniak2, Kamila Migacz-
Gruszka3, EPIGENOME Consortium, Aneta Sitek4, Andrzej Ossowski5,
Wojciech Branicki1,2, Magdalena Spólnicka2, Ewelina Po śpiech1
1Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland,2Central Forensic Labora-
tory of the Police, Warszawa, Poland,3Department of Dermatology,
Collegium Medicum of the Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland,
4Department of Anthropology, Faculty of Biology and Environmental
Protection, University of Łódź,Łódź, Poland,5Department of Forensic
Genetics, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland.
Introduction: Research shows that lifestyle in ﬂuences the human
epigenome by altering DNA methylation patterns. In forensics,
reliable prediction of lifestyle from DNA traces can be informative
in characterizing an unknown donor of a forensic specimen, andthus useful in guiding an investigation. Changes in DNAmethylation patterns can also be signatures of habit-related
diseases, and their study is of medical signi ﬁcance. Aim: The goal
of the EPIGENOME project is to identify differentially methylatedregions (DMRs) for selected habits factors including diet, physicalactivity and stressful experiences. An additional goal is to analyze
selected CpGs associated with particular habits in terms of their
correlation with aging processes and then validate them asmarkers for lifestyle-induced diseases.
Materials and methods: A set of 600 blood samples was
collected from individuals aged above 30 years including groupsexposed to extreme factors such as soldiers and professionalbodybuilders. The project involves the extension of the list to the
number of 800 blood samples. Each sample donor provided a
detailed questionnaire. For the whole cohort genome- andepigenome data will be collected using the microarray technology(Illumina). The obtained SNP and methylation data will be used in
statistical analyses.
Conclusions: The project will allow us to develop DNA
methylation-based models for the prediction of individual ’s habits
based on forensic material. The obtained data can also help shape
the right habits for healthy aging. This research is supported by
the grant from the National Centre for Research and Developmentno DOB-BIO10/06/01/2019.
J. Rudnicka: None. R. Noorozi: None. A. Pisarek: None. M.
Boro ń:None. A. Masny: None. B. Wo źniak: None. K. Migacz-
Gruszka: None. A. Sitek: None. A. Ossowski: None. W. Branicki:
None. M. Spólnicka: None. E. Po śpiech: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
544
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P20.014.A Functional characterization of variants in the 5UTR
and promoter of PCK9 gene
Ana Catarina Alves , Juliane Menezes, Rafael Fernandes, Luísa
Romão, Mafalda Bourbon
Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Lisboa, Portugal.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is the most common genetic
disorder conferring an increased cardiovascular risk due to
cholesterol accumulation since birth. FH patients have usually
mutations in LDLR ,APOB orPCSK9 genes, but in about 50% a
variant causing disease is not identi ﬁed. The 5 ’and 3 ’untranslated
regions (UTRs) and promoter of these genes is poorly studied. The
aim of this project is to de ﬁne the PCSK9 5’UTR sequence and
perform an in vitro characterization of variants in 5 ’UTR and
promoter of PCSK9 gene. To de ﬁne the PCSK9 5’UTR sequence we
used a 5 ’-RACE kit that involved several steps. The promoter and
5’UTR regions of PCSK9 (-650 to -1) was cloned into the pGL4.10
[luc2] plasmid containing Fire ﬂy luciferase. This construct was
subjected to site-directed mutagenesis to obtain the variantsunder study. All the variants were transfected into HepG2 and
luciferase activity was determined using the Dual-Luciferase
Reporter Assay System in a GloMax Luminometer. We veri ﬁed
that the promoter in PCSK9 was concordant with that described in
ENSEMBL. A total of 17 variants in the promoter region of the
PCSK9 gene described in ClinVar have been studied or are under
study. Preliminary results suggest that 2 of the variants appear tobe gain-of-function and 6 loss-of-function variants. Our results
emphasize the necessity of functional analysis of new variants in
these regions with the objective of determining their biologicaleffect and possible in ﬂuence on FH phenotype, allowing the
correct diagnosis of the disease.
A.C. Alves: None. J. Menezes: None. R. Fernandes: None. L.
Romão: None. M. Bourbon: None.
P20.015.B Functional characterization of three GLYAT variants
and the effect on phase II glycine conjugation
Rencia van der Sluis
1, Johann Rohwer2, Chantelle Schutte1
1North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa,2Stellenbosch
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
The glycine conjugation pathway is involved in the metabolism of
natural substrates as well as the detoxi ﬁcation of xenobiotics. The
interactions between the various substrates in this pathway and
their competition for the pathway enzymes are currently
unknown. The pathway consists of a mitochondrial xenobiotic/medium chain fatty acid: CoA ligase (ACSM2B) and glycineN-acyltransferase (GLYAT). In this study, the level of evolutionary
conservation of the GLYAT gene was analysed and haplotype
variants were selected (S
156,T17S156and S 156C199) in order to
characterise the kinetic mechanism of the enzyme over a wide
range of substrate concentrations. Cooperative substrate binding
was observed and the kinetic data were ﬁtted to a two-substrate
Hill equation. The coding region of the GLYAT gene was found to
be highly conserved and the rare S 156C199variant negatively
affected the relative enzyme activity and kcatparameter. The
S156C199variant displayed only 10% of the activity of the most
abundant S 156haplotype, while the activity of T 17S156was 73% of
S156. The in vitro kinetic analyses indicated that individuals with
the S 156C199 haplotype might have a decreased ability to
metabolise benzoate when compared to individuals with theS
156haplotype. This is due to the fact that benzoyl-CoA remains
tightly bound to the enzyme and that binding of glycine (thesecond substrate) further decreases the af ﬁnity of the enzyme for
benzoyl-CoA. Accumulation of acyl-CoA intermediates can inhibit
ACSM2B leading to a reduction in mitochondrial energy produc-
tion.Funding: National Research Foundation of South Africa (NRF),Grant No 117890.
R. van der Sluis: None. J. Rohwer: None. C. Schutte: None.
P20.016.C C-terminal truncation of NR2B subunits of NMDA
receptor - functional characteristics of the GRIN2B nonsense
mutation p.Glu839Ter
Roza Szlendak1,2, Nathalie Bouquier2, Annie Varrault2, Tristan
Bouschet2, Eymeline Pageot2, Sylwia Rzo ńca-Niewczas1, Dorota
Hoffman-Zacharska1, Julie Perroy2
1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child,
Warsaw, Poland,2Institute of Functional Genomics, IGF, University of
Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, Montpellier, France.
Introduction: GRIN-related developmental-epileptic encephalopa-
thies are rare genetic conditions caused by heterozygous mutations
in Glutamate ionotropic receptors (GluNRs, NMDARs), ligand-gated
ion channels with important roles in learning, memory and synapticplasticity. NMDARs are heterotetramer and are composed of GluN1,
GluN2 and GluN3 subunits. The C-terminal domains of subunits play
an important role in their localiz ation and synaptic function. We
searched for “GRIN mutations ”as targeted study. Research based on
rare variants identi ﬁed in patients is a powerful approach to study
receptor function.
Materials and methods: We identi ﬁed de novo heterozygous
pathogenic mutation in GRIN2B gene - p.Glu839Ter. To study how
this mutation alters receptor expression and biophysical proper-
ties we combined patch-clamp recordings, BRET experiments and
immunocytochemistry, using HEK cells expressing wild type ormutated NMDA receptors subunits or patient ﬁbroblasts repro-
grammed into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and
differentiated into neurons.
Results: This mutation leads to truncation of the entire cytosolic
C-tail of GluN2B subunits. The mutated GluN2B correctly interacts
with wild type GluN2B and GluN1 subunits forming functional
receptor. However, compared to wild type NMDAR, mutated oneis less expressed at the cell surface and display a reduced NMDAcurrent amplitude with higher sensitivity to magnesium blockade.
Conclusion: Ongoing experiments on patient-derived neurons
might be a future platform for personal treatment of diseases witha broad spectrum of mutation. Functional analysis of the identi ﬁed
variants is an important step to interpret the clinical consequences
of genetic variants and search for speci ﬁc treatment for GRIN-
related neuropathologies.
Financial support: French Government Scholarship.
R. Szlendak: None. N. Bouquier: None. A. Varrault: None. T.
Bouschet: None. E. Pageot: None. S. Rzo ńca-Niewczas: None. D.
Hoffman-Zacharska: None. J. Perroy: None.
P20.017.D Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of the
enteric nervous system in Hirschsprung disease
Jonathan D. Windster
1,2, Musa Idris2,3, Ruben G. Boers4, Cornelius E.
J. Sloots1, René M. H. Wijnen1, Veerle Melotte2,3, Maria M. Alves2,
Robert M. W. Hofstra2
1Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center -
Sophia Children ’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Univer sity Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
Netherlands,3Department of Pathology, GROW-School for OncologyAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
545
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608and Developmental Biology, Maastri cht University Medical Center,
Maasstricht, Netherlands,4Department of Reproduction and Develop-
ment, Erasmus University Medical C entre, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a neurocristopathy,
characterized by an absence of enteric neurons in the distal part of
the bowel. Epigenetic modi ﬁcations, such as DNA methylation, are
known to play crucial roles in the development of the entericnervous system (ENS). However , the involvement of such modi ﬁca-
tions in HSCR pathogenesis, is still largely unknown.
Materials and methods: Colon tissue collected from HSCR
patients (n =5) and controls (n =5), was used to isolate ENS cells
by enriching for the neuronal marker p75NTRwith magnetically
activated cell sorting. Cell-type speci ﬁc genome-wide DNA
methylation pro ﬁling (MeD-seq), was performed using the
methylation-dependent restriction enzyme LpnPI. Differentially
methylated regions (DMRs) (>5.0-fold change) between HSCR and
controls, were identi ﬁed and used for a supervised hierarchical
cluster analysis.
Results: The MeD-seq yielded 1541 DMRs in transcription
starting sites (TSS), CpG islands and gene bodies. Gene ontology
analysis of these DMRs showed enrichment (>2.0-fold change) of
genes associated with regulatory pathways involved in nervoussystem development and differentiation. In the top 10 hyper-methylated TSS in HSCR patients, we identi ﬁedMAB21L2 . Previous
work from our group implicated this gene in ENS development by
showing enteric aganglionosis in mab21l2
-/-mutant zebra ﬁsh
embryos.
Conclusions: Our data shows that DNA methylation is involved
in HSCR pathogenesis, and suggests the involvement of MAB21L2
in disease development. These ﬁndings are particularly interesting
to further unravel new (modi ﬁer) genes involved in the etiology of
HSCR, as well as to provide new potential markers for genetic
counselling.
Funding: Stichting Sophia Kinderziekenhuis Fonds (S15-30).
J.D. Windster: None. M. Idris: None. R.G. Boers: None. C.E.J.
Sloots: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. V. Melotte: None. M.M.
Alves: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None.
P20.018.A Arm speci ﬁc miRNAs expression analysis of hsa-
miR-195 in non-small cell lung cancer
Veronika Y. Petkova1, Silva G. Kyurkchiyan1, Darina Kachakova -
Yordanova1, Gergana S. Stancheva1, Dora Marinova2, Evgeni
Mekov3, Yanina Slavova-Marinova2, Vanio Mitev1, Radka Kaneva1
1Molecular Medicine Center,Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, So ﬁa, Bulgaria,2University hospital
"Medika", Ruse, Bulgaria,3Clinical Center for Lung Diseases, Medical
Faculty, Medical University of So ﬁa, So ﬁa, Bulgaria.
Introduction: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs
expressed in various tissues and cell types.They can helpunderstanding the carcinogenesis of lung cancer and serve as
potential diagnostic biomarkers for differentiating squamous cell
carcinoma(SCC) and adenocarcinoma(ADC).The miR-195 hairpingives rise to the “guide strand ”miR-195-5p and the sister
“passenger ”strand miR-195-3p.This preference can be different
and can change dynamically depending upon tissue types. The
aim of the present study is to analyse and compare the expressionpatterns of miRNAs in ADC and SCC samples.
Methods: Fresh frozen tissue samples from 100 NSCLC patients
(50ADC,50SCC) and adjacent normal tissues were examined.Theexpression of miRNAs was evaluated by qRT-PCR.The normal-ization of data, statistical and target prediction analyses wereperformed using R version 3.0.2 and GSEA with the Python
package, GSEApy (version0.9.12).
Results: We assessed the expression levels of miR-195-5p and
miR-195-3p between the ADC and adjacent normal tissues andfound expression of miR-195-3p to be signi ﬁcantly differentially
downregulated (p < 0.001). Expression of miR-195-5p was signi ﬁ-
cantly downregulated (p =0.032) between the SCC and adjacent
normal. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and pathway enrichmentanalysis was performed to investigate relationship between miRNAand targeted mRNA. Most affected signaling pathways were mTOR
signaling pathway,Proteoglycans in ca ncer,DNA replication, Cell cycle,
Wnt signaling pathway, FoxO signaling pathway.
Conclusions: The expression patterns of miRNAs and their
target genes revealed both common and subtype speci ﬁc signal
pathways for ADC and SCC.Our results were in agreement with
previous suggestions that miR-5p/-3p arms regulated signalingpathways critical to lung cancer development and
chemoresistance.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Grants
DH03/14/19.12.2016/NSF; D01-285/17.12.2019,MES, Bulgaria.
V.Y. Petkova: None. S.G. Kyurkchiyan: None. D. Kachakova -
Yordanova: None. G.S. Stancheva: None. D. Marinova: None. E.
Mekov: None. Y. Slavova-Marinova: None. V. Mitev: None. R.
Kaneva: None.
P20.019.B Hydralazine promotes the expression of pluripo-
tency genes OCT4 and NANOG in human somatic cells
Alain Aguirre-Vazquez
1,2, Fabiola Castorena-Torres3, Luis A Salazar-
Olivo1, Mario Bermúdez de León2
1Instituto Potosino de Investigación Cientí ﬁca y Tecnológica, San Luis
Potosí, Mexico,2Centro de Investigación Biomédica del Noreste,
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, Mexico,3Tecnolo-
gico de Monterrey, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud,
Monterrey, Mexico.
Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) has
established promising opportunities for stem cell research, drug
discovery and disease modeling. Despite their enormous potential
in research, cell reprogramming is an inef ﬁcient process due to
iPSCs contain epigenetic signatures from their cells of origin. Thisepigenetic memory constitutes one of the greatest obstacles in
cell reprogramming. Currently, the search for small molecules that
generate changes in the chromatin structure and reactivate theexpression of genes related to cell reprogramming are of
particular interest. Here we report the sole and combined effect
of valproic acid (VPA), a class I selective HDAC inhibitor, andhydralazine (HYD), a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, drugs overthe expression of pluripotency genes in adult and newborn
ﬁbroblasts. Our results show that VPA upregulate NANOG
expression by 2-fold in adult ﬁbroblast. The combined effect of
VPA and HYD nulli ﬁes the effect of each drug over pluripotency
genes expression, except for cMYC which is increased in newborn
ﬁbroblasts. Interestingly, HYD signi ﬁcantly increase OCT4 and
NANOG expression by 2.5-fold and 4-fold, respectively in adult
ﬁbroblast. However, when HYD was added to enhance repro-
gramming ef ﬁciency no changes were observed. Currently, we are
evaluating the molecular mechanisms by which HYD increases
OCT4 and NANOG expression. Preliminary results suggest that
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha, HIF1A, and the nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2, NRF2, could be involved in the up-
regulation of OCT4 and NANOG . Finally, these data, for the ﬁrst
time, evidence that HYD regulates OCT4 and NANOG expression in
human somatic cells.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
546
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608A. Aguirre-Vazquez: None. F. Castorena-Torres: None. L.
Salazar-Olivo: None. M. Bermúdez de León: None.
P20.020.C Maternal-effect variants in PADI6 and NLRP2 genes
associated with reproductive anomalies, Multilocus Imprint-
ing Disorders (MLID) and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
(BWS)
Pierpaola Tannorella1, Luciano Calzari1, Alessandro Vimercati1,
Ester Mainini1, Davide Gentilini2,3, Maria Teresa Bonati4, Cecilia
Daolio5, Annalisa Pedrolli6, Lidia Larizza1, Silvia Russo1
1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, Cytogenetics and Molecular
Genetics Laboratory, Milano, Italy,2Istituto Auxologico Italiano,
IRCCS, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Unit of Bioinformatic andStatistical Genomic, Milano, Italy,3Department of Brain and
Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,4Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, Service of Medical Genetics, Milano, Italy,
5Pediatric Unit, Carlo Poma Hospital, Mantova, Italy,6IDivision of
Pediatrics, S. Chiara Hospital, Outpatient Consultation for RareDiseases, Trento, Italy.
Deregulated methylation at single germline-DMRs is causative of
Imprinting disorders (ID), diseases often characterized by growth
alterations and/or by neurological symptoms. A heterogenous
percentage of cases with a speci ﬁc ID has been discovered to
show deregulation in Multiple Loci (MLID). Here we refer to twopatients with MLID and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS,
OMIM # 130650), an overgrowth ID. The most frequent molecular
BWS defect (50%) consists in the KCNQ1OT1 :TSS-DMR hypomethy-
lation and among these patients at least 30% of cases displayMLID. The two mothers were investigated by WES disclosing novel
pathogenic variants, respectively in PADI6 and NLRP2 . These genes
are transcribed from the maternal genome, their mRNAsdeposited in the oocyte, where they code for components of
the subcortical maternal complex (SCMC), probably involved in
the establishment of genomic imprinting and post-zygoticmethylation maintenance. It is thought they play a role duringthe early stages of embryonic development. Two PADI6 variants, p.
Leu555Profs5ter and p.Asp547Asn, were detected in case 1: she
had a reproductive history countersigned by nine miscarriagesand a unique born child with BWS-MLID. The second mothershowed a truncating homozygous variant in the NLRP2 gene (p.
Gln602ter). Conversely, this woman had an infertility history and
underwent two ART attempts without success. Our ﬁndings
enforce the concept that variants in SCMC genes may contribute
to the birth of children with ID and MLID phenomenon; moreover,
these variants may explain infertility and/or miscarriages oftenobserved in these patients. Their study is extremely important inthe context of family genetic counseling.
P. Tannorella: None. L. Calzari: None. A. Vimercati: None. E.
Mainini: None. D. Gentilini: None. M. Bonati: None. C. Daolio:
None. A. Pedrolli: None. L. Larizza: None. S. Russo: None.
P20.021.D Targeted deletion of a cisregulatory element of
abca4 using a paired guide RNA CRISPR Cas9 system in
Xenopus tropicalis
Munevver Burcu Cicekdal
1,2, Miriam Bauwens1, Víctor López
Soriano1, Marjolein Carron1,2, Elfride De Baere1, Kris Vleminckx1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics and Department of Biomolecular
Medicine (GE31), Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,Ghent, Belgium,2Developmental Biology Unit, Department of
Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.Introduction: ABCA4 -retinopathy (including Stargardt disease,
STGD1) is by far the most common single-gene inherited retinal
disease (IRD). Non-coding variants in regions, such as cis-
regulatory elements (CREs), may be implicated in missingheritability of ABCA4 -associated disease. Xenopus (X.)tropicalis is
an interesting model organism for IRD, having the major cell types
of the human eye, and a true diploid genome. Here, we aimed tomap and functionally study CREs of the abca4 region and generate
a stable knock-out of a CRE of abca4 inX. tropicalis using CRISPR/
Cas9 editing.
Material and Methods: Putative CREs of abca4 were deter-
mined according to epigenetic markers H3K4me1 and Pol II in X.
tropicalis whole embryo. Regulatory activity of putative CREs was
tested using in vitro luciferase assays. Paired guide RNAs (gRNA)
and Cas9 in X. tropicalis embryos was used to create a deletion of a
selected CRE.
Results: A putative CRE of abca4 , showing around 2-fold
increase in luciferase activity compared to empty vector wasselected as a target for disruption. Two gRNAs were designed asﬂanking the target CRE of abca4 . The genomic region ﬂanking the
CRISPR target site was ampli ﬁed and sequenced. Genome editing
using a paired gRNA CRISPR/Cas9 system showed the deletion ofthe target CRE.
Conclusion: In conclusion, regulatory elements can be dis-
rupted in model organisms using paired gRNAs. Regulatory animal
models may contribute to the annotation of the non-codinggenome and provide insights into the regulation of IRD genes
such as abca4 .Funding: EU ITN, grant No. 813490.
M.B. Cicekdal: None. M. Bauwens: None. V. López Soriano:
None. M. Carron: None. E. De Baere: None. K. Vleminckx: None.
P20.022.A biallelic PTRHD1 frameshift variant associated with
intellectual disability
Ghalia Al-Kasbi , Abeer Al-Saegh, Ahmed Al-Qassabi, Tariq Al Jabry,
Fahad Al-Zadjali, Said Al-Yahyae, Almundher Al-Maawali
Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
Background: PTRHD1 was recently proposed as the disease-
causing gene in three families that shared the phenotype ofintellectual disability and parkinsonism. Further reports and
functional analysis to support the association are essential.
Objectives: To characterize the clinical phenotype and the
molecular cause of the intellectual disability in four affected
members of a consanguineous Arab family.
Methods: Clinical evaluation, neuroimaging studies, whole-
exome sequencing, Sanger sequencing of candidate variants,reverse transcriptase PCR, Real-Time PCR, immunoblot and
Isoelectric Focusing.
Result: A homozygous 28-nucleotide frameshift deletion
introducing a premature stop codon in the PTRHD1 exon onewas identi ﬁed in the four affected family members. We further
conﬁrmed the apparent transcript escape of the nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay pathway. Real-time PCR showed that
mRNA expression of the mutant PTRHD1 is higher compared towild-type. Western blotting identi ﬁed a stable truncated mutant
PTRHD1 protein expressed in the lymphocytes cells obtained from
the peripheral blood of the patients. Isoelectric focusing provedthat PTRHD1 protein in the affected individuals is truncated with
MW of 8KDa with no signi ﬁcant expression difference relative to
wild type protein.
Conclusion : We provide further evidence that PTRHD1 muta-
tions are associated with autosomal-recessive childhood-onset
intellectual disability and later symptoms of parkinsonism.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
547
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608G. Al-Kasbi: None. A. Al-Saegh: None. A. Al-Qassabi: None. T.
Al Jabry: None. F. Al-Zadjali: None. S. Al-Yahyae: None. A. Al-
Maawali: None.
P20.023.B Identi ﬁcation of long non-coding RNA controlling
regulatory T cell identity
Véronique Adoue1, Samira Ghazali1, Julie Noguerol1, Manuel
Lebeurrier2, Karl Laviolette1, Olivier Joffre1
1Inﬁnity, Université Toulouse, CNRS, Inserm, UPS, Toulouse, France,
Toulouse, France,2CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, Rennes, France.
Conventional CD4 T lymphocytes play a central role in the
protection of the organism against a wide range of endogenousand exogenous dangers. Their action needs however to be tightlycontrolled by a population of regulatory T cells (Treg) endowed
with immunosuppressive function. Treg critically control immune
tolerance to self and prevent chronic in ﬂammation. Long non-
coding RNA (lncRNA) are acknowledged as important regulators ofimmune cell differentiation, but the repertoire of non-coding
transcripts that control Treg development and function largely
remains to be identi ﬁed.
To achieve that goal, we fractionated the T cell compartment
based on the nature, origin, activation status and location of the
cells, and we analyzed the transcriptome of the 11 FACS-isolatedsubpopulations using a bioinformatic pipeline dedicated tolncRNA identi ﬁcation. In particular, since lncRNA are enriched in
sequences derived from transposable elements, we combined
speci ﬁc tools and scripts in order to properly handle multi-
mapped reads alignment.
This strategy allowed us to accurately annotate and to precisely
estimate the expression level of 2316 new lncRNA speci ﬁcally
expressed in Treg and located nearby immune genes. Usingconservation of synteny between mouse and human genomes, we
next showed that many of these genes correspond to auto-
matically annotated lncRNA genes in human, which overlap or arelocated nearby GWAS hits associated with immune-relateddisorders.
We are currently characterizing the function of the most
promising candidates using in vitro and in vivo functional assays.Promising lncRNA could be considered as new therapeutic tool tocontrol speci ﬁc T cell immunity.
V. Adoue: None. S. Ghazali: None. J. Noguerol: None. M.
Lebeurrier: None. K. Laviolette: None. O. Joffre: None.
P20.025.D Immunolocalization of epimarks: methylation
(5mC) and hydroxymethylation (5hmC) in sperm DNA, andmethylation (H3K4me3) and acetylation (H4K12ac) of lysine
residues in histones, in differentially protaminated human
spermatozoa
Marta Olszewska
1, Oliwia Kordyl1, Agnieszka Kralska1, Marzena
Kamieniczna1, Piotr Jedrzejczak2, Maciej Kurpisz1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 60-479,
Poland,2Department of Infertility and Reproductive Endocrinology,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 60-535, Poland.
Introduction: A special role in etiology of male infertility play
epigenetic modi ﬁcations of DNA and histones, including methylation
(5mC), hydroxymethylation (5hmC), histones ’lysine residues methyla-
tion or acetylation. Also, the link between sperm quality and thechromatin protamination status is known. Our aim was to determine
the relationship between 5mC, 5hmC, H3K4me3 and H4K12ac andthe sperm chromatin protamination , in three sperm subpopulations:
properly-protaminated, less-protaminated, and deprotaminated.
Materials and Methods: Spermatozoa from 31 patients with
oligo-/oligoasthenozoospermia and 28 normozoospermic controlswere evaluated using a sequential staining protocol (for the ﬁrst
time), which allowed to analyze the epimarks ’level and their
nuclear localization by immuno ﬂuorescent stainings on the same
spermatozoon with determined chromatin protamination status(aniline blue staining).
Results: The protamination levels of sperm chromatin and
5mC/5hmC were decreased in the infertile patients, followed by
increased values of H3K4me3 and H4K12ac, and higher inter-individual heterogeneity of all epimarks. All epimarks levels werehighest in properly-protaminated spermatozoa (both groups).
H4K12ac localization was shifted towards sperm acrosome in
majority of patients. A relationship between 5mC/5hmC andsperm motility or morphology was identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: The high DNA 5mC and low H3K4me3 levels are
markers for properly-protaminated spermatozoa, documenting thecorrect spermatogenesis. Its disru ption may indicate a reproductive
failure revealed as decreased quality of seminological parameters
and/or fertility problems. Disturbances in both histones ’epimarks
observed in this study may in ﬂuence fertilization process due to
a b n o r m a lc h r o m a t i nc o m p a c t i o ni na c r o s o m a la r e aa n dt h e naberrant gene transcription in early embryo development. Funding:
2015/17/D/NZ5/03442, National Science Centre in Poland
M. Olszewska: None. O. Kordyl: None. A. Kralska: None. M.
Kamieniczna: None. P. Jedrzejczak: None. M. Kurpisz: None.
P20.026.A Interaction between asbestos exposure and sto-
chastic epigenetic mutations in malignant pleuralmesothelioma
Giovanni Cugliari
1, Alessandra Allione1, Simonetta Guarrera2,3,
Elisabetta Casalone1, Davide Gentilini4, Federica Grosso5, Daniela
Ferrante6,7, Marika Sculco8, Anna Aspesi8, Roberta Libener9, Enrica
Migliore10,11,12, Dario Mirabelli10,11,12, Corrado Magnani6,7,10, Irma
Dianzani8,10, Giuseppe Matullo1,10,13
1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,
2Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, IIGM, Candiolo, Italy,
3Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO - IRCCS, Candiolo, Italy,4Department
of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,
5Mesothelioma Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera SS Antonio e Biagio e
Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy,6Unit of Medical Statistics, Depart-
ment of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale,Novara, Italy,7Cancer Epidemiology Unit, CPO-Piemonte, Novara,
Italy,8Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte
Orientale, Novara, Italy,9Department of Integrated Activities
Research and Innovation - Azienda Ospedaliera SS. Antonio e Biagioe Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy,10Cancer Epidemiology Unit,
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy,
11Cancer Epidemiology Unit, CPO Piemonte, Turin, Italy,12Inter-
departmental Center for Studies on Asbestos and Other ToxicParticulates "G. Scansetti", University of Turin, Turin, Italy,13Medical
Genetics Unit, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, Italy.
BACKGROUND : Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare
and aggressive neoplasm strongly associated with asbestos
exposure. The aim of this study is to investigate the relationship
between stochastic epigenetic mutations (SEMs) and MPM withthe aim to better characterize the burden between MPM cases
and controls. Interaction between asbestos exposure and SEM was
evaluated to infer on the MPM odds ratio (OR).
Methods: We analyzed methylation levels through the Human-
Methylation450 Beadchip in a population of 300 (163 cases and
137 controls) subjects. Multivariate regression analysis consideringAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
548
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608age, gender, population strati ﬁcation and WBCs composition was
performed. As second outcome, we investigated the effect of
asbestos exposure in cases and controls. Lastly, interaction
analysis was performed to better characterize the MPM OR.
Results: We demonstrated that mean of the number of total
SEMs (hypo and hyper) was higher in cases respect to controls. In
particular, hypo-SEMs showed a mean difference between cases
and controls about three-fold higher than hyper-SEMs. Moreover,mean SEMs increases in relation to asbestos exposure in cases butnot in exposed controls. Considering asbestos exposure and SEM
statistically signi ﬁcant interaction effect was found considering
categorical clustering by medians.
Conclusions: The SEMs approach can add information at the
level of epigenetic evaluation in the context of MPM. SEMs can be
used as outcome or mediator in association models in order to
better understand its contribution to MPM development. Con-sidering SEM occurrence and asbestos exposure levels may allow
clinicians to better evaluate MPM risk.
G. Cugliari: None. A. Allione: None. S. Guarrera: None. E.
Casalone: None. D. Gentilini: None. F. Grosso: None. D.
Ferrante: None. M. Sculco: None. A. Aspesi: None. R. Libener:
None. E. Migliore: None. D. Mirabelli: None. C. Magnani: None. I.
Dianzani: None. G. Matullo: None.
P20.027.B Directly detect and phase genomic 5mC methyla-
tion with high reproducibility and low bias using Nanoporesequencing
Rocío Esteban , Irina-Alexandra Vasilescu, Marcus H. Stoiber, Daniel
J. Turner, David Stoddart, Eoghan Harrington, Sissel Juul, PhilippRescheneder
Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Epigenetics, the study of heritable phenotypic changes that do not
involve alteration of the nucleotide sequence, plays a key role in
gene expression and has been associated with many diseases. AsPCR removes base modi ﬁcations, their detection via traditional
sequencing technologies requires the use of special library prepara-
tion steps to convert nucleotides according to their methylation
status. These additional steps are labour intensive, damage DNA,introduce biases and complicate ana lysis.With nanopore sequencing,
ampli ﬁcation and other sample prep is not required, enabling DNA
and RNA modi ﬁcations to be preserved and directly sequenced and
detected. Nanopore sequencing therefore greatly simpli ﬁes whole
genome methylation calling.Here we benchmarked the performance
of nanopore 5mC methylation calling to assess whether it could be
used as a replacement for traditional methods of 5mC detection. Wecompared nanopore methylation c alls with publicly available
bisulphite sequencing datasets of the NA12878 cell line. We showed
the effect of sequencing biases like GC bias and uniformity of
coverage and assed how much of the human genome can be calledby both technologies at different coverage levels. We found that at
20X Nanopore outperforms bisulphite sequencing datasets with
more than twice the sequencing depth. Furthermore, we found high
correlation (>0.9) of methylation f requencies compared to bisulphite
and high reproducibility between runs on a per base level as well asfor larger features like CpG islands. Finally, we successfully
demonstrated how to combine methylation calling with read
phasing to identify 5mC methylatio n status independently for both
haplotypes and identify i mprinted genes in humans.
R. Esteban: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ
cant;
Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. I. Vasilescu: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd.
M.H. Stoiber: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. D.J. Turner: A. Employment(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd.
D. Stoddart: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies Ltd. E. Harrington: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd. S. Juul:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore
Technologies Ltd. P. Rescheneder: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd.
P20.028.C Characteristics of DNA methylation of the regula-
tory region of the MLH1 gene in peripheral blood leukocytes
of patients with common age-related diseases
Nadezhda P. Babushkina , Anton V. Markov, Irina A. Goncharova,
Ramil R. Salahov, Iuliia A. Koroleva, Elena Yu Bragina, Aleksei A.
Zarubin, Alexei Sleptcov, Aksana N. Kucher, Maria S. Nazarenko M.S
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research
Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
MLH1 protein is one component of a system of DNA mismatch
repair. These proteins serve cruci al functions in many biological
processes. MLH1 epimutations is a cause of Lynch syndrome.
However, there is not data about the DNA methylation of theregulatory region of the MLH1 gene in leukocytes of patients with
common age-related diseases. We studied the DNA methylation level
of the MLH1 promoter region in peripheral blood leukocytes ofpatients with severe carotid atherosclerosis (n =22), Huntington ’s
disease (n =14), lung cancer (n =8) and healthy individuals (n =27)
by bisul ﬁte NGS on the Illumina platform. There was no statistically
signiﬁcant difference of DNA methylation level of the MLH1
promoter region (GRCh37/hg19; chr3:37,033,249-37,033,762)between groups of patients and healthy individuals, although the
mean methylation levels for individual CpG-sites varied signi ﬁcantly
(from 0.1 to 12%). We found that lung cancer patients differsigniﬁcantly in the level of methylation of the CpG-site chr3:
37,033,373 from healthy people and patients with Huntington ’s
disease (p =0.046 and p =0.0196, respectively). The highest average
methylation level for most CpG-sites was detected in leukocytes ofpatients with lung cancer (34.7%-73,0%). Patients with Huntington ’s
disease had the lowest average methyl tion level for most CpG-sites
in leukocytes (26.5%-65.0%).Thes e data indicate the differences in
mean methylation levels of indiv idual CpG-sites in Huntington ’s
disease and lung cancer but w ithout a total change in the
methylation status of studied region of the MLH1 gene. This work
was carried out with partial support of the RFBR grant No. 19-015-
00391-A
N.P. Babushkina: None. A.V. Markov: None. I.A. Goncharova:
None. R.R. Salahov: None. I.A. Koroleva: None. E.Y. Bragina:
None. A.A. Zarubin: None. A. Sleptcov: None. A.N. Kucher: None.
M.S. Nazarenko M.S.: None.
P20.029.D New diagnostic tool for multi-locus imprinting
disturbances
Eguzkine Ochoa1, Sunwoo Lee1, Benoit Lan-Leung1, Renuka
Dias2,3,4, Ken K. Ong5,6, Jessica A. Radley7,8, Gustavo Pérez de
Nanclares9, Rosa Martinez9, Graeme Clark10, Ezequiel Martin10, Luis
Castaño9, Leonardo Bottolo11,12,1, Eamonn R. Maher1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Institutes of Metabolism and Systems Research, Birmingham, United
Kingdom,3Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
Birmingham, United Kingdom,4Department of Paediatric Endocri-
nology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children ’s Hospital NHS Founda-
tion Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,5MRC Epidemiology Unit,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
549
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, United Kingdom,6Department of
Paediatrics, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom,7West
Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham HealthPartners, Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,8London North
West Regional Genetics Service, St. Mark ’s and Northwick Park
hospitals, Harrow, United Kingdom,9Biocruces Bizkaia Health
Research Institute, Hospital Universitario Cruces, CIBERDEM, CIBERER,
Endo-ERN, University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), Barakaldo,
Spain,10Strati ﬁed Medicine Core Laboratory NGS Hub, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom,11The Alan Turing
Institute, London, United Kingdom,12MRC Biostatistics Unit, Uni-
versity of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Multi-locus imprinting disturbance (MLID) is de ﬁned as multiple
imprinting defects across the genome and has been described in
miscarriages, recurrent hydatidi form moles and in some congenital
imprinting disorders (CIDs). These i mprinting defects are produced by
epimutations but their underlying cause in most cases is unknown. An
increased risk of MLID has been asso ciated with assisted reproductive
technology births and genetic causes may be identi ﬁed in a small
subset of patients (e.g. biallelic ZFP57 mutations). The speci ﬁci m p a c t
of MLIDs on clinical phenotype is not well de ﬁned though some
patients will have discordant epig enotype-phenotype. We analysed
145 individuals with a CID and 70 healthy controls with ImprintSeq, acustom targeted methylation sequencing panel capable to inter-
rogate 63 imprinting differentially methylated regions (iDMRs). We
deﬁned 3 standard deviation con ﬁdence interval of mean methylation
level (MML) per iDMR in the healthy controls and we distinguishedloss-of-methylation (LOM) and gai n-of-methylation (GOM) when MML
per iDMR is below or above this interval. We classi ﬁed the signi ﬁcant
signals detected in high (HMA) and mo derate methylation alteration
(MMA) based on the difference with MML in controls. Using proposeddiagnostic criteria for MLID (in addition to the primary CID-associated
diagnostic epimutation) of either a LOM/GOM HMA at a CID-
associated iDMR or LOM/GOM HMAs at two non-CID iDMRs, thefrequency of MLID in individual CIDs varied between 0% to 42%.Proﬁling larger cohorts of CID patients will contribute to determine
the signi ﬁcance of HMAs at speci ﬁc iDMRs for patient phenotype. This
research was supported by the Cambridge NIHR BRC
E. Ochoa: None. S. Lee: None. B. Lan-Leung: None. R. Dias:
None. K.K. Ong: None. J.A. Radley: None. G. Pérez de Nanclares:
None. R. Martinez: None. G. Clark: None. E. Martin: None. L.
Castaño: None. L. Bottolo: None. E.R. Maher: None.
P20.030.A Characterization of the functional enhancers in
human neural stem cells
Elena Perenthaler , Soheil Youse ﬁ, Ruizhi Deng, Anita Nikoncuk,
Tahsin Stefan S. Barakat
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
The development of the cerebral cortex is a complex and dynamic
process. Alterations at any stage can result in a wide range ofneurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), that are a common cause of
developmental delay, intellectual disability, and epilepsy. Exome
sequencing greatly increased the diagnostic yield of genetic formsof NDDs, allowing the identi ﬁcation of variations in hundreds of
genes. Nevertheless, many cases remain genetically unexplained,
hinting at variations in the non-coding genome. Among these non-coding regions are the understudied enhancers, cis-acting elements
that control gene-expression in a temporal and tissue-speci ﬁ
c
manner during many key-developmental processes. Here, wecombined analysis of transcription factor binding sites, histone
modi ﬁcations (ChIPseq) and open chromatin regions (ATACseq) with
the massively parallel reporter assay ChIP-STARR-seq to identify the
subset of functional enhancers in human neural stem cells, an invitro model re ﬂecting early brain development. This led to a
genome-wide, quantitative map of enhancer activity of relevance for
neurodevelopmental disorders.
E. Perenthaler: None. S. Youse ﬁ:None. R. Deng: None. A.
Nikoncuk: None. T.S. Barakat: None.
P20.031.B Hybrid minigene assay: an ef ﬁcient tool to
characterize mRNA splicing pro ﬁles of NF1 variants
Valeria Morbidoni1,2, Elisa Baschiera1,2, Monica Forzan2, Valentina
Fumini2, Dario Seif Ali2, Gianpietro Giorgi2, Lisa Buson1,2, Maria
Andrea Desbats1,2, Matteo Cassina2, Maurizio Clementi2, Leonardo
Salviati1,2, Eva Trevisson1,2
1Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica - Fondazione Città della Speranza,
Padova, Italy,2Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women ’s and
Children ’s Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
Introduction: Neuro ﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1) is caused by hetero-
zygous loss of function mutations in NF1. Although patients are
diagnosed according to clinical criteria and few genotype-
phenotype correlations are known, molecular analysis remainsimportant. NF1 displays allelic heterogeneity, with a high
proportion of variants acting on splicing, including deep intronic
alleles and changes outside the canonical splice sites, making
validation problematic. NGS technologies integrated with MLPAhave largely overcome RNA-based techniques that are faster andwith high yield, but do not detect splicing defects.
Materials and Methods: We set up and employed a rapid
minigene-based system to test the effect(s) of 29 intronic andexonic variants in NF1, which were identi ﬁed in patients during
molecular analyses, on splicing.
Results: The minigene assay allowed to assess the effect(s) on
splicing for all the variants we examined and showed thecoexistence of multiple mechanisms of splicing alterations for
seven of them. In one de novo substitution identi ﬁed in a sporadic
patient with a mild phenotype, a leaky effect on splicing wasdocumented suggesting a new genotype-phenotype correlation.
Conclusions: Our splicing assay proved to be a reliable and fast
method to validate novel NF1 variants potentially affecting
splicing and to detect hypomorphic effects that might underlinemilder phenotype, avoiding the requirement of patient ’s RNA.
Funding: Grants from Italian Ministry of Health (Young Researcher,
Grant number GR-2016-02362779) and Istituto di Ricerca Pedia-trica Fondazione Città della Speranza IRP (Grant number 19/10).
V. Morbidoni: None. E. Baschiera: None. M. Forzan: None. V.
Fumini: None. D. Seif Ali: None. G. Giorgi: None. L. Buson: None.
M. Desbats: None. M. Cassina: None. M. Clementi: None. L.
Salviati: None. E. Trevisson: None.
P20.033.D Identi ﬁcation of the regulatory network at the
nsCL/P associated GWAS locus 1p36.13
Ronja Hollstein
1, Frederic Thieme1, Julia Welzenbach1, Hanna K.
Zieger1, Julia Schröder1, Magdalena Laugsch2, Kerstin U. Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany,
2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany, Heidelberg, Germany.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
550
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Non syndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P) is
among the most common birth defects. The condition has a
multifactorial etiology with a strong genetic component. Within
the last decade, more than 40 risk loci have been identi ﬁed
through GWAS and the majority of risk loci map to non-codingregions. The development of nsCL/P takes place during the ﬁrst
4-10 weeks of embryogenesis, and is presumed to involve several
transient cell systems. Thus, the translation of disease-associatednon-coding variants into a functional model is challenging andfurther limited by the availability of cellular models and the
presumed time point- and tissue speci ﬁc effect of the variants. Our
group has previously shown that associated risk variants for nsCL/P are strongly enriched in active regulatory elements of humanneural crest cells (hNCCs). Preliminary 4C data using the sentinel
SNV of the newly identi ﬁed risk locus 1p36.13 as viewpoint
suggest an interaction with GRHL3 , a known cleft palate-
associated gene. Further, we used an in silico approach to screen
the sentinel SNV for possible transcription factor binding sites.
Interestingly, we identi ﬁed binding motifs of key regulators of
neural crest development, such as TFAP2A and SNAI2, to beaffected by the SNV. To unravel the underlying regulatory
network, we are establishing a combined approach of circular
chromosome conformation capture (4C) and ChIP-seq in iPSC-derived hNCCs, and ﬁrst results will be presented at the
conference. Overall, this project will contribute to the identi ﬁca-
tion and understanding of regulatory networks involved in the
development of nsCL/P.
R. Hollstein: None. F. Thieme: None. J. Welzenbach: None. H.
K. Zieger: None. J. Schröder: None. M. Laugsch: None. K.U.
Ludwig: None.
P20.035.B From man to mouse: The discovery and validation
of CYR61 as a regulator of body composition
Sophia Metz , Katja Thorøe Michler, Matthew Paul Gillum, Tuomas
Oskari Kilpeläinen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Obesity is a major contributor to the global burden of chronic
disease. There is currently a great unmet need for developingeffective and safe anti-obesity treatments. Genomic studies
provide novel molecular targets for obesity treatment by
discovering genes and pathways involved in obesity. We haverecently identi ﬁed an association between the rare variant
Ser316Cys in CYR61 , implicated in angiogenesis, and increased
body fat percentage (P =1.1x10
-9), particularly trunk fat percen-
tage (3.8x10-11). The Cys316 minor allele was associated with a 0.4
% higher body fat percentage and 0.5% higher trunk fat
percentage. In a mouse model overexpressing human-Cyr61
(hCyr61) in the fat tissue, we see an increased body fat percentageunder a high fat diet (HFD), due to a switch in body composition(higher fat mass, lower lean mass), while body weight did not
differ from WT mice. The mean area of adipocytes was increased
in the hCyr61 overexpressing mice (p =0.009), re ﬂecting
increased adipocyte hypertrophy. The endogenous Cyr61remained unaffected by hCyr61, but was abundantly expressed
in all fat depots, supporting a hypothesis of CYR61 being involved
in fat tissue development. Our results suggest a critical role ofCYR61 in the regulation of body composition, possibly mediated
by angiogenesis and adipocyte growth. Ongoing in vitro
experiments will provide further insights into the mechanisticrole of CYR61 in the development of obesity and metabolic
dysfunction. Ultimately, understanding the mechanisms of how
CYR61 regulates body composition may enable new therapeuticoptions for the treatment of obesity by lowering fat mass and
retaining lean mass.
S. Metz: None. K.T. Michler: None. M.P. Gillum: None. T.O.
Kilpeläinen: None.
P20.036.C Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of a cohort
of 41 patients affected by Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Spec-trumpatients affected by Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Spectrum(OAVS)
Valentina Guida
1, Luciano Calzari2, Maria Teresa Fadda3, Francesca
Piceci-Sparascio1,4, Maria Cristina Digilio5, Laura Bernardini1, Fran-
cesco Brancati6,7, Teresa Mattina8, Daniela Melis9, Francesca
Forzano10, Silvana Briuglia11, Tommaso Mazza12, Sebastiano
Bianca13, Enza Maria Valente14,15, Leila Bagherjad Salehi16, Paolo
Prontera17, Pagnoni Mario3, Romano Tenconi18, Bruno Dallapiccola5,
Giorgio Iannetti3, Luigi Corsaro19, Alessandro De Luca1, Davide
Gentilini2,19
1Medical Genetics Division, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,2Istituto Auxologico Italiano
IRCCS, Bioinformatics and Statistica l Genomics Unit, Cusano Milanino,
Italy,3Department of Maxillofacial Su rgery, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy,4Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy,5Genetics and Rare Diseases Research
Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
6Department of Life, Health and Env ironmental Sciences, Unit of
Medical Genetics University of L ’Aquila, L ’Aquila, Italy,7IRCCS San
Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy,8Medical Genetics, Department of
Biomedical and Biotechnological S ciences, University of Catania,
Catania, Italy,9Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry,
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy,10Clinical Genetics Department,
Guy’s & St Thomas ’NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,
11Medical Genetics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy,12Unit of
Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca sa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,13Centro di Consulenza Genetica e Teratologia
della Riproduzione, Dipartimento M aterno Infantile, ARNAS Garibaldi
Nesima, Catania, Italy,14Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,15IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy,16Tor
Vergata University Hos pital, Medical Genetics Unit, PTV, Rome, Italy,
17Medical Genetics Unit, Universi ty of Perugia Hospital SM della
Misericordia, Perugia, Italy,18Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics,
Università di Padova, Padova, Italy,19Department of Brain and
Behavioral Sciences, Univer sity of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Introduction: Oculo-auriculo-vertebral -spectrum (OAVS) is a rare
disorder of craniofacial morphogenesis involving the ﬁrst and second
branchial arch derivatives. The clinical phenotype is extremely
heterogeneous with ear anomalies, hemifacial microsomia, oculardefects, and vertebral malformations being the main features.
C h r o m o s o m a la n o m a l i e sa sw e l la sp o i n tm u t a t i o n sh a v eb e e n
documented in some OAVS patients, but the etiology of the diseaseremains largely unknown. A multifactorial origin has been proposed,including the involvement of envir onmental/epigenetic mechanisms.
To search for the epigenetic mechanisms contributing to disease, we
explored the DNA-methylation pro ﬁle of OAVS individuals.
Material and methods: study-cohort included 41 OAVS-
affected subjects and the tissue-matched methylation pro ﬁles of
48 anonymous healthy individuals. DNA-methylation pro ﬁles were
obtained by using the Illumina In ﬁnium Methylation 450K
Beadchip.
Results : analysis was ﬁrst carried out comparing OAVS patients
with controls at the group level. This approach revealed amoderate epigenetic variation in a large number of genesimplicated in basic chromatin dynamics such as DNA packaging
and protein-DNA organization. An alternative approach based onAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
551
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608the analysis of individual pro ﬁles to search for Stochastic
Epigenetic Variants (SEVs) identi ﬁed an increased number of SEVs
in OAVS subjects compared to controls. Although no recurrent
deregulated enriched regions were found, isolated patientsharboring suggestive epigenetic deregulations were identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: The recognition of a different DNA methylation
pattern in the OAVS cohort and the identi ﬁcation of isolated
patients with suggestive epigenetic variations provide consistentevidence for the contribution of epigenetic mechanisms to theetiology of this complex and heterogeneous disorder. Funding:
IMH RC2019, RC2020
V. Guida: None. L. Calzari: None. M. Fadda: None. F. Piceci-
Sparascio: None. M. Digilio: None. L. Bernardini: None. F.
Brancati: None. T. Mattina: None. D. Melis: None. F. Forzano:
None. S. Briuglia: None. T. Mazza: None. S. Bianca: None. E.
Valente: None. L. Bagherjad Salehi: None. P. Prontera: None. P.
Mario: None. R. Tenconi: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. G.
Iannetti: None. L. Corsaro: None. A. De Luca: None. D. Gentilini:
None.
P20.037.D Weighted gene co-expression network analysis
identi ﬁes critical altered pathways and hub genes in high-
grade serous ovarian cancer
Magdalena Niemira
1, Karolina Chwialkowska2, Agnieszka Bielska1,
Anna Szalkowska1, Iwona Sidorkiewicz1, Urszula Korotko2, Anna
Erol1, Justyna Raczkowska1, Gabriela Sokolowska1, Katarzyna
Doroszko1, Sylwia Chludzinska3, Jacek Szamatowicz4, Pawel Knapp5,
Miroslaw Kwasniewski2, Joanna Reszec3, Marcin Moniuszko6, Adam
Kretowski1,7
1Clinical Research Centre, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok,
Poland,2Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,3Department of Medical
Pathomorphology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,
4Department of Gynecology and Gynecological Oncology, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,5University Oncology
Center, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,6Depart-
ment of Regenerative Medicine and Immune Regulation, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,7Department of Endocri-
nology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Medical University ofBialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Introduction: High-grade serous ovaria nc a n c e r( H G S O C )i st h e
most common histological subtype of epithelial ovarian cancer,with a ﬁve-year survival rate below 30%. While the disease
limited only to the ovaries can be cured in up to 90% of patients,
most cases are diagnosed at a late stage. Therefore, a moreeffective understanding of the i mportance of biological path-
ways and the relationship between major genes in HGSOC in the
perspective of searching for new targets are still urgently
required.
Materials and methods: The transcriptional changes between
tumour (n =33) and normal (n =33) ovary tissues were investi-
gated by RNA-seq. Gene ontology (GO), canonical pathways
analysis (IPA), gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and weightedgene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify co-expressed modules and hub genes were used to explore the
biological functions of the dysregulated genes.
Results: The analysis revealed that 2718 deregulated genes
were related to developmental process, cell cycle, cytokines,
inﬂammatory response and apoptosis. By using WGCNA was
revealed 15 co-expression modules and identi ﬁed the driving
module for HGSOC associated with the tumour size, the presenceof lymph node metastasis and the distant metastasis. The hub
genes including FOXK2 ,EFNA5 ,XPC,VGLL4 ,ELP1 ,MKKS ,LIN7B ,STS,ZNF23 and ZNF71 , which may be potential biomarkers or
therapeutic targets for HGSOC, have been identi ﬁed.
Conclusions: Theﬁndings of the present study could improve
our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of HGSOC andshed light on further investigation. Data were generated by the
Centre for Arti ﬁcial Intelligence of the Medical University of Bialystok .
M. Niemira: None. K. Chwialkowska: None. A. Bielska: None.
A. Szalkowska: None. I. Sidorkiewicz: None. U. Korotko: None.
A. Erol: None. J. Raczkowska: None. G. Sokolowska: None. K.
Doroszko: None. S. Chludzinska: None. J. Szamatowicz: None. P.
Knapp: None. M. Kwasniewski: None. J. Reszec: None. M.
Moniuszko: None. A. Kretowski: None.
P20.038.A Mitochondrial D-loop region methylation and copy
number are not altered in peripheral blood of Parkinson ’s
disease patients
Andrea Stoccoro1, Adam R. Smith2, Claudia Del Gamba3, Katie
Lunnon2, Filippo Baldacci3, Lucia Migliore1, Fabio Coppedè1
1Department of Translational Research and of New Surgical and
Medical Technologies, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,2University of
Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom,3Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
Introduction: In recent years growing evidence on a potential
role of altered mitochondrial DNA methylation in several diseaseshas emerged, although until now little attention has been given to
neurodegenerative diseases. Recently, we reported that methyla-
tion levels of the mitochondrial displacement loop (D-loop)region, which regulate mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication,are impaired in peripheral blood cells of late-onset Alzheimer ’s
disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. The aim of the
current research was to investigate D-loop methylation levels andmtDNA copy number in Parkinson ’s disease (PD) patients.
Materials and Methods: Blood samples have been collected
from 30 PD and 30 age and sex matched control subjects. DNAmethylation analyses have been performed by means ofMethylation Sensitive High Resolution Melting (MS-HRM) and
pyrosequencing techniques, while mtDNA copy number by means
of quantitative PCR.
Results: MS-HRM and pyrosequencing analyses provided very
similar D-loop methylation levels in PD patients and control subjects,
and no differences between the two groups have been observed.
Moreover, use of L-dopa and duration of the disease had no effect onD-loop methylation levels in PD patients. Also mtDNA copy number
did not differ between PD patients and control subjects. A signi ﬁcant
inverse correlation between pyrosequencing D-loop methylationlevels and age at sampling of the individuals enrolled has beendetected (r =-0.53, p< 0.0001).
Conclusions: Current results suggest that D-loop methylation
levels are not altered in peripheral blood of PD patients andreinforce previous evidence that peripheral blood mtDNAmethylation are sensitive to ageing.
A. Stoccoro: None. A.R. Smith: None. C. Del Gamba: None. K.
Lunnon: None. F. Baldacci: None. L. Migliore: None. F. Coppedè:
None.
P20.039.B Transcriptome analysis of the effects of melano-
cortin and tuftsin analogues in rat brain
Ivan B. Filippenkov
1, Vasily V. Stavchansky1, Natalya Yu Glazova1,
Natalia G. Levitskaya2, Elena A. Sebentsova1, Daria D. Khukhareva2,L i y a
V. Valieva1, Anna E. Golubovich3, Nikolai F. Myasoedov1,S v e t l a n aA .
Limborska1, Lyudmila V. Dergunova1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
552
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre
«Kurchatov Institute», Moscow, Russian Federation,2Lomonosov
Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation,3I.M. Seche-
nov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov University),Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Synthetic peptides have a wide range of clinical
effects. Of particular interest, peptides based on adrenocortico-tropic hormone (ACTH) and tuftsin are used as drugs to preventthe effects of cerebral ischemia and stress. However, their precise
mechanisms of action within the body remain unclear to date.
Here, we used high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) toanalyze differential expressed genes (DEGs) in the frontal cortex ofrats produced by melanocortin (ACTH(4 –7)PGP (Semax), ACTH
(6–9)PGP), and tuftsin (Selank) analogues under normal physiolo-
gical conditions.
Materials and Methods: Wistar rats, RNA-Seq, real-time RT-PCR,
bioinformatics.
Results: Using RNA-Seq we revealed 257, 100, and 228 DEGs with
cut-off>1.5 and padj < 0.05 at 22.5h after the ﬁrst administration of
Semax, Selank, and ACTH(6 –9)PGP, respectively. Moreover, all the
peptides tested had a strong effect on the expression of genes (e.g.,
RT1-Ba, Cxcl13, RT1-Db1, RT1-Da) associated with the immunesystem. Simultaneously, each of the peptides had a speci ﬁc effect on
the transcriptome. We revealed DEGs of nucleic acids and protein
metabolism (Tlr7, Cd48, Stk17b, Eif2ak2, Fli1) for Selank; DEGs linked
to lipid binding (Apol3, Apol9a), and the regulation of ion channels(Grin2a, Arc, Slc6a13) for Semax; and DEGs associated with the
functioning of proteasomes (Psma8, Psmb11, Psmb8, Psmb9), and
DNA replication (Mcm3) for ACTH(6 –9)PGP action.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that when studying the effects of
regulatory peptides on the transcriptome under pathological
conditions, it is necessary to consider their effects under normal
physiological conditions. This work was supported by grant fromthe Russian Science Foundation 19-14-00268.
I.B. Filippenkov: None. V.V. Stavchansky: None. N.Y. Glazova:
None. N.G. Levitskaya: None. E.A. Sebentsova: None. D.D.
Khukhareva: None. L.V. Valieva: None. A.E. Golubovich: None.
N.F. Myasoedov: None. S.A. Limborska: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending
grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Russian
Science Foundation (Grant number 19-14-00268). L.V. Dergu-
nova: None.
P20.040.C A common variant in the PHOX2B 3’UTR is
associated with infant life-threatening and sudden death
events in the Italian population
Tiziana Bachetti
1,2, Simona Bagnasco1, Raffaele Piumelli3, Antonella
Palmieri4,Isabella Ceccherini1
1Laboratorio di Genetica e Genomica delle malattie rare, IRCCS
Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,2University of Genova-DISTAV,
Genova, Italy,3Centro per i Disturbi Respiratori nel Sonno-Centro
Regionale SIDS, Firenze, Italy,4Dipartimento di Emergenza, Centro
SIDS-ALTE, Genova, Italy.
Heterozygous mutations in the Paired like homeobox 2b ( PHOX2B )
gene are responsible for congenital central hypoventilation
syndrome (CCHS), a rare autosomic dominant monogenic diseasecaused by a compromised development of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS).
CCHS is characterized by a predominant respiratory phenotype
due to sudden hypoxic manifestation, a condition resembling twoother unexplained perinatal disorders caused by defective ANS,
apparent life-threatening event (ALTE) and Sudden andUnexpected Infant Death (SUID), among which the vast majority
is represented by Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS).
However, while CCHS is a Mendelian disorder, ALTE and SIDS
are complex traits, where common genetic variants, together withexternal factors, may exert an additive effect with symptoms likelymanifesting only over a “threshold ”.
Given the similarities observed among the three above
mentioned perinatal disorders, in order to search a genetic roleofPHOX2B in both complex traits we have analysed the frequency
ofPHOX2B common variants in two groups of Italian idiopathic
ALTE (IALTE) and SUIDs/SIDS patients.
We have found that the c*161G>A (rs114290493) SNP of the
3’UTR of PHOX2B resulted overrepresented in the two sets of
patients compared to population matched healthy controls;
moreover, it was associated with a decreased activity of the
PHOX2B 3 ’UTR mediated by miR-204, likely resulting in a reduced
PHOX2B expression, in accordance with observations made in
specimens derived from SIDS patients.
Overall these results suggest that c*161G>A causes a loss-of-
function effect of PHOX2B , and can be considered a susceptibility
factor in Italian sudden unexplained perinatal life-threatening or
fatal disorders
T. Bachetti: None. S. Bagnasco: None. R. Piumelli: None. A.
Palmieri: None. I. Ceccherini: None.
P20.041.D Extensive placental methylation pro ﬁling in normal
pregnancies
Ornella Rondinone
1, Alessio Murgia1, Jole Costanza1, Silvia
Tabano2,3, Margherita Camanni1, Luigi Corsaro4, Laura Fontana1,5,
Patrizia Colapietro2, Luciano Calzari6, Silvia Motta1, Carlo Santa-
niello1, Tatjana Radaelli7, Davide Gentilini4,6, Silvia Maria Sirchia5,
Monica Miozzo1,5
1Research Laboratories Coordination Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale
Ca’Granda Policlinico Milano, Milan, Italy,2Department of Pathophy-
siology and Transplantation, Medical Genetics, Università degli Studi diMilano, Milan, Italy,3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca’Granda Ospedale Maggiore P oliclinico, Milan, Italy,4Department of
Brain and Behavioral Sciences, Uni versità di Pavia, Pavia, Italy,5Medical
Genetics, Department of Health Sci ences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy,6Bioinformatics and Statistical Genomics Unit,
Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS , Cusano Milanino, Milan, Italy,
7Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
The placenta is the transient organ of primary importance during
pregnancy, intimately connecting mother and fetus and ensuringnutrients and oxygen to the embryo, waste disposal and productionof hormones. In order to allow the pregnancy to progress, even in
presence of unfavorable conditions (of maternal or fetal origin), the
placenta can adapt dynamically, a process favored by epigeneticmodi ﬁcations. These modi ﬁcations may persist after birth, as an
“epigenetic memory ”,a n di n ﬂuence post-natal health (DoHad
hypothesis by D. Barker). In order to de ﬁne the placenta methylome
compared to cord blood by means of an ontology- driven approach,we explored the LINE-1 methylation pro ﬁle in cord blood and
placenta samples from 154 uncomplicated full-term pregnancies,
and the genome-wide methylation pattern by methylation array
(Inﬁnium EPIC array) in ten pregnancies and by targeted methylation
sequencing (Methyl-Seq) in other ﬁve pregnancies. Our results
showed: 1) a signi ﬁcant hypomethylation in placenta compared to
cord blood (including LINE-1, promoters, CpG islands, gene bodies,and tilings); 2) a more pronounced LINE-1 hypomethylation inplacenta of small for gestational age neonates; 3) similar methylome
proﬁles among cord blood samples, whereas they were variable inAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
553
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608placenta, suggesting a placental broader plasticity compared to the
fetus. Gene-ontology of the 1000 most variable sites between cord
blood and placenta showed that promoters and gene bodies that
are hypermethylated in placenta are associated with blood speci ﬁc
functions, while those hypomethylated mainly belong to pathwaysinvolved in cancer (mainly neuroendocrine). Taken together these
evidences support the functional analogies between placenta and
cancer.
O. Rondinone: None. A. Murgia: None. J. Costanza: None. S.
Tabano: None. M. Camanni: None. L. Corsaro: None. L. Fontana:
None. P. Colapietro: None. L. Calzari: None. S. Motta: None. C.
Santaniello: None. T. Radaelli: None. D. Gentilini: None. S.
Sirchia: None. M. Miozzo: None.
P20.042.A Characterization of placental methylation quanti-
tative trait loci
Ariadna Cilleros-Portet1, Sergi Marí1, Barbara Paola González-
García1, Iraia García-Santisteban1, Mariona Bustamante2, Loreto
Santa Marina3, Jose Ramon Bilbao1,4, Nora Fernandez-Jimenez1
1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) andBiocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Basque Country, Spain,
2ISGlobal, Barcelona Institute for Global Health, Barcelona, Spain,
3Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastián, Gipuzkoa,
Spain,4Spanish Biomedical Research Center in Diabetes and
Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Placenta plays a crucial role in the mother-child
interplay during prenatal development, and placental DNA
methylation could re ﬂect environmental exposures and affect
health and disease in early infancy. However, the contribution ofgenetics to DNA methylation patterns remains unclear. The aimhas been to map placental DNA methylation Quantitative Trait
Loci (mQTLs) to ascertain to which extent genetic background
shapes the methylation landscape.
Material and Methods: To establish placental mQTLs we
combined DNA methylation and genotype data from 373 samples
from the INMA cohort. Linear regressions between genotypes and
methylation levels were performed using TensorQTL in a ±1 Mbwindow, adjusted by sex and ﬁve principal components. We also
annotated the mQTL-participating CpGs and conducted enrich-
ment analyses with the DisGeNET database.
Preliminary results: We obtained 61,105 signi ﬁcant placental
mQTLs from which, 39,284 of these were located inside one or more
genes. We observed an enrichment of mQTL-participating CpGs in
open sea, and CpG island shelf and shore regions, but a signi ﬁcant
absence in promoter regions and stable areas of the methylome,such as Partially Methylated Domains (PMDs), and imprinting regions.
The mQTL-CpGs presented intermediate methylation (around 60%)
compared to the typical trimodal distribution of the placenta (withparticular enrichment around 0 and 100% methylation). Finally, theGene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that the genes located closest
to the mQTL-CpGs were enriched in 53 traits, including, colorectal
cancer and several drug-dependency and -abuse related traits.Funding: MINECO-PID2019-106382RB-I00 and GV-SAN2018111086 toJRB, ISCIII-PI18/01142 to LSM a nd GV-SAN2019111085 to NFJ.
A. Cilleros-Portet: None. S. Marí: None. B.P. González-García:
None. I. García-Santisteban: None. M. Bustamante: None. L. Santa
Marina: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. N. Fernandez-Jimenez: None.
P20.043.B SV detection, SNP phasing and haplotype methyla-
tion calling from one nanopore sequencing dataset provides
insights to complex genomic disorderHeather Mary Jeffery , Philipp Rescheneder, Daniel Turner, Phillip
James, Sissel Juul
Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Genetic disorders are a major factor in ﬂuencing human morbidity
and can manifest through combinations of genetic, epigenetic and
environmental factors. Often, deter mining the underlying aetiological
features of a given disease requires a multi-faceted approach.Genomic disorders which present as both genetically and clinically
heterogeneous, like Prader-Willi syndrome, add a further layer of
complexity and hinder genetic interrogation at targeted loci.
Here we use Prader-Willi syndrome as an example of how one
method i.e. long-read whole genome nanopore sequencing, can
provide detailed insights into the underlying genetic and
epigenetic causes of a rare inherited genomic disorder.
Prader-Willi syndrome is characterised by the loss of function of
usually paternally expressed genes on a ~5Mb region of
chromosome 15. We describe how whole genome sequencing,
structural variant (SV) detection, SNP phasing and concurrenthaplotyped methylation data from one PromethION ﬂow cell
sequencing run can be used to characterise the underlying
genetic and epigenetic changes of Prader-Willi trios along with
their patterns of inheritance.
Within the three trios we investigated, we have examples of i)
an SV removing paternally expressed alleles paired with silencing
of maternal alleles by methylation, ii) a paternally inherited smallSV in the imprinting centre silencing a wide range of thepaternally expressed alleles via methylation of promoter regions,
and iii) SNP phasing identi ﬁcation of uniparental disomy of
maternal alleles leading to complete gene silencing.
Similar combinatorial analysis using nanopore sequencing can
also be applied to other complex and/or unresolved genetic
disorders to provide cost and time-ef ﬁcient biological insights.
H.M. Jeffery: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies. P. Rescheneder: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi
ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies. D. Turner: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore
Technologies. P. James: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Oxford Nanopore Technologies. S. Juul: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies.
P20.044.C Common RUNX3 missense variant contributes to
psoriatic arthritis by modifying differentiation of CD8+T-cells
Iris Kerker1, Sabine Löhr1, Steffen Uebe1, Bernt Popp1,2, Georgia
Vasileiou1, John Bowes3, Philipp Kirchner1, Ina Becker4, Emiliano
Giardina5, Eleanor Korendowych6, Arif B. Ekici1, Pauline Ho3, Frank
Behrens7, Michaela Köhm7, Georg Schett8, Jürgen Rech8, Gunter
Assmann9, Ali Nimeh10, Leonid Padyukov11, Gerd-Marie Alenius12,
Neil J. McHugh13, Heinrich Sticht14, Benjamin Frey4, Harald
Burkhardt7, Anne Barton3,15,André Reis1, Ulrike Hüffmeier1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany,2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig
Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany,3The Centre for Genetics
and Genomics, University of Manchester, Manchester, United King-dom,4Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany,5University of Rome Tor Vergata,
IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy,6Royal National Hospital
for Rheumatic Diseases, NHS Foundation Trust, Bath, UnitedKingdom,7Division of Rheumatology and Frauenhofer Institute for
Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany,8Department of Internal Medicine 3 -
Rheumatology and Immunology, Friedrich-Alexander-UniversitätErlangen-Nürnberg and University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
554
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Germany,9Department of Internal Medicine I, José-Carreras Centrum
for Immuno- and Gene Therapy, University of Saarland Medical
School, Homburg/Saar, Germany,10Department of Rheumatology,
Fachklinik Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, Germany,11Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden,12Department of Public Health and
Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden,
13Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath,
Bath, United Kingdom,14Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry,
FAU-Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,15NIHR Manchester
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Central Manchester
Foundation Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester
Academy of Health Sciences, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) is a chronic T-cell mediated joint disease
occurring in up to 30% of patients with psoriasis vulgaris (PsV).
Genome-wide association studies identi ﬁed >60 largely over-
lapping susceptibility loci for PsA/ PsV with mostly unde ﬁned
disease-contributing mechanisms. At one of these, the RUNX3
locus, association has also been described in celiac disease andankylosing spondylitis. The gene encodes a transcription-factorexpressed in T-cells and skin. Insuf ﬁcient coverage by genotyping-
arrays at RUNX3 prompted a ﬁne-mapping approach using 32
tagging SNPs. Association analysis in 3,049 European PsA patientsand 6,178 controls showed signi ﬁcant association to 5 SNPs
(6.52E-12 ≤p≤2.82E-07) within one intragenic LD-block. Genomic
annotations for SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium were
inconclusive. Haplotype and conditional analyses pointed todisease-contribution by the common variant c.53T>A/p.Ile18Asn.
Its proximity to an intron suggested alternative splicing, but
transcriptomes in CD8
+T-cells did not con ﬁrm this hypothesis.
Comparative transcriptome analysis in CD8+T-cells indicated
altered T-cell regulation affecting their differentiation, activation
and signaling. In carriers of the risk-allele, the CD8+T-cells were
increased, NK cells decreased; the ratio of CD4+/CD8+correlated
signi ﬁcantly with the genotype of the disease-contributing variant
(p=0.035). Our study indicates that the RUNX3 risk-allele in PsA
affects differentiation of T-cells, a disease-mechanism which might
also be relevant for other complex autoimmune diseases.
Grants: BMBF Metarthros-01EC1407A, CRC1181-project A05I. Kerker: None. S. Löhr: None. S. Uebe: None. B. Popp: None.
G. Vasileiou: None. J. Bowes: None. P. Kirchner: None. I. Becker:
None. E. Giardina: None. E. Korendowych: None. A. Ekici: None.
P. Ho: None. F. Behrens: None. M. Köhm: None. G. Schett: None.
J. Rech: None. G. Assmann: None. A. Nimeh: None. L. Padyukov:
None. G. Alenius: None. N. McHugh: None. H. Sticht: None. B.
Frey: None. H. Burkhardt: None. A. Barton: None. A. Reis: None.
U. Hüffmeier: None.
P20.045.D Comprehensive pro ﬁling of multi-omics features in
CD4+T cells revealed that DNA methylation-mediated
regulatory variants contribute to substantial heritability of
rheumatoid arthritis
Eunji Ha1, So-Young Bang2,3, Jiwoo Lim1, Jun Ho Yun4, Jeong-Min
Kim4, Jae-Bum Bae4, Hye-Soon Lee2,3, Bong-Jo Kim4, Kwangwoo
Kim1, Sang-Cheol Bae2,3
1Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,2Hanyang University
Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,3Hanyang
University Institute for Rheumatology Research, Seoul, Korea,Republic of,4National Institute of Health, Osong Health Technology
Administration Complex, Cheongju, Korea, Republic of.
Introduction: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune
disease, primarily affecting joints. CD4+T cells have been
highlighted as the most relevant cell type to RA pathogenesisby non-coding RA-risk variants on CD4+-speci ﬁc regulatory
elements. This study aimed to examine how RA-speci ﬁc tran-
scriptomic features in CD4+T cells are led by RA-risk genetic
variants with effects on DNA methylation.
Methods: We generated genomic, transcriptomic, and DNA
methylation data of CD4+T cells from 82 RA patients and 40
controls. RA-speci ﬁc differentially expressed genes (DEGs), differ-
entially methylated regions (DMRs), and their quantitative trait loci(QTLs) were identi ﬁed to dissect regulatory sources for DEGs in
CD4+T cells based on individual-level inter-omics correlations. A
partitioned heritability enrichment analysis was performed using
ancestry-matched RA genetic association results to assess thestatistical enrichment of RA heritability in query genomic regions.Result: We identi ﬁed 2,575 DEGs, re-emphasizing T-cell differentia-
tion and activation pathways. DMRs were preferentially located in
T-cell-speci ﬁc regulatory regions, showing signi ﬁcant correlations
with the expression of 548 DEGs. QTLs for expression and
methylation were detected in 771 DEGs and 83 DMR-
methylation-correlated DEGs, respectively. We observed muchlarger enrichment of RA heritability in DEG-correlated DMRs with alarge number of methylation QTLs than in expression-
uncorrelated DMRs or non-DMRs.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings demonstrate that DNA methylation
alterations driven by RA-risk variants contribute to expressionalchanges of RA-speci ﬁc DEGs in CD4 +T cells. Grants: National
Research Foundation of Korea (2017R1E1A1A01076388), Korea
NIH (2012-N73006-01;2017-NI73002-02), Korea Disease Controland Prevention Agency (4848-308;4845-301), Hanyang University
Institute for Rheumatology Research
E. Ha: None. S. Bang: None. J. Lim: None. J. Yun: None. J. Kim:
None. J. Bae: None. H. Lee: None. B. Kim: None. K. Kim: None. S.
Bae: None.
P20.047.B Identi ﬁcation of novel SCN5A regulatory regions
using a CRISPRi system in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes
Adrian Pérez-Agustín
1,2, Hector Hugo Galvez-Leon2, Sara Pagans1,2
1Department of Medical Sciences. Universitat de Girona., Girona,
Spain,2Biomedical Research Institute of Girona (IDIBGI), Girona,
Spain.
Genetic alterations in SCN5A , encoding the alpha subunit of the
cardiac sodium channel, are associated with cardiac arrhythmias
and may lead to sudden cardiac death. Recent ﬁndings also
suggest that aberrant SCN5A gene expression may increase
susceptibility to arrhythmogenic diseases, but the regulatory
mechanisms of this gene are still not well understood. Here, weperform a CRISPRi-based screening along the topological asso-ciated domain (TAD) of SCN5A in order to identify novel regions
involved in the control of its gene activity and topology. We used
a human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) line in which theexpression of a deactivated Cas9 fused to a KRAB repressiondomain (dCas9-KRAB) is induced upon doxycycline (Dox) treat-
ment. We designed several gRNAs targeting hotspot regions
within the SCN5A TAD, based on ENCODE and ChIP-seq data from
cardiac transcription factors. hiPSCs were differentiated intocardiomyocytes resulting in a homogeneous population of mature
beating cells within 30 days. SCN5A differential expression analysis
of+/-Dox-treated cells using RT-qPCR was performed to identify
SCN5A regulatory regions. Our results show that targeting SCN5A
promoter regions leads to 2-fold decreased gene expression and
identify novel SCN5A enhancer regions within the neighboring
SCN10A gene. Our data con ﬁrm that the CRISPRi screening system
is suitable for the precise characterization of SCN5A regulatory
regions. Further analysis of speci ﬁc regions with ChIP-seqAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
555
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608techniques and electrophysiological assays may be a launch pad
to elucidate novel molecular mechanisms underlying arrhythmo-
genic diseases. Funding: Agaur-fellowship (AP-A), SAF2015-70823-
R (MINECO/FEDER-UE).
A. Pérez-Agustín: None. H.H. Galvez-Leon: None. S. Pagans:
None.
P20.048.C Multi-locus imprinting disturbance in a child with
Silver-Russell syndrome and maternal effect gene variants
Sunwoo Lee1, Eguzkine Ochoa1, Eamonn R Maher1,2
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Cambridge
University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Congenital imprinting disorders (CID) such as Beckwith-
Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) and Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS)
may be associated with multi-locus imprinting disturbances
(MLIDs). Mostly, an underlying cause is not identi ﬁed, but MLID
may be associated with biallelic pathogenic variants in ZNF57 or in
maternal effect genes (MEGs) such as NLRP2 ,NLRP7 ,NLRP5 ,PADI6
and KHDC3L . Here we describe a case of SRS-MLID associated with
maternal variants in MEGs.Methylation pro ﬁling of 63 genomic
regions containing imprinted DMRs was undertaken in a female
child diagnosed with SRS and compared to healthy controls. The
proband demonstrated signi ﬁcant methylation alterations at 35
DMRs among 63 imprinted DMRs. Further Whole-Exome Sequen-cing analysis revealed that both proband and the mother
harboured a heterozygous PADI6 frameshift insertion located in
chr1:g.17401225 [GRCh38/hg38, c.1873dupA, p.G624fs], which hasnot been previously reported. In addition, two further maternaleffect missense variants; PADI6 [chr1:g.17401225, c.1456T>C, p.
C486R] and NLRP5 [chr1:g.56027344, c.1111C>T, p.L371F]. Both
missense variants were classi ﬁed as VUSs (PM1, PM2, PP3 and
PM1, BP4 respectively). PADI6 is a component of subcortical
maternal complex (SCMC), which has a crucial role in early
embryonic development and biallelic PADI6 mutations were
initially described in women with infertility characterised by earlyembryonic arrest. Our genetic ﬁndings in this family could be
consistent with the occurrence of MLID in the proband secondary
to maternal biallelic PADI6 mutations (which would imply an
increased recurrence risk). However, the interpretation of thepathogenicity of rare missense variants in the absence of previous
reports or a functional assay is challenging.
S. Lee: None. E. Ochoa: None. E. Maher: None.
P20.049.D SMAD4 gene coding transcripts with alternative 5 ’
ends as colorectal cancer biomarkers
Tamara Babic
1,Sandra Dragicevic1, Marko Miladinov2, Zoran
Krivokapic2,3,4, Aleksandra Nikolic1
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,2Clinic for Digestive Surgery, Clinical
Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia,3Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia,4Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts,
Belgrade, Serbia.
Introduction: Aberrant use of multiple promoters contributes
signi ﬁcantly to a global change in transcription, which is
recognized as a de ﬁning feature of cancer. Changes in alternative
promoter activity might lead to alternations in expression pattern
of transcripts with alternative 5 ’ends, making them potential
cancer biomarkers. The aim of this study was to pro ﬁle the
expression of two major transcripts of SMAD4 gene, a key tumorsuppressor for most human tissues, and evaluate their potential as
rectal cancer biomarkers.
Materials and methods: Portion of SMAD4-201 and SMAD4-
202 among total SMAD4 transcripts was analyzed using quanti-tative PCR in seven permanent human cell lines and twelve tumorand corresponding healthy tissue samples from patients with
rectal cancer.
Results: Cell lines Caco-2, HCT116, DLD-1 and SW480 had a
similar portion of SMAD4-201 as non-malignant cell line HCEC-1C(between 35% and 50%), while cell lines SW620 and HT-29
contained very low (less than 10%) and very high (almost 100%)
portions of SMAD4-201, respectively. The portion of SMAD4-201transcript was increased for average 20.6% in malignant incomparison to non-malignant tissue (p =0.001). Transcript
SMAD4-201 was undetectable in all analyzed samples.
Conclusions: Alteration in the composition of SMAD4 tran-
scripts can be attributed to change in levels of transcripts other
than SMAD4-201 and SMAD4-202. The results obtained for
transcript SMAD4-201 in human tumor and non-tumor tissuesamples indicate translational potential of this molecule as rectalcancer biomarker. Acknowledgement: This research was sup-
ported by the Science Fund of the Republic of Serbia, PROMIS,
#6052315, SENSOGENE.
T. Babic: None. S. Dragicevic: None. M. Miladinov: None. Z.
Krivokapic: None. A. Nikolic: None.
P20.050.A Tanycytes and Co. A single cell analysis of the brain
third ventricle
Maxime Brunner
1, Federico Santoni1, Fanny Langlet2
1CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland,2University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Tanycytes are specialized epend ymoglial cells lining the wall
and the ﬂoor of the third ventriclenext to ependymal cells from
which they are morphologically distinct. Beside from being a
neuralstem cell niche, they are known to be involved in a varietyof functions such as metabolismregulators and traf ﬁc controllers
at the interface between blood and brain. Single-cell RNAse-
quencing was performed on induced adult mouse tdTomato-
positive cells isolated by FACS inthree different metabolicconditions (fed, 12h-fast and 24h -fast mice). Sequencing data
were mainlyanalyzed using Seurat where differential gene
expression (DGE) analysis was conducted onintegrated data
between fed and fasting conditions. Different tools were usedfor inference of cellpseudotime , RNA velocity and for inference
of intercellular network communication.We were able to identify
potential sub-popul ations of ependymal cells as well as known
and newspeci ﬁc markers for tanycyte sub -populations. Pseudo-
time trajectories showed for the ﬁrst timeastrogenesis in adult
mice from alpha-tanycytes. DGE analysis enlightened the
activation of severaltranscriptio nal pathways of induced cellular
stress in fast24 compared to fed c ondition. Intriguingly,in 12h-
fast and 24h-fast, an additional cell cluster expressing genes
speci ﬁc of the suprachiasmaticnucleus (SCN) appeared. Given
that no cells from SCN were expected to be targeted bythisexperiment, further investig ations are ongoing to clarify this
ﬁnding.In conclusion, this work shows the power of single cell
transcriptomics to analyze the complexity ofheterogeneous
neural structures and to understand the interplay among keycell types inenvironment sens ing and energy homeostasis.
M. Brunner: None. F. Santoni: None. F. Langlet: None.
P20.051.B TFAP2B haploinsuf ﬁciency as a cause of Chronic
Instestinal Pseudo-obstructionAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
556
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Almira Zada1, Bianca M. de Graaf1, Laura Kuil1, Jonathan D.
Windster1,2, Marjon A. van Slegtenhorst1, Alice Brooks1, Robert M. W.
Hofstra1, Erwin Brosens1, Maria M. Alves1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus
University Medical Centre - Sophia Children ’s Hospital, Rotterdam,
Netherlands.
Introduction : Chronic Intestinal Pseudo-obstruction (CIPO) is a
congenital enteric disorder characterized by severe intestinal
dysmotility without mechanical obstruction. Although severalgenes have been described in the etiology of this disease, themajority of patients have an unknown molecular genetic
diagnosis. The Transcription Factor AP-2 Beta (TFAP2B) regulates
neural crest cells speci ﬁcation. Pathogenic missense mutations in
this gene cause Char syndrome, characterized by characteristicfacial features, patent ductus arteriosus and hand abnormalities.
However, no gastro-intestinal defects have been reported.
Material and methods : Whole exome sequencing of a CIPO
patient revealed a de novo heterozygous deletion in TFAP2B (TFAP2B
c.602-5_606delTCTAGTTCCA). To prove pathogenicity of this dele-
tion, an exon trapping-splice site assay was performed. The effect of
this deletion on RNA and protein expression levels, was alsodetermined by in vitro assays, and compared to two TFAP2B
missense variants (c.C706T and c.C898T) found in patients with Char
syndrome. Moreover, tfap2b crispant and morphant zebra ﬁsh were
generated, to determine the effect of this gene in vivo.
Results : Our results con ﬁrmed that this TFAP2B deletion affects
RNA splicing, and results in loss of exon 4, leading to the
appearance of a premature stop codon. As a consequence,decreased RNA levels and absence of TFAP2B protein wereobserved. No effect on the expression levels of TFAP2B was
detected for the two Char missense variants. Loss of tfap2b in
zebra ﬁsh leads to hypoganglionosis and delayed intestinal
peristalsis.
Conclusions: TFAP2B haploinsuf ﬁciency likely underlies CIPO
pathogenesis, as this gene seems to be required for intestinaldevelopment and function.
A. Zada: None. B.M. de Graaf: None. L. Kuil: None. J.D.
Windster: None. M.A. van Slegtenhorst: None. A. Brooks: None.
R.M.W. Hofstra: None. E. Brosens: None. M.M. Alves: None.
P20.052.C A molecular map of long non-coding RNA expres-
sion, isoform switching and alternative splicing inosteoarthritis
Georgia Katsoula
1, Julia Steinberg1,2,3, Margo Tuerlings4, Rodrigo
Coutinho de Almeida4, Lorraine Southam1, Diane Swift5, J Mark
Wilkinson5, Eleftheria Zeggini1
1Institute of Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Neuherberg, Germany,2Cancer Research Division, Cancer Council
NSW, Sydney, Australia,3School of Public Health, University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia,4Department of Biomedical Data Sciences,
Section Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University, Leiden, Nether-lands,5Department of Oncology and Metabolism, University of
Shefﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom.
Osteoarthritis is a prevalent joint disease and a major cause of
disability worldwide. Despite osteoarthritis having a remarkableburden there is currently no curative therapy. Cartilage degradation
is a hallmark of osteoarthritis progression and is characterized by
large transcriptomic changes. We aim to decipher the molecularmechanisms of knee osteoarthritis pathology in cartilage tissue.We performed RNA sequencing in paired samples of high andlow-grade knee osteoarthritis cartilage derived from 207 osteoar-
thritis patients. We identi ﬁed markers of osteoarthtis progression
combining gene and transcript-level analysis for the ﬁrst time. We
detected widespread differential expression between low and high-grade osteoarthritis articular cartilage for 9,871 genes, differentialtranscript expression for 189 genes and differences in transcript
usage for 79 genes at 5% FDR in the largest transcriptomic study of
osteoarthritis to date. We identi ﬁed 186 genes showing evidence for
alternative splicing and described the individual events for the ﬁrst
time in osteoarthritis. We detected novel transcript-speci ﬁcm a r k e r s
including ABI3BP, PTPRE, PRDX1 and GADD45 found in both
transcript-level and splicing analyses. Gene-level markers novellyassociated with osteoarthritis include TMEM59L and PMCH as well as
lncRNA markers including TENM3-AS1 and MYOSLID .E x p l o r i n gt h e
enrichment of differentially expressed genes and transcripts we
detected terms related to extracellular matrix, metabolism andspliceosome formation as well as new pathways gained from
transcript-level analysis including collagen related terms. The
impacted pathways serve as potential targets for novel therapeutics.
G. Katsoula: None. J. Steinberg: None. M. Tuerlings: None. R.
Coutinho de Almeida: None. L. Southam: None. D. Swift: None.
J. Wilkinson: None. E. Zeggini: None.
P20.053.D Chromatin LINE1 RNAs control the switch from
quiescence to activation in human T lymphocytes
Federica Marasca
1, Shruti Sinha1, Rebecca Vadalà1, Benedetto
Polimeni1, Valeria Ranzani1, Elvezia Paraboschi2, Renata Grifantini1,
Giulia Soldà2, Stefano Biffo1, Sergio Abrignani1, Beatrice Bodega1
1INGM, Milan, Italy,2Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
T-cell quiescence is actively enforc ed at transcriptional and transla-
tional levels, but its epigenetic maintenance is unknown. Weexplored the role of LINE1, the largest class of Transposable
Elements, in human T-cells. We found that LINE1-RNAs is enfolded
in chromatin of naïve CD4+T-cells and downregulated through
mTORC1 upon activation. Sequencing of chromatin-associated RNAidenti ﬁed hundreds of shorter variants of T-cell activation genes with
LINE1 novel exons.LINE1 transcripts in complex with Nucleolin
reduce expression of the originating genes hampering H3K36me3levels. We demonstrated that T-ce lls depleted of LINE1-RNAs increase
their effector responses. LINE1-RNAs reappear in T-cells from
mTORC1 hyperactivation genetic disease (Lymphangioleiomyoma-
tosis) patients, treated for life with mTORC1 inhibitors,and indysfunctional T-cells in ﬁltrating colorectal or lung tumors, where
LINE1-RNAs depletion rescue T-cel l function.Our study uncovers a
novel epigenetic mechanism contributing to enforcement of T-cellquiescence and suggests that LIN E1 RNAs abundance is critical for
T-cell effector function in physiolo gical and pathological contexts.
F. Marasca: None. S. Sinha: None. R. Vadalà: None. B.
Polimeni: None. V. Ranzani: None. E. Paraboschi: None. R.
Grifantini: None. G. Soldà: None. S. Biffo: None. S. Abrignani:
None. B. Bodega: None.
P21 New Treatments for Genetic Disorders
P21.002.C Improving the ef ﬁciency correction of mutation
с.337delG in the EGFP gene during cell cycle synchronization
in the G2/M phase
Milyausha Zaynitdinova , Vasilina Sergeeva, Alexander Lavrov,
Svetlana Smirnikhina
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
557
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Introduction: Genome editing techniques, in particular, CRISPR-
Cas9, could correct a wide range of gene mutations. The classic
approach is the use of Cas9 nuclease and single guide RNA, which,
when paired, create a DNA double-strand break at desired locus.This break is subsequently repaired by HDR, which is possible onlyin the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, while the major repairing
pathway is NHEJ, which creates additional mutations. One of the
approaches to increasing HDR is the use of various agents thatsynchronize cells in the G2/M phase.
Materials and Methods: ABT-751, nocodazole and vinblastine
were chosen as synchronizers. At the ﬁrst stage, their optimal
concentrations for HEK293T cell cu lture were determined: 560 ng/ml
for ABT-751, 50 ng/ml for nocodazole and 10.1 μg/ml for vinblastine.
Next, we edited the c.337delG mutation at the exogenous EGFP gene
in the HEK293T. CRISPR-Cas9 components were delivered as plasmid
DNA together with ssODN for DNA repair by lipofection. Editingefﬁciency was assessed by ﬂow cytometry and TIDER.
Results: According to cytometric analysis, the using of ABT-751,
nocodazole, and vinblastine increases the ef ﬁciency of correction
mutation by 2.5, 1.8 (p < 0.05) and 3.9 times (p < 0.05), respec-tively. According to TIDER, the ef ﬁciency of correction mutation
increases to 17.1% (ABT-751, p < 0.05), 3.5% (nocodazole, p < 0.05)
and 1.5% (vinblastine), compared with the basic level (0.4%).
Conclusions: The ef ﬁciency of correcting a single nucleotide
deletion in the EGFP gene increases by synchronization of cell
cycle in the G2/M phase in HEK293T culture, apparently due to the
activation of HDR.
M. Zaynitdinova: None. V. Sergeeva: None. A. Lavrov: None.
S. Smirnikhina: None.
P21.003.D In vitro evaluation of DMD transcripts after
Golodirsen treatment of MyoD-converted ﬁbroblasts of
patients enrolled in the 4053-101 clinical trial
Rachele Rossi
1,2, Marc Moore1,2, Silvia Torelli1,2, Pierpaolo Ala1,2,
Francesco Catapano1,2,3, Rahul Phadke3, Jennifer Morgan1,2, Jyoti
Malhorta4, Francesco Muntoni1,2
1UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom,2Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health Biomedical
Research Centre, London, United Kingdom,3UCL Queen Square
Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,4Sarepta Thera-
peutics, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy is an X-linked, neuromuscular
disease caused by dystrophin gene ( DMD ) mutations which result
in a substantial reduction or absence of the dystrophin protein.
Deletions are the most commonly occurring mutation type,disrupting the transcriptional reading frame, and causing dystro-phin loss. Antisense oligonucleotide-induced exon skipping can
restore the mRNA reading frame and produce an internally
deleted, yet functional dystrophin protein, as Exondys 51
TMdoes
in patients with con ﬁrmed DMD gene mutations amenable to
exon 51 skipping.
Golodirsen (formerly SRP-4053) is a phosphorodiamidate
morpholino oligomer (PMO) developed by Sarepta Therapeutics,Inc., to target exon 53 of the DMD gene. In Study 4053-101, we
demonstrated exon skipping and dystrophin restoration in all
patients. Some variability of protein restoration was observed in
different patients, likely due to the not well-understood mechan-ism of delivery of PMOs and other factors. Here, we aim to assess
the exon 53 PMO-induced skipping in primary cell cultures from
these patients.Fibroblasts, from patients enrolled in Study 4053-101, underwent Myo-D induced differentiation and were treatedwith golodirsen. After screening for exon skipping ef ﬁciency in
treated patients ’cells and in healthy controls, we evaluated thetranscript 5 ’-3’imbalance in treated vs non-treated patient cells by
custom FluiDMD cards. To better understand the intracellular RNA
dynamics of the deleted and skipped products, we investigated
the transcript subcellular localization by BaseScope assay. Ourdata will be correlated with the previously obtained in-vivo data,to provide a more comprehensive assessment of the response to
golodirsen in eligible patients.
Grant: Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc.
R. Rossi: None. M. Moore: None. S. Torelli: None. P. Ala: None.
F. Catapano: None. R. Phadke: None. J. Morgan: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc. J. Malhorta: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc. F. Muntoni: B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant
and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc..
P21.004.A Combination of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
valproic acid and stopcodon readthrough therapy produces
improved alpha-galactosidase activity in Fabry patient-
derived R227X ﬁbroblasts
Halil Dündar , Gürsel Bibero ğlu, Asl ıİnci, Ilyas Okur, Leyla Tümer,
Fatih Ezgü
Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, ANKARA, Turkey.
Premature terminations codons (PTCs) in the coding regions of
DNA form approximately 30% of gene lesions in human geneticdiseases, which result in produc tion of non-functional truncated
proteins. Some compounds referrred to as stopcodon read-
through drugs induce ribosomes to readthrough PTCs and
restore the function of missing pr oteins in a variety of genetic
diseases by interfering with ribosomal function, which allows
translation of some full-length protein. This strategy can be
applied to any disease provided that the molecular cause is aprimary nonsense mutation. Triamterene was a previouslyidenti ﬁed stopcodon readthrough drug for the treatment of
MPS I-Hurler caused by PTCs. In a previous study we demon-
strated the suppression of R227X nonsense mutation by treatingtheﬁbroblasts of a male Fabry patient with triamterene. Since
PTC bearing transcripts are subject to degradation by nonsense
mediated decay, we hypothesize that an increase in gene
expression by a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor incombination with triamterene will lead to a greater increase in
enzyme activity than triamtrene alone. For this purpose we
treated the ﬁbroblasts with triamterene alone (90 μM) and
triamterene in combination with different concentrations of (21,
62, 125, 250, 500, 1000 μg/ml) valproic acid (VPA), which is a
HDAC inhibitor. In agreement w ith our hypothesis, we found a
more robust increase in α-galactosidase activity in ﬁbroblasts
treated with both drug than in cells treated with triamterenealone where triamterene induc ed readthrough in combination
with 125 and 250 μg/ml VPA yiel d e d2 . 5a n d3 . 1 - f o l dm o r e
activity than triamterene did.
H. Dündar: None. G. Bibero ğlu:None. A.İnci: None. I. Okur:
None. L. Tümer: None. F. Ezgü: None.
P21.005.B Creation of a joint consortium to treat Kosaki
syndrome
Maxime Luu1, Alison Foster2, Cristina Aguirre Rodriguez3, Hanna
Westergren4, Unai Hernandez Dorronsor5, Itziar Martinez Soroa6,
Derek Lim2, Sarah Thompson2, Ann Nordgren7, Sara Bluefeather8,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
558
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Elise Schaefer9, Marc Bardou1, Pierre Vabres10, Jean-Emmanuel
Kurtz11, Laurence Faivre12
1Centre d ’Investigation Clinique –module plurithématique, CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France,2West Midlands Regional Gene tics Service, Birmingham
Women ’sa n dC h i l d r e n ’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United
Kingdom,3Internal Medicine Department, Donostia University Hospital,
Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain,4Neuropaediatric department, Astrid
Lindgren ’s Children ’sa n dY o u t h ’s Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
5Pediatrics Department, Donostia Un iversity Hospital, Donostia-San
Sebastián, Spain,6Ophthalmology Department, Donostia University
Hospital, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain,7Department of Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Universit y Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,8Peadia-
trics, Hervey Bay & Maryborough hospital, Maryborough, Queensland,
Australia,9S e r v i c ed eg é n é t i q u em é d i c a l e , institut médical de génétique
d’alsace, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
10Centre référence MAGEC, Dijon, France et Inserm UMR1231 GAD,
Génétique des Anomalies du Déve loppement, Université Bourgogne
Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,11Department of medico-surgical
oncology and hematology, Strasbourg Cancer Institute ICANS, INSERMU4113, Strasbourg, France,12Centre de Référence Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malf ormatifs, FHU TRANSLAD et ERN
ITHACA, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France et Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique
des Anomalies du Développement, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France.
Background: Kosaki overgrowth syndrome (KOGS) is an ultrarare
disorder characterized by characteristic facial features, tall stature,
skeletal features, hyperelastic t hin skin and MRI brain anomalies.
Vascular and neurological deterioration may arise. This disorder isdue to heterozygous act ivating variants in PDGFRB , also responsible
for Penttinen syndrome and infantile myo ﬁbromatosis. Imatinib
mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting PDGFR that has been
extensively used in chronic myelogenous leukemia as well as in GIST,with a well-known and safe toxicity pro ﬁle. To date, 5 patients with
myoﬁbromatosis or Penttinen syndrome have been treated with
Imatinib with encouraging safety and ef ﬁcacy results.
Material and methods: The creation of a joint and pluridisci-
plinary consortium for treating KOGS has been proposed to 5international teams that were put in contact after the article
(Foster et al., 2020) was published, either by contact between
physicians or through families.
Results: The consortium wishes to use a common protocol and
to set up follow-up meetings to optimize the sharing of
knowledge around the ef ﬁcacy and tolerance of Imatinib in KOGS,
but also administrative/ethical issues. Taking into account theclinical heterogeneity of the syndrome, some ef ﬁcacy endpoints
should be personalized. To date, the ﬁrst French patient, aged 55
years, has been treated with progressively increasing dose ofImatinib for 1.5 months and already reports some improvement ofhis quality of life with no adverse outcome.
Conclusion: The consortium is looking for teams interested in
joining this international initiative to improve the collectiveexpertise for the bene ﬁt of patients.
M. Luu: None. A. Foster: None. C. Aguirre Rodriguez: None. H.
Westergren: None. U. Hernandez Dorronsor: None. I. Martinez
Soroa: None. D. Lim: None. S. Thompson: None. A. Nordgren:
None. S. Bluefeather: None. E. Schaefer: None. M. Bardou: None.
P. Vabres: None. J. Kurtz: None. L. Faivre: None.
P21.006.C Testing therapeutic strategies in MERRF cell models
Mariantonietta Capristo
1, Valentina Del Dotto2, Concetta Valentina
Tropeano1, Claudio Fiorini2, Monica Montopoli3, Valerio Carelli1,
Alessandra Maresca11ISNB, Bologna, Italy,2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
3University of Padova, Bologna, Italy.
Introduction: MERRF is a mitochondrial encephalomyopathy
caused by mtDNA mutations in the MT-TK gene, always foundheteroplasmic with a high threshold for the expression of the
pathologic phenotype. These mutations lead to a severe defect in
the mitochondrial protein synthesis, impairing mitochondrialcomplexes activity. We tested some therapeutic approaches inMERRF cell models, to rescue defective mitochondrial function.
Materials and Methods: We used ﬁbroblasts and cybrids carrying
different loads of the m.8344A>G mutation to test two differenttherapeutic approaches: i) the increase of absolute wild type mtDNAmolecules, inducing mitochondrial biogenesis by over-expression of
PGC1 αprotein and by NAD
+donor nicotinic acid treatment; ii) the
reduction of mutant mtDNA molecules, stimulating the removal ofdamaged mitochondria, by chronic rapamycin treatment.
Results: Theﬁrst approach (i) was effective in slightly increasing
mitochondrial protein expression and respiration in the wild typeand intermediate-mutation load cybrids and ﬁbroblasts, but were
ineffective in high-mutation load cell lines. These results suggest
that induction of mitochondrial biogenesis is not suf ﬁcient to
improve mitochondrial respiration in MERRF cybrids and ﬁbro-
blasts with high mutation load. The second approach (ii),ineffective in cybrids, induced a slight increase of basal and
maximal respiration in ﬁbroblasts with high mutation load, and a
signi ﬁcant improvement in ﬁbroblasts with intermediate-mutation
load, rescuing completely the bioenergetics defect. Indeed, we
observed an upregulation of PGC1 α, and consequently increased
mitochondrial biogenesis, possibly related to inhibition ofmTORC1 and activation of TFEB.
Conclusions: Overall, these results convincingly support the
potential ef ﬁcacy of a rapamycin-based therapy for MERRF.
M. Capristo: None. V. Del Dotto: None. C. Tropeano: None. C.
Fiorini: None. M. Montopoli: None. V. Carelli: None. A. Maresca:
None.
P22 Genetic Counselling/Services/Education
P22.001.D Further evidence that the pathogenic variant p.
Arg592Trp in the AARS2 gene is not necessarily lethal
Tessi Beyltjens , Katrien Janssens, Geert Mortier
Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University/Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
Background :AARS2 is a nuclear gene encoding the mitochondrial
enzyme alanyl-tRNA synthetase. Bi-allelic mutations in AARS2 are
known causes of early-onset cardiomyopathy or late-onset leuko-dystrophy. Until very recently, the p.Arg592Trp variant, either in thehomozygous or compound heterozygous state, has been exclusively
and repeatedly described in infants with severe cardiomyopathy or
primary pulmonary hypoplasia, both resulting in death before theage of 1 year. Nielsen et al. (2020) however reported one girl who
developed dilated cardiomyopathy in her teens.
Case report : We report on a 6-year-old boy who was referred
for genetic evaluation because of global developmental delay anda severe autism spectrum disorder. Pregnancy and perinatal
course were uneventful. Besides gastro-oesophageal re ﬂux there
were no general health problems. Exome sequencing revealed thehomozygous presence of the pathogenic variant c.1774C>T (p.Arg592Trp) in AARS2 . Both healthy parents, who denied con-
sanguinity, were heterozygous carriers. MRI of the brain did not
show structural abnormalities or signs of leukodystrophy. AnAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
559
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608echocardiogram revealed a borderline thickness of the left
ventricular wall (z-score: 2.4). Ophthalmologic examination was
completely normal.
Conclusion: We con ﬁrm the recent clinical letter by Nielsen et
al. reporting that the p.Arg592Trp variant is not always resulting infatal infantile-onset cardiomyopathy. At the age of 6 years, our
proband only presented with neurodevelopmental de ﬁcits which
are occasionally retrospectively found in patients with late-onsetleukodystrophy due to bi-allelic pathogenic variants in AARS2 .
These ﬁndings are important for genetic counselling, especially
when this variant is found in a prenatal setting or early in
postnatal life.
T. Beyltjens: None. K. Janssens: None. G. Mortier: None.
P22.002.A Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer predisposi-
tion management for asymptomatic patient carrier of a BRCA
mutation
Arianna Bonfanti , Christophe Cordier
Synlab, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Introduction: Speci ﬁc inherited mutations in a BRCA gene
increase the risk of female breast and ovarian cancers and male
breast and prostate cancers. Despite the existence of medical
guidelines for the management of an asymptomatic BRCA
mutation carrier, how to manage cancer risk is frequently unclearand patients experienced a sense of disorientation leading a loss
of follow up. The aim of our study is to compare the Hereditary
Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) syndrome management in theworld for unaffected BRCA carriers.
Methods: An online survey was created and sent to at least 200
healthcare professionals around the world. It contains questions
about cancer prevention, control continuum and the implicationof Genetic Counsellors in the management of asymptomatic BRCA
carriers.
Results: 47 health professionals from 13 countries participated
to our study. 45 respondents declared that there are guidelines intheir own country concerning the management of BRCA carriers.
For women are recommended mammograms (100%), MRIs
(100%), breast ultrasound (85%), serum CA-125 (61,7%), transva-ginal ultrasound (59,6%), chemoprevention (61,7%), bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy (100%) and risk-reducing salpingo-oophor-
ectomy (100%). For men is recommended only prostate surveil-
lance (87,2%). Our study concerns also the frequency, the age ofbeginning and stopping of surveillance and prevention.
Conclusions: Guidelines for HBOC syndrome management are
different in the world. Some countries recommend risk-reducingfor cancer prevention and others recommend an early detection.The age of beginning and stopping are also different. It would be
necessary that each country has the same guidelines concerning
the HBOC syndrome management.
A. Bonfanti: None. C. Cordier: None.
P22.003.B Predictive genetic testing - uptake in the Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Children ’s Health Ireland at Crumlin
and two tertiary cardiac referral centres
Claire Winifred Kirk
1, Jane Lucy Murphy1, Joseph Galvin2, Catherine
McGorrian2, Deirdre Ward3, Terence Prendiville4, Margaret Galla-
gher2, Helen Connaughton3, Sally Ann Lynch4
1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland,2Mater Misericordiae
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,3Tallaght University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland,4Children ’s Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.Introduction: Inherited cardiac conditions (ICC) comprising cardio-
myopathies and cardiac ion channelopathies predispose to sudden
death. Next generation sequencing has facilitated predictive genetictesting of at-risk relatives. This informs management and is cost-effective as patients who test negative can usually be discharged
from cardiac follow-up. We investigated the uptake and demo-
graphics of predictive genetic testing in the Department of ClinicalGenetics and two tertiary referral centres.
Materials and Methods: Data was collected by interrogation of
departmental databases and molecular genetic reports at
Children ’s Health Ireland, Crumlin, the Mater Misericordiae
University Hospital and Tallaght University Hospital.
Results: In 207 families where a pathogenic/likely pathogenic
variant was detected, 1422 relativ es had predictive testing. The mean
age at testing was 34 years, media n age was 35 years (range 25 days
- 90 years). Of the 1067 adults tested, 446 were male (41.8%) and 621
were female (58.2%); of the 355 infants/children tested, 188 were
male (53%) and 167 were female (47%). On average, six relatives perfamily were tested (range 1 - 84); 48% (n =682) of patients tested
positive and 52% (n =740) tested negative.
Conclusions: Cascade testing is a prolonged process as
evidenced by the fact that one of the cases tested was a 5thdegree relative of the proband. However, genetic testing hasallowed 740 individuals (and their offspring) to be reassured and
discharged from long-term cardiac follow-up. Our data suggests
that it can be challenging to encourage male relatives to comeforward. (Funded by National Children ’s Research Centre)
C. Kirk: None. J. Murphy: None. J. Galvin: None. C. McGorrian:
None. D. Ward: None. T. Prendiville: None. M. Gallagher: None.
H. Connaughton: None. S. Lynch: None.
P22.005.D Incidental ﬁndings in cytogenetics - the old new
Valentina Miteva
1,2, Tsanka Ruseva2, Dinnar Yahya1,2, Marya
Levkova1,2, Milena Stoyanova1,2, Mari Hachmeryan1,2, Ilina Micheva3,
Lyudmila Angelova1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University - Varna,
Bulgaria, Varna, Bulgaria,2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University
Hospital Saint Marina, Varna, Bulgaria, Varna, Bulgaria,3Clinic of
Hematology, University Hospital Saint Marina, Varna, Bulgaria,Varna, Bulgaria.
Introduction: Much has been discussed over the “incidental ”or
“secondary ”ﬁndings, arising from application of genomic
technologies, so it is not a completely new dilemma. Genetic
counselling has been dealing with outcomes of tests that are not
related to the initial indication since conventional karyotyping isused.
Materials and Methods: For a period of 10 years among 1554
bone marrow karyotypes performed on both children and adultswith haematological disorders, subsequent follow up wassuggested in 9 patients. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood
lymphocytes was successfully conducted in 7 of them. Genetic
counselling was performed.
Results: Suspected chromosomal aberration based on bone
marrow result has been con ﬁrmed in 6 patients (0.4%) - two
robertsonian translocations (14;21) and (13;14), two monosomies
X, one paracentric inversion and a ring 18 chromosome. Three ofthe ﬁndings lead to diagnosis of unsuspected chromosomal
disorder and the other three required genetic counselling in ﬁrst
grade relatives at risk with possible further impact on theirreproduction.
Conclusion: Incidental ﬁndings have always been a feature of
medicine. A proper follow up of every abnormal result should beAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
560
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608considered. Depending on the patients ’will and the neat
collaboration between genetic counsellors and other hospital
clinicians a number of families can receive proper genetic care.
V. Miteva: None. T. Ruseva: None. D. Yahya: None. M.
Levkova: None. M. Stoyanova: None. M. Hachmeryan: None. I.
Micheva: None. L. Angelova: None.
P22.006.A Emerging experiences of working in UK clinical
genetics services during the COVID-19 pandemic
Makaela Jacobs-Pearson , Aamisha Kyada
Peninsula Department of Clinical Genetics, Exeter, United King-
dom.
Clinical genetics services offer care to adults, children and families
with genetic conditions. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a
number of rapid changes to patient care across the UK. Clinical
genetics services have adapted to the ongoing challenges ofsocial distancing and redeployment whilst balancing the safety ofcolleagues and patients. Many centres have rapidly replaced face
to face consultations with video and telephone consultations. We
have asked Healthcare Professionals in UK clinical geneticsservices to provide insight into their experience of working
during this unique time. Through assessing this data, we will
utilise mixed methods to determine the challenges experiencedand how services have adapted and developed resilience toprovide the best possible service to patients in the landscape of
COVID-19 and beyond.
We invited UK based Clinical Geneticists, Genetic Counsellors,
Trainees and Students to participate in this questionnaire.
Preliminary results show excellent engagement with 138
responses to date from a wide number of UK clinical genetics
services. The impact of the pandemic on Healthcare Professionalsis clear; decreased patient and colleague contact is proving
challenging. The adaptations, with increased use of telephone and
video consultations, have enabled continued patient care.Additionally, our preliminary data shows substantial impact onjob satisfaction. Current data trends have identi ﬁed what is, and is
not, working. We therefore hope this research can be used to help
plan future healthcare models to protect staff wellbeing andpatient care.
We aim to continue hearing from participants with ﬁnal results
collated and analysed in May 2021.
M. Jacobs-Pearson: None. A. Kyada: None.
P22.007.B COVID-19 effect on post-test genetic counselling
Mari Hachmeriyan
1,2, Maria Levkova1,2, Dinnar Yahya1,2, Milena
Stoyanova1,2, Valentina Miteva1,2, Lyudmila Angelova2
1University Hospital "St. Marina", Varna, Bulgaria,2Medical University,
Varna, Bulgaria.
Introduction: In an era of pandemics along with the emerging
possibilities of telemedicine technologies, traditional model shiftsfrom face-to-face to distant genetic counselling. Post-test counsel-
ling is crucial for patients ’understanding of genetic testing results.
The aim of the study is to evaluate Bulgarian patients ’attitude
towards post-test counselling choice regarding how they receivetheir results.
Materials and Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis
on 5338 patients ’post-testing choices, stratifying them into two
groups - 5133 pregnant women undergoing ﬁrst trimesterscreening for aneuploidies and 205 patients undergoing conven-
tional karyotyping for reproductive reasons. Ten-month period in
2020y during COVID-19 lockdown was compared with the equal
one in 2019y. We applied Chi-squared test.
Results: Results showed that during COVID-19 lockdown in the
group of pregnant women, 65.9 % of respondents preferred to
obtain their results online, that is signi ﬁcantly higher in
comparison with the equivalent period from 2019 (p < 0.05).However, difference was not found in the second group. In bothperiods, the couples with reproductive problems preferred face-
to-face disclosure, in contrast with the pregnant women ’s group
with statistical signi ﬁcance. This could be explained by the
differences between the tests as well as with the possible higherself-protective behaviour of pregnant women towards infectious
diseases. Concerning the outcome of the result- positive or
negative, there was no signi ﬁcant preference on the receiving
method, regardless of the indication.
Conclusions: Certain patients prefer to receive their results
online. This emphasizes on the importance of providing them withpost-testing counselling with equivalent quality and value to aface-to-face one.
M. Hachmeriyan: None. M. Levkova: None. D. Yahya: None.
M. Stoyanova: None. V. Miteva: None. L. Angelova: None.
P22.008.C Genetic counseling during COVID19 pandemic. One
center experience
Amir Peleg , Lena Sagi-Dain
Lady Davis Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
Introduction: Genetics and genetic counseling are an integral
component in modern clinical healthcare. The COVID-19 pan-
demic introduced new challenges in genetic counseling servicesand promoted healthcare tele-technologies. Advantages of this
technologies includes reducing patients travel time to medical
centers and waiting time. It promote healthcare in remote areasthat lack tertiary health care services. Disadvantages include adecrease in rapport-building, possibilities to interpret non-verbal
cues, technical or language dif ﬁculties, inabilities to perform
physical examination, less access to DNA sampling and privacyconcerns.
Materials and Methods: From March 15 through December 31
2020, all scheduled visits were evaluated. Tele-counseling was
offered when suitable. All requested documents were e-mailedahead of the tele-appointment. Tele-consultations were not
possible in cases when: a. physical or neurological examinations
were necessary. b. abnormal genetic tests results. c. patientrequest d. technical or language dif ﬁculties. Following the tele-
consultation, secured e-mails sent to patient and referral doctor
presented the consultation results. When required, DNA sampling
appointments were scheduled. SMS satisfaction questionnairessent to patients.
Results: Overall, 2211 consultations were performed. 928(42%)
by Tele-counseling. 166(7.5 %) by video and the rest by telephone.
Out Of the 990 prenatal consultations, 643(65%) used tele-technologies. 390(32%) of the 1221 postnatal consultations usedtele-technologies. In comparison to 35% no-show visits during
2019, no-show visits were reduced to 16% (353). Patient ’s
satisfaction with tele services were high.
Conclusions: This study shows that during the COVID-19
pandemic, tele-health improved Medicare and genetic counseling.
Tele-medicine seems to be bene ﬁcial in genetic counseling
healthcare post the pandemic.
A. Peleg: None.
L. Sagi-Dain: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
561
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P22.010.A Parenting a child with Down syndrome: a qualita-
tive study of parental experiences to inform genetic
counselling
Ellen H. Steffensen1,2, Ida Vogel1,2, Stina Lou3,2
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N,
Denmark,2Center for Prenatal Diagnostics, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark,3Defactum - Public Health & Health Services
Research, Aarhus, Denmark.
Introduction: Knowledge on the experience of families where a
child has Down syndrome (DS) is essential to genetic counsellingand family support. However, studies qualitatively assessing the
parenting experience in Nordic welfare states are scarce. Here, tax
funded healthcare and a comprehensive public social servicesystem likely in ﬂuences the experience. Therefore, we aimed to
explore the experience of parents of children with DS living in
Denmark.
Materials and Methods: Semi-structured interviews were
carried out with 25 parents of 15 children with a postnataldiagnosis of DS aged 4-12 years. Parents represented diverse
sociodemographic backgrounds. Re ﬂexive thematic analysis was
applied as analytical approach.
Results: Ourﬁndings display parents ‘at work ’in various aspects
of everyday life: as moderators of their child ’s daily activities; as
ambassadors of ‘the good life ’with DS; and as agents advocating
the special needs of their child and family. The latter was expressed,for example, as a concern about declining knowledge on DS among
health professionals. Interviews also pointed to the signi ﬁcance of
belonging to a community exempli ﬁed by the value of guidance in
parent groups and by parents ’ambitions of their child engaging in a
social community, e.g. by going on play dates.
Conclusion: This study describes parents acting in an interplay
between family unit and society. Our results are of value toprofessionals providing counselling on DS and to institutions and
policy makers planning support to families. Funding: Aarhus
University; Health Research Foundation of Central DenmarkRegion (A2602); Helsefonden (20-B-0065).
E.H. Steffensen: None. I. Vogel: None. S. Lou: None.
P22.011.B New Spanish translation of EuroGEMS.org: the
ESHG ’s guide to international educational online resources
Adam P. Tobias
1, Anna Esteve Garcia2, Irene Esteban2,Edward S.
Tobias3
1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,2West of
Scotland Centre for Genomic Medicine, Queen Elizabeth UniversityHospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom,3West of Scotland Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Introduction: The ESHG ’swww.EuroGEMS.org guide to interna-
tional educational online resources has now been visited from 115
countries. The website ’s design, structure and content have been
published in Human Mutation, following peer review (PMID:32906220). The site ’s content and links have been kept
continuously under review and many links to excellent new
resources have been added following suggestions from profes-sionals worldwide. Consequently, the proportion of visits made tothe site by returning visitors has grown to 28% of the total. Each
EuroGEMS.org page already includes a non-English language
resources links section. However, adding non-English languagetranslations of the entire website has been suggested.Methods: Translation of the website ’s content into Spanish is
consequently now being undertaken, by UK NHS bilingual genetic
counselling staff. Subsequent independent veri ﬁcation by bilingual
genetics staff elsewhere has been arranged. The largest page hasalready been translated and the remainder should be completed byMay 2021. The new Spanish web-pages will be closely linked to
corresponding existing English pag es, for search-engine optimisation
(SEO) and maximal ease of navigation.
Results and discussion: Spanish is the ﬁrst language of
approximately 480 million people worldwide, predominantly in
Mexico (122 million), Colombia (49.4 million), Argentina (44.1
million) and Spain (42.9 million). However, only 4.55% of totalvisits originate from countries with Spanish as a primary language.Translation may greatly widen the website ’s readership, especially
for individuals with genetic conditions, their relatives and the
general public. Future translation into additional languages is alsobeing considered. Comments and suggestions would be wel-
comed (edward.tobias@glasgow.ac.uk).
A.P. Tobias: None. A. Esteve Garcia: None. I. Esteban: None. E.
S. Tobias: None.
P22.012.C Developing an e-learning tool on medical genetics:
APOGeE Project (A Practical Online Genetics e-Education)
Sarra Selatnia
1, Jonathan Berg2, Jill Clayton-Smith3,4, Maurizio
Genuardi5, Martin Krahn6,7, Ute Moog8, Edward Tobias9, Peter
Turnpenny10, Johannes Zschocke11, Dorica Dan12,S oﬁa Douzgou
Houge3,13, Laurence Faivre14,15, Raoul Hennekam16, Anne Hugon1,
Tjitske Kleefstra17, Andrea Manunta18, Giovanni Mosiello19, Alessan-
dra Renieri20,21,22, Ammi Sundqvist23, Marco Tartaglia24, Zeynep
Tümer25, Birute Tumiene26, Dagmar Wieczorek27, Lisenka Vissers28,29,
Klea Vyshka1,30, Giuseppe Zampino31, Alain Verloes1,32
1Dept. of Genetics, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université
de Paris, Paris, France,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, United Kingdom,3Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom,4Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,United Kingdom,5UOC Genetica Medica, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy,6APHM, Hôpital Timone
Enfants, Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France,7Aix-
Marseille Université, Inserm, U1251-MMG, Marseille Medical Genetics,Marseille, France,8Clinical genetic department, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany,9Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and
Clinical Pathology, Laboratory Medicine Building, Queen ElizabethUniversity Hospital, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom,
10Clinical Genetics Department, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS
Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom,11Institute of Human
Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,12Roma-
nian National Alliance for Rare Diseases RONARD, Zalau, Romania,
13Avdeling for medisinsk genetikk, Haukeland universitetssjukehus,
Haukeland, Norway,14UFR Des Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université
de Bourgogne UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies duDéveloppement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,15Dept of Genetics
and Centres of Reference for Development disorders and intellectual
disabilities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI Institute, University HospitalDijon, Dijon, France,16Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical
Centre, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,17Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,18Department of Urology, University of Rennes, Rennes,
France,19Department of Surgery, Urology and Neuro-Urology,
Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy,20Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Center, Dept of Medical Biotechnologies, Universityof Siena, Siena, Italy,21Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy,22Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
562
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Siena, Italy,23RBU International SBH, Solna, Sweden,24Genetics and
Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,
IRCCS, Rome, Italy,25Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark,26Vilnius
University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Santariskiu, Vilnius, Lithuania,
27Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Heinrich Heine
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany,28Dept of Human
Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,29Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,Netherlands,30CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques
en Droit ”, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,31Department of Woman
and Child Health, Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Instituteof Pediatrics, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino GemelliIRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy,
32INSERM
UMR 1141 "NeuroDiderot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
To ful ﬁl the objectives of e-Training and e-Learning developments in
ERNs, the ERN ITHACA will be launching in 2021 an online and
interactive textbook of medical genetics, built with the open-accessplatform Moodle, will the collaboration of multiple authors of fromITHACA ’s network and from other ERNs. APOGeE with include
sections on biological genetics, f ormal genetics, medical genetics,
both clinically oriented and patho physiologically oriented approach
to genetic diseases, precision medicine, and treatment of geneticdiseases. APOGeE will connect with other online knowledge sources.
APOGeE is ITHACA ’s main contribution to the EU strategic objectives
of ERN-speci ﬁc knowledge generation, to contribute to a structured
programme of post-graduate education and training in the ﬁeld of
human genetics and Rare Disorders. The aim of this project is to
establish a free and open access inte ractive, asynchronous training
source in medical genetics: e-learners will be able to access aninterface offering them different blocks of e-learning, self-assessment
tools, and monitoring of learning achievement. The original content is
coordinated by an international an d renowned editorial team. It will
be enriched with documents and courses already available in ournetwork. APOGeE targets 1) EU train ees in medical genetics and those
in other specialities who are interested in certain chapters of genetics;
2) candidates for the European examination in medical genetics andgenomics of the European Union of Medical Specialists (UEMS); 3) MDin training in genetics in less wealthy countries who would have
access to a free university teaching tool.
S. Selatnia: None. J. Berg: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. M.
Genuardi: None. M. Krahn: None. U. Moog: None. E. Tobias:
None. P. Turnpenny: None. J. Zschocke: None. D. Dan: None. S.
Douzgou Houge: None. L. Faivre: None. R. Hennekam: None. A.
Hugon: None. T. Kleefstra: None. A. Manunta: None. G.
Mosiello: None. A. Renieri: None. A. Sundqvist: None. M.
Tartaglia: None. Z. Tümer: None. B. Tumiene: None. D.
Wieczorek: None. L. Vissers: None. K. Vyshka: None. G.
Zampino: None. A. Verloes: None.
P22.013.D Reporting uncertain prenatal exome sequencing
results: how do medical students handle uncertainty?
Jasmijn E. Klapwijk
1,2, Marike G. Polak2, Karin E. M. Diderich1,
Malgorzata I. Srebniak1, Hennie T. Brüggenwirth1, Stina Lou3, Ida
Vogel3,4,5, Vyne van der Schoot1, Iris M. Bakkeren1, Katinka Dijkstra2,
Sam Riedijk1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands,2Department of Psychology, Education & Child
Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
3Center for Fetal Diagnostics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark,4Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University,Aarhus, Denmark,5Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus Uni-
versity Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Introduction : With the introduction of prenatal Exome Sequen-
cing (ES), uncertainty is often a topic of debate; uncertain resultsmay needlessly burden pregnant couples, whereas withholding
results may be needlessly paternalistic. We investigated how
medical students handled uncertain prenatal ES results.
Materials and Methods : Fifty-one 5thyear medical students
participated in a vignette study covering seven uncertain prenatal
ES results derived from clinical cases (e.g. incidental and
secondary ﬁndings). Medical students 1) ranked vignettes on
perceived uncertainty, 2) indicated whether they would want toreport the results, and 3) indicated how certain they were with
their choice to report. Additionally, we investigated students ’
intolerance of uncertainty, and self-reported anxiety whenhypothetical parents indicated to consider termination of
pregnancy (TOP) based on the result.
Results : Vignettes that ranked high in uncertainty were
reported less often (30/51, 59%) than low uncertainty vignettes(50/51, 98%), p< 0.001. Students ’self-reported certainty about
choices to report was lower for high uncertainty vignettes ( M=
79.99) than for low uncertainty vignettes ( M=90.33), p < 0.001.
Low or high intolerance of uncertainty was not associated withreporting decisions. Students ’anxiety towards TOP considerations
of parents was not related to number of reported results, p=
0.357 nor to certainty with choices to report, p=0.898.
Conclusions : This study inspected how medical students
handled uncertainties from prenatal ES, showing that more
uncertain results are less likely to be reported. Additional researchis needed to ascertain whether this pattern extends to healthcareprofessionals in the clinic.
J.E. Klapwijk: None. M.G. Polak: None. K.E.M. Diderich: None.
M.I. Srebniak: None. H.T. Brüggenwirth: None. S. Lou: None. I.
Vogel: None. V. van der Schoot: None. I.M. Bakkeren: None. K.
Dijkstra: None. S. Riedijk: None.
P22.014.A Identi ﬁcation of familial risk of cardiovascular
disease: creating expert-based family criteria for the general
population
Tetske Dijkstra
1, Lieke M. van den Heuvel2,3,4, J. Peter P. van Tintelen3,
Christian van der Werf4, Irene M. van Langen1,Imke Christiaans1
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,
2University Medical Center Groningen;, Groningen;, Netherlands,
3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,4Amster-
dam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Both inherited and familial cardiovascular diseases
can pose a risk of early and preventable cardiovascular events to
healthy relatives. Implementing a risk assessment tool to facilitatehealthy individuals to evaluate a potential risk of familialcardiovascular disease based on their family history could serve
as a solution. However, such family criteria to be used by laymen
are non-existent.
Methods: We used a qualitative study design to develop
expert-based family criteria to use for risk assessment. In an online
focus group with physicians (n =7: cardiologists, clinical geneti-
cists, vascular internist, general practitioners) with expertise ininherited and familial cardiovascular diseases we discussed
potential family criteria. These criteria are used as input for a
Delphi method to reach consensus among a larger group ofexpert physicians (n =26).Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
563
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Results: The focus group resulted in family criteria focussing on
cardiovascular events (i.e. sudden death, any cardiovascular disease,
implantable cardioverter-de ﬁbrillator) at young age in one or more
close relatives. Speci ﬁc cardiovascular diagnoses were considered
too dif ﬁcult for laymen. Additionally, information on referral criteria
for familial cardiovascular disease for the general practitioner to act
upon a potential risk was recommended.
Conclusions: Preliminary results show that experts prefer to
keep the risk assessment tool and thus its criteria as simple aspossible to increase usability by laymen whilst remaining critical in
advising people to visit their general practitioner because of a
potential familial risk. Results of the Delphi method for expertconsensus are upcoming. This research is funded by the DutchHeart Foundation (2019T111).
T. Dijkstra: None. L.M. van den Heuvel: None. J.P. van
Tintelen: None. C. van der Werf: None. I.M. van Langen: None. I.
Christiaans: None.
P22.015.B An international plan for education, awareness,
commemoration and celebration of the July 2022 Bicentennial
of Gregor Mendel ’s Birth in Brno Czechia
Milan Macek Jr.
1, Maurizio Genuardi2, John J. Mulvihill3, Carla L.
Easter4, Daniel Fairbanks5, Susan Lindee6, Jiri Sekerak7, Vojt ěch
Adam8, Blanka Krizova9, Jakub Carda10, Sarka Pospisilova11
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University -
2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic,2Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS,
Rome, Italy,3University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA,4National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA,5Utah Valley University, Orem, UT,
USA,6Department of History and Sociology of Science, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA,7Department of the history of
biological sciences, Moravian museum, Brno, Czech Republic,
8Department of chemistry and biochemistry, Mendel University,
Brno, Czech Republic,9Mendel Museum of the Masaryk University,
Brno, Czech Republic,10Augustianian Abbey, Brno, Czech Republic,
1112) Department of Genetics and Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and
Center of Molecular Medicine, CEITEC, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic.
Introduction: Johann Mendel was born July 22, 1822 at Vrazne in
Silesia and died as Abbot Gregor Mendel on January 6, 1884 in
Brno, Moravia. After eight years of experiments, and another yearand a half of compiling and interpreting his results, he founded
the science of genetics, giving two lectures at the Natural Science
Society in former Brünn (Brno), and publishing two papers oninheritance (1866 and 1870) in the society ’s journal. But there is
much more to his life and work to be seen following his path from
a small birth town, to a monastery in Brno, a university in Vienna,
political activism in Brno, and, of course, his experimental gardenand bee house at the Augustian monastery (mendelmuseum.muni.cz/en).
Methods: To mark the unique occasion, planning has bene ﬁted
from virtual meetings with an international group representingdiverse interests and perspectives, including the ESHG. Mission andVision: Organize and help implement international programming
designed to educate, celebrate, commemorate, and bring awareness
to diverse audiences. Increase global awareness among geneticists,other professionals and the public of the current meanings of
Mendel ’s life and work, as a person of science and a cleric, the
founder of genetics and contributor to meteorology and agriculture,pedagogy, and his religious community. Goals: Improved scienceliteracy and awareness, education, appreciation of science, celebra-
tion, inspiration for trainees, students, and the public, internationalcollaboration, and enjoyment. Brno conference to be held at the
Augustinian Abbey: “Bicentennial of the birth of Gregor Johann
Mendel ”, July 20-23, 2022 ( www.mendel22.cz )
M. Macek Jr.: None. M. Genuardi: None. J.J. Mulvihill: None. C.
L. Easter: None. D. Fairbanks: None. S. Lindee: None. J. Sekerak:
None. V. Adam: None. B. Krizova: None. J. Carda: None. S.
Pospisilova: None.
P22.016.C Well-de ﬁned philosophical concepts as a tool for
ethical genetic counselling: a complementary course proposal
for genetic counsellors ’training
Jennifer L. Castañeda
Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
Genetic counselling is a speci ﬁc form of medical communication
in many aspects. The usual doctor-patient communication in
which the doctor informs on diagnosis, therapeutic options,management and prognosis is prone to a rather paternalisticclimate and is rarely burdened with ethical dilemmas or value-
laden decision-making processes. Genetic counselling, in contrast,
involves not only complex information often surpassing thepatient ’s knowledge on health and disease, but also value-laden
questions such as parent-offspring disease transmission, preg-
nancy fate after prenatal diagnosis, genetic testing in late-onsetdisorders, uncertain prognosis. These aspects undoubtedly requirefrom the counsellor a combination of professional competency
with empathic communication skills and the capacity to
adequately address ethical issues. The question is whether geneticcounselling training meets the need of the latter. An analysis of 50publications involving ethical aspects of genetic counselling from
years 2015 - 2020 was done with the aim of identifying
philosophical concepts most frequently mentioned therein. A listof 20 concepts was elucidated including genetic determinism,
essentialism, reductionism, as well as philosophical trends:
principialism, ethics of care, personalism. With these concepts asa starting point, a description of a possible complementary courseon relevant philosophical concepts is proposed with the aim of
providing genetic counsellors with adequate philosophical tools
for ethical genetic counselling.
J.L. Castañeda: None.
P22.017.D Sudden shift to remote genetic counseling during
the COVID-19 pandemic: experiences of genetics professionals
Daniela Turchetti
1, Linda Battistuzzi2, Benedetta Bertonazzi3,Lea
Godino1
1Division of Medical Genetics; IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-
Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy,2Dipartimento di Informa-
tica, Bioingegneria, Robotica e Ingegneria dei Sistemi, Universitàdegli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy,3IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-
Universitaria di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
The COVID-19 pandemic has rendered in-person provision of genetic
counseling impossible for prolonged periods in many countries,
mandating a sudden shift to remote delivery. We used qualitative
thematic analysis to explore Italian genetics professionals ’experience
with remote counseling. Fourt een group and four individual
interviews were conducted after participants had delivered remote
sessions. Three themes were identi ﬁed: 1) technical and logistical
issues, 2) communication issues 3) clinical content and outcome of
the session. According to participants, not having to travel to theclinic saves consultands ’time and expense; however, not sharing aAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
564
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608physical space with consultands and having to rely on technology
can negatively impact on effective communication, building trusting
relationships and performing accurate psychosocial assessments.
Although remote counselling was perceived to favor greater focusand succinct, to-the point communi cation, participants felt uncom-
fortable not being able to use visual aids to support the explanation
of complex concepts. Demographi cs and socio-cultural status of
consultands emerged as factors in ﬂuencing the outcome of remote
counseling sessions. Anyway, participants felt that gaining moreexperience with this novel app roach would improve their con ﬁdence
and ability to adapt counseling skills. Based on these ﬁndings, we
suggest that effective, equitable p rovision of remote counseling will
require an infrastructure able to sup port videocounseling, sharing of
clinical documents and visual aids, and connect with a wide range of
devices. Moreover, the structure of sessions should be tailored to the
speci ﬁc requirements of remote couns eling and suitable training
efforts should be promoted to enhance professionals ’communica-
tion skills in such setting.
D. Turchetti: None. L. Battistuzzi: None. B. Bertonazzi: None.
L. Godino: None.
P22.018.A How do non-geneticist physicians deal with genetic
tests? A qualitative analysis
Laurent Pasquier
1,2, Guy Minguet3, Sylvie Moisdon-Chataigner4,
Pascal Jarno5, Philippe Denizeau6, Ginette Volf7, Sylvie Odent8,
Grégoire Moutel9,2
1Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence "Dé ﬁciences
Intellectuelles de causes rares", Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Rennes,
France,2INSERM U1086, Anticipe, Normandie Université, Caen, France,
3Institut Mines Télécom Atlantique, Département Sciences Sociales et de
Gestion, Nantes, France,4Laboratoire IODE, Faculté de Droit, Université
Rennes 1, Rennes, France,5Service de Santé Publique, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire, Rennes, France,6Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire, Rennes, France,7Délégation Régionale
Bretagne, Alliance Maladies Rares, Rennes, France,8Service de
Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire,Rennes, France,9Espace régional de Ré ﬂexion Ethique, Médecine légale
et droit de la santé, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Caen, France.
Genetic testing is accepted to be a common practice in many medical
specialties. These genetic tests rai se issues such as respect for basic
rights, how to handle results and uncertainty and how to balance
concerns for medical con ﬁdentiality with the rights of third parties.
Physicians need help to deal with the rapid development of genomicmedicine as most of them have received no speci ﬁct r a i n i n go nt h e
medical, ethical, and social issues involved. Analyzing how these
professionals integrate genetic testing into the patient-providerrelationship is essential to p aving the way for a better use of
genomics by all.
We conducted a qualitative study comprising a series of focus
groups with 21 neurologists and endocrinologists about theirgenetic testing practices in the western part of France. Theinterviews were transcribed and analyzed for major themes.
We identi ﬁed an automated care management procedure of
genetic testing that affect patient autonomy. The simple fact ofhaving a written consent cannot justify a genetic test given thestakes associated with the results. We also suggest to orient
practices toward a systemic approach using a multidisciplinary team
or network to provide resources for dealing with uncertainties ininterpreting results or situations that require additional technical or
clinical skills and, if necessary, to allow for joint consultations with
both a geneticist and a non-geneticist medical specialist.
L. Pasquier: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; the French Ministry of Health (DGOS,PREPS-17-0385, 2017). G. Minguet: None. S. Moisdon-Cha-
taigner: None. P. Jarno: None. P. Denizeau: None. G. Volf:
None. S. Odent: None. G. Moutel: None.
P22.019.B Integrating genetic professional skills into nursing
practice
Efrat Dagan
1, Sivia Barnoy2
1University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel,2Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel.
Background and aims: Genetics and genomics are essential
aspects of healthcare contributing to precision medical care. In
this frame nurses are responsible to undergo continuing educa-tion about the potential bene ﬁts of genetics and genomics in their
routine practice. We aimed at exploring the association of genetic/
genomic knowledge, self-epistemic authority (SEA) and perceived
importance of genetic/genomic in nursing, and the integration ofgenetic/genomic skills into nursing practice.
Methods : A cross-sectional study among nurses working in
pediatric, obstetric, and internal wards of two medical centers in
Israel was conducted between February and October 2018.Participants completed anonymous validated questionnaires.
Descriptive statistics and a hierarchical regression model were
carried out to determine which variables explained the perfor-mance of genetics/genomics practices among participants.
Results : The sample consisted of 423 nurses. The ﬁndings
demonstrated that although nur ses perceived importance of
genetics was positive (M =2.88, SD =0.68), and their SEA was
average (M =2.93 SD =0.75), low genetic knowledge (55.05 ±
14.82%) and low integration of ge netic skills in nursing practice
(M=1.90, SD =0.71) was found. Obstetric nurses had more genetic
knowledge, more positive perceptions about genetics, and per-formed more genetic/genomic skills in their nursing practice.
Conclusions : Although nurses realized the importance of genetics/
genomics to their practice, and gen e t i c si sp a r to ft h eI s r a e l in u r s i n g
core-curriculum, we found disappo intingly low levels of knowledge
and performance of genetic skills in nursing practice. The results call
for action to establish ongoing genetic education programs for
nurses, which would lead to the inclusion of genetics into nursingpractice, and prepare nurses to provide personalized medicine.
E. Dagan: None. S. Barnoy: None.
P22.020.C Implementing Medical Genetics in Luxembourg:
two years after the creation of the National Center of
Genetics, overview and perspectives
Arthur Sorlin , Guillaume Jouret, Christian Müller, Philippe Theis,
Karin Dahan, Seval Türkmen, Marizela Kulisic, Nathalie Monhoven,
Karin Segers, Arantzazu De Perdigo, Christophe Olinger, Zhi Zhang,Farida Berbache, Daniel Stieber, Dominique Bourgeois, Barbara Klink
National Center of Genetics, Laboratoire National de Santé,
Dudelange, Luxembourg.
Up until recently, the medical discipline of human genetics
practically did not exist in Luxembourg and patients were mainly
sent abroad. To provide access to the full spectrum of geneticmedical care to all individuals living and/or working in Luxembourg,the National Center for Genetics (NCG) at the Laboratoire National
de Santé (LNS) was established in April 2018. It is the sole health care
provider in the domain of human genetics according to articles 6and 7 of the Hospital law from 08/03/2018. The NCG also functionsas a reference center, with the mission to provide expertise to healthAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
565
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608professionals, public authorities, and research partners, develop best
practices guidelines and actively participate in national plans. Since
its creation, the NCG implemented a multilingual clinical genetic
service providing genetic consultations for app. 1,300 patients peryear. It provides a broad diagnostic spectrum, from NIPT tohereditary cancer solution, from hemato-oncogenetics to molecular
characterization of solid tumors, and coordinates the outsourcing of
speci ﬁc genetic testing to external partner centers when needed.
The establishment of a legislative and policy framework as well astheﬁnancing model for genetics in Luxembourg are crucial points to
address in the future. It will be important to pursue collaborations
with international expert centers and networks, in particular thedifferent ERNs. We describe the developments and the implementa-tion of medical genetics in Luxembourg with the challenge to cover
all the aspects and diseases in the ﬁeld of human genetics in a small
multilingual country.
A. Sorlin: None. G. Jouret: None. C. Müller: None. P. Theis:
None. K. Dahan: None. S. Türkmen: None. M. Kulisic: None. N.
Monhoven: None. K. Segers: None. A. De Perdigo: None. C.
Olinger: None. Z. Zhang: None. F. Berbache: None. D. Stieber:
None. D. Bourgeois: None. B. Klink: None.
P22.021.D NSGC Prenatal and Cancer MMIC Decision Tools:
Patient Reported and Research Outcomes
Barbara B. Biesecker
1, Susan Christian2, Stephanie Cohen3, Roya
Mostafavi4, Jill Slamon5, Karen E. Wain6
1RTI, International, Bethesda, MD, USA,2Precision Labs, Calgary, AB,
Canada,3Ascension St. Vincent, Indianapolis, IN, USA,4St. Jude
Children ’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA,5Vanderbilt University
Hospital, Nashville, TN, USA,6Geisinger, Lewisberg, PA, USA.
A key genetic counseling goal is to facilitate informed decision
making. The multidimensional model of informed choice (MMIC) was
developed as a research outcome to assess decision making in
genetic counseling. It is a key outcome of decision interventionsaimed at achieving informed choice in personalized medicine. TheMMIC is a compound assessment tool with three elements: relevant
knowledge; outcome value, and test d ecision. The relationship among
these components differentiates informed choice from less informedchoice. Due to the speci ﬁcity of the MMIC knowledge scale, versions
are speci ﬁc to subspecialties and must represent current information.
In addition to a research outcome , the National Society of Genetic
Counselors (NSGC) Research, Quality, & Outcomes Committee (RQOC)has prioritized the MMIC as a Pati ent-Reported Outcome Measure
(PROM). As such, it assesses the perceived decision support patients
received during genetic couns eling. The RQOC developed two
knowledge scales for non-invasive prenatal screening and hereditarycancer testing for MMIC decision t ools. The objective was to ensure
that information key to decision making was current and the literacy
level was low for broad accessibi lity. Plain language was used to
develop eight true/false knowledge items deemed critical to under-standing. To broaden its accessibility, the scales are being validated in
English and Spanish. The NSGC has prioritized the development and
promotion of PROMS for assessment of service value and to supportreimbursement for clinical servic es. In countries where reimbursement
is less a priority, the MMIC prenatal and cancer scales are well
designed for research outcomes of decision support tools.
B.B. Biesecker: None. S. Christian: None. S. Cohen: None. R.
Mostafavi: None. J. Slamon: None. K.E. Wain: None.
P22.022.A Psychological burden of preimplantation genetic
testing (PGT) on mothers with multiple monogenic disorders
and the role of genetic counselling in Saudi ArabiaMonira AlShehri
1, Alya Qari1,2, Moeenaldeen AlSayed1,2, Ameera
Balobaid1,2, Wafa AlQubbaj1,3
1Alfaisal University, College of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
2Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Centre (KFSH&RC), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,3Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Centre (KFSH&RC), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Introduction: The interplay between multiple genetic diseases,
poor ovarian response, arrested embryonic development, and
aneuploidy can have a psychosocial impact. Studies analysing theeffect of PGT on mothers with only one genetic disorder revealedthat PGT can destabilise individuals.
Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective study of
attitudes toward PGT in mothers carrying multiple geneticdisorders (n =31). Phone interviews were conducted with
mothers who had undergone PGT during January 2009-March
2020 at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre
(KFSHRC), Riyadh. Data was analysed using SPSS. This studyfocused on participants ’sociodemographic background, repro-
ductive history, genetic conditions, number of children (healthy/
affected), number of IVF cycles, attendance at genetic counselling
sessions, donation of hematopoietic stem cells, attitudes towardsassociated moral issues, embryo cryopreservation and prenatal
diagnosis (PND) after PGT.
Results: PGT was provided free of charge to participants; their
primary concern was emotional. Multiple genetic disorders increasethe risk to embryos. Mothers with mild genetic conditions believed
PGT was safer than PND. However, most women who did not meet
the acceptance criteria for PGT considered PND. This study revealedthat mothers undergoing PGT require further counselling. Geneticcounsellors can accurately estimate the risk to embryos. However,
the counsellor ’s role extends beyond merely identifying genetic
abnormalities. After failed PGT cycles, sessions must be available forfamilies with multiple genetic diseases to assess future risks.
Conclusion: Patients undergoing IVF/PGT who do not have
healthy offspring/alternative reproductive options require custo-mised genetic counselling sessions to clarify their risk of recurrentreproductive problems.
M. AlShehri: None. A. Qari: None. M. AlSayed: None. A.
Balobaid: None. W. AlQubbaj: None.
P22.023.B Kabuki syndrome: case series from one local centre
Akane Akane Kondo Kondo
1, Nobuhiko Okamoto2, Aki Hayashi1,
Mikio Yamasaki1, Mikio Morine1, Kenji Hinokio1, Kazuhisa Maeda1
1Shikoku Medical Center for Children and Adults, Zentsuji, Japan,
2Osaka Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
Introduction: Kabuki make-up syndrome (KMS) is a rare condition
described by Kuroki and Niikawa in Japanese population in 1981.The aim of this study is looking into the clinical course before the
diagnosis to know what made them to visit genetics clinic. Also,
after the diagnosis, what sort of social and medical support wasprovided in countryside of Japan.
Materials and Methods: We looked into the medical record of
5 patients diagnosed as KMS since 2013 till now retrospectively.
Results: Timing of diagnosis was 1y/o, 2y/o, 3y/o, 4y/o, 9y/o
respectively. All the cases showed dysmorphic feature, but notsuspected as KMS until they visited genetic clinics. All had been
followed up as developmental and growth delay including
congenital heart defects. As for the support after diagnosis, ithas been settled well by medical social worker and local healthcentre. None of them joined KMS patient support group.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
566
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Conclusions: Some older case was diagnosed after grown up.
We suspect one factor can be laboratory issues. Most of the
congenital genetic conditions had been diagnosed as clinical
research at some University or Medical centres but not atdiagnostic laboratory in Japan. Ordinary paediatrician was notable to order the genetic test for KMS easily until 2020. Also, there
were only few hospitals in Shikoku area to provide genetic service.
Even so, they have good social support, however it seems dif ﬁcult
to join KMS patient group due to geographical reason. Remotesupport group can be the next step for future.
A.A. Kondo: None. N. Okamoto: None. A. Hayashi: None. M.
Yamasaki: None. M. Morine: None. K. Hinokio: None. K. Maeda:
None.
P22.024.C When Science Communication Meets Medical
Education
Kinza Mahmood , Saeeda Bhatti
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
The Year 2 Student Selected Component (SSC) at the University of
Glasgow encourages students to explore medical topics outwiththeir normal medical school curriculum. Here we feedback on the
outcomes of two SSCs with a focus on communicating scienti ﬁc
and medical concepts.
The ﬁrst SSC was delivered to primary 6 pupils at a school
Glasgow in 2020. This SSC was an opportunity for students to
learn about the important concepts of haematology and genetics
in disease, whilst affording them the chance develop thecommunication skills required to present this information indifferent formats. Genetics and Haematology are core elements of
the medical school curriculum but also on a basic level link back to
the biological systems module of the Scottish School Curriculumof Excellence. Sickle cell anaemia was used to teach children about
blood physiology and anaemia and a variety of mediums were
used which included interactive activities, videos, andpresentations.
The second SSC took a more in-depth view of genetics and
focussed on the challenges of communicating genetic informa-
tion. It was delivered online during lockdown 2021. Here studentswere introduced to a variety of professionals all communicatinggenetics. The experts ranged from charities, public engagement
professionals and medical professionals from the UK and
internationally.
In both SSCs the students learned the importance of thinking
creatively and sensitively and to adapt their language and
approach depending on the audience. They reported that thistaught them to be adaptable in their approach to communicatingthereby developing their communication skills.
K. Mahmood: None. S. Bhatti: None.
P22.025.D MOOC on Bioinformatics in Genomic Medicine (BiG
MOOC)
Evan Gouy
1,2, Kevin Yauy3,4, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon5,6,
Emanuelle Génin7, François Lecoquierre8, Alban Lermine9, Robert
Olaso10, Jean-François Deleuze10, Sacha Schutz11, Marie de Tayrac12,
Aurélien Trimouille13, Guillaume Collet14, Xavier Desplas2, Fabien
Hobart15, Amodsen Chotia2, Agata Urbanczyk16, Olivier Palombi16,
Pascal Pujol17, David Geneviève18, Laurence Faivre19,5, Damien
Sanlaville1, Yannis Duffourd5,6, Andrew Green20, Janna Kenny20,
Sally-Ann Lynch20, Sarah Wedderburn21, Helena Carley22, Anne
Hugon23, Sarra Selatnia23, Klea Vyshka23,24, ERN-ITHACA Executive
Committee, Julien Thevenon25, Alain Verloes23,261Service de génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France,2Centre
de Recherche Interdisciplinaire, Paris, France,3Institute of Advanced
Biosciences, Centre de recherche UGA, Inserm U 1209, CNRS UMR
5309, Grenoble, France,4SeqOne Genomics, Montpellier, France,
5Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des
maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,
6UMR1231 GAD, Inserm –Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté,
Dijon, France,7UMR 1078, Inserm, Brest, France,8Laboratoire de
génétique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,9MOABI-APHP, Paris,
France,10CNRGH, CEA, Evry, France,11Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU
de Brest, Brest, France,12Laboratoire de Bioinformatique et
Génétique Computationnelle, Service de Génétique Moléculaire etGénomique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France,13Service de génétique
médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,14Réseau BioInfoDiag
INCa, Rennes, France,15Nipédu, Nipcast, Paris, France,16Université
Numérique de la Santé et du Sport, Grenoble, France,17Unité
d’oncogénétique, Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Montpellier,
Montpellier, France,18Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,19Centre de Référence maladies
rares "Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs",centre de génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,
20Department of Clinical Genetics, Temple Street Children ’s University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,21NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde,
Glasgow, United Kingdom,22South West Thames Regional Genetics
Service, London, United Kingdom,23Dept. of Genetics, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Paris, France,
24CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques en Droit ”,
Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,25Service de Génétique et
Procréation, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France,26INSERM UMR
1141 "NeuroDiderot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
The development of technologies like Next Generation Sequen-
cing (NGS) has revolutionized the practices of the Medical
Genetics. For medical genetic practitioners, new skills areexpected to meet the challenges of tomorrow. The futurespecialist in medical genetics must understand the different steps
that lead from phenotyping to diagnosis, the limits, and pitfalls of
NGS. There is a need for training of the genetics residents andpractitioners in the concepts of algorithmics, NGS data analysis,statistics, and massive data management. The purpose of this
project is to teach the medical genomics concepts essential to the
production, analysis, and interpretation of NGS data in theframework of rare disorders and ontogenetic. Launched on French
platform FUN MOOC in the ﬁrst half of 2020, the ﬁrst session
gathered more than 5000 participants of which 400 obtainedcertiﬁcates. 15 speakers participated in the creation of the content
in videos and additional resources. 2 webinars and a forum
allowed to exchange with learners. With the support of ERN
ITHACA and UNESS (Digital University for Health and Sport), thecontent of the MOOC is currently being revised and translated intoEnglish to be launched in mid-2021 in a bilingual French-English
version. This new version emphasizes on the manipulation of NGS
data for interpretation and use of bioinformatics algorithms.Learners from will be able to learn about this ﬁeld and share their
knowledge for the bene ﬁt of patients. This project is co- ﬁnanced
by the Connecting Europe Facility of the European Union, underthe Action Number 2018-FR-IA-0184.
E. Gouy: None. K. Yauy: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. E.
Génin: None. F. Lecoquierre: None. A. Lermine: None. R. Olaso:
None. J. Deleuze: None. S. Schutz: None. M. de Tayrac: None. A.
Trimouille: None. G. Collet: None. X. Desplas: None. F. Hobart:
None. A. Chotia: None. A. Urbanczyk: None. O. Palombi: None.
P. Pujol: None. D. Geneviève: None. L. Faivre: None. D.
Sanlaville: None. Y. Duffourd: None. A. Green: None. J. Kenny:
None. S. Lynch: None. S. Wedderburn: None. H. Carley: None. A.
Hugon: None. S. Selatnia: None. K. Vyshka: None. J. Thevenon:
None. A. Verloes: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
567
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P22.026.A Specialist Medical Genetics Training Requirements
Across Europe
Freya Anderson1, Ute Moog2, Peter D. Turnpenny3, Feliciano J.
Ramos4, Edward S. Tobias5, Laura Pölsler6,7, Yvonne Arens8,
Jonathan Berg1, European Certi ﬁcate in Medical Genetics and
Genomics (ECMGG) Exam Committee
1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom,2Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany,3University of Exeter Medical School,
Exeter, United Kingdom,4University of Zaragoza Medical School,
Zaragoza, Spain,5University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom,
6Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium,7Medical University
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,8Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, Netherlands.
Introduction: The rapid evolution of Medical Genetics as a speciality
has resulted in signi ﬁcant diversity in training programmes and
examination requirements. The Union Européenne de Médecins
Spécialistes Section of Medical Genetics (UEMS-SMG) was estab-lished in 2013 with the aim of promoting the specialty of MedicalGenetics across Europe. In 2017/18 the UEMS-SMG developed the
European Certi ﬁcate in Medical Genetics and Genomics (ECMGG)
exam, designed to assess competence as a specialist clinician.Optimal development of this exam requires alignment to the
existing training requirements of European countries.
Methods: We approached thirty-three European countries for
information about their training requirements, using a question-naire sent to leading specialists. Data gaps were ﬁlled using
information from national specialty organisations.
Results: 31/33 countries recognise a specialty called "Clinical",
"Medical" or "Human" Genetics. Time spent in specialist trainingvaried, with a minimum time to complete specialist training
ranging from 4 to 6 years; with an additional 0 to 4 years of
training required after medical registration before enteringspecialist training. In all countries, training included Clinical and
Laboratory practice, although the proportions of these compo-
nents varied widely. In 4 countries, assessment was by logbookcompletion. In the remainder, examination requirements variedwith a combination of multiple choice written examination (n =7),
oral examination (n =11) and clinical examination (n =10). Our
study suggests that a collaborative approach to developing aEuropean assessment would help standardise training require-ments, assisting mobility of specialists across Europe.
F. Anderson: None. U. Moog: None. P.D. Turnpenny: None. F.
J. Ramos: None. E.S. Tobias: None. L. Pölsler: None. Y. Arens:
None. J. Berg: None.
P22.027.B A national survey of Israeli clinical geneticists and
genetic counselors on the transition to remote genetic
counseling during the COVID-19 pandemic
Nira Schreyer-Sha ﬁr
1, Amihood Singer2, Rachel Michaelson-Cohen3,
Orna Staretz-Chacham4, Ehud Banne5
1Genetic Laboratory, Meuhedet Health Maintenance Organization,
Lod, Israel,2Community Genetics, Public Health Services, Ministry of
Health, Jerusalem, Israel,3Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel,
4Metabolic Clinic, Soroka Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer
Sheva, Israel,5The Rina Mor Institute of Medical Genetics, Wolfson
Medical Center, Holon, Israel.
The COVID-19 pandemic emerged in November 2019 in China and
has spread worldwide since. This pandemic has had substantialinﬂuences on all aspects of life. The growing understanding thatsocial distancing is the best way to reduce the chance of COVID-19
contagion, combined with the long-term lockdowns, forced the
entire healthcare system to adapt new healthcare methods. Prior
to the COVID-19 pandemic, genetic counseling in Israel wasalmost exclusively an in-person face to face visit. Thispandemic led the genetic counseling in Israel to suddenly change
format to remote methods (either telephone or video-based
counseling).
A3 5 ‐question anonymous online survey was sent out using the
mailing list of the Israel Society of Clinical Geneticists and the
Israel Society of Genetic Counselors. Descriptive statistics and a
thematic analysis were used to analyze data. A total of 100 surveyswere completed, of which 99 respondents had practiced remotegenetic counseling in the COVID-19 pandemic era. The remote
counseling raised dif ﬁculties which included environmental
interferences, problems using the technology modalities, anddifﬁculties involving transferring data. On the other hand, overall,
genetic counseling providers giving remote counseling were
generally satis ﬁed with this transition. We also found that no-show
rates, which have major ﬁnancial consequences, decreased
signi ﬁcantly with the transfer to remote counseling.
These results show that remote genetic counseling, given the
appropriate administrative, economic, and legal infrastructure, hasbene ﬁts even beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. We suggest
integrating telemedicine routinely as a possible alternative to in-
person genetic counseling.
N. Schreyer-Sha ﬁr:None. A. Singer: None. R. Michaelson-
Cohen: None. O. Staretz-Chacham: None. E. Banne: None.
P22.029.D Secondary ﬁndings of exome sequencing in
Russian patients
Olga Mironovich , Polina Gundorova, Tatyana Cherevatova, Anna
Orlova, Viktoria Zabnenkova, Alena Chuhrova, Aleksander Poliakov,Oxana Ryzhkova
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: In exome and genome sequencing, there is a
chance of appearance of secondary ﬁndings. These variants are
located in genes unlikely related to patients diagnosis. TheAmerican College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)recommends reporting pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants
(PVs) in 69 genes linked with medically actionable diseases. In this
study, we estimated the proportion of secondary ﬁndings of
exome sequencing among Russian patients.
Materials and Methods: in DNA samples of 1285 patients
clinical or whole exome sequencing were performed.
Results: Among 1285 Russian patients secondary ﬁndings have
been identi ﬁed in 36 cases (3%). In 21 cases (60%) the genes were
in ACMG list, and in 15 cases (40%) variants were found in the
other genes. Most of the variants were found in genes linked withcancer susceptibility syndromes - 36% ( BRCA1, BRCA2, MSH6, RET,
PMS2, RAD50, BRIP1, CHEK2 ) and congenital heart diseases - 33%
(DSG2, SCN5A, TNNI3, KCNH2, KCNQ1, TNNC1, TTN ). Variants were
also found in RYR1 (Malignant hyperthermia), LDL, RPCSK9
(Hypercholesterolemia) and MEFV (Mediterranean fever) genes.
PVs also were found in genes linked to genetics disease not
reported in clinical diagnosis of patients, but having distinct
clinical manifestations: EXT2 (Exostoses, multiple), NOTCH3(Cerebral arteriopathy), SOD1 (Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis),
CACNA1A (Episodic ataxia) and FGFR3 (Achondroplasia).
Conclusions: Reporting of secondary ﬁndings is important both
for determining the tactics of further treatment, and for familyconsulting. Therefore, it is necessary to discuss the addition into
laboratory report of PVs in genes not from the recommended list.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
568
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608O. Mironovich: None. P. Gundorova: None. T. Cherevatova:
None. A. Orlova: None. V. Zabnenkova: None. A. Chuhrova:
None. A. Poliakov: None. O. Ryzhkova: None.
P22.030.A An innovative e-training tool for the clinical
management of NDD, the De ﬁGame serious game
Anne Hugon1, C. Immesoete2, B. Chaumette3, J. Clayton-Smith4,5,C .
Cravero6, S. Daugy7,D .D a n8, S. Douzgou Houge9,10, L. Faivre11,12,S .
Heide13, RC. Hennekam14, T. Kleefstra15, L. Laporte16, I. Marchetti-
Waternaux17, A. Manunta18, G. Mosiello19, S. Peudenier20, V. Des
Portes21,22, MP. Reymond2, S. Selatnia1, A. Sundqvist23, M. Tartaglia24,
Z. Tümer25, B. Tumiene26, L. Vissers27,28, K. Vyshka1,29, D. Wieczorek30,
G. Zampino31, A. Renieri32,33,34, A. Verloes1,35
1Dept. of Genetics, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université
de Paris, Paris, France,2DéﬁScience, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France,3Reference Centre for Rare Diseases with Psychiatric
Manifestation, Psychiatry-Neuroscience University hospital SainteAnne, Paris, France,4Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,5Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,6Reference Centre
for Rare Diseases with Psychiatric Manifestations, APHP.SU - Pitié-
Salpêtrière hospital group, Paris, France,7Association Génération 22,
Paris, France,8Romanian National Alliance for Rare Diseases
RONARD, Zalau, Romania,9Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK, Manchester,
United Kingdom,10Avdeling for medisinsk genetikk, Haukeland
universitetssjukehus, Haukeland, Norway,11UFR Des Sciences de
Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne UMR 1231 GAD « Génétiquedes Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France,
12Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference for Development
disorders and intellectual disabilities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMIInstitute, University Hospital Dijon, Dijon, France,13Reference Centre
for Rare Intellectual Disabilities, APHP.SU - Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital
group, Paris, France,14Dept. of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Centre,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,15Department of Human
Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
16French Angelman Syndrome Organisation, Paris, France,17Valentin
Organisation for Carriers of Rare Chromosome Disorders, Paris,France,18Department of Urology, University of Rennes, Rennes,
France,19Department of Surgery, Urology and Neuro-Urology,
Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy,20Reference Centre
for Rare Diseases, Rare Intellectual Disabilities and MultipleDisabilities, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France,21DéﬁScience National
Coordinator, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,22Neuropediatrics
Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,23Swedish
national Federation for children and youth with disabilities(Rörelsehindrade Barn och ungdomar), Solna, Sweden,24Genetics
and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,25Department of Clinical Genetics,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark,26Vilnius
University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Santariskiu 2, LT-08661, Vilnius,
Lithuania,27Dept of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,28Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,29CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre
de Recherches Critiques en Droit ”, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France,
30Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Heinrich Heine
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany,31Department of Woman
and Child Health, Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Institute
of Pediatrics, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli
IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy,32Med
Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Dept of Medical Biotechnol-ogies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,33Medical Genetics,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,34Genetica Medica, AziendaOspedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,35INSERM UMR 1141
"NeuroDiderot", Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Déﬁgame is a serious game created by the French Network
“DéﬁScience ”dedicated to rare neurodevelopmental diseases
(NDD). Its main objective is to develop screening and aetiological
diagnostic practices for NDD. The serious game is designed
alongside the help of parents and specialists and it allows medicalpractitioners to reinforce their knowledge in the diagnosticstrategies and care of neurodevelopmental disorders in an
interactive way. Dé ﬁgame is based on computer technologies
that combine serious objectives with the playful means inspiredby video games. This digital training tool is made available to allgeneral practitioners in order to implement clinical practice
recommendations and to coordinate actions of providing
adequate healthcare and follow-up of patients. This toolcontributes to seeking a diagnosis, to improve the early treatment
of NDD and to support the family during a diagnosis of a rare and
severe disease. In this game, users take on the role of a generalpractitioner and monitor the developmental trajectory of fouryoung patients. From the ﬁrst warning signs, to seeking an
aetiological diagnosis, the various scenarios help users gain more
in-depth knowledge of the neurological development andunderstand the role of the general practitioner in coordinatingthe process. The scenarios are inspired from actual events and
have been devised in a manner that is as close as possible to the
day-to-day reality of the diagnosis of the care of a patient withNDD. This project is co- ﬁnanced by the Connecting Europe Facility
of the European Union, under the Action Number 2018-FR-IA-
0184.
A. Hugon: None. C. Immesoete: None. B. Chaumette: None. J.
Clayton-Smith: None. C. Cravero: None. S. Daugy: None. D. Dan:
None. S. Douzgou Houge: None. L. Faivre: None. S. Heide: None.
R. Hennekam: None. T. Kleefstra: None. L. Laporte: None. I.
Marchetti-Waternaux: None. A. Manunta: None. G. Mosiello:
None. S. Peudenier: None. V. Des Portes: None. M. Reymond:
None. S. Selatnia: None. A. Sundqvist: None. M. Tartaglia: None.
Z. Tümer: None. B. Tumiene: None. L. Vissers: None. K. Vyshka:
None. D. Wieczorek: None. G. Zampino: None. A. Renieri: None.
A. Verloes: None.
P22.031.B Tele-consultations at the patient ’s home in genet-
ics: an expected practice, boosted by the pandemic
Allan Lançon
1, Amandine Beaudouin1, Estelle Petit2, Geoffrey
Bertolone1,2, Amandine Baurand1,2, Salima El Chehadeh3, Claire
Kastner3, Laurine Tempé3, Christelle Cabrol4, Chloé Trouvé4, Elise
Boucher Brischoux4, Mélanie Berard5, Alexia Burtin5, Bruno Leheup5,
Mathilde Renaud5, Axelle Rivière5, Céline Poirier6, Marta Spodenkie-
wick6, Lola Lissy6, Caroline Sawka1,2, Marion Robert1,2, Christel
Thauvin-Robinet2, Elodie Gautier2, Sophie Nambot1,2, Juliette Piard4,
Martine Doco-Fenzy6, Elise Schaefer3, Laetitia Lambert5, Laurence
Faivre1,2
1Service d ’oncogénétique, Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon,
France,2Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon,
France,3Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg, Institut de Génétique Médicale d ’Alsace, Strasbourg,
France,4Centre de Génétique Humaine, Centre Hospitalier Universi-
taire, Besançon, France,5Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire, Nancy, France,6Service de Génétique,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Reims, France.
Introduction: Genetic consultations are often centralized over a
large area, sometimes requiring patients to travel long distances.
French legislation requires that results, even negative, beAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
569
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608managed within the framework of a genetic consultation. In
certain situations (genetic counselling in particular), a clinical
examination is not required. For these situations, teleconsultations
at the patient ’s home seem to be an interesting offer. The COVID-
19 pandemic has accelerated the implementation of this type ofteleconsultation, and has quickly made it possible to assess
patient satisfaction.
Material and method: 2307 patients who bene ﬁted from a
telemedicine consultation by telephone or videoconferencebetween March and December 2020 from the ﬁve genetic
consultations of the east of France were asked by e-mail or by
post to answer an online satisfaction questionnaire.
Results: 20% responded (80% women, 55% over 40 years old).
In 56% of the cases, the consultations were by videoconference, in
56% of the cases for a result report, in 64% of the cases as a
replacement for a physical consultation due to the epidemic. Thesatisfaction rate was 96% (excellent (72%) or good (24%)) with
22% who would have preferred a face-to-face consultation,
especially when they live near the hospital. Half of therespondents avoided more than 1.5 hours of transport and 69%avoided taking a day off. Patients were less often accompanied by
relatives (43% vs. 61%). There was little change in responses
during or outside con ﬁnement.
Conclusions: These results encourage the optimization of these
practices in the long term.
A. Lançon: None. A. Beaudouin: None. E. Petit: None. G.
Bertolone: None. A. Baurand: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. C.
Kastner: None. L. Tempé: None. C. Cabrol: None. C. Trouvé:
None. E. Boucher Brischoux: None. M. Berard: None. A. Burtin:
None. B. Leheup: None. M. Renaud: None. A. Rivière: None. C.
Poirier: None. M. Spodenkiewick: None. L. Lissy: None. C.
Sawka: None. M. Robert: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. E.
Gautier: None. S. Nambot: None. J. Piard: None. M. Doco-Fenzy:
None. E. Schaefer: None. L. Lambert: None. L. Faivre: None.
P22.032.C Telegenetics: attitudes of genetic counselors and
patients in Bulgaria
Mariya Levkova
1,2, Mari Hachmeriyan1,2, Milena Stoyanova1,2,
Valentina Miteva1,2, Lyudmila Angelova1
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Varna, Bulgaria,
Varna, Bulgaria,2University Hospital St Marina, Varna, Bulgaria.
Telegenetics is a useful tool in an era of globalization and especially
in a time of pandemic. The present study aims to explore the
attitudes of both Bulgarian genetic counselors and random
participants to its usage.We conducted an online survey among200 randomly selected pe оple, who have not visited a genetic
counselor, and 19 genetic counselors from Bulgaria in January 2021.
The questionnaire explored the willingness of both groups to
participate in distant genetic counseling (DGC), referral reasons andthe way they would prefer to conduct DGC. Correlation analysis wasapplied. Mean age of the participants was 35.4 ± 8.4 years. Most of
the people (62%) preferred GC in person. Even 63% of people living
within two hours away would choos ef a c e - t o - f a c eG C ,a l t h o u g ht i m e
saving was the leading reason for DGC choice. There was a negative
correlation between advanced age and type of GC (p =0.03) - the
elders were more prone to DGC, possibly because of the COVID-19
pandemic. Personal contact was t he leading advantage of face-to-
face CG, but when it comes to post-testing counseling, 81% people
would prefer DGC. Most genetic counselors (68%) would dedicate
their time in favor of onsite CG, but 63% already provided DGC andsupported its application (79%). T he majority of both patients and
genetic counselors preferred using a video call for DGC. Althoughtelegenetics has been accepted and applied, especially in a
pandemic time, major part of both participants and providers of
CG prefer face-to-face communication. DGC is favored for post-
testing counseling.
M. Levkova: None. M. Hachmeriyan: None. M. Stoyanova:
None. V. Miteva: None. L. Angelova: None.
P22.033.D Telemedicine tools to break down barriers in
neuromuscular diseases: Clinical Patient Management System
(CPMS) and Telegenetics
Fernanda Fortunato
1, Marianna Farnè1, Francesca Bianchi2,
Marcella Neri1, Gabriele Siciliano2, Valeria Sansone3, Andrea Barp3,
Emilio Albamonte3, Gianluca Vita4, Antonio Atalaia5, Teresinha
Evangelista6, Francesca Gualandi1, Alessandra Ferlini1
1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Sciences, University
of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,2Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,3NEMO Clinical
Center in Milan, Milan, Italy,4NEMO Clinical Center in Messina
(NEMO Sud), Messina, Italy,5Institut de Myologie, Sorbonne
Université- Inserm UMRS 974, G.H. Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,
6Unité de Morphologie Neuromusculaire; Institut de Myologie,
Sorbonne Université-AIM, Paris, France.
Introduction: The development of e-health technologies for
teleconsultation and exchange of knowledge is within the missionof European Reference Networks (ERN), including Euro-NMD, the
ERN for rare neuromuscular diseases. The Clinical Patient Manage-
ment System (CPMS) is a web-based platform promoting activecollaboration within and across ERNs to discuss patient cases.“Telegenetics ”represents an attractive alternative to traditional
on-site genetic counseling in light of the non-homogeneous
availability of genetic services among countries and the increasingdemand of high-level expertise.
Materials and Methods: -To improve the use of CPMS platform
among Euro-NMD ERN Italian members, a training course, leadedby two medical doctors, was organized through theoretical andpractical virtual lessons, addressing CPMS different applications
and functions. Panels were created to share and discuss complex
cases.- Telegenetic counselling was offered to adult neuromus-cular and cardiac patients in a pilot project, called “TeleNEwCARe ”.
Dedicated questionnaires were conceived in order to assess
patient satisfaction.
Results: -13 Italian HCPs joined the CPMS training course and
87 panels of discussion were opened; -A total of 55 patients were
enrolled for telegenetic counselling during the ﬁrst 10 months of
the project and questionnaires were collected.
Conclusions: The CPMS project was effective in implementing
the platform use, maximizing data sharing among care providers,
through virtual panels of discussion. Preliminary data from the
TeleNEwCARe project show that remote counselling meets theapproval of patients, allowing a con ﬁdential relationship with
clinicians and an effective sharing of information. Grant Sarepta
Therapeutics (CPMS project). This work is generated within the ERN
Euro-NMD
F. Fortunato: None. M. Farnè: None. F. Bianchi: None. M. Neri:
None. G. Siciliano: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; Biogen, Kedrion. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Italfarmaco, Uriach. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
CSL Behring, Alnylam, Lupin. V. Sansone: None. A. Barp: None. E.
Albamonte: None. G. Vita: None. A. Atalaia: None. T. Evange-
lista: None. F. Gualandi: None. A. Ferlini: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
570
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P22.034.A Pregnancy termination rate following prenatal
diagnosis of chromosomal abnormality
Nina Maric
University Clinical Centre of the Republic of Srpska, Banjaluka, Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Introduction: When a chromosomal abnormality is identi ﬁed
prenatally, parents are faced with the option to terminate the
pregnancy. That kind of decision is complex and may depend on
several factors, primarily on the risk associated with thechromosomal abnormality and the way it is explained to parents.
Materials and methods: In this study, we looked at parental
decisions following prenatal diagnosis of a chromosome abnorm-
ality by conventional karyotyping in our department from 2009 to2014. Genetic counseling was provided for the parents thatreceived abnormal results. The pregnancy termination rate was
calculated depending on the type of abnormality and associated
risk.
Results: Among 90 pregnancies with chromosome abnormal-
ities, 53 (58,89%) were terminated. Pregnancies with autosomal
aneuploidy were terminated in 94,44% of cases. Among pregnan-
cies with sex chromosome abnormalities, 83,33% were termi-nated, including all of the cases with 47,XXY and half of the cases
with 47,XXX karyotype. Pregnancies with marker chromosomes
were terminated in 20% of the cases. In cases with unbalancedstructural abnormalities, the termination rate was 87,50%. Amongpregnancies with a balanced structural abnormality, one with de
novo translocation was terminated and all with inherited
abnormalities were continued.
Conclusion: Theﬁndings indicate that most pregnancies with a
severe-risk chromosomal abnormality, as autosomal aneuploidy or
unbalanced structural abnormality, were terminated, and those
with a low-risk abnormality were continued. However, thetermination rate in cases with sex chromosome triploidy is unduly
high. Because genetic counseling may greatly in ﬂuence parental
decisions, advocating the training of more genetic counselors isvery important.
N. Maric: None.
P22.035.A Transition in rare diseases workshops - different
perspective of patients, carers and professionals may add an
important value to guidelines of care
Karolina M. Sledzinska
1, Jolanta M. Wierzba1, Tomasz Grybek2,
Katarzyna Milska1, Kacper Kowalski3, Joanna Kulisiak-Kazimierczak4,
Katarzyna Świeczkowska3
1GUMED, Gdansk, Poland,2FBB, Gdansk, Poland,3PSONI, Gdansk,
Poland,4DSW, Wroclaw, Poland.
Introduction: Rare diseases (RD) with its genetic background may
affect up to 6-8% of the Europeans. As the life span of RD patients
has recently increased, an issue of care during transition from
pediatric to adult care has arisen. To better understand aspects oftransition (so far there are no international guidelines available),Rare Disease Centre in Gdansk, Poland, organized workshops for
patients and carers (P&C) and medical professionals (MP).
Materials and methods: Through the application process we
chose 6 groups (6 people each): 3 MPs and 3 P&C. We asked everygroup 3 questions regarding challenges of transition that people
with disabilities/the families of people with disabilities / specialists
must face in adolescence. Then, we mixed groups (MP +P&C; 6
people each) to choose 3 most valuable MP ’s and P&C ’s answers
separately. At the end, we asked participants to ﬁnd solutions:imaginary ideal ones and real, possible to implement here and
now.
Results: Interestingly, the answers of MPs and P&Cs were
different. MPs focused on problems with education, dif ﬁculties in
ﬁnding adequate medical care, random selections of specialist
with not enough experience and knowledge needed, issues of
family support, legal aspects of care. On the other hand, P&Cs
addressed problems of infantilism, not adequate attitude towardsadolescents, no independence, sexuality as taboo, lack of self-deciding, including range of medical care needed.
Conclusions: It is important to create guidelines of transition
care together with P&Cs, as their expectations towards transitionmay signi ﬁcantly differ from MPs ’view.
K.M. Sledzinska: None. J.M. Wierzba: None. T. Grybek: None.
K. Milska: None. K. Kowalski: None. J. Kulisiak-Kazimierczak:
None. K.Świeczkowska: None.
P22.036.C Evaluation of nursing and midwifery capacity to
deliver genomic healthcare in Wales United Kingdom
Joanne Elizabeth Swidenbank
1, Emma Tonkin1, Maggie Kirk1, Siva
Ganesh1, Deborah Lancastle1, Mark Davies1, Alexandra Murray2,
Michaela John2, Rebecca Hopes2
1University of South Wales, Treforest, United Kingdom,2Genomics
Partnership Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Nurses and midwives are the largest professional
group within the NHS, numbering 32,927 and making up 42% of
the NHS health workforce in Wales in 2018. They will play asigni ﬁcant role in delivering genomics-based care to patients and
their families. To benchmark the current capacity of these
professionals to deliver genomic healthcare, an online survey
(available in English and Welsh) was developed. Ethical review andapproval University of South Wales [19ET1101LR]. The survey
assessed four broad areas: awareness of national and UK-wide
genomics initiatives and attitudes to genomics; current profes-sional practice and genomics competency; genomics and theworkplace (including support from colleagues and work environ-
ment); and in ﬂuencing factors. Demographic data including
clinical role and (regional) health board was also collected alongwith free text responses.
Materials and Method: Data collection occurred in two rounds
between March 2020 and January 31
st, 2021. Links to the survey
were disseminated though each health board and trust in Walesand via social media.
Results: A total of 262 responses were received from nurses ( n
=226, 86.1%) and midwives ( n=36, 13.7%) from six out of seven
health boards across Wales. Results are currently being analysed.Keyﬁndings and relationships within the data will be presented.
Conclusions: These data will be used by Genomics Partnership
Wales to inform strategic workforce development and planning ofeducation and training for the Welsh Nurses and Midwives.Funding: KESS MAXI 21434
J.E. Swidenbank: None. E. Tonkin: None. M. Kirk: None. S.
Ganesh: None. D. Lancastle: None. M. Davies: None. A. Murray:
None. M. John: None. R. Hopes: None.
P23 Ethical, Legal and Psychosocial Aspects in Genetics
P23.002.B Relatives and providers perspectives on a decision
support intervention for cascade screening for beta-
thalassaemia major in Pakistan
Hussain Jafri
1, Mushtaq Ahmed2, Yasmin Ehsan1, Shabnam Bashir3,
Yasmin Rashid4, Shenaz Ahmed5Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
571
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Thalassemia Society of Pakistan, Lahore, Pakistan,2Yorkshire
Regional Genetics Service, Leeds NHS Teaching Hospitals Trust, UK,
Leeds, United Kingdom,3Punjab Thalassaemia Prevention Project,
Lahore, Pakistan,4Health Department Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan,
5Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, Leeds, United Kingdom.
Introduction: To develop and assess the acceptability of a
‘decision support intervention for relatives ’(DeSIRe) of children
with beta-thalassemia major to facilitate informed decision-making about cascade screening in Pakistan.
Materials and Methods: The DeSIRe was developed by a
multidisciplinary team using the International Patient DecisionAids Standards quality criteria and the Ottawa Decision SupportFramework. Twelve focus groups were conducted in six cities in
the Punjab province of Pakistan: six with relatives of children with
βeta thalassaemia major ( β-TM) and six with HCPs af ﬁliated with
the government funded ‘Punjab Thalassaemia Prevention Project ’
(PTPP).
Results: 117 participants (60 HCPs and 57 relatives) generally
valued the DeSIRe for improving understanding of β-TM,
thalassaemia carriers and genetic inheritance. It was considered
accessible for people with varying levels of education, although
some had dif ﬁculties understanding the key concept used in
genetic counselling, such as, ‘genes ’and ‘inheritance ’. Participants
also agreed the DeSIRe was pro-choice and suggested using more
directive language.
Conclusion: Cultural preferences for using directive language
to support decision-making raise ethical challenges for developing
interventions using Western theories, frameworks and guidelines
that emphasise the importance of non-directiveness. Nevertheless,use of the DeSIRe by HCPs in the PTPP to support decision-makingabout cascade screening is feasible and acceptable. The ﬁndings
will inform re ﬁnement of the DeSIRe and plans for implementation
in the clinical setting.FUNDER: Medical Research Council, GrantRef: MR/T003782/1
H. Jafri: None. M. Ahmed: None. Y. Ehsan: None. S. Bashir:
None. Y. Rashid: None. S. Ahmed: None.
P23.003.C Development of biobanking in Russia: legal aspect
Iurii S. Povarov , Andrey A. Inyushkin, Elena S. Kryukova, Valentina D.
Ruzanova
Samara National Research University, SAMARA, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The development of biobanking makes it possible to
conduct large-scale population studies, search for biomarkers, and
develop new drugs.
Materials and Methods: The Russian legislation accompanying
the functioning of biobanks was systematically analyzed.
Results: The legal regime of the biobank as a complex object
consists of the regimes of biomaterials and information collectedon their basis speci ﬁed in the law. The main problem in Russia is
the disunity of biobanks, which increases the risks, prevents the
exchange and rapid use of information for scienti ﬁc research. The
formation of a system of interaction between organizationsengaged in biobanking can be carried out by improving the legalregime of biobanks, including in terms of the exchange of
biomaterials and relevant information, the formation of registers
of genetic data, and strengthening state control over theiractivities.
Conclusions: It is necessary to formulate general provisions on
the status of subjects with biobanks and the regime of bioobanksand the information obtained on their basis on the basis of asingle conceptual framework. It is also necessary to single out the
procedure of cross-border exchange for the full functioning ofbiobanks, ensuring autonomous, uni ﬁed, from the point of view of
international rules, legal regulation.The study was carried out with
theﬁ
nancial support of the Russian Federal Property Fund in the
framework of the scienti ﬁc project no. 18-29-14073.
I.S. Povarov: None. A.A. Inyushkin: None. E.S. Kryukova:
None. V.D. Ruzanova: None.
P23.004.D Rapid Genomic Testing in critically ill children:
Managing risk and uncertainty during the testing cycle
Isabelle M. Delon1, Angus J. Clarke2, F Lucy Raymond3
1East Genomic Laboratory Hub, Cambridge University Hospitals,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,2School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom,3Department of Medical Genetics, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Over the last ﬁve years, rapid genomic testing for critically ill
children has been implemented around the world and delivered
many successes of life-saving diagnosis demonstrating the clinicalutility of the approach. The lack of phenotypic speci ﬁcity in the
neonatal period combined with ever-growing knowledge of gene-
disease associations but incomplete understanding of the natural
history of disorders in the neonatal period has oriented thediagnostic search towards the agnostic analysis of whole genome
sequencing data to increase the chance of a diagnosis. The
resulting testing approach is hypothesis-generating rather thanhypothesis-testing and we propose represents the epistemologydescribed in Biesecker, 2013 (Genomes Research 23:1051-1053)
and a change of paradigm in genomic testing. This new testing
model in turn presents many new risks and uncertainties for theresearch, scienti ﬁc and clinical teams, through pre- and post-test
counselling, testing method, result interpretation, use of the
results in clinical management and health systems functions and
policies. We explore and deconstruct the risks and uncertaintiesdebated in the literature through the lens of the social
construction of knowledge, of frameworks of knowledge and of
probability of outcome, and concepts of genomic uncertainty. Wediscuss the challenges ahead of the community to harness theopportunities offered by novel genomic testing methods in
critically ill children.
I.M. Delon: None. A.J. Clarke: None. F.L. Raymond: None.
P23.005.A Factors that in ﬂuence data sharing through data
sharing platforms: a qualitative study on the views andexperiences of cohort holders and platform developers
Thijs Devriendt
1, Pascal Borry1, Mahsa Shabani2
1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2UGent, Gent, Belgium.
Introduction: Data infrastructures are being developed to
enhance and facilitate the sharing of cohort data internationally.However, empirical studies have shown that many barriers can
impede broad sharing data. Our aim is to describe the barriers and
concerns that cohort holders might have over the sharing ofcohort data in greater contextual depth, and the implications fordata sharing platforms.
Materials and Methods: Seventeen participants involved in
developing data sharing platforms or tied to cohorts that are to besubmitted to platforms were recruited for semi-structured inter-views to share views and experiences regarding data sharing.
Results: Credit and recognition, the potential misuse of data,
loss of control, lack of resources, socio-cultural factors and ethicaland legal barriers were identi ﬁed as elements that in ﬂuence
decisions on data sharing. Based on argumentation underlyingAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
572
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608restrictions, core values were classi ﬁed as equality, reciprocity,
trust, transparency, grati ﬁcation and bene ﬁcence.
Conclusions: Data generators might use data sharing platforms
primarily for collaborative modes of working and networkbuilding, such as to ﬁnd similar cohorts. Data generators might
be unwilling to contribute and share for non-collaborative work, or
if no ﬁnancial resources are provided for sharing data. This
publication is part of a project that has received funding from theEuropean Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under grant agreement No 825903. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
T. Devriendt: None. P. Borry: None. M. Shabani: None.
P23.006.B Your DNA, Your Say: the views of Italian lay public
on sharingDNA and medical information
Virginia Romano
1,2
1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,2Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.
The “Your DNA, Your Say ”project is a global online survey
gathering lay public attitudes toward access and sharing of DNA
and other medical information (Middleton et al., 2018). The survey
has been translated into 15 languages and conducted in 22countries. We report results obtained in Italy regarding trust in aset of selected social entities and willingness to share medical and
DNA information (WTS) to these actors.We obtained responses
from 1229 persons and performed multivariate correlation toanalyse, among others i) trust as distributed per age ii)geographical distribution of WTS and differences amongst the
different potential recipients of sharing iii) trust and WTS as
related to religiosity. The most trusted social actor and potentialdata recipient was the category of “My Medical Doctor ”which
scored an average of 75% across all age ranges. Above and
beyond a general positive attitude towards sharing, respondentswere clear when expressing their preferences between potentialsharing recipients, “My Medical Doctor ”(60%) as opposed to “For
Proﬁt Researcher ”(38%). Finally, the relationship between WTS
and religiosity is complex; while religious people seem lessinclined (58%) than non-religious (62%) towards sharing with “My
Medical Doctor ”this trend is overturned when considering sharing
with “For Pro ﬁt Researcher ”(religious 41% vs non religious 32%).
These survey results suggest that efforts to collect and sharegenomic data should consider and adapt to the social distribution
of trust and willingness to share in the population, and that further
research should explore the speci ﬁc social and cultural contexts of
genomic data.
V. Romano: None.
P23.008.D A couple based approach to expanded carrier
screening in a fertility setting
Juliette Schuurmans
1,2, Mirjam Plantinga1, Angela Fenwick2, Irene
van Langen1, Anneke Lucassen2
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,
2Clinical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Medicine, University of South-
ampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Approximately 1 in every 100 couples are at risk of a
child with an autosomal recessive condition. Often this carriercouple status will not be known until the birth of an affected child,yet new technologies facilitating the rapid simultaneous testing ofmany different carrier states- expanded carrier screening (ECS)-
now mean those couples at risk can be identi ﬁed before they
conceive. We previously described how GPs in the Netherlands
met criteria for responsible implementation when offering this testto their patients. Instead of reporting individual carrier states,results were provided as a couple-result. Here, we describe the
offer of ECS couple-testing in a fertility setting, where those
seeking fertility treatment may not both be providing the gametesto be used in conception.
Methods: We explored healthcare professionals ’(HCPs) (6 focus
groups) and couples ’views (14 interviews) regarding the ethical
issues and implications of couple-based ECS in a UK-based fertilitysetting. Data were analysed thematically. Findings: Couples andHCPs were supportive of the concept of couple-results. However,
many participants found this a dif ﬁcult concept to grasp and often
reverted to discussing individual results. HCPs recognised the limitedutility of disclosing individual carrier results, but thought that their
responsibilities to report these might be different in this setting,
where the social and ‘genetic ’couple are sometimes different.
Conclusion: Although the general population and fertility arms
of the study are not directly comparable (and took part in different
countries), both shed important light on perceptions around
individual and couple test results.
J. Schuurmans: None. M. Plantinga: None. A. Fenwick: None.
I. van Langen: None. A. Lucassen: None.
P23.009.A Why do Belgian reproductive-aged women choose
to accept or decline expanded carrier screening?
Eva Van Steijvoort
1, Remke Demuynck1, Hilde Peeters2, Hilde
Vandecruys3, Jasper Verguts3, Karen Peeraer4, Gert Matthijs5, Pascal
Borry1
1Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Centre for
Biomedical Ethics and Law, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,3Jessa
Ziekenhuis Hasselt, Hasselt, Belgium,4Department of Development
and Regeneration, Woman and Child, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
5Department of Human Genetics, Laboratory for Molecular Diag-
nosis, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) allows to identify
future parents at risk of conceiving a child affected with an
autosomal or X-linked recessive monogenic condition. A Belgian
carrier screening offer for reproductive partners became availablein October 2019.
Materials and Methods: Non-pregnant women visiting their
gynaecologist were invited to complete a questionnaire assessingsocio-demographic characteristics, the perceived susceptibility ofbeing a carrier/conceiving a child with a hereditary condition, the
acceptability of offering ECS, attitudes towards ECS, the intention
to participate in ECS and reasons to accept or decline ECS.
Results: Most women (n =127) were between 25-34 years old
(60%), in a relationship (91%) and wanted to have children in the
future (65%). Being able to share genetic information with
children or relatives (82%), to prevent the birth of a child affectedwith a hereditary condition (81%) and to know the risk ofconceiving a child with a hereditary condition (80%) were the
main reasons to accept ECS that were selected by the majority of
women. The most common reasons for declining ECS were thepossible concerns that could arise when receiving test results
(21%), having no family history of hereditary disorders (15%) and
not wanting to take action based on test-results (before or duringpregnancy) (10%).
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings show that potential users of ECS in
Belgium show positive attitudes towards ECS and would considerAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
573
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608participating in ECS in the future. The results of this study can be
used to develop pre-test counseling services. Grant references:
Research Fund Flanders (FWO).
E. Van Steijvoort: None. R. Demuynck: None. H. Peeters:
None. H. Vandecruys: None. J. Verguts: None. K. Peeraer: None.
G. Matthijs: None. P. Borry: None.
P23.011.C What specialists talk about medical genetics in
Russia? (based on a results of expert interviews)
Alexander Yu. Dolgov1,2
1Institute of Scienti ﬁc Information for Social Sciences of the Russian
Academy of Sciences (INION), Moscow, Russian Federation,2HSE
University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The aim of the study is to ﬁnd out how experts look
at the growth of popularity of genetics, how they describe the
expectations and requests from the government and society, what
problems, in their opinion, they face in the development ofscienti ﬁc knowledge in Russia.
Methods: Expert interviews (N =13) were conducted with
Russian specialists in the ﬁeld of human genetics, medical
genetics, and genomic medicine.
Results: The following main topics were highlighted: uncertainty;
government support and regulatio n; the professional community
problems; ethical limitations and responsibility to patients; expecta-tions, fears and prejudices of people. The problem of uncertainty iso n eo ft h ek e yi s s u e sf o rt h ec u r r e n ts t a g eo fk n o w l e d g ea b o u t
human genome. Government ’s interest in the results of genetic
research plays a controversial role. On the one hand, governmentsupport measures are being improved, and on the other hand,excessive regulation of scienti ﬁc activities appears, while many issues
remain unresolved in terms of their legal regulation. There is also a
problem in the academic community at the level of interaction withdoctors who are not work with genetic data. Experts call ethical
limitations and responsibility to pat ients the main principles of their
work. In the experts ’statements, professional ethics is a working self-
regulatory mechanism. Finally, experts noted that people are notready to introduce genetic technologies into their everyday lives. The
study was supported by the Russia n Science Foundation (project №
19-18-00422).
A.Y. Dolgov: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Russian Science Foundation.
P23.012.D Legal issues relating to genome editing in human
embryos: lessons from the French Bioethics Law
Anastasia Constantin
1,2, Bettina Couderc1,2,3, Emmanuelle Rial-
Sebbag1,2
1CERPOP, UMR 1295, Inserm, Université de Toulouse - Université
Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France,2Plateforme "Ethique et
Biosciences" (Genotoul Societal), GIS Genotoul, Toulouse, France,
3Institut Claudius Regaud - IUCT-Oncopole, Toulouse, France.
France has its own vision of bioethics and thus has adopted
speci ﬁc laws on bioethics covering advances in biology and
medicine. The laws are periodically revised regarding scienti ﬁc
advances and societal demands. The ﬁrst laws were adopted in
1994, revised in 2004 and 2011. They are currently under
revision (to be adopted by the end of ﬁrst semester 2021).
Several ﬁelds are covered: human research, donation and use of
elements and products of the human body, medically assistedprocreation, genetics and genome manipulation, use of personalhealth data for research purpose s and neurosciences. The recent
discovery of the new genome edi ting biotechnology called
CRISPR-Cas9 has raised huge debates in this revision process.
Developed by E. Charpentier and J. Doudna, CRISPR-Cas9
enables targeting and cutting speci ﬁc DNA segments in the
genome to remove or add few nucleotides or substitute another
DNA sequence. Compared to previous technologies, it is more
reliable, easier and cheaper to use; even if serious technicalproblems still exist. The ethical/legal discussions that haveoccurred, in particular regarding genome editing in human
embryos, tackled questions on it s use in research and in clinical
applications. The French bioethics law still ﬁrmly forbids the
clinical application, however the use of genome editing inhuman embryos for research purposes is debatable in the
French Parliament. The French bioethics law, its current revision
and the related legal issues with genome editing in humanembryos will be presented. Supported by ANR as part of the
ComingGen project n°ANR-18-CE38-0007
A. Constantin: None. B. Couderc: None. E. Rial-Sebbag: None.
P23.013.A The ef ﬁcacy of genetic counselling for familial
colorectal cancer. Findings from a randomised controlled trial
Andrada Ciuca
1, Adriana Baban1, Tara Clancy2,3, Ramona
Moldovan1,2,3
1Department of Psychology, Cluj-Napoca, Romania,2Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Division of Evolu-
tion and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Science, University ofManchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background: Genetic counselling (GC) for familial colorectal
cancer (fCRC) has been shown to improve outcomes such asemotional distress and screening adherence. This is the ﬁrst
randomised clinical trial to evaluate the ef ﬁcacy of GC for fCRC.
Method: We included individuals affected or at risk for fCRC
(Lynch syndrome, APC-associated polyposis, MUTYH-associatedpolyposis or clinically de ﬁned fCRC). Participants were randomised
to (1) genetic counselling and standard care or (2) standard care
alone (control). Measures include empowerment (Genetic Coun-selling Outcome Scale, GCOS), knowledge, risk perception,emotional distress, screening/surveillance behaviours, perceived
social support, decisional con ﬂict and quality of life.
Results: We currently recruited 56 participants. The average age
of participants is 46 years old, with 50% females. Our data indicate
a signi ﬁcant effect in terms of empowerment (p =0.0002),
depression (p =0.03), anxiety (p =0.03) and knowledge (p =
0.01), when comparing the genetic counselling group with thecontrol group, at post-intervention. Anxiety and depression at
baseline had a moderating effect on the change in empowerment.
Participants scoring lower on anxiety (p =0.009) and depression
(p=0.011) at baseline had a greater increase in empowerment
scores after genetic counselling.
Conclusions: Our data shows signi ﬁcant improvements for
both the primary endpoint (empowerment) and secondaryendpoints (knowledge, depression, anxiety). We hypothesize thatthese trends will be maintained and our ﬁndings will be further
supported by the sample (n =68) we intend to recruit to ensure
power for statistical and clinical signi ﬁcance.
A. Ciuca: None. A. Baban: None. T. Clancy: None. R.
Moldovan: None.
P23.014.B Genetic counsellors and legal recognition: a made-
for-Canada approachAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
574
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Dimitri Patrinos1,Deborah M. Lambert2, Bartha Maria Knoppers1,
GenCOUNSEL Study, Ma ’n Zawati1
1Centre of Genomics and Policy, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada,2National Rare Diseases Of ﬁce, Dublin, Ireland.
Genetic counselling is a fast-growing profession in Canada, but
despite this growth, is only recognized legally in 1 of 13 Canadianprovinces and territories. Legal recognition ensures safety in theprovision of healthcare services by regulating professions that are
considered to pose a risk of harm to the public, if not properly
regulated. It also offers title protection to legally recognizedprofessionals.
We surveyed a newly-formed special interest group for provincial
genetic counselling regulation and estimate that there are 484
individuals in Canada to be regulated as genetic counsellors (n =
484), with 89% found in only 4 of 13 jurisdictions. Compared to other
regulated professions, the route tow ards legal recognition for genetic
counsellors may be challenging due to its small number ofpractitioners. Under Canadian law, there are three models of legalrecognition: 1) the constitution of a p rofessional order, 2) inclusion in
another professional order, and 3) delegation of speci ﬁc tasks from
another regulated profession. Pra ctical consideration of each model
is a balancing act between public protection, and the resources
required to seek legal recognition . Though legal recognition occurs at
the provincial rather than federal level in Canada, we advocate for a
pan-Canadian approach to develo p strategies and resources to
further provincial and territorial pursuit of legal recognition.
This work is part of the larger GenCOUNSEL study, funded
through the LSARP Genome Canada competition with co-fundingfrom: Canadian Institutes for Health Research, Genome BC, GenomeQuebec, Provincial Health Services Authority, BC Children ’sH o s p i t a l
Foundation and BC Women ’s Hospital Foundation.
D. Patrinos: None. D.M. Lambert: None. B. Knoppers: None.
M. Zawati: None.
P23.015.C Implementing the use of genetic information in the
electronic health record: a scoping review on the ethical andlegal framework in the European context
Paola Del Sette, Marco Salivetto, Camilla Tettamanti, Rosagemma
Ciliberti, Emilio Di Maria
University of Genoa, Genova, Italy.
Genetic information includes family health history as well as data
resulting from the analysis of biological samples. Data management
is increasingly important to integrate relevant information into the
electronic health record (EHR). I n the European context, the GDPR
has revised the data protection scheme to respond to the challengesof the digital technologies. Objective of the present study is to
evaluate the existing knowledge about the implementation of
genetic information in the EHR for clinical purposes, with focus onlegal and ethical issues from the European perspective. A scoping
review was designed according to the PRISMA-ScR extension to
respond to the key question: What are the current recommendationsand best practices on the implementation of genetic information intothe EHR and its sharing among records of extended families?. The
search strategy was piloted on PubMed. Out of 1608 records, the 500
best matching documents were screened. Grey literature wasinspected as well. The major ﬁndings are brie ﬂy outlined. The
deﬁnition of genetic data used in most of ﬁcial documents is
restricted to genotype(s). A few a rticles addressed the broader term
genetic information and family data. Most recent articles focussed onthe use data collected by the mean of massive sequencing, and onpossible abuse of such data. The sharing of genetic informationwithin the family and with clinicians was not deeply explored so far;
information inferred from family history was not addressed as well.
The dialogue in the genomics community would need further
investigation. Partially funded by University of Genova FRA2017-2018 .
P. Del Sette: None. M. Salivetto: None. C. Tettamanti: None. R.
Ciliberti: None. E. Di Maria: None.
P23.017.A New British Society for Genetic Medicine (BSGM)
guidelines for ethical issues relating to genetic testing in
childhood
Alison E. Hall
1, Rachel Hart2, Angus Clarke3
1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2West Midland
Region Clinical Genomic Centre, Birmingham Women ’s and Chil-
dren ’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom,3School of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Introduction : The publication of the UK British Society for Genetic
Medicine ’s (BSGM) consent and con ﬁdentiality guidance in July
2019 highlighted the need and desire for separate and updated
guidelines in two areas, genetic testing in childhood, and prenatal
genetic testing. The BSHG published guidance on the genetictesting of children in 2010, but this requires revision in light of
challenges raised by new technological developments including
whole genome sequencing (WGS), the mainstreaming of geno-mics and the wider integration of WGS and other genetic andgenomic testing into routine health care via the NHS Genomic
Medicine Service.
Methods : A multidisciplinary working group was formed in late
2019 under the auspices of the BSGM ethics and policy committeeto update the 2010 BSHG genetic testing of children guidance.
This group carried out a survey of BSGM members to solicit views
on the continuing utility of the guidelines and the changesneeded. A workshop was held in February 2020 to agree a draft
outline, identify contents and the process for generating the draft.
Results : This presentation will highlight key aspects of the
updated guidance. The guidance addresses relevant ethical andlegal frameworks alongside case-based good practice for some of
the ethical challenges that can be generated as a result of genetic
and genomic testing. The intention is that this guidance is useableand readable for the expanding non genetic community under-taking genomic tests as well as for existing audiences. This
guidance will be published in the summer of 2021.
A.E. Hall: None. R. Hart: None. A. Clarke: None.
P23.018.B Legal regulation of human genome editing in the
Russian Federation
Andrey A. Inyushkin
1, Valentina D. Ruzanova1, Elena M. Inyush-
kina2, Olga A. Vedyasova2, Margarita A. Zhuravleva2, Alexey N.
Inyushkin2
1Department of Civil and Business Law, Samara National Research
University, Samara, Russian Federation,2Department of Human and
Animal Physiology, Samara National Research University, Samara,Russian Federation.
Introduction: The development of modern technologies has
created new opportunities for carrying out genetic research andgenome editing. On the other hand, scientists and potential usersfaced challenges, concerning civil and public regulations of
genome editing and its clinical application. Here we discuss
questions and legal issues related to the genome editing and itspotential clinical uses in the Russian Federation.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
575
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: Historical and comparative legal
methods, methods of formal and dialectical logics, legal modelling
were applied for the analysis of Russian law relating to the
genome editing.
Results: Considering the Russian legal regulation, it should be
noted that according to Art. 3 of the Federal Law of July 5, 1996 №
86-FL"On State Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering" the
regulatory legal framework for genetic engineering, includinggenome editing, genome diagnostics and gene therapy, is madeup by federal (not International) laws and laws of the subjects of
the Russian Federation. This Law mainly regulates the issues of
genetic engineering in agriculture and food production. Mean-while, social relations associated with the diagnosis and editing ofthe human genome are rapidly developing and there is a vital
need for solving of legal issues in this area. It is necessary to
regulate in detail the issues of gene editing in relation to humans.
Conclusion: In our opinion, the normative legal regulation in
this area needs to be expanded and brought into line with
international legislation. The research was funded by RFBRaccording to the project №18-29-14073.
A.A. Inyushkin: None. V.D. Ruzanova: None. E.M. Inyushkina:
None. O.A. Vedyasova: None. M.A. Zhuravleva: None. A.N.
Inyushkin: None.
P23.019.C Laboratory perspectives on a template for report-
ing genomic sequencing results
Danya F. Vears
1,2,3, Marjolein Kriek4, Koen L. van Gassen5
1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Department of Public Health
and Primary Care,KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2Biomedical Ethics
Research Group, Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Parkville,
Australia,3Melbourne Law School, University of Melbourne, Carlton,
Australia,4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,
5University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Existing research shows considerable variability in the information
laboratories include in their genomic sequencing reports and theirclassi ﬁcation of variants. This suggests reporting guidelines are not
being used consistently, which may have signi ﬁcant implications
for patients.
To address this, we developed a report template based on the
clinical reports we received from our previous study in which 41
laboratories analysed exome data from a virtual patient-parent
trio. The template contents adhered to existing guidelines andwas structured so that, even for very complex results, the most
important information was on the ﬁrst page. We invited these
laboratories to complete a questionnaire to rate their satisfactionwith each report component, overall length and layout.
Twenty-four laboratories from 13 countries assessed the template
(RR=58.5%). Support for inclusion of the Primary Findings section
was high (96%) but fewer respondents agreed to include theSecondary Findings (71%) and Incidental Findings sections (58%).Rationales for excluding these sections often related to laws or
laboratory-based practices which prevented reporting/searching for
these types of ﬁndings or concerns about whether the patient had
provided consent to receive them . Views on including the Clinical
Management section were mixed with 75% of respondents agreeing
to inclusion. Overall satisfactio n with report length was high (79%),
yet only 50% were satis ﬁed with the level of detail provided.
These ﬁndings allowed us to re ﬁne the template, producing a
tool which will assist laboratories to improve their reporting
practices. This will increase report reproducibility and readabilityfor clinicians, ultimately improving patient care.
D.F. Vears: None. M. Kriek: None. K.L. van Gassen: None.P23.020.D New guidance from the British Society for Genetic
Medicine about the ethical issues relating to prenatal genetic
testing
Ruth Horn
1, Alison Hall2, Anneke Lucassen3, BSGM Prenatal Genetic
Testing Working Group
1Ethox Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2PHG
Foundation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Clinical Ethics and Law Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Introduction : The publication of the UK British Society for
Genetics Medicine (BSGM) consent and con ﬁdentiality guidance
in 2019 highlighted the need and desire for separate and more
detailed considerations of the ethical issues in two areas: genetictesting in childhood, and prenatal genetic testing. Substantialadvances in the ability to detect genetic variation, at speed and
low cost, together with the need to make these advances available
to a much wider range of healthcare professionals - via the NHSGenomic Medicine Service - means that consideration of theethical issues raised is timely.
Methods : A multidisciplinary working group was formed in late
2019 under the auspices of the BSGM ethics and policy committeeto develop new guidance that focuses on areas highlighted by the
BSGM consent and con ﬁdentiality guidance. This group carried
out a survey of BSGM members to solicit views on the reach ofexisting guidelines and any changes that might be needed. Aworkshop was held in February 2020 to agree a draft outline,
identify content and the process for generating the new guidance
relating to pre-natal genetic diagnosis.
Results : This presentation will highlight key-aspects covered in
the report. The document provides an overview of the types of
prenatal genetic tests and the routes to their realisation with case-
based illustrations of potential ethical and legal issues that arise inthe patient-pathway. We explore the offer, delivery of testing,
communication of results and subsequent management and hope
that the report will facilitate ethical decision-making for bothprofessionals and patients.
R. Horn: None. A. Hall: None. A. Lucassen: None.
P23.021.D The use of re ﬂective diaries to explore the liminal
space between clinical encounters in predictive Huntington ’s
disease clinics
Lisa M. Ballard
1, Shane Doheny2, Angus Clarke2, Anneke M.
Lucassen1
1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom,2Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Introduction: What happens in a clinic appointment for a
predictive Huntington ’s disease (HD) test has been documented
in various ways. However, much less is known about the liminal
space between those sessions. Our aim was to explore the
following questions: 1) how does the decision to have a predictivetest for Huntington ’s disease impact on patients ’lives and 2) what
does it feel like for patients to experience this process? This
patient group was chosen because the pace of decision making
does not usually allow for such detailed scrutiny of this liminalspace.
Methods: We recruited 15 patients who were considering
predictive testing for HD from four UK regional genetics services.
Qualitative data was gathered from patients ’reﬂective diaries to
explore the impact of the deliberation process for a predictive HDAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
576
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608test and compared with data from clinical appointments. Data was
analysed using thematic analysis, the voice approach and I-poems.
Results: We focused on topics identi ﬁed in the re ﬂective diaries
that were not present in the clinic appointments. Analysishighlighted themes such as ‘front and back-stage management ’,
‘fear of stigmatisation ’,‘social responsibility ’,‘the absence of hope ’
and ‘three imagined futures ’. Voices and I-poems were used to
illustrate these themes.
Conclusion: We used a participatory approach to answering the
research questions, which was proportionate for the private
nature of the diaries and the sometimes-emotive experiences they
contained. It may be possible to develop these explorations ofpatient deliberation between clinical appointments to informdiscussion within clinical appointments.ESRC Grant ES/R003092/1
L.M. Ballard: None. S. Doheny: None. A. Clarke: None. A.M.
Lucassen: None.
P23.022.B Lessons learned from incidental ﬁndings in clinical
exome sequencing of 16,482 individuals
Vyne van der Schoot
1, Lonneke Haer-Wigman2, Ilse Feenstra2,
Femke Tammer2, Anke J. M. Oerlemans2, Martine P. A. van Koolwijk2,
Frans van Agt2, Yvonne H. J. M. Arens1, Han Brunner2, Lissenka
Vissers2, Helger G. Ijntema2
1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,
2Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Incidental ﬁndings are unintentionally uncovered
pathogenic variants predisposing to a disease unrelated to theclinical question. We report our experiences with IFs identi ﬁed
during 5 years of clinical exome sequencing.
Materials and methods: We evaluated IFs identi ﬁed in 16,482
index patients receiving clinical exome sequencing, and comparedthese to ‘ACMG59 ’-listed genes.
Results: IFs were identi ﬁed in 0.58% (95/16,482) of index
patients. The odds of IF differed signi ﬁcantly between analysis of
restricted disease-gene panels (0.03%) and whole exome/Mendeliome analysis (1.03%). In 86 of 95 individuals, the IF
was medically actionable. Sixty-one percent affected an
‘ACMG59 ’-listed gene. The remaining 39% grouped into four
categories: disorders similar to listed on ‘ACMG59 ’(25%);
disorders for which disease manifestation could be in ﬂuenced
(7%); IFs providing reproductive options (2%); and IFs with
pharmacogenetic implications (5%).
Conclusion: The overall odds of IFs is low. IFs predisposing to
medically actionable disorders affect a broader range of genes
than ‘ACMG59 ’, advocating that pre-de ﬁned gene lists are too
restrictive, and that IFs require ad hoc evaluation of medicalactionability. Whereas both the identi ﬁcation and disclosure of IFs
depend on local policy, the lessons learned provide essential
insight into the nature and odds of IFs in clinical exomesequencing.
V. van der Schoot: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. I. Feenstra:
None. F. Tammer: None. A.J.M. Oerlemans: None. M.P.A. van
Koolwijk: None. F. van Agt: None. Y.H.J.M. Arens: None. H.
Brunner: None. L. Vissers: None. H.G. Ijntema: None.
P23.027.C Coping with healthcare needs among adolescents
and young adults with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS): ‘You ’re
having to put up a ﬁght to take care of your health ’
Catherine Wilsnack
1, Camella Rising1, Pat Boyd1, Alix Sleight2, Sadie
Hutson3, Payal P. Khincha1, Allison Werner-Lin41National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, USA,2Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Los
Angeles, CA, USA,33University of Tennessee Knoxville, College of
Nursing, Knoxville, TN, USA,4University of Pennsylvania School of
Social Policy and Practice, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Introduction: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare hereditary
cancer syndrome that confers nearly 100% lifetime cancer riskstarting from birth. Early detection screening involves high-
interval, burdensome, multimodal examinations. Adolescents
and young adults (AYAs) with LFS may experience barriers toaddressing unique healthcare needs in the US healthcare system,requiring compensatory strategies to cope with emotional and
ﬁnancial strain.
Materials and Methods: A multidisciplinary research team
interviewed 38 AYAs with LFS (aged 16-38 years) who wereenrolled in the National Cancer Institute ’s (NCI) LFS study
(NCT01443468). Participants were predominantly female (n =26)
and white (n =31) Interviews were recorded and transcribed, then
analyzed using modi ﬁed grounded theory.
Results : Participants described barriers related to accessing
screening services or high quality LFS-related care, and inade-quate ﬁnancial resources for screening-related expenses. Most
AYAs relied on the NCI to receive no-cost cancer screening and
expressed worry about accessing screening after study termina-
tion. Participants in the control arm forewent cancer screeningservices to cope with cost burden. Financial planning supportedcoping with anxiety related to anticipated cancer costs. Partici-
pants demonstrated self-advocacy and served as educators to
address dissatisfaction of healthcare providers rendering LFS care.
Conclusions : Participants discussed how their healthcare needs
are disproportionate to coping capacity. Individuals are experien-
cing systems- and policy-level challenges yet employing
individual-level coping strategies. Multi-level supportive interven-tions are lacking to ameliorate the burdensome physical,
emotional, and ﬁnancial challenges of AYAs with LFS. Results
highlight the need for an integrated systems level solution toaddress barriers and optimize clinical care to promote adaptivecoping strategies.
C. Wilsnack: None. C. Rising: None. P. Boyd: None. A. Sleight:
None. S. Hutson: None. P.P. Khincha: None. A. Werner-Lin:
None.
P23.028.D Exploring the role of religion/spirituality on the
lived experience of Muslim patients with Long QT syndrome:patients ’and health professionals ’perspectives
Khadijah Bakur
1,2,3, Jumana Al-Aama4,3, Zuhair Alhassnan5, Helen
Brooks6, Tara Clancy7, Waleed Manea8, Saud Takroni9, Fiona Ulph10
1Department of Genetic Medicine, King Abdulaziz University Hospital,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,2School of Biological Science, Faculty of
Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester,United Kingdom,3Princess Al-Jawhara Centre of Excellence in
Research of Hereditary Disorders, King AbdulAziz University, Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia,4Department of Genetic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,5Department of
Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center,
College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
6Institute of Population Health Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, United Kingdom,7Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, St. Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,88 Heart center department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
& Research Centerr, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,9Department of Medical
Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
577
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Saudi Arabia,10Division of Psychology and Mental Health, Faculty of
Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background : Genetic services are rapidly growing in many Islamic
countries, leading to more diagnoses. Because Muslim patients
integrate religion throughout their lives, its role in their coping
and decision-making must be understood in the context ofgenetic counselling. This study explored the role of religion in theexperiences of Saudi patients with long QT syndrome (LQTS),
drawing on their perspectives and those of their health
professionals.
Methods: The study employed semi-structured interviews to
explore the role of Islam in patients ’perceptions of the cause of
diagnosis, coping strategies and decision-making. The participants
were recruited from two Saudi Arabian cardio-genetic centres andinvestigated via interpretative phenomenological analysis. The
study also used semi-structured interviews to explore health
professionals ’experiences regarding the role of patients ’religion
and spirituality in coping and decision-making. The healthprofessionals were recruited from the same cardio-genetic
centres, with the interviews thematically analysed.
Results: The interviews with 13 patients who had (or were
carriers of) LQTS and 12 health professionals (clinical geneticists,genetic counsellors, cardiologists, molecular geneticists and
patient coordinators) demonstrated that religion was signi ﬁcant
in maintaining wellbeing in these patients. From both perspec-tives, the main factors in ﬂuencing perceptions of the cause of
diagnosis, coping and decision-making were the interpretations of
religious beliefs and rulings and the availability and understandingof medical information.
Conclusion: Providing patients with clear medical information
could alter their perceptions of the cause of diagnosis, which
could contribute to better outcomes. Religious beliefs help reducecognitive dissonance by casting wise decision-making as areligious duty.
No grant
K. Bakur: None. J. Al-Aama: None. Z. Alhassnan: None. H.
Brooks: None. T. Clancy: None. W. Manea: None. S. Takroni:
None. F. Ulph: None.
P23.030.B New British Society for Genetic Medicine (BSGM):
Ethical issues relating to prenatal genetic testing
Adeline Perrot , Ruth Horn
Ethox Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Introduction : Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is a rapidly
developing genomic technology that is constantly widening its
scope and opening up new possibilities in reproductive medicine.
Ten years after NIPT has been made commercially available, it isincreasingly entering routine antenatal care as either a ﬁrst- or
second-tier test. In England, France and Germany, for example,
NIPT has been made available free-of-charge as a second-tier test
to women with a higher chance of common chromosomalanomalies. The clinical implementation of NIPT carries bene ﬁts
but also raises important ethical questions. Our project analyses
these questions within their speci ﬁc contexts in England, France
and Germany.
Methods : As part of a wider research project, which will involve
qualitative methods, we conducted a document analysis to
compare arguments about, and regulations governing NIPT inthe three countries in: law and policy document; public reports;medical press; academic literature; and media.Results : Despite the similarities between the three countries to
offer NIPT as a second-tier screening tool, they exhibit differences
with regard to their public discourses about prenatal genomics,
screening policies, the risk-thresholds they use, professionalregulations and laws. These differences have an impact on theway ethical issues emerge, and questions about the meaning of
health, illness and disability, the scope of public health interven-
tions, social inclusion and exclusion as well as reproductive choiceare approached in each country.
A. Perrot: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; Economic and Social Research Council. R.
Horn: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);
Signi ﬁcant; Economic and Social Research Council.
P23.031.C Healthcare professionals ’perspectives and experi-
ences with cases of nondisclosure of genetic information torelatives
Amicia Phillips1, Danya F. Vears1,2,3, Ine Van Hoyweghen1, Pascal
Borry1
1University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2Murdoch Children ’s Research
Institute, Melbourne, Australia,3University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia.
Findings from genomic sequencing can have important implica-
tions for patients and relatives. Yet, when a patient does not
consent to the disclosure of genetic information to relatives, it isunclear how healthcare professionals (HCPs) should balance theirresponsibilities towards patients and their family members and
whether breaches in con ﬁdentiality are warranted. To address this
issue, we interviewed 20 HCPs from Belgian genetics centers toexplore how they addressed familial implications before and after
testing, experiences with nondisclosure, and their views on various
policies addressing nondisclosure. Participants identi ﬁed various
strategies for facilitating family communication but noted thatconstraints on time and resources hindered their ability to support
patients with disclosure. Although cases of nondisclosure were
uncommon, almost all HCPs reported having encountered such acase. HCPs felt tension between their duties to their patients andpatients ’relatives who could bene ﬁt from being informed of their
genetic risk. There was substantial variation in the degree to which
HCPs tried to persuade patients to communicate; severalparticipants felt that by informing the patient of the importance
of family communication, they had discharged their duty, while
others took further measures to persuade patients. Participants feltthat communication to relatives was primarily the responsibility ofthe patient but were hesitant to support policies that would
formalize this responsibility. Participants also criticized policies
that would permit or oblige HCPs to breach con ﬁdentiality, citing
many practical limitations. Based on our ﬁndings, we recommend
the development of clearer guidelines to help HCPs understand
their duties and constraints.
A. Phillips: None. D.F. Vears: None. I. Van Hoyweghen: None.
P. Borry: None.
P23.032.D Parents ’experiences with whole-exome sequencing
in pediatric renal cancer
Sebastian B. B. Bon
1, Roel H. P. Wouters1, Janna A. Hol1, Marjolijn C.
J. Jongmans1,2, Marry M. van den Heuvel-Eibrink1, Martha A.
Grootenhuis1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
578
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Introduction: In pediatric renal cancer, germline whole-exome
sequencing (WES) contributes to the identi ﬁcation of predisposing
factors, facilitating surveillance and family counseling. Little is
known about experiences and needs of families of childhood
cancer patients regarding WES. Our qualitative interview studyexplores these experiences and needs in order to improvecounseling and support.
Methods: Twenty-nine interviews were conducted with parents
after they had been approached for a nationwide germline WESstudy in children with renal tumors, comprising a cancer panelanalysis and optional exome-wide trio-analysis. The interviews
were analyzed using an inductive thematic approach.
Results: Parents were generally positive about WES. Parents
reported both individual and altruistic motives for participating.
Altruistic motives such as contributing to science and helping
future patients appeared more important after the child ’s
treatment had been ﬁnished. Several families approached shortly
after diagnosis reported feeling overwhelmed by the information.
Parents often chose exome-wide (trio-)analysis over cancer panel
analysis, although they faced signi ﬁcant dif ﬁculties distinguishing
between these approaches. Families who received negativeresults felt relieved, but some worried about yet undiscovered
factors or felt disappointed.
Conclusions: Families are positive about WES, however we
identi ﬁed several challenges pertaining to timing, consent and
follow-up. We recommend approaching families during a rela-
tively stable phase in their child ’s treatment trajectory. Separating
consent for panel analysis and exome-wide analysis might helpparents to make a deliberate decision. Attention should be payed
to families who receive negative results.
S.B.B. Bon: None. R.H.P. Wouters: None. J.A. Hol: None. M.C.J.
Jongmans: None. M.M. van den Heuvel-Eibrink: None. M.A.
Grootenhuis: None.
P23.033.A De ﬁnition of personalized medicine: links with
familiarity and knowledge in genetics
Valentyn Fournier , Loris Schiaratura
University of Lille, Villeneuve-d ’ascq, France.
Introduction: Personalized medicine (PM) is an important topic in
public health. However, there is no consensus among its
deﬁnitions. A recent study showed that familiarity with the
medical ﬁeld in ﬂuences the de ﬁnition of PM. Indeed, the most
familiar people de ﬁne it more technically with biomedical and
genetic aspects, while the others only cite patient-centered
aspects. In line with this study, our research proposes to replicate
the effect of familiarity in a larger sample and to examine the roleof genetic knowledge on the de ﬁnition of PM.
Methods: 427 participants (205 in general population and 222
students, with different study domains) were recruited. They
answered to an online questionnaire evaluating the de ﬁnition of
PM, attitudes towards pharmacogenomics and general beliefstowards medicines. Moreover, the general population participants
answered to a genetic knowledge questionnaire.
Results: Independently of their study domain (scienti ﬁc or not),
participants characterize PM with both technical and patient-
centered aspects. In the general population, the knowledge in
genetics is signi ﬁcantly predictive of the de ﬁnition of PM. The
more genetically literate people are, the more they will de ﬁne PM
with genetic-related concepts.Conclusions: The ﬁndings could lead to an improvement of
patient care by taking into account knowledge in genetics. PM being
a frequent tool in cancer care, it seems important for patients to
understand what PM really implies in order to promote a betterunderstanding and avoid oversized hopes.This research was fundedby French National Cancer Institute, grant number 2018-164
V. Fournier: None. L. Schiaratura: None.
P23.034.B The views of health care providers on the scope of
pre-implantation genetic testing: a systematic review
Maria Siermann
1, Olga Tsuiko1, Joris Vermeesch1, Taneli Raivio2,
Pascal Borry1
1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,2University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
Introduction: Pre-implantation genetic testing (PGT) can be used
to prevent passing on genetic conditions to future offspring or toimprove reproductive success. Whereas in the past it was solelyused for childhood-onset, lethal disorders, nowadays PGT is used
for conditions with adult-onset, possible treatment and lower
penetrance, in addition to non-medical traits such as sex selection.This can create dilemmas for health care providers around what
should be the scope of PGT.
Materials and Methods: Four databases (Web of Science,
PubMed, Embase, CINAHL) were systematically searched forqualitative empirical studies that investigated the perspectives
of health care professionals on the scope of PGT. Multiple
researchers independently performed a selection process andassessed included studies for methodological quality using theCritical Appraisal Skills Program.
Results: Twelve articles were included in our analysis. The main
themes extracted were the providers ’assessment of the ‘serious-
ness ’of genetic conditions, the tension between respecting patients ’
autonomy and provider ’s own viewpoint, and the dilemmas
surrounding the expanding scope of PGT such as sex selection,non-medical traits, carrier embryos and comprehensive PGT.
Conclusions: In general, providers found the patients ’view-
point the most important in assessing appropriateness of PGT.
However, providers differed in views of their role in limiting PGT:some preferred ‘shared decision-making ’between providers and
patients, whereas others thought it should be the patients ’choice.
This project has received funding from the European Union ’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under theMarie Sk łodowska-Curie grant agreement No 813707 ( ‘MATER ’:
‘Innovative Training Network in Female Reproductive Care ’).
M. Siermann: None. O. Tsuiko: None. J. Vermeesch: None. T.
Raivio: None. P. Borry: None.
P23.035.C Sociological aspects of preconception genetic
screening for autosomal recessive diseases
Oksana V. Kopylova
1, Karina Z. Revazyan1, Alexey N. Meshkov1,
Alexandra I. Ershova1, Anush M. Glechyan1, Natalia A. Voinova2,
Alexander K. Volkov2, Oxana M. Drapkina1
1National Medical Research Centre for Therapy and Preventive
Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation,2Bauman Moscow State
Technical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: The aim of the study was to identify attitudes
towards preconception genetic screening (PGS) for common
autosomal recessive diseases in family planning.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
579
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and Methods: The study included 535 students and
staff from one of Moscow Universities, age of 18-49 (female, 41%)
and≥18 (male). 83% were undergraduate; 61% were not married,
87% did not plan conception in the near future, 6% had relativeswith hereditary diseases. Participants read a booklet on PGS ofcystic ﬁbrosis (CF), phenylketonuria (PKU), sensorineural hearing
loss (SNHL), alpha-1-antitrypsin de ﬁciency (A1AT) and ﬁlled out an
anonymous questionnaire.
Results: The participants ’answers were: PGS is useful
regardless of family history (92% ) ,i tw o u l dh e l pt oa v o i ds t r e s s
of having a sick baby (48%), PGS increases the chances of having
a healthy baby (45%), carriage identi ﬁcation can change
relationship between partners (46%) and attitude towardsoneself (34%). 55% previously did not know about any of 4
diseases, the most known disease was SNHL (29%), the least
known - A1AT (6%). Only 20% chose all correct statements onunderstanding of book let information. 73% participants wanted
to participate in PGS. The most common reason for consent was
the desire to have complete information before the childbirth(62%); for refusal - absence of current relevance (70%). 15%chose the absence of relatives with hereditary diseases as a
reason for refusal.
Conclusions: Most of the participants reacted positively to PGS.
When introducing PGS into the health system, it is important tostrengthen the knowledge of the population of PGS.
O.V. Kopylova: None. K.Z. Revazyan: None. A.N. Meshkov:
None. A.I. Ershova: None. A.M. Glechyan: None. N.A. Voinova:
None. A.K. Volkov: None. O.M. Drapkina: None.
P23.036.D Patient perspectives on making decisions in
predictive genetic testing and in responses to fetal cardiac
anomaly
Shane Doheny
1, Lisa Ballard2, Anneke M. Lucassen2,Angus J.
Clarke1
1School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom,
2University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Introduction: The making of decisions by patients about genetic
testing or about continuing a pregnancy in the face of genetic riskis often dif ﬁcult. We focused on settings where decisions are
personal choices not driven by medical treatment: testing for late
onset disease with no treatment and decisions about continuing a
pregnancy when the fetus has a cardiac anomaly. Patients wererecruited as active co-researchers who reported their thoughts,
feelings and family discussions about the “life world ”within which
their decisions are made.
Materials & Methods: We recruited 31 patients from predictive
genetic testing clinics and seven patients from prenatal anomaly
clinics. Data were collected from clinics, diaries and interviews. We
mapped the content of all data sources and selected key parts ofthe data for discourse analysis, attending to what was (not) saidand considering questions of in ﬂuence and persuasion.
Results: Diaries can provide rich information about the life
world within which patients make decisions, giving insight intofactors that may not be discussed in clinic. Differences ofperspective within a family were found to be important factors
in the making of decisions. Although there were few recordings of
family discussions, these can be especially rich.
Conclusions: Asking patients to keep a diary allows access to
difﬁcult and sensitive aspects of their decision making relevant to
genetic counselling. Our approach provides novel insights of usein training practitioners. We suggest ways to develop thesemethods for research and adapt them for use in genetic
counselling. ESRC Grant Ref: ES/R003092/1S. Doheny: None. L. Ballard: None. A.M. Lucassen: None. A.J.
Clarke: None.
P23.037.A Uptake of Fetal Aneuploidy Screening After the
Introduction of the Non-Invasive Prenatal Test: a National
Population-based Register Study
Karuna R. M. van der Meij
1, Maurike de Groot- van Mooren1, Caroline
Kooij1,E l l e nW .S .C a r b o2, Mijntje J. Pieters3,4, Wendy Rodenburg2,
Robert-Jan H. Galjaard5,E r i kA .S i s t e r m a n s1, Martina C. Cornel1,L i d e w i j
Henneman1, The Dutch NIPT Consortium
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands,3Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,4Foundation
Prenatal Screening Southeast region of the Netherlands, Maastricht,Netherlands,5Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Introduction: Countries are exploring ways to integrate the Non-
Invasive Prenatal Test (NIPT) in their prenatal screening programs,either as a ﬁrst- or second-tier test. This study describes how the
uptake of fetal aneuploidy screening changed after the introduction
of NIPT as a second-tier and as a ﬁrst-tier test within the Netherlands.
Methods: A population-based register study, recording uptake
of fetal aneuploidy screening in the Netherlands. Data from all
pregnant women choosing to have the First-trimester CombinedTest (FCT) or ﬁrst-tier NIPT between January 2007 and March 2019
were retrospectively collected using national registration systems.
For 2018, postal codes were used to compare NIPT uptake
between socioeconomically disadvantaged neighborhoods andother neighborhoods.
Results: After the introduction of NIPT as a ﬁrst-tier test for all
women in April 2017 (TRIDENT-2 study), FCT uptake declined
signi ﬁcantly from 35.8% in 2016 to 2.6% in 2018 (p < 0.0001). NIPT
uptake increased to 43.4% in 2018. Total uptake (FCT and NIPT)
between 2007 and 2018 increased signi ﬁcantly from 14.8% to
45.9% (p < 0.0001). However, total uptake stabilized at 46% forboth years of TRIDENT-2. NIPT uptake in socioeconomicallydisadvantaged neighbourhoods was 20.3% whereas NIPT uptake
in other neighbourhoods was 47.6% (p < 0.001).
Conclusions: An increase in total fetal aneuploidy screening
uptake up to 45.9% was observed after the introduction of NIPT.Uptake appears to have stabilized within a year after introducing
ﬁrst-tier NIPT. The results indicate potential unequal access to
NIPT, which has both ethical and policy implications. Funding:
ZonMw Netherlands grant no. 543002001
K.R.M. van der Meij: None. M. de Groot- van Mooren: None.
C. Kooij: None. E.W.S. Carbo: None. M.J. Pieters: None. W.
Rodenburg: None. R.H. Galjaard: None. E.A. Sistermans: None.
M.C. Cornel: None. L. Henneman: None.
P23.038.B Ethical aspects of genomic sequencing in
neonatology
Elena Grebenshchikova
Institute of Scienti ﬁc Information for Social Sciences; Pirogov Russian
National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Advances in genetic technologies are gradually
making genetic screening cheaper and more accessible. The
prospect of a "genomic revolution" as declared by Matt Hancock,
the UK ’s health secretary, announced a plan to sequence the
genome of all babies born in a NHS hospital, raises many ethicalquestions in a broader bioethical context.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
580
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Materials and methods: basic principles of bioethics (do no
harm, bene ﬁcence, respect for autonomy and justice) have been
used to analyze ethical issues.
Results: Based on the principle of do no harm, it is necessary to
take into account the damage that may arise for both the childand the parents. For example, there is no consensus on the need
to inform about late manifestation diseases. The principle of
bene ﬁcence brings into question our understanding of good. For
example, the idea of the good can vary signi ﬁcantly in different
sociocultural contexts. The principle of respect for individual
autonomy presupposes self-determination of the individual.
However, instead of the newborn, the decision is made by theparents. “Choose instead of ”can be a tricky question given the
incidents of “wrongful life suits ”. The principle of justice raises
many ethical issues related to access, allocation of scarce health
care resources, etc.
Conclusion: The analysis of ethical issues of genomic sequen-
cing based on the basic principles of bioethics has considerable
theoretical potential. The research was supported by the grant ofthe Russian Scienti ﬁc Foundation, project №19-18-00422.
E. Grebenshchikova: None.
P23.039.C Product liability landscape in the EU: the case of
DTC genetic testing within the in vitro diagnostic medical
devices regulation (IVDR) framework
Klea Vyshka
1,2,3, Alain Verloes1,4,3
1Dept. of Genetics, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université
de Paris, Paris, France,2CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches
Critiques en Droit ”, Université de Lyon, Saint-Etienne/Lyon, France,
3European Reference Network For Intellectual Disability, Telehealth
And Congenital Anomalies (ERN-ITHACA), Paris, France,4INSERM
UMR 1141 "NeuroDiderot", Hôpital R DEBRE, Paris, France.
Introduction: The EU law landscape on in vitro diagnostic medical
devices, applicable to direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic tests, hasbeen enriched in 2017 with a new regulation (IVDR). Despite theever-growing attention the EU legislator dedicates to safety and
marketing of medical devices and pharmaceutical products, the
liability regime for potentially defective products remains thesame as described in the maximum harmonisation directive onproduct liability (PLD), in force since 1985.
Methods: DTC genetic testing enterprises, after an already
established practice in the USA, are progressively interested inselling their products in the EU single market, one of the largest
and richest in the world, endowed with educated and empowered
patient-consumers. Through an analysis of the relevant EUlegislation and applicable national laws, this contribution aimsto answer the question whether the EU product liability directive
is suited to litigations on health-related products in general and
DTC tests in particular.
Results: Even though the PLD may have raised numerous
questions with regard to its adaptability with advanced techno-
logical devices, its system of no-fault, strict liability of the
manufacturers remains effective.
Conclusion: The PLD broad de ﬁnition of manufacturer,
combined with the IVDR obligation for non-EU manufacturers to
designate a sole authorised representative in the territory,
provides satisfactory protection for the consumers. Thus, in everylitigation the EU manufacturer or its representative is identi ﬁable.
In this reading, these instruments are complementary to each-
other and can establish as such a special product liability regimeapplicable to IVDR products. This research is supported by ERN-ITHACA.
K. Vyshka: None. A. Verloes: None.P23.040.D The psychosocial experience of families with
hereditary amyloid transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuro-
pathy: a mixed-methods systematic review
José D. Pereira
1,2, Andreia Santos3, Eugenia Cisneros4,5, Intissar
Anan6, Marina S. Lemos7,8, Milena Paneque1,2
1CGPP - Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva and UnIGENe,
IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, i3S - Instituto deInvestigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal,2Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universi-
dade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Póvoa de Varzim, Porto, Portugal,
4Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario Son Llàtzer,
Palma de Mallorca, Spain,5Institut d ’Investigació Sanitària Illes
Balears, Hospital Universitario Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca,
Spain,6Institutionen för folkhälsa och klinisk medicin, Umeå
universitet, Umeå, Sweden,7Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciências
da Educação, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal,8Centro de
Psicologia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Introduction: Hereditary amyloid transthyretin amyloidosis with
polyneuropathy, besides its chronicity and devastating progres-
sion, poses a strong psychological impact on patients and their
relatives. A systematic review about the psychosocial experienceof these families may help health professionals to provide them
with the best possible care.
Methods: Manuscripts published between January 1992 and
December 2019 were searched using 16 databases. The workincludes a methodological quality assessment of the selected
studies, a postsynthesis sensitivity analysis, and an overall
assessment of the thematic synthesis.
Results: Of 7,394 manuscripts identi ﬁed through database
searching, 220 were reviewed in full text and 57 met the eligibility
criteria. Although scarce, the data on psychosocial issues present
in those studies suggest that the disorder and its life implicationsprovoke a signi ﬁcant psychosocial burden for these families. The
decision about up taking presymptomatic testing and seeking
reproductive options are other sources of emotional impact.
Conclusions: Psychosocial experience of these families is not
enough studied. Although literature has described their life paths,
further research on other key disease variables (including the
psychosocial experience based on t iming of clinical onset in the life
cycle and effects of the most recent treatment interventions) can ﬁll
gaps and optimize health care servi ces that support the families with
the condition. José D. Pereira has a Ph.D. grant (SFRH/BD/138012/
2018), ﬁnanced by the Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia
through the Human Capital Operational Programme, co-participated
by the European Social Fund and by national funds from the
Ministério da Ciência, Tecnologia e Ensino Superior.
J. D. Pereira: None. A. Santos: None. E. Cisneros: None. I.
Anan: None. M. S. Lemos: None. M. Paneque: None.
P23.041.A How to accomplish public dialogue about human
germline editing? The example of the Dutch DNA dialogues
Sam Riedijk
1, Diewertje Houtman1, Marcia van Woensel2, Eef Grob3,
Eline Gorter4, Jacqueline Pot3, Petra Verhoef5
1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Nemo Kennislink,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Erfocentrum, Amersfoort, Netherlands,
4NPV Zorg voor het leven, Veenendaal, Netherlands,5Rathenau
Institute, Den Haag, Netherlands.
Introduction: Public dialogue about human germline editing
(HGGE) is globally endorsed, but not many initiatives have beendeployed. It requires expertise that most genomics professionalsAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
581
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608do not possess. Therefore, we assembled a multidisciplinary
consortium consisting of technology assessment-, science com-
munication- and genomics experts and created an innovative
dialogue format to raise awareness and empower opinionformation among a broad and diverse public.
Methods: Most professionals intuitively resort to explaining
HGGE technology when attempting to engage the public. This
deﬁcit model approach to science communication is a sticky
concept, although demonstrably outdated. Instead of sendinginformation, we created three short, adaptive animations of a
future society in which HGGE has (not) been embedded.
Employing a dialogue model, as opposed to debate, themoderator invited participants to exchange perspectives andassemble thoughts, feelings, doubts and questions.
Experts were not given a stage but were seated among
participants, and instructed to contribute only to stimulate theconversation, not to direct it. To attract various participants we
employed a targeted media strategy and creatively involved our
networks.
Results: This resulted in 27 dialogues in one year with a broad
variety of publics, numerous accounts of dialogues in (social) media
and a summarizing report for our Ministry of Health, Welfare and
Sports.
Discussion: Our interdisciplinary approach has led to the
creation of a sustainable dialogue format that allowed to stimulate
opinion formation as well as assembly of public opinions on
HGGE. Overall, acceptance of HGGE for severe hereditary diseasewas high, but highly conditional.
S. Riedijk: None. D. Houtman: None. M. van Woensel: None. E.
Grob: None. E. Gorter: None. J. Pot: None. P. Verhoef: None.
P23.042.B Assessing the outcomes of public engagement in
genomics: the case of the Dutch DNA-dialogues
Diewertje Houtman
1, Boy Vijlbrief1, Marike Polak2, Jacqueline Pot3,
Petra Verhoef4, Martina Cornel5, Sam Riedijk1
1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Erasmus Uni-
versity Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,3Erfocentrum, Amers-
foort, Netherlands,4Rathenau Instituut, The Hague, Netherlands,
5Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands.
Introduction: This study reports on the acceptance of human
germline gene editing (HGGE) among visitors and non-visitors of25 public dialogues in The Netherlands. Public perspectives on
HGGE have often been called for and are deemed necessary for
democratic decision-making about potential future applicationsand current proceedings. In addition, comparing acceptancebefore and after dialogue signals the potential impact of
participation.
Methods: Aiming to generate data on national and dialogue
levels, questionnaires on opinions were ﬁlled out (1) before and
after dialogue (T0 & T1; n =33) by a subgroup of visitors, (2)
before or after dialogue by subgroups of people who had either
signed up for dialogue (T0; n =283) or who completed the
questionnaire after they entered in dialogue (T1; n =110), and
(3) in August 2019 (T0; n =1172) and April 2020 (T1; n =1209)
by independent samples from the Dutch population. Questions
included acceptance of different applications of HGGE, whichwe compared between groups using t-tests.
Results: Table 1 shows the different subgroups and their
acceptance of different applications. Comparisons of T0 and T1measures show a difference in independent dialogue responses,with higher acceptance of HGGE to prevent a severe muscular
disease after dialogue.Conclusions: The results might indicate that for some visitors,
dialogue increases the acceptance of HGGE for severe heritable
diseases, possibly because participants exchange perspectives
with people who experience such diseases.
Table 1 Changes in acceptance of applications mean scores, T0 to T1
D. Houtman: None. B. Vijlbrief: None. M. Polak: None. J. Pot:
None. P. Verhoef: None. M. Cornel: None. S. Riedijk: None.
P23.043.C Rare Diseases in Georgia Results of a Two-Year
Study
Tinatin Tkemaladze
1,2,3,4, Elene Abzianidze1, Mariam Ghughunish-
vili1,2, Irakli Rtskhiladze3, Tamar Ramishvili3, Volha Skrahina4, Arndt
Rolfs4,5,6
1Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia,2Givi Zhvania
Pediatric Academic Clinic, Tbilisi, Georgia,3Medical Center Mrcheveli,
Tbilisi, Georgia,4Centogene GmBH, Rostock, Germany,5University
Rostock, Rostock, Germany,6Arcensus GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
Introduction: Diagnosing rare diseases (RD) is challenging for
doctors in many countries, especially in underdeveloped low-
income countries like Georgia. Because of the rarity of theseconditions and the high price of genetic investigations awareness
of RDs is limited and many patients remain undiagnosed.
Aim: Our aim was to increase awareness of RDs among the
healthcare professionals and the public, and enable diagnosis ofRD patients.
Methods: From 2018 we initiated Biomarker Clinical Study with
Centogene for various IEMs, which enabled us to offer free ofcharge testing for suspected patients. We carried out severalworkshops “Application of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in the Diagnosis of
RDs”together with FDNA for doctors and medical students. We
also initiated “Rare Disease ”column in one of Georgia ’s largest
social media medical groups, where each week information on a
particular RD is uploaded into Georgian language. Additionally, we
started collaboration with Unique and information on various RDswill now be available in Georgian language as well.
Results: As a result of the above-mentioned activities aware-
ness of RD has signi ﬁcantly increased. In 2018-2020 about 2000
individuals received genetic testing. WES had up to 60%diagnostic yield in children with neurodevelopmental disorders,with 4 missed PKU cases identi ﬁed through untargeted WES.
Several patients ’organizations were formed and more are
underway. Our goal in future is to further promote education ofdoctors and students to recognize RD, support formation of
parent ’s organizations and patient advocacy groups, negotiate
with government to support RD patients and facilitate improve-ment national NBS program.
T. Tkemaladze: None. E. Abzianidze: None. M. Ghughunish-
vili: None. I. Rtskhiladze: None. T. Ramishvili: None. V. Skrahina:
None. A. Rolfs: None.
P23.044.D Standardised tool for measurement of rare genetic
disease costs: development, contextualisation, translation,and validation of the Client Service Receipt Inventory
Claudia C. Y. Chung
1, Jasmine L. F. Fung1, Adrian C. Y. Lui1, Marcus C.
Y. Chan1, Yvette N. C. Ng1, Wilfred H. S. Wong1, So Lun Lee2,3, Martin
Knapp4,Brian H. Y. Chung1,3
1University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong,2Queen Mary
Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong,3The Duchess of Kent Children ’s
Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong,4London School of Economics and
Political Science, London, United Kingdom.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
582
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Background: The measurement of costs is challenging, but is
fundamental in healthcare decision-making. Standardised meth-
ods have not been developed in the rare disease (RD) population.This study aims to develop, contextualise, translate, and validatethe Client Service Receipt Inventory for RDs (CSRI-Ra).
Methods: Two focus group meetings were conducted, invol-
ving RD patients, carers, and healthcare and social-care profes-sionals from Hong Kong to understand the needs of RDpopulation and the local healthcare and social-care systems. Data
were analysed using thematic analysis. The CSRI-Ra was devel-
oped. Forward and backward translations were performed.Interviews with RD patients, carers, and healthcare professionalswere conducted to achieve face validity and semantic equiva-
lence. Intra-class correlation coef ﬁcient (ICC) was used to estimate
the inter-rater reliability between English-Chinese translations, andbetween CSRI-Ra and electronic patient record (ePR).
Results: Emerging themes identi ﬁed from focus group meet-
ings were grouped into ﬁve sections in the CSRI-Ra: background,
household and carer support, healthcare service and resourceutilisation, community support, and education and employment.
Excellent reliability was achieved between English-Chinese trans-
lations (ICC 0.91; 95% CI 0.89-0.92). Moderate-to-good reliabilitywas achieved between CSRI-Ra and ePR (ICC 0.69; 95% CI 0.56-0.78). Following rounds of revision in the development, con-
textualisation, translation, and validation stages, the CSRI-Ra is
ready for use in empirical research.
Conclusion: The CSRI-Ra provides a suf ﬁciently standardised
yet adaptable method for collecting socio-economic data related
to RDs. Adaptation of the tool to other populations wouldfacilitate international research.
Funding: Health and Medical Research Fund, Hong Kong Food
and Health Bureau
C.C.Y. Chung: None. J.L.F. Fung: None. A.C.Y. Lui: None. M.C.
Y. Chan: None. Y.N.C. Ng: None. W.H.S. Wong: None. S. Lee:
None. M. Knapp: None. B.H.Y. Chung: None.
P23.045.A Responsible research and innovation in genetics:
the challenge of preventive clinical genetics
Boy Vijlbrief , Diewertje Houtman, Sam Riedijk
Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Developments in clinical genetics are increasingly moving towards
the possibility of preventive clinical genetics (PCG), opposed to
current indication-based paradigms. While expected to bene ﬁt
many, this technology is also expected to disrupt commonpractice and raise dif ﬁcult questions regarding utility, feasibility,
and permissibility. Central to these concerns is the question: what
are key characteristics of responsible research and innovation (RRI)
of PCG? Data triangulation was performed between 8 semi-structured interviews with clinical genetics experts on PCG,analysis of ESHG 2020 presentations, and multidisciplinary meet-
ings with genetics experts on ethical issues of PCG, to collect and
compare expert perspectives on PCG and RRI. Results are markedby wide discrepancies, such as in motivation (meeting DTCdemand in a hospital setting vs. establishing biobanks), envi-
sioned target groups (PCG as universal population screening vs.
additional diagnostic tool for hereditary cancer), uses (pharmaco-genetics vs. severe monogenic actionable mutations), and
evaluation criteria (health expenditure vs. self-reported empower-
ment of patients). Appraisal of discrepancies by experts is typi ﬁed
by shock at developments and possibilities, and an inability toestablish a common language between disciplines and research
groups. Notably, there seems to be little knowledge concerningtarget group needs besides extrapolation from DTC demand.
Results show RRI of PCG requires development of common
language between experts, and alignment between their motiva-
tions, practices, evaluation criteria etc. to cooperatively assess anddesign responsible PCG practices. To ensure alignment betweenPCG bene ﬁts and target group needs, strong dialogical engage-
ment of possible target groups is required, to be facilitated by PCG
experts.
B. Vijlbrief: None. D. Houtman: None. S. Riedijk: None.
P23.046.B Scarcity of available information resources for
patients and clinicians after a diagnosis of ultra-rare diseases:retrospective on a cohort of 626 individuals with congenital
abnormalities and/or intellectual disability
Paul Rollier
1,2, Sandrine de Montgol ﬁer3,4, Christèle Dubourg1,2,
Wilfrid Carré1,2, Véronique David1,2, Marie-Dominique Galibert1,
Chloé Quelin1, Mélanie Fradin1, Alinoë Lavillaureix1,2, Godelieve
Morel1, Laurent Pasquier1,5, Sylvie Odent1,2, Nolwenn Jean-Marçais1,5
1Rennes University Hospital, Rennes, France,2Institute Genetics &
Development of Rennes (IGDR CNRS UMR 6290), Rennes, France,
3Interdisciplinary Institute of Social Issues (IRIS UMR8156 - U997),
Aubervilliers, France,4Institut national supérieur du professorat et de
l’éducation (INSPE), Creteil, France,5CIC-P Inserm 1414, Rennes,
France.
Introduction: With development of high-throughput sequencing,
diagnostic yield in congenital malformations (CM) and/or intellec-
tual disability (ID) has increased rapidly as has the share of ultra-rare diseases (URD: prevalence<1/50 000) diagnosed. Amongthese URD, ratio of recently described diseases with little hindsight
on clinical course and with small descriptive cohorts appears to be
signi ﬁcant.
Materials and Methods: We used exome data of 626
individuals with CM and/or ID (without speci ﬁc clinical orientation)
sequenced between 2017 and 2020 at the Molecular GeneticsLaboratory of Rennes University Hospital (France). DNA sampleswere analyzed by exome sequencing (Agilent kit) on Illumina
platforms. Among these diagnoses, we researched URD and
information resources available to patients and clinicians.
Results: Detection of ACMG (likely) pathogenic variants in 142
different genes allowed us to make a diagnosis in 208 cases
(33.23%). 83.7% of these diseases, whose prevalence is available
via Orphanet database, are URD. For these diagnoses, mostly ofrecent descriptions (55.3% after 2011, 23.4% after 2016), limited
information (patient association, web resources) is available to
patients and clinicians.
Conclusions: All these data underscore the signi ﬁcant propor-
tion of URD diagnosed in CM/ID and the limited information
available to patients and their families on their evolution and
management. This can lead to a feeling of isolaton, which requiresspecial medical follow-up procedures accompanied by regularupdating of knowledge. In view of the increase in diagnosis of
URD, it seems fundamental to establish them as a research subject
and to study the ethical issues surrounding the announcementand accompaniment of such diagnostic results.
P. Rollier: None. S. de Montgol ﬁer:None. C. Dubourg: None.
W. Carré: None. V. David: None. M. Galibert: None. C. Quelin:
None. M. Fradin: None. A. Lavillaureix: None. G. Morel: None. L.
Pasquier: None. S. Odent: None. N. Jean-Marçais: None.
P23.047.C Motives for withdrawal of participation in biobank-
ing and participants ’willingness to allow linkages of their
dataAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
583
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Reinder Broekstra1,2, Judith L. Aris-Meijer1, Els L. M. Maeckelberghe1,
Ronald P. Stolk1, Sabine Otten1
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands,2University of Southampton, Southampton
General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Biobanks and data-sharing projects seek to optimize public
participation rates while simultaneously attempting to increasethe amount of data donated per participant. All these efforts
should foster development of learning health systems and
personalized medicine, especially when data linkage is permittedby participants. We investigated individuals ’motives for partici-
pating in such projects and potential reasons for their withdrawal
from participation in a population-based biobank. We also
analysed how these motives were related to various characteristicsof the participants and their intention to permit data linkage totheir personal data for research. These questions were explored
using sample of a participants in the Dutch Lifelines biobank (n =
2,615). Our results indicated that motives for participation andwithdrawal were premised on bene ﬁts or harm to society and to
the individuals themselves. Although general values and trust
both played key roles in participation, potential withdrawal, and
willingness to permit data linkage, they were differentiallyassociated with motives for participation and withdrawal. These
ﬁndings support and nuance previous ﬁndings by highlighting the
distinctiveness and complexity of decision making regardingparticipation or withdrawal from data donation. Moreover, wesuggest some new directions for improving recruitment, retention
and safeguarding strategies in biobanking. Moreover, our data
provide initial evidence regarding how factors may relate with theprobability that individuals will agree to data linkages, whencontrolling for their unique effects. Future research should further
investigate how perceptions of societal and individual harm and
bene ﬁts may in ﬂuence decision making on withdrawal of
participation.
R. Broekstra: None. J.L. Aris-Meijer: None. E.L.M. Maeck-
elberghe: None. R.P. Stolk: None. S. Otten: None.
P24 GWAS
P24.001.D The COL1A1 gene variants and sports-related
musculoskeletal soft-tissue injuries in Lithuanian athletes
Valentina Gineviciene , Kamile Venckute, Algirdas Utkus
Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, rs1107946
and rs1800012) within the COL1A1 gene, an important regulator of
ﬁbril assembly in tendons, have previously been associated with
sports ‐related musculoskeletal soft-tissue (MSST) injuries. The aim
of this case-control study was to examine the association of theseCOL1A1 SNPs with MSST injuries in Lithuanian elite athletes group.
Materials and Methods: A total of 62 athletes, with a history of
MSST injuries (shoulder dislocations, anterior cruciate ligament &meniscus tears; Achilles tendon ruptures & tendinopathy) and 123control athletes (CON) without any reported history of MSST
injuries were genotyped for the COL1A1 rs1107946 (G>T) and
rs1800012 (G>T) variants (using Real ‐Time PCR Taqman genotyp-
ing assays).
Results: Genotype distributions for both SNPs among cases and
controls conformed to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p>0.05). TheCOL1A1 rs1107946 TT genotype was signi ﬁcantly over-represented
in the MSST injuries (case) group (11%) when compared to the
CON group (3%, p =0.042). The odds ratio (OR) of case athletes
harboring rs1107946 TT genotype compared to CON was 5.09(95%CI:1.27-20.43, p =0.022). The distribution of genotype
frequencies of COL1A1 rs1800012 variant in the cases signi ﬁcantly
differed from the CON (GG/GT/TT: 44/32/24% vs 89/10/1%; p <
0.0001). The frequency of the rs1800012 T allele was signi ﬁcantly
higher in cases (40%) compared to that in the CON (6%, p <0.0001). The OR of athletes with MSST injuries harboring COL1A1
rs1800012 TT genotype compared to CON was 38.9 (95%CI:5-303,
p=0.0005).
Conclusions: This study revealed an association among the
SNPs COL1A1 rs1107946 (TT genotype) and rs1800012 (TT
genotype) and MSST injuries in Lithuanian athletes.
V. Gineviciene: None. K. Venckute: None. A. Utkus: None.
P24.002.A Genome-wide association meta-analysis identi ﬁes
12 novel loci for age-related hearing loss
Natalia Trpchevska1, Neelke B. C. Oosterloo2, Maxim B. Freydin3,
Linda Broer2, Paul A. Nagtegaal2, Andre Goedegebure2, Christopher
R. Cederroth1,4, Frances M. K. Williams5, EARGEN consortium
1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,3King ’s College, London, United Kingdom,
4Nottingham University, Nottingham, United Kingdom,5King ’s
College, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) is a complex
polygenic disorder, but relatively few genomic loci have beenidenti ﬁed so far. The EARGEN consortium was initiated to
systematically discover new loci underlying HL and conducted
the largest meta-GWAS to date.
Methods and Materials: The sample comprises 14 indepen-
dent cohorts including the UKBiobank and FinnGen. Summary
GWAS statistics were obtained for each cohort. The phenotype
was based on self-reported HL and ICD9/10 diagnosis forsensorineural HL. EasyQC was applied in order to unify and
harmonize datasets. Meta-analysis was performed with METAL
software. Post-GWAS analyses were carried out using FUMA andVEGAS2 software.
Results: Our total sample comprised 724 ,756 Caucasian individuals
(148,471 cases and 576,595 controls). We found 46 independent loci,
of which 12 were novel. Many previously identi ﬁed loci were
conﬁrmed, including loci harboring r are variants for non-syndromic
HL (e.g. EYA4 and TRIOBP), as well as variants involved in hearing
function such as CTBP2, a component of the presynaptic machinery,
and CLRN2, which maintains stereocilia integrity and function. Fivenew genes (SPTBN1, CCDC87, KCTD10, MYO1H, MMAB) were
prioritized for functional fo llow-up. Pathway analysis con ﬁrmed the
involvement of sensory percepti on of sound, actin-binding, and
ﬁlament polymerization in ARHL.
Conclusion: A GWAS meta-analysis of 724,756 individuals
identi ﬁes 12 novel loci associated with ARHL while con ﬁrming
previously reported genes in either mice or humans.
N. Trpchevska: None. N.B.C. Oosterloo: None. M.B. Freydin:
None. L. Broer: None. P.A. Nagtegaal: None. A. Goedegebure:
None. C.R. Cederroth: None. F.M.K. Williams: None.
P24.004.C Genome-wide association study of sex effect on
asthma susceptibility in African-admixed populations
Antonio Espuela-Ortiz
1, Esther Herrera-Luis1, Fabian Lorenzo-
Diaz1,2, Michael A. Lenoir3, Jose R. Rodriguez-Santana4, Esteban G.
Burchard*5,6, Maria Pino-Yanes *1,7,8
1Genomics and Health Group, Department of Biochemistry, Micro-
biology, Cell Biology and Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, SanAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
584
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Cristóbal de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain,2Instituto Universitario de
Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de Canarias (IUETSPC),
Universidad de La Laguna, San Cristóbal de La Laguna, Tenerife,
Spain,3Bay Area Pediatrics, Oakland, CA, USA,4Centro de
Neumología Pediátrica, San Juan, PR, USA,5Department of
Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,6Department of Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,
7Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La
Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain,8CIBER de
Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid,
Spain.
Introduction: Sexual dimorphism in humans is presented in a
variety of forms and affects both physical traits and disease-
related phenotypes. One of the diseases affected by sexualdimorphism is asthma, a respiratory disease characterized by
dyspnoea, cough, chest tightness, and wheezing. Asthma
prevalence changes throughout the lifespan and differs by sex,being more prevalent in males during childhood and in womenafter puberty. Here we aimed to study the in ﬂuence of sex on the
genetic susceptibility to asthma in African-admixed populations.
Materials and methods: A total of 4,291 Hispanic/Latino and
1,657 African American subjects were analysed. Genetic dataimputed using 1000 Genomes Project was used to perform
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) following two different
approaches, sex-interaction and sex-strati ﬁed analyses, and results
obtained from each cohort were meta-analysed.
Results: In the interaction GWAS, no variants were associated at
a genome-wide signi ﬁcant level, but suggestive associations at
2q22.1 were detected (p-value
interaction <10-6). In the strati ﬁed
GWAS, these variants had a protective effect in females and risk in
males. On the other hand, strati ﬁed GWAS highlighted that 17q12-
21 asthma locus has a contribution in both sexes (p-value female <
4.47x10-8; p-value male< 9.5x10-3), while the genomic region
4p15.31, involved in height determination and spermatogenesis,
was only signi ﬁcant in males (p < 4.3x10-8).Conclusion: Despite having a common genetic basis, our
results suggest that asthma pathogenesis acts through different
mechanisms in males and females. Funding: Funded by SAF2017-
83417R MINECO/AEI/FEDER, UE, and a MICIU/ULL fellowship to AE-O.
A. Espuela-Ortiz: None. E. Herrera-Luis: None. F. Lorenzo-
Diaz: None. M.A. Lenoir: None. J.R. Rodriguez-Santana: None. E.
G. Burchard*: None. M. Pino-Yanes *: None.
P24.005.D Harnessing tissue-speci ﬁc genetic variation to
dissect the causal pathways between adiposity and complexdisease
Genevieve Leyden , Chin Yang Shapland, George Davey Smith,
Michael Greenwood, David Murphy, Tom G. Richardson
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Body-mass index (BMI) is a risk factor for complex
disease known to be in ﬂuenced by genes acting via both
metabolic pathways and appetite regulation. In this study, we
aim to gain insight on the disease impact of BMI associated
genetic variants mediated by their expression in different tissues.
Methods: First, we harnessed meta-analyzed gene expression
datasets derived from adipose (n =1157) and brain (n =1194)
tissues to provide insight into the underlying mechanisms at 915genome-wide loci for BMI (r
2<0.01, p < 5x10-8). Next, we devel-
oped a novel extension of multivariable Mendelian randomization
(MVMR) to separate the effects of adipose- and brain-regulated
BMI on 5 disease outcomes.
Results: 86 and 140 loci provided evidence of genetic
colocalization with adipose and brain-derived gene expression
respectively, suggesting that the genetic variants which in ﬂuence
BMI at these loci also in ﬂuence proximal gene expression in these
tissues. Overall, we found that the adipose colocalized variants
Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
585
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608were enriched for waist:hip ratio (adjusted for BMI) (P =0.0003)
suggesting that they are typically involved in fat distribution. The
MVMR reveals that tissue partitioned variants have distinct
biological contributions, with brain-regulated BMI driving theeffect on outcomes such as coronary artery disease P =0.009; OR
=1.52; 95%-CI:1.11-2.08) and type-2 diabetes (P =0.0007; OR:2.66;
95%-CI:1.5-4.7), whereas adipose-regulated BMI was responsible
for the effect on osteoarthritis risk (P =0.01; OR:1.86; 95%-CI:1.16-
2.98).
Conclusion: This study extends knowledge on the context in
which to study the impact of candidate genes on adiposity and
disease risk. Grant code: FS/17/60/33474
G. Leyden: None. C. Shapland: None. G. Davey Smith: None.
M. Greenwood: None. D. Murphy: None. T.G. Richardson: None.
P24.006.A Deciphering how early life adiposity in ﬂuences
breast cancer risk using Mendelian randomization
Marina Vabistsevits , George Davey Smith, Eleanor Sanderson, Tom
Richardson, Bethan Lloyd-Lewis, Rebecca Richmond
MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom.
Studies suggest that adiposity i n childhood may reduce the risk
of breast cancer in later life. The biological mechanism under-lying this effect is unclear but is likely to be independent ofadult BMI. In this work, we investigated 18 potential mediators
of the protective effect in a Mendelian Randomization (MR)
framework, reviewing hormones, reproductive, physical, and
glycaemic traits.
Using data from publicly available GWAS, we designed an MR
work ﬂow to assess the causal role of potential mediators. We ﬁrst
evaluated whether the trait is affected by childhood BMI, and thenwhether it has a causal effect on breast cancer risk (two-step MR).
We also assessed the independent effect of childhood BMI on
breast cancer with each mediator taken into account (multi-variable MR). Finally, we used mediation analysis to characterisethe indirect effect of BMI via the mediators.
The results showed that although there is evidence of
childhood BMI affecting most of the reviewed mediators, onlyIGF-1, testosterone, age at menarche and menopause, andmammographic density have an effect on breast cancer risk.
However, multivariable MR showed that the protective effect of
childhood BMI was not affected when accounted for those traits,suggesting a lack of evidence for mediation.
Our work presents a framework for systematic exploration of
mediators in MR. We explored many plausible links betweenchildhood adiposity and breast cancer risk, but none of thereviewed traits in this work accounted for the protective effect
observed.
All authors work in a Unit supported by UK Medical Research
Council (MC_UU_00011/1&4).
M. Vabistsevits: None. G. Davey Smith: None. E. Sanderson:
None. T. Richardson: None. B. Lloyd-Lewis: None. R. Richmond:
None.
P24.008.C Coeliac disease phenotypic variation unraveled by
disease-susceptibility loci in a deeply phenotyped Finnishcohort
Juliana Xavier de Miranda Cerqueira
1, Päivi Saavalainen2, Kalle
Kurppa3, Pilvi Laurikka1, Heini Huhtala4, Matti Nykter5, Lotta L. E.
Koskinen2, Dawit A. Yohannes2, Elina Kilpeläinen6, Anastasia
Shcherban6, Aarno Palotie6, Katri Kaukinen1, Katri Lindfors11Coeliac Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Technology, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland,2Research
Programs Unit, Immunobiology, and the Haartman Institute,
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,Finland,3Center for Child Health Research, Tampere University and
Tampere University Hospital, Finland, Tampere, Finland,4Faculty of
Social Sciences, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland,5Laboratory of
Computational Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology,Tampere University, Tampere, Finland,6Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Introduction: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identi ﬁed
numerous genomic regions associated with coeliac disease (CeD).Their contributions to the heterogenous disease that varies
considerably for unclear reasons remains largely unknown. We
investigated whether CeD susceptibility variants (SNPs) areindividually or cumulatively associated with distinct disease
phenotypes. We also tested whether a polygenic risk score (PRS)
could explain the phenotypic variation.
Material and methods : The phenotypic association of 39 non-
HLA CeD SNPs was tested in 625 thoroughly phenotyped CeD
patients and 1817 controls. To assess their cumulative effects a
weighted genetic risk score (wGRS39) was built, and strati ﬁed by
tertiles. In our PRS in cases, we took the summary statistics from aGWAS in CeD (24,269 participants) and tested their association
with phenotypes at eight P value thresholds (P
T).
Results : Ten SNPs were associated with distinct phenotypes
after correction for multiple testing (P EMP2≤0.05). The TLR7/TLR8
locus was associated with disease onset before and the SH2B3/
ATXN2, ITGA4/UBE2E3 and IL2/IL21 loci after 7 years of age. Thelatter three loci were associated with severe small bowel mucosaldamage and SH2B3/ATXN2 with type 1 diabetes. Patients at the
highest wGRS39 tertiles had OR > 1.62 for having CeD-related
symptoms during childhood, severe small bowel mucosal damage,malabsorption, anaemia. PRS was only associated with dermatitisherpetiformis (P
T=0.2, P EMP2=0.02).
Conclusions: Independent CeD-susceptibility loci were asso-
ciated with distinct phenotypes, suggesting that genetic factorsplay a role in determining the disease presentation. The increasednumber of CeD SNPs might predispose to a more severe disease
course. Published: https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-020-00888-5
J.X.M. Cerqueira: None. P. Saavalainen: None. K. Kurppa:
None. P. Laurikka: None. H. Huhtala: None. M. Nykter: None. L.L.
E. Koskinen: None. D.A. Yohannes: None. E. Kilpeläinen: None.
A. Shcherban: None. A. Palotie: None. K. Kaukinen: None. K.
Lindfors: None.
P24.009.D Tissue-speci ﬁc expression data increases the power
of gene-based collapsing analysis
Samuel Lewis
1, Katherine Smith1, Keren Carss1, Peter MacCallum1,
Quanli Wang2, Slave Petrovski1
1Centre for Genomics Research, Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceu-
ticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Centre for
Genomics Research, Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals R&D,AstraZeneca, Waltham, MA, USA.
Collapsing analysis compares the number of rare variants in each
gene between cases and controls, to detect genes in which rarevariants are signi ﬁcantly enriched or depleted for a given
phenotype. This approach has given important insights into the
genetic basis of many complex diseases. However, tissue-speci ﬁc
expression means that not all variants are expressed in all tissues.We tested the hypothesis that removing variants that are
unexpressed in the relevant tissue could increase the power ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
586
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608collapsing analysis. We developed TISSUE (TIssue Speci ﬁc Screen
Using Expression) -informed collapsing analysis, an approach that
uses tissue-speci ﬁc gene expression data from the GTEx database
to identify and ﬁlter out isoforms found at low levels or
unexpressed in the disease-relevant tissue prior to collapsinganalyses. We tested TISSUE-informed collapsing analysis com-
pared to standard collapsing analysis across 1,170 cardiovascular
traits using exome data for 268,450 individuals from the UKBiobank. We found that TISSUE-informed collapsing analysisincreases the statistical power for many associations. For example,
the p value for the association between TTN and cardiomyopathy
dropped from 1.70e-31 in standard collapsing analysis to 1.11e-38in TISSUE-informed collapsing analysis. Overall, of the 83signi ﬁcant associations (p < 5.00e-08) for the 1,170 traits tested
with standard collapsing analysis, 37 (44.6%) became more
signi ﬁcant using TISSUE-informed collapsing analysis. We con-
clude that by leveraging tissue-speci ﬁc expression data, we can
increase the power of collapsing analysis to identify associations
between genes and disease. Future work will expand this study toinvestigate more phenotypes in 450,000 UK Biobank individuals.
S. Lewis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. K. Smith: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. K. Carss: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. P. MacCallum: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. Q. Wang: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
P24.010.A Reimagining the metabolic syndrome: A composite
complex trait
Mads Engel Hauberg
Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense
C, Denmark.
Introduction: Hypertension, insulin resistance, abdominal obesity,
decreased HDL, and high triglycerides co-occur as the metabolicsyndrome at substantial health cost. Despite decades of research,
problems discerning cause and effect have impeded our under-
standing of its pathophysiology.
Materials and Methods: Using GWASs we explored genetic
correlations of the ﬁve aforementioned traits and 1218 additional
GWAS traits using LD-score based genetic correlations. This was
done to examine if the current de ﬁnition was meaningful and to
identify traits that could be substituted or added to the syndrome.
We further used MAGMA to identify genetic loci, pathways,
mouse/human phenotypes, drugs, tissues, and cells that werebroadly associated with the syndrome or were uniquely associatedwith the different components of the syndrome.
Results: The metabolic syndrome traits were more correlated
than traits in general ( P=3.9E-6). Several, often unexpected traits,
signi ﬁcantly correlated with all components of the syndrome (n =
314). These included osteoarthritis, smoking, drinking, attention-
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, and various metabolites. At the gene
level, genes associated with lipid/glucose metabolism, andadipocyte function showed associations across all aspects of themetabolic syndrome. Genes uniquely associated with a single trait
of the syndrome were often well known from physiology and/or
monogenic disease. Further analyses dissected the ﬁve constitu-
ent traits into different disease components. E.g. abdominal
obesity had, in addition to the lipid/glucose component, also
brain/behavioral component.
Conclusions: Jointly, this data-driven approach suggested
endophenotypes and implicated both lipid/glucose metabolismand behavior in the syndrome as well as highlighting a genetic
overlap with related monogenic traits and drug targets.
M.E. Hauberg: None.
P24.011.B Identi ﬁcation of the association between amylase
gene copy number variations and pancreatic diseases
Assel Arginbekova , John Armour
University of Nottingham,Queen ’s Medical Centre, Nottingham,
United Kingdom.
Background: CNV (copy number variation) regions include a
number of genes that can be associated with multifactorial human
diseases. The amylase gene and its CNV can play an important role
in the development of pancreatic diseases. Our study aims toexplore the association between the CNV of the human amylasegenes and diseases of the pancreas.
Materials and methods: In our ongoing pilot study, DNA was
prepared from blood samples collected from 79 patients ofEuropean origin with diagnoses of acute and chronic pancreatitis,or pancreatic cancer. As a control, copy number was determined
(417 for AMY2 and 472 for AMY1) from DNA samples of healthy
people. Copy numbers of amylase genes were determined by theparalogue ratio test.
Results: Initial analysis showed a signi ﬁcant association (P =
2.3x10
-4) of an increase in the AMY1 copy number with the disease
risk for pancreatic disease. The values in cases showed a 4-folddifference between high (copy numbers>5) and low copy numbers.
For AMY2A/2B, higher copy numbers also showed a positive
association (P =4.6x10-3). The analysis determined that the devel-
oping pancreatic diseases are more common from the age of 40(P=6x10-5). At the same time, the development of pancreatic
diseases has no association with the genders (P =0.1283).
Conclusion: It is suggested that genes like AMY1, 2A/2B may
correlate with the occurrence of pancreatitis as a disease modi ﬁer,
and our work will continue to establish whether these associations
are observed in a larger data set.
A. Arginbekova: None. J. Armour: None.
P24.012.C New genes for coronary artery disease detected via
gene-based association analysis
Irina Zorkoltseva1, Nadezhda Belonogova1, Alexandra Shadrina1,
Anatoly Kirichenko1, Yakov Tsepilov1,2, Tatyana Axenovich1,2
1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,
2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Genome-wide association analyses (GWAS) have
identi ﬁed more than 300 single nucleotide polymorphisms at 163
genetic loci associated with coronary artery disease (CAD). However,
little is known about the causal CAD genes and the mechanisms oftheir action. We aimed to conduct a more detailed analysis of genes
whose polymorphism may in ﬂuence the risk of CAD.
Materials and Methods: Using the UK Biobank-based GWAS
summary statistics, we performed a gene-based associationanalysis using four sets of genetic variants within a gene differing
in their protein coding properties, and combination of three
Methods: SKAT-O, PCA, and ACAT-V implemented in sumFREGAT
package. We used a ‘polygene pruning ’procedure to eliminate the
inﬂuence of strong GWAS signals outside the gene.
Results: We found 123 genes signi ﬁcantly associated with CAD.
Using the extended sample, we validated 65 of these genes. Fiveof them, CDK19, NCALD, ARHGEF12, HECTD4 and PTPN11 wereAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
587
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608located in four new loci. We prioritized the genes in known CAD
loci. Usually, the gene closest to the top GWAS signal is
interpreted as the causal gene. We showed that only 50% of
validated genes were the closest to the top signal at each locus.For 19 known CAD loci, we showed that the probably causal genesare more distant from the top GWAS signal.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed 65 genes that contribute to CAD
with their within-gene variants and prioritized genes in known CADloci. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education andScience of the RF (project 0259-2021-0009/-17-117092070032-4).
I. Zorkoltseva: None. N. Belonogova: None. A. Shadrina:
None. A. Kirichenko: None. Y. Tsepilov: None. T. Axenovich:
None.
P24.013.D Genome-wide association study of estradiol levels,
and the causal effect of estradiol on bone mineral density
Daniel Schmitz , Weronica E. Ek, Elin Berggren, Julia Höglund, Torgny
Karlsson, Åsa Johansson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Estrogen is the primary female sex hormone and plays an
important role for skeletal health in both sexes. Several enzymes
are involved in estradiol metabolism but few genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have been performed to characterizethe genetic contribution to variation in estrogen levels.
We performed GWAS for estradiol in males (N =147,690) and
females (N =163,985) from UK Biobank (UKB). Estradiol was
analyzed as a binary phenotype; above/below detection limit (175pmol/L). We further estimated the causal effect of estradiol onbone mineral density (BMD) using Mendelian randomization.
We identi ﬁed 14 independent loci associated (P < 5x10
-8)w i t h
estradiol levels in males, of which one ( CYP3A7 ) was genome-wide,
and another seven were nominally (P < 0.05) signi ﬁcant in females. In
addition, one female speci ﬁcl o c u sw a si d e n t i ﬁed. Most candidate
genes have functions that are relevant to estrogen metabolism andhave not been discussed in relation to estradiol levels in previous
GWAS. For example, SRD5A2 , which encodes a steroid 5-alpha
reductase that is involved in processing androgens, and UGT3A1 and
UGT2B7 which encode enzymes likely to be involved in estradiol
elimination. The allele that tags the O blood group at the ABO locus,
was associated with higher estradiol levels.
We further applied Mendelian Randomization to identify a
causal effect of estradiol on bone mass density, both in males(beta=0.099, P =1.58x10
-11) and, for the ﬁrst time, in females
(beta=0.15, P =7.48x10-6). Our ﬁndings further support the
importance of the body ’s own estrogen to maintain skeletal
health in males and in females.
D. Schmitz: None. W.E. Ek: None. E. Berggren: None. J.
Höglund: None. T. Karlsson: None. Å. Johansson: None.
P24.015.B Genetic variability of 6p22.1 in sepsis susceptibility:
aﬁne mapping association study of the HLA
Tamara Hernandez-Beeftink1,2, Itahisa Marcelino-Rodriguez1,3,Eva
Suarez-Pajes1, Megan L. Paynton4, Luis A. Rubio-Rodríguez5, Beatriz
Guillen-Guio1, Jose M. Lorenzo-Salazar5, Almudena Corrales1,6, M. Isabel
García-Laorden2,6, Miryam Prieto González7, Aurelio Rodríguez-Pérez8,9,
Demetrio Carriedo10, Jesús Blanco6,11,A l f o n s oA m b r ó s12,E l e n a
González Higueras13, Elena Espinosa14, Arturo Muriel11,D a v i dD o m -
ínguez14, Louise V. Wain4,15, Abelardo García de Lorenzo16,J o s éM .
Añón16, Javier Belda17, Jesús Villar2,6, Carlos Flores1,5,61Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Uni-
versidad de La Laguna, Sant a Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Research
Unit, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas
de Gran Canaria, Spain,3Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB),
Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
4Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester,
United Kingdom,5Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de
Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,6CIBER
de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,Madrid, Spain,7Servicio de Medicina Inte nsiva, Complejo Asisten-
cial Universitario de Palencia, Palencia, Spain,8Department of
Anesthesiology, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín,Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,9Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las
Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,10I n t e n s i v eC a r eU n i t ,C o m p l e j o
Hospitalario Universitario de León, León, Spain,11Intensive Care
Unit, Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain,
12Intensive Care Unit, Hospital General de Ciudad Real, Ciudad
Real, Spain,13Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Luz,
Cuenca, Spain,14Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital Universi-
tario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,15National
Institute for Health Research, Leicester Respiratory Biomedical
Research Centre, Glen ﬁeld Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom,
16Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
17Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Hospital Clinico
Universitario of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: Sepsis is a severe in ﬂammatory response to
infections with a high death rate. We previously conducted the
ﬁrst GWAS of copy number variations in 839 sepsis cases from
the Gen-Sep Network and 1,453 con trols, highlighting 6p22.1 as
one of the signi ﬁcant loci linked to sepsis susceptibility. Due its
importance in in ﬂammatory and immunological diseases, here
we performed a ﬁne mapping of the Human Leukocyte Antigen
(HLA) region contained in that locus.
Methods: We used SHAPEIT v2.837 for phasing the haplotypes
and Impute2 to impute the classic HLA alleles, amino acids, and
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Association analyseswere performed by logistic regressions using EPACTs v3.2.6. ABonferroni correction was applied to identify signi ﬁcant classic
HLA alleles ( p< 2.58E-4) and amino acids ( p< 4.91E-5). For SNPs, a
signi ﬁcance threshold was established at p< 1.50E-5 based on the
number of independent variants.
Results and conclusions: We analyzed a total of 194 classic
HLA alleles, 1,019 amino acids and 10,919 SNPs. None of theclassic HLA alleles ( p
lowest=0.01), amino acids ( plowest=0.01), or
SNPs ( plowest=9.84E-4) were signi ﬁcantly associated with sepsis.
Given the complexity of this phenotype, these results suggest that
the HLA genetic variation is not a major driver of sepsissusceptibility or has a modest effect size.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CD19/00231, FI17/00177,
PI17/00610, PI20/00876), Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (RTC-
2017-6471-1; AEI/FEDER, UE), and agreement OA17/008 with ITER;ECIT CGIEU0000219140. The genotyping service was performed at
CEGEN-PRB3-ISCIII, supported by grant PT17/0019, of the PE I +D+i
2013-2016, funded by ISCIII and FEDER .
T. Hernandez-Beeftink: None. I. Marcelino-Rodriguez: None.
E. Suarez-Pajes: None. M.L. Paynton: None. L.A. Rubio-
Rodríguez: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar:
None. A. Corrales: None. M.I. García-Laorden: None. M. Prieto
González: None. A. Rodríguez-Pérez: None. D. Carriedo: None. J.
Blanco: None. A. Ambrós: None. E. González Higueras: None. E.
Espinosa: None. A. Muriel: None. D. Domínguez: None. L.V.
Wain: None. A. García de Lorenzo: None. J.M. Añón: None. J.
Belda: None. J. Villar: None. C. Flores: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
588
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P24.017.D Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies
for N-glycosylation in 10,000 individuals
Sodbo Sharapov1, Yakov Tsepilov1,2, Elizaveta Elgaeva1, Evgeny
Tiys1, Arina Nostaeva1,3, Frano Vuckovic4, Irena Trbojevi ć-Akma čić4,
Michel Georges5, Karsten Suhre6, Nishi Chaturvedi7, Harry Camp-
bell8,9, Malcolm Dunlop9, Frances Williams10, Matthias B.
Schulze11,12,13, Tim Spector10, Gordan Lauc4, Yurii S. Aulchenko1
1Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,3PolyKnomics, ’s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands,4Genos
Glycoscience Research Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia,5Unit of Animal
Genomics, WELBIO, GIGA-R and Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Liège, Liège, Belgium,6Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar,7MRC Unit for
Lifelong Health & Ageing University College London, London, UnitedKingdom,8Colon Cancer Genetics Group, Cancer Research UK
Edinburgh Centre, Medical Research Council Institute of Genetics &
Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, The University ofEdinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,9Centre for Global Health
Research, Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences and
Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King-
dom,10Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology,
School of Life Course Sciences, King ’s College London, London, United
Kingdom,11Department of Molecular Epidemiology, German Insti-
tute of Human Nutrition Potsdam- Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany,
12German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg,
Germany,13Institute of Nutrition Science, University of Potsdam,
Potsdam, Germany.
Glycosylation is a common modi ﬁcation of proteins that in ﬂuences
their physical properties and biological function. Although changes
in protein glycosylation are observed in many diseases, the
examples of the use of glycans as biomarkers and therapeutictargets are limited. This is not in small part because the
understanding of human glycome regulation in vivo is incomplete
and fragmented.To bridge this gap, we performed the largestgenome-wide association study of the human blood plasmaprotein N-glycosylation measured by ultra performance liquid
chromatography in 10,765 people. We studied the association
between 8.8 million genetic polymorphisms on human autosomesand 117 relative abundances of N-glycan structures. We discoveredand replicated 31 associated loci, 16 of which are novel. The
SBayesR prediction models that included on average 1,090,196
genetic polymorphisms explained up to 21% of glycan variance(36% of SNP-based heritability). To prioritize potentially causal
genes in the established loci, we performed an in silico functional
study. Eight loci contained genes coding enzymes with a knownrole in N-glycan biosynthesis, while 23 loci, including 16 novels,may contain regulators of protein glycosylation, including tran-
scription factors, transporters, blood pQTLs for glycosylated
proteins. Using a network-based multi-omics approach, weexplored a functional network formed by the glycome-associatedloci. Our results set the scene, provides data and hypotheses for
future studies that will establish genes and gene networks involved
in regulation of global, cell-, tissue-, and protein-speci ﬁc pathways
of protein glycosylation.This work was supported by a grant fromthe Russian Science Foundation (RSF) No. 19-15-00115.
S. Sharapov: None. Y. Tsepilov: None. E. Elgaeva: None. E.
Tiys: None. A. Nostaeva: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; PolyKnomics. F. Vuckovic: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory. I.
Trbojevi ć-Akma čić:A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory. M. Georges: None. K.
Suhre: None. N. Chaturvedi: None. H. Campbell: None. M.
Dunlop: None. F. Williams: None. M.B. Schulze: None. T.Spector: None. G. Lauc: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Genos
Glycoscience Research Laboratory. Y.S. Aulchenko: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; PolyKnomics.
P24.019.B Effect of host genetics on the gut microbiome in
7,738 participants of the Dutch Microbiome Project
Esteban A. Lopera-Maya
1, Alexander Kurilshikov1, Adriaan van der
Graaf1, Shixian Hu1, Sergio Andreu-Sánchez1, Lianmin Chen1, Arnau
Vich-Vila1, Ranko Gacesa1, Trishla Sinha1, Valerie Collij1, Marjolein A.
Y. Klassen1, Laura A. Bolte1, Milla F. Brandao-Gois1, Pieter B. T.
Neerincx1, Morris A. Swertz1, Lifelines Cohort Study, Hermie J. M.
Harmsen1, Cisca Wijmenga1, Jingyuan Fu1, Rinse K. Weersma1,
Alexandra Zhernakova1, Serena Sanna2
1University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, Netherlands,2Institute for Genetic and Biomedical
Research (IRGB), National Research Council (CNR), Cagliari, Italy.
Host genetics are known to in ﬂuence the gut microbiome, yet
their role remains poorly understood. To robustly characterize
these effects, we performed a genome-wide association study of207 taxa and 205 pathways representing microbial composition
and function within the Dutch Microbiome Project, a population
cohort of 7,738 individuals from the northern Netherlands. Tworobust, study-wide signi ﬁcant ( p< 1.89x10
-10) signals near the LCT
and ABO genes were found to associate with multiple microbial
taxa and pathways and were replicated in two independent
cohorts. The LCTlocus associations seemed modulated by lactose
intake, while those at ABO could be explained by participant blood
type in interaction with the secretor status determined by their
FUT2 genotype. Twenty-two other loci showed suggestive
evidence ( p< 5x10-8) of association with microbial taxa and
pathways. At a more lenient threshold, the number of loci we
identi ﬁed strongly correlated with trait heritability, suggesting that
much larger sample sizes are needed to elucidate the remainingeffects of host genetics on the gut microbiome.
E.A. Lopera-Maya: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. A. van der
Graaf: None. S. Hu: None. S. Andreu-Sánchez: None. L. Chen:
None. A. Vich-Vila: None. R. Gacesa: None. T. Sinha: None. V.
Collij: None. M.A.Y. Klassen: None. L.A. Bolte: None. M.F.
Brandao-Gois: None. P.B.T. Neerincx: None. M.A. Swertz: None.
H.J.M. Harmsen: None. C. Wijmenga: None. J. Fu: None. R.K.
Weersma: None. A. Zhernakova: None. S. Sanna: None.
P24.020.C Interest of the pro ﬁle and admixed sample for
genetic analysis of human facial morphology
Betty Bonfante1, Pierre Faux1, Nicolas Navarro2,3, Javier Mendoza-
Revilla4,5, Morgane Dubied2, Charlotte Montillot2, Emma Went-
worth6, Lauriane Poloni2,3, Philip Jones7, Ziyi Xiong8, Sagnik Palmal1,
Fan Liu8,9,10, Seth M. Weinberg11, John R. Shaffer11, Evie Stergia-
kouli12, Laurence J. Howe12, Pirro G. Hysi13, Timothy D. Spector13,
Rolando Gonzalez-José14, Lavinia Schüler-Faccini15, Maria-Cátira
Bortolini15, Victor Acuña-Alonzo16, Samuel Canizales-Quinteros17,
Carla Gallo4, Giovanni Poletti4, Gabriel Bedoya18, Francisco Roth-
hammer19, Christel Thauvin-Robinet2,20, Laurence Faivre2,20, Caroline
Costedoat1, David Balding7,21, Timothy Cox22, Manfred Kayser8,
Laurence Duplomb2, Binnaz Yalcin2, Justin Cotney6, Kaustubh
Adhikari23,7, Andrés Ruiz-Linares1,7,24
1Aix Marseille University, Marseille, France,2Université Bourgogne
Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,3PSL University, Paris, France,4Uni-
versidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru,5Institut Pasteur,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
589
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Paris, France,6University of Connecticut Health, Farmington, CT, USA,
7University College London, London, United Kingdom,8Erasmus MC
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
9Beijing Institute of Genomics, Beijing, China,10University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China,11University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA,12University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom,
13King ’s College London, London, United Kingdom,14CONICET,
Puerto Madryn, Argentina,15Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil,16National School of Anthropology and
History, Mexico City, Mexico,17UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina
Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico,18Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín,
Colombia,19Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile,20CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France,21University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
22University of Missouri, Kansas City, MO, USA,23The Open University,
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom,24Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
Introduction: here is an interest in ﬁnding genetic basis explaining
human facial variations because of its impact in different ﬁelds such
as forensic or biomedical sciences. Until now 9 genome-wideassociation studies (GWASs), mainly using samples of European
ancestry, have reported about 50 genetic loci affecting human facial
traits and only a dozen of these ﬁndings were replicated
independently. Human face pro ﬁle shows important variations
between humans but no GWAS have focused on that particular
phenotype so far. We performed various GWASs to identify variants
impacting human pro ﬁle traits in an admixed population.
Materials and Methods: We used a sample of more of 6,000
volunteers from Latin America gathered by the CANDELA
consortium. We extracted 59 measurements from landmarksmanually placed on photographs (2D) of the right pro ﬁle of the
volunteers and performed genetic analyses with nearly 9M
imputed or genotyped SNPs.
Results: We found signi ﬁcant association of 32 traits with at
least 1 (and up to 6) of 32 different genomic regions. Theseregions were enriched in regulatory elements speci ﬁcally active
during craniofacial development. Within those regions, 9 were not
identi ﬁed as regions affecting the non-pathological variation of
human face. We were able to replicate 4 of these new associationsin an independent sample. Among them is the VPS13B gene
region that we also found to impact mouse facial morphology.
Conclusions: By investigating face pro ﬁle variations in an
admixed population, we were able to identify new regions
associated with human face traits.
B. Bonfante: None. P. Faux: None. N. Navarro: None. J.
Mendoza-Revilla: None. M. Dubied: None. C. Montillot: None. E.
Wentworth: None. L. Poloni: None. P. Jones: None. Z. Xiong:
None. S. Palmal: None. F. Liu: None. S.M. Weinberg: None. J.R.
Shaffer: None. E. Stergiakouli: None. L.J. Howe: None. P.G. Hysi:
None. T.D. Spector: None. R. Gonzalez-José: None. L. Schüler-
Faccini: None. M. Bortolini: None. V. Acuña-Alonzo: None. S.
Canizales-Quinteros: None. C. Gallo:
None. G. Poletti: None. G.
Bedoya: None. F. Rothhammer: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet:
None. L. Faivre: None. C. Costedoat: None. D. Balding: None. T.
Cox: None. M. Kayser: None. L. Duplomb: None. B. Yalcin: None.
J. Cotney: None. K. Adhikari: None. A. Ruiz-Linares: None.
P24.021.D Fine mapping of GWAS loci associated with
multiple sclerosis to dissect the pathogenetic role of drugtarget genes
Miriam zuccalà *1, Alessandro Pizzino*1, Nadia Barizzone1, Ferdi-
nando Clarelli2, Chiara Basagni1, Melissa Sorosina2, Elisabetta
Mascia2, Domizia Vecchio3, Mattia Pozzato4, Cristoforo Comi3,
Roberto Cantello3, Vittorio Martinelli5, Giancarlo Comi6, Maurizio
Leone1,7, Massimo ﬁlippi5,8, Filippo Martinelli-Boneschi9, Federica
Esposito2, Sandra D ’Alfonso11Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont,
Novara, and IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research Center of Autoim-
mune Diseases), Novara, Italy,2Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Neurological Disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE),Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan., Milano, Italy,3MS Centre, SCDU Neurology, AOU Maggiore
della Carità, Novara, Italy, Novara, Italy,4Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology Unit and MultipleSclerosis Center, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy,5Neurology Unit, IRCCS
San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Milano, Italy,6Institute of
Experimental Neurology, San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan,
Milano, Italy,7Unit of Neurology, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo
della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy, Milano, Italy,
8Neuroimaging Research Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology,
Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute,
Milan, Milano, Italy,9Dino Ferrari Centre, Neuroscience Section,
Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation (DEPT), Uni-
versity of Milan, Milano, Italy.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease of the
central nervous system. Recently large GWAShave uncovered
more than 200 loci that independently contribute to disease
pathogenesis. However, the speci ﬁc functional mechanism by
which they in ﬂuence MS pathogenesis is still largely unknown.
This study aims to dissect the deeper biological understanding of
pathogenetic mechanisms of MS through combinations of human
genetics association data and network biology approaches. Toidentify primarily associated variants in MS related regions, we
performed a preliminary analysis of co-occurrence of drug target
genes in the 201 known MS associated regions querying threedrug databases. We selected for follow-up 11 regions (23 genes),that showed the highest ranking in a meta-analysis performed in
large Italian sample sets. The level of signi ﬁcance of the genetic
association with the pathological phenotype was analyzedthrough PhenoScannerto investigate if any SNPs show eQTLassociations of signi ﬁcant expression and consequently quantify
the regulatory effect of the risk variants. We also evaluated GEO,
looking for two array expression datasets of MS patients vs healthycontrols and the results were compared with what found onPhenoScanner. In conclusion, 4 regions have been selected from
the 11 preselected, including 6 drug target genes for an upcoming
functional evaluation. These 6 genes will be tested to evaluatetheir translational role for a better understanding of the main
pathogenetic mechanisms of MS, the identi ﬁcation of new
therapies and the design of clinical trials for MS treatments.
M. zuccalà*: None. A. Pizzino*: None. N. Barizzone: None. F.
Clarelli: None. C. Basagni: None. M. Sorosina: None. E. Mascia:
None. D. Vecchio: None. M. Pozzato: None. C. Comi: None. R.
Cantello: None. V. Martinelli: None. G. Comi: None. M. Leone:
None. M.ﬁlippi: None. F. Martinelli-Boneschi: None. F. Esposito:
None. S. D ’Alfonso: None.
P24.023.B A Genome-Wide Association Study in patients with
sepsis supports the association of SAMD9 variant with 28-day
survival
Tamara Hernandez-Beeftink
1,2, Beatriz Guillen-Guio1, Jose M.
Lorenzo-Salazar3, Almudena Corrales4,5, M Isabel García-Laorden2,5,
Miryam Prieto González6, Aurelio Rodríguez-Pérez7,8, Demetrio
Carriedo9, Jesús Blanco5,10, Alfonso Ambrós11, Elena González
Higueras12, Elena Espinosa13, Arturo Muriel10, David Domínguez13,
Abelardo García de Lorenzo14, José M. Añón14, Javier Belda15, Jesús
Villar2,5, Carlos Flores1,3,5
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Universidad
de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Research Unit, HospitalAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
590
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,
Spain,3Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico de Energías Renova-
bles, Granadilla, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,4Research Unit, Hospital
Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,5CIBER
de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid,Spain,6Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Complejo Asistencial Universi-
tario de Palencia, Palencia, Spain,7Department of Anesthesiology,
Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de GranCanaria, Spain,8Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria, Spain,9Intensive Care Unit, Complejo Hospitalario Universi-
tario de León, León, Spain,10Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario
Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain,11Intensive Care Unit, Hospital General
de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Spain,12Intensive Care Unit, Hospital
Virgen de la Luz, Cuenca, Spain,13Department of Anesthesiology,
Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,
14Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,
15Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Hospital Clinico
Universitario of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction: Sepsis is a severe systemic in ﬂammatory response to
infections that has a 20-30% mortality rate. To date, most genetic
studies have focused on particular biological candidates. Weperformed the ﬁrst genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 28-
day survival in sepsis.
Methods . A GWAS was performed in 475 Europeans from the
GEN-SEP cohort and 7.5 million imputed variants. Associationanalyses were conducted using Cox regression models, adjusting
by gender, age, and the main two principal components of
genetic variation. A replication was performed in 212 independentpatients from the same cohort. Statistical signi ﬁcance was
established at p< 5.0E-8 in the meta-analysis. Whole-blood
transcriptomics from septic patients were assessed by focusing
on genes linked to signi ﬁcant variants.
Results and conclusions . The GWAS identi ﬁed three indepen-
dent common variants associated with reduced 28-day survival,
including an exonic variant in SAMD9 (HR=4.75, 95%CI =2.86-
7.89, p=1.77E-9), which encodes the sterile alpha motif domain-
containing protein 9, related with the in ﬂammatory response to
tissue injury. An upregulation of SAMD9 expression in non-
surviving septic patients ( p=0.003) was observed. In conclusion,
we completed the ﬁrst GWAS of 28-day survival in sepsis and
identi ﬁed novel candidate genes associated with reduced survival.
Funding : Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI16/00049; PI17/00610; FI17/
00177; PI19/00141; PI20/00876) and co- ﬁnanced by the European
Regional Development Funds, “A way of making Europe ”from the
European Union; and by the agreement OA17/008 with Instituto
Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER) to strengthen scienti ﬁc
and technological education, training, research, development andinnovation in Genomics, Personalized Medicine and Biotechnology;ECIT CGIEU0000219140 .
T. Hernandez-Beeftink: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. J.M.
Lorenzo-Salazar: None. A. Corrales: None. M.I. García-Laorden:
None. M. Prieto González: None. A. Rodríguez-Pérez: None. D.
Carriedo: None. J. Blanco: None. A. Ambrós: None. E. González
Higueras: None. E. Espinosa: None. A. Muriel:
None. D.
Domínguez: None. A. García de Lorenzo: None. J.M. Añón:
None. J. Belda: None. J. Villar: None. C. Flores: None.
P24.024.C Improving the representation of traits in the GWAS
Catalog
Elliot Sollis1, Annalisa Buniello1,2, Maria Cerezo1, Laura W. Harris1,
Elizabeth Lewis1, Ala Abid1, Peggy Hall3, James Hayhurst1,2, Lucia A.
Hindorff3, Sajo John1, Aoife McMahon1, Abayomi Mosaku1, Santhi
Ramachandran1, Patricia Whetzel1, Fiona Cunningham1, Paul Flicek1,
Helen Parkinson11European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics
Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2Open Targets, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,3Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,MD, USA.
The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog ( www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas )i sa
comprehensive resource of manually curated GWAS data(>11,000 studies as of February 2021), alongside full summarystatistics for a growing proportion (currently ~30%). GWAS have
been performed for an increasing ly wide array of human traits.
The most highly represented traits in the Catalog include bloodbiomarker measurements, diabetes, body mass index, schizo-phrenia, depression, Alzheimer ’s disease, breast carcinoma and
bipolar disorder.
Traits are annotated in the Catalog using terms from the
Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO), to enable standardisation
across studies and interoperability with other resources. The
Catalog is currently re ﬁning how traits are annotated, to improve
scienti ﬁc accuracy and enable more precise searching. All studies
have a main trait (the variable under investigation), but many also
include a background trait shared by all study participants (e.g.
“Allergic rhinitis in asthma ”). Previously, such traits were
annotated with multiple EFO terms in the same ﬁeld (i.e. allergic
rhinitis, asthma). Here, we present new functionality allowing
users to easily distinguish main and background traits to more
accurately re ﬂect the study design.
Investigating the range of traits in the Catalog also highlights
differences in data availability between research areas, including
the rate of summary statistics sharing. For example, summarystatistics were available for 58% of ovarian cancer studiespublished since 2017, compared to only 6% of leukaemia studies.
Strikingly, the rate for COVID-19 studies has been extremely high
(99%). We invite summary statistics submissions and feedback toaddress underrepresented trait areas.
E. Sollis: None. A. Buniello: None. M. Cerezo: None. L.W.
Harris: None. E. Lewis: None. A. Abid: None. P. Hall: None. J.
Hayhurst: None. L.A. Hindorff: None. S. John: None. A.
McMahon: None. A. Mosaku: None. S. Ramachandran: None.
P. Whetzel: None. F. Cunningham: None. P. Flicek: None. H.
Parkinson: None.
P24.025.D Identifying host genetic determinants of HIV-1
reservoir markers reveals PTDSS2 and IRF7 as potentialmodifying factors in HIV-1 patients
Zhenhua Zhang
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
Combination antiretroviral treatment (cART) cannot eradicate HIV-
1 from the body due to the persisting virus. These HIV-1 reservoirsmainly comprise long-lived resting memory CD4 +T cells and
show a high variability in size and activity. Therefore, the
identi ﬁcation of host factors contributing to the variation could
introduce new HIV-1 treatment strategies. We conducted agenome-wide quantity trait locus analysis to probe geneticvariants linked to levels of cell-associated (CA)-HIV-1 DNA, CA-
HIV-1 RNA and RNA:DNA ratio in whole blood CD4 +T cells from a
HIV-1 patient cohort (207 Caucasians) under long-term suppres-sive cART (median 6.6 years). CA-HIV-1 DNA and CA-HIV-1 RNA
levels were measured with droplet digital PCR assays and
genotype information (522,455 SNPs) was retrieved via In ﬁnium
Global Screening array platforms. By additive linear regression
models corrected by age, gender, CD4-nadir and HIV-1 duration,
we identi ﬁed one signi ﬁcant genetic association with CA-HIV-1Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
591
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608DNA (p-value < 5 × 10-8) and subsequently the PTDSS2 as a
candidate gene. Also, four were found for RNA:DNA ratio (p-
value < 5 × 10-7), which highlighted RNH1, IRF7, DEAF1 and RP11-
1149M10.2 as candidates. Next, we validated the IRF7 SNV issigni ﬁcantly correlated with higher expression of the IRF7 gene in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HIV-1 patients, support-
ing its functional role in HIV-1 infection. The presented data
suggests CA-HIV-1 DNA levels and RNA:DNA ratio could beinﬂuenced by PTDSS2 and IRF7. These observations provide novel
knowledge on the molecular mechanisms involved in HIV-1
reservoir establishment and/or maintenance and could indicate
targets for future therapeutic strategies for HIV-1 reservoir inpatients.
Z. Zhang: None.
P24.026.A Genetics of hand grip strength: novel insights from
GWAS and PRS studies in young cohorts
Filippo Abbondanza
1, Carol Wang2, Andrew Whitehouse3, Silvia
Paracchini1
1University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom,2University of
Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia,3University of Western Australia,
Western Australia, Australia.
Introduction : Hand grip strength (HGS) is a predictor of
cardiovascular disease and overall poor health outcomes and itis broadly used as a proxy for muscular strength and frailty.
Genetic studies in adult cohorts found multiple markers associated
with HGS and showed genetic correlation with bone density traits.Despite thesep ﬁndings, the genetics of HGS remains largely
elusive and has never been explored in a cohort of young
individuals.
Materials and Methods: We performed GWAS meta-analyses
on three grip strength tests, namely with the right and left hand
and the maximal score, in the ALSPAC and Raine cohorts (N
ALSPAC
~ 5,400, N Raine=1,162, age range 11-13 years). We followed
standard protocols and tools for the GWAS and downstreamanalyses (GWAS: PLINK and ProAbel; GSEA: magma; meta-
analysed: METAL; functional mapping: FUMA; SNP-heritability:
LDSC; Polygenic risk scores: PRSice2).
Results : We reported a novel genome-wide signi ﬁcant hit for
HGS (rs2968991, p =2.34E-08) with the right hand and we
replicated a previous association with HOXB3 (p=6.22E-08). The
gene-set analyses found associations with HOXB7 and HOXB3 .W e
reported similar SNP-heritability than previous studies and high-
lighted a signi ﬁcant positive correlation between HGS and bone
density and fracture risk PRS.
Conclusion : In addition to a novel association, we replicated
associations previously reported both at pathway and gene
speci ﬁc level, suggesting a robust genetic component of HGS at
different ages. The PRS results supported the relationship betweenHGS and bone density and fracture risk. This work was funded bythe Royal Society.
F. Abbondanza: None. C. Wang: None. A. Whitehouse: None.
S. Paracchini: None.
P24.028.C Associations of genetic variants and in ﬂammation
markers in the Lithuanian population
Toma Adomaityt ė
1, Ingrida Domarkien ė2, Dovil ėKarčiauskait ė3,
Laima Ambrozaityt ė2, Ingrida Kavaliauskien ė2, Raimonda Mekien ė2,
Alina Urnikyt ė2, Zita Aurel ėKučinskien ė3, Asta Maeiki ėnė3, Neringa
Burokien ė4, Andrejus Coj3, Vaidutis Ku činskas21Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Depart-
ment of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
3Department of Physiology, Biochemistry, Microbiology and Labora-
tory Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,4Clinic of Internal Diseases,
Family Medicine and Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty
of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Inﬂammation plays a key role in the development of complex
diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). High-sensitivity
C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) has been associated with CVDs andcontributes to atherosclerotic plaques rupture. Levels of matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs) and their matrix-degrading activity are
raised in areas of atherosclerotic plaques. The analysis of genetic
factors is essential to understanding the pathogenesis ofinﬂammation.
Study group included 435 individuals of the Lithuanian origin.
Genotyping was performed using Illumina In ﬁnium
®HD SNP arrays.
hs-CRP, MMP-9, IL-1 βlevels were determined in blood serum
samples. Genes were selected based on interactions with hs-CRP,
MMP-9 and IL-1 βmarkers (37 genes, 382 SNPs). Gene set association
analysis was performed using Fisher ’s exact test with Plink v1.9.
Case/control groups were formed accordingly: individuals with hs-CRP levels >2.5mg/l were referred as cases (N =111), <0.6 mg/l - as
controls (N =89); individuals with MMP-9 levels >84.74 ng/ml were
referred as cases (N =42), <38.33 ng/ml - as controls (N =42);
individuals with autoimmune diseases were referred as cases (N =
45), the healthy ones - as controls (N =71). Frequencies of
associated alleles and genotypes were compared with 1000Genomes project data. Chi-squared test was used.
hs-CRP level was associated with APCS rs2121477 ( p=0.0001, OR
=0.12 (95% CI: 0.035-0.42)). MMP-9 level was associated with CD44
rs378517 ( p=0.00002, OR =4.1 (95% CI: 2.128-7.755)). rs2121477,
rs378517 allelic frequencies differed from AFR, South and EastAsians, AMR, also rs2121477 - from FIN, rs378517 - TSI ( p<0 . 0 5 ) .
Our study identi ﬁed new associations between in ﬂammation
markers hs-CRP, MMP-9 and genetic variants in the Lithuanianpopulation.
T. Adomaityt ė:None. I. Domarkien ė:None. D. Kar čiauskait ė:
None. L. Ambrozaityt ė:None. I. Kavaliauskien ė:None. R.
Mekien ė:None. A. Urnikyt ė:None. Z.A. Ku činskien ė:None. A.
Maeiki ėnė:None. N. Burokien ė:None. A. Coj:
None. V.
Kučinskas: None.
P24.029.D Genetic studies indicate that fetal - and not
maternal - insulin resistance is associated with birth weight
Hermina Jakupovi ć1, Mario García Ureña1, Thorkild I. A. Sørensen1,2,
Tuomas O. Kilpeläinen1
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Department of
Public Health, Section of Epidemiology, Faculty of Health and Social
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Fetal and maternal insulin resistance have been linked to
differences in birth weight. However, it is dif ﬁcult to separate
between fetal and maternal effects. We investigated whether the
associations of fetal and maternal insulin resistance with birthweight are independent using a genetic approach. First, we
performed a genetic correlation analysis between insulin resis-
tance, measured by fasting insulin (FI) concentration (n =98,210)
or HOMA-IR (n =46,186), and fetal and maternal effects on birthAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
592
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608weight (n =210,076 to 298,412) using genome-wide summary
results. Second, we studied whether genetic risk scores for insulin
resistance, comprising 13 loci associated with FI or 53 loci
associated with a combination of high FI, high triglycerides andlow HDL cholesterol (FI-TG-HDL), contribute to fetal or maternalgenetic effects on birth weight. We found a negative genetic
correlation between insulin resistance and fetal effect on birth
weight after adjusting for maternal genotype (FI: ρG -0.30 [95% CI
-0.51, -0.09]; HOMA-IR: ρG -0.29 [95% CI -0.46, -0.11]). There was no
signi ﬁcant genetic correlation between insulin resistance and
maternal effect on birth weight. The genetic risk scores for insulin
resistance showed a negative fetal effect on birth weight afteradjusting for maternal genotype (FI: beta -0.12 [95% CI -0.25,-0.02]; FI-TG-HDL: beta -0.14 [95% CI -0.20, -0.07]), whereas no
signi ﬁcant maternal effect on birth weight was seen after
adjusting for fetal genotype. Our results indicate that geneticpredisposition to higher fetal and not maternal insulin resistance
is associated with birth weight.
Funding : Novo Nordisk Foundation (cbmr.ku.dk)(grant number
NNF18CC0034900), TOK (NNF17OC0026848), HJ (NNF17SA0031406).
H. Jakupovi ć:None. M. García Ureña: None. T.I.A. Sørensen:
None. T.O. Kilpeläinen: None.
P24.030.A Genome-wide age at onset analysis discovers
association of the ApoE locus with earlier onset of ischemic
stroke
Joanna von Berg
1, Braxton Mitchell2, Steven Kittner2, Jeroen de
Ridder1,3, Sander W. van der Laan4, the SiGN consortium
1Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Utrecht, Netherlands,2University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA,3Oncode Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands,4Central
Diagnostics Laboratory, Division Laboratories, Pharmacy, andBiomedical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of ischemic stroke
(IS) commonly aim to identify genetic variants associated with
lifetime risk of IS in the general population by applying a case-
control design. A fundamentally different approach would beto investigate the age-of-onset (AAO) of IS, i.e. getting strokeearlier (or later) than the avera ge of the case population. Such
an approach would distinguish i ndividuals at early risk from
those at later risk, identify variants associated with diseasetiming, and point towards mechanisms involved in disease
onset. As the prevalence of IS differs between men and women
across age, there might be sexual dimorphic mechanismsinvolved in IS onset. We performed genome-wide linearregression in SiGN (without inclusion restrictions on age) to
analyse AAO of IS limited to cases of European ancestry. To ﬁnd
potential sex-speci ﬁc or sex-differential associations, we ﬁrst
analyse all cases regardless of sex ( all)a n dt h e n
analyse strati ﬁed on sex. A variant in ApoE is signi ﬁcantly
associated with AAO of IS in all(rs429358:T>C, p-value =1.3e
-8,
beta=-1.6 years), with the largest effect size in women (p-
value=2.5e-7,b e t a=-2.4 years). A variant in TRIB3 showed the
largest and signi ﬁcant effect in men (rs67896217:C>T, p-value
=4.1e-9,b e t a =-2.4 years). Preliminary follow-up studies
replicated the ApoE variant in external datasets. Our results
indicate that considering the age at onset of ischemic stroke
identi ﬁes genetic variants involved in disease accelerating
processes.
Funding: R01NS100178, R01NS105150, N1699-R, BX004672-
01A1, NWO vidi 639.072.715, CVON 2011/B019, CVON 2017-20,
ICIN.09.001, 01KL1802.J. von Berg: None. B. Mitchell: None. S. Kittner: None. J. de
Ridder: None. S.W. van der Laan: None.
P24.031.B Association study of KLF1 gene variations with HbF
and HbA2 levels in β-thalassemia carriers of Portuguese origin
Licinio Manco1, Celeste Bento2, Luis Relvas2, Tabita Maia2, M Leticia
Ribeiro2
1University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,2Centro Hospitalar e
Universitario de Coimbra CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal.
Introduction: Kruppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) is an erythroid speci ﬁc
transcription factor, that inhibits γ-globin expression through
BCL11A. Several reports showed that mutations on KLF1 gene are
associated with increased levels of HbF and HbA 2. This study aims
to examine the association between three KLF1 common variants
(rs3817621; rs79334031; rs2072597) and HbF and HbA2 levels in
β-thalassemia carriers.
Materials and Methods: Eighty-one Portuguese β-thalassemia
carriers (40 males, 41 females), aged 2 to 70 years (mean 32.9
years), were studied. HbF levels range from 0.2 to 9.5% and HbA2
levels from 3.5 to 6.1%. HbA2 and HbF levels were determined byHPLC. SNPs were genotyped by PCR-RFLP.
Results: Minor allele frequencies for SNPs rs3817621 (C),
rs79334031 (A) and rs2072597 (C) were 0.213, 0.038 and 0.263,respectively. Basic simple linear regression, in the additive model,showed no signi ﬁcant association between the three SNPs and
HbF levels (p >0.05). However, the 0.046 frequency haplotype CGT
(rs3817621/rs79334031/rs2072597), reaches a signi ﬁcant associa-
tion with increased levels of HbF (beta =1.99; p =0.024). A
nominal association was found between the rs79334031 minor
A-allele and increased levels of HbA
2, unadjusted (beta =0.59; p
=0.037) and adjusted for age and sex (beta =0.615; p =0.028).
Haplotype analyses showed a signi ﬁcant association with HbA 2for
the two di-nucleotide haplotypes combining the minor alleles
rs3817621/rs79334031 CA (beta =0.591; p =0.036) and
rs79334031/rs2072597 AC (beta =0.921; p =0.020), and a near-
signi ﬁcant association for haplotype CAC (beta =0.614; p =0.075).
Conclusion: Our results indicate that KLF1 variations could
make a signi ﬁcant contribution to increase HbF and HbA 2levels in
β-thalassemia carriers.
L. Manco: None. C. Bento: None. L. Relvas: None. T. Maia:
None. M. Ribeiro: None.
P24.032.C Association between indicators of lipid metabolism
and genetic pro ﬁle in the Lithuanian population
Neda Janonyt ė1,Ingrida Domarkien ė2, Dovil ėKarčiauskait ė3, Zita
Aurel ėKučinskien ė3, Neringa Burokien ė4, Asta Maeikien ė3, Andrejus
Coj3, Laima Ambrozaityt ė2, Ingrida Kavaliauskien ė2, Raimonda
Mekien ė2, Alina Urnikyt ė2, Vaidutis Ku činskas2
1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,2Depart-
ment of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of BiomedicalSciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,
3Department of Physiology, Biochemistry, Microbiology and Labora-
tory Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,4Clinic of Internal Diseases,
Family Medicine and Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Facultyof Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: The most common disorders of lipid metabolism
are LDL-hypercholesterolemia, HDL-hypocholesterolemia, hyper-triglyceridemia. Identi ﬁcation of variants that determine lipidAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
593
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608metabolism should improve risk prediction, generate targets for
pharmacologic intervention and is bene ﬁcial for further research.
Materials and Methods: DNA from 445 participants of
Lithuanian origin was extracted from venous blood andgenome-wide genotyping was performed. Individuals weredivided by quartiles of metabolite concentrations into case and
control groups according to: total cholesterol (<5.31 - control,
>6.81 - case, mmol/l), triglycerides (<0.89, >1.77), HDL-cholesterol(>1.65, <1.16), ApoA1 (>1.81, <1.44, g/l), ApoB (<0.89, >1.22),lipoprotein(a) (<0.03, >0.23) levels and cardiovascular disease,
hypertonia, stroke, diabetes phenotypes. Association analysis was
performed using SNPs (487) of the protein-protein interactinggenes (48). Allele and genotype frequencies of previously reportedas associated 10 SNPs were compared among Lithuanian
population and other populations from the 1000 Genomes
Project. A chi-square test was performed using PLINK .
Results: This study identi ﬁed new associations between:
cholesterol levels and rs940806 (p =0.00718), rs4947995 (p =
0.03076), rs12536061 (p =0.03076), rs1111650 (p =0.03076),
rs10774519 (p =0.04462); hypertonia and rs878847 (p =0.0263).
Frequency differences of previously associated SNPs were de ﬁned:
between Lithuanians and FIN - 2, IBS - 1, CEU - 0, GBR - 0, TSI - 4,
AFR - 8, AMR - 5, EAS - 6, SAS - 6. Differences between men andwomen, in ethnolinguistic regions of Lithuania were not detected.
Conclusions: Six new associations were identi ﬁed, interpopula-
tion differences in allele frequencies were determined. Population
genetic structure regarding disease associated variants may bene ﬁt
personalized medicine, clinical risk management, further research.
N. Janonyt ė:None. I. Domarkien ė:None. D. Kar čiauskait ė:
None. Z.A. Ku činskien ė:None. N. Burokien ė:None. A. Maeikien ė:
None. A. Coj: None. L. Ambrozaityt ė:None. I. Kavaliauskien ė:
None. R. Mekien ė:None. A. Urnikyt ė:None. V. Ku činskas: None.
P24.033.D Polygenic risk score of longevity predicts longer
survival across an age-continuum
Niccolo Tesi
1, Sven J. van der Lee1, Marc Hulsman1, Iris Jansen1,
Najada Stringa1, Natasja M. van Schoor1, Philip Scheltens1, Wiesje M.
van der Flier1, Martijn Huisman1, Marcel J. T. Reinders2, Henne
Holstege1
1Amsterdam UMC, location VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Delft
University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands.
Studying the genome of centenarians may give insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying extreme human longevity and
the escape of age-related diseases. Here, we set out to construct
polygenic-risk-scores (PRS) for longevity and to investigate thefunctions of longevity-associated variants. Using a cohort ofcentenarians with maintained cognitive health ( N=343), a
population-matched cohort of older-adults from ﬁve cohorts ( N
=2905), and summary statistics data from a GWAS on parental
longevity, we constructed a PRS including 330 independentvariants that signi ﬁcantly discriminated between centenarians and
older-adults ( p=4.5x10
-5,APOE variants excluded). This PRS was
also associated with longer survival in an independent sample ofyounger individuals, ( p=0.02), leading up to a 4-year difference in
survival based on common genetic factors only. We show that this
PRS was, in part, able to compensate for the deleterious effect of
theAPOE- ε4allele, and that the variants included in the PRS were
previously associated with several age-related diseases. Using an
integrative framework, we annotated the 330 variants included in
this PRS to the genes they associate with, and performed gene-setenrichment analysis. We found a signi ﬁcant enrichment for genes
associated with cellular differentiation, developmental processes,
and cellular response to stress. Together, our results suggest thatthe genome of healthy centenarians is enriched with a constella-
tion of variants each exerting small advantageous effects on
aging-related biological mechanisms that maintain overall health
and decrease the risk of age-related diseases.
N. Tesi: None. S.J. van der Lee: None. M. Hulsman: None. I.
Jansen: None. N. Stringa: None. N.M. van Schoor: None. P.
Scheltens: None. W.M. van der Flier: None. M. Huisman: None.
M.J.T. Reinders: None. H. Holstege: None.
P24.036.C Host genome variants in ﬂuence on bacterial
salivary composition in African admixed population
Antonio Espuela-Ortiz
1, Esther Herrera-Luis1,Fabian Lorenzo-
Diaz1,2, Celeste Eng3, Scott Huntsman3, Michael A. Lenoir4, Jose R.
Rodriguez-Santana5, Esteban G. Burchard *3,6, Maria Pino-Yanes *1,7,8
1Genomics and Health Group, Department of Biochemistry, Micro-
biology, Cell Biology and Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, San
Cristóbal de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain,2Instituto Universitario de
Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de Canarias (IUETSPC),Universidad de La Laguna, San Cristóbal de La Laguna, Tenerife,
Spain,3Department of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,4Bay Area Pediatrics, Oakland,
CA, USA,5Centro de Neumología Pediátrica, San Juan, PR, USA,
6Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA,7Instituto de
Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La Laguna, SanCristóbal de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain,8CIBER de Enfermedades
Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: The relationship between human genetic variation
and microbiota composition of different body sites has been
recently started to be assessed through microbiota genome-wide
association studies (mGWAS). However, similar to other genomicapproaches, the main efforts have been targeted to study
European descent populations, and little is known about other
populations. This work aimed to explore the interplay betweenhost genetics and the oral microbiota in two understudiedpopulations, African Americans and Latinos.
Methods: A total of 114 African Americans from SAGE and 144
Hispanics/Latinos from GALA II were included in the analyses.Salivary bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing pro ﬁling and
genomic data imputed using 1000 Genomes Project as reference
panel were used to perform a mGWAS. For each genus, cohort-
speci ﬁc results from linear regression models corrected for age,
sex, genetic ancestry and asthma were meta-analysed. Further-
more, in-silico functional analysis of genome-wide signi ﬁcant
variants was carried out using public online databases.
Results: The most abundant genera detected in saliva were
Prevotella ,Streptococcus ,Haemophilus ,Veillonella ,Neisseria ,Rothia ,
and Fusobacterium . Genome-wide signi ﬁcant associations for
variants located at 11q14.1 were found for Streptococcus (p-
value < 4.94x10
-8). The top hit is an intronic variant of genes
AAMDC and INTS4 found to be a blood expression quantitative
trait locus for INTS4 (p-value =1x10-8),AAMDC (p-value =8x10-24),
and AQP11 (p-value =5x10-14), the latter being potentially
involved in saliva volume regulation.
Conclusions: Genetic variation at 11q14.1 was associated with
Streptococcus genus abundance in saliva in African-admixed
populations. Funding: Funded by SAF2017-83417R MINECO/AEI/FEDER, UE, and a MICIU/ULL fellowship to AE-O.
A. Espuela-Ortiz: None. E. Herrera-Luis: None. F. Lorenzo-
Diaz: None. C. Eng: None. S. Huntsman: None. M.A. Lenoir:
None. J.R. Rodriguez-Santana: None. E.G. Burchard *: None. M.
Pino-Yanes *: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
594
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P24.037.D Mitochondrial genetic determinants of nuclear
gene expression variation among four European ancestries
Joseﬁna Lascano Maillard1, Halit Ongen1,2, Emmanouil T.
Dermitzakis1,2
1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland.
Introduction: Mitochondria are involved in different key aspects
of cell homeostasis. Somatic mutations in the mitochondrial
genome are linked to varying patterns of nuclear DNA methyla-tion and acetylation, contributing to differential gene expressionand to the development of particular diseases. Although
mitochondrial sequence alteration was investigated in the
pathological context, little is known about the effect of itsvariation among the population on phenotypic traits.
Materials and Methods: We assess the extent of genetic
contribution from the mitochondrial genome to nuclear gene
expression using RNAseq data of 358 lymphocytic cell lines (LCLs)from the Geuvadis project and matched 1000 Genomes (1KG)
mitochondrial genotypes from four different European ancestries.
We further explore probabilistic relationships between nuclear
genes associated with particular groups of mitochondrial variants,using Bayesian Networks.
Results: We ﬁnd a total of 66 mito-nuclear expression
quantitative trait-loci (eQTLs) involving 21 different mitochondrialvariants and 65 unique nuclear genes. Mitochondrial eQTL variantsare grouped into blocks of correlated genotypes (r
2> 0.8) and the
corresponding eQTL genes are enriched for terms related to
mitochondrial genetic diseases and processes. Genes associatedwith language disorders, cancer, encephalomyelopathies andcardiomyopathies are observed in eQTLs with different mitochon-
drial genotypic groups and de ﬁne pathways within Bayesian
Networks.
Conclusions: Our results highlight probabilistic relationships
between genes associated with variants from the same genotypic
block, pinpointing potential players of mitochondrial traits andpathways. Beyond the link between pathogenic mutations anddiseases development, our ﬁndings point towards an expanded
role of the mitochondrial genome in human phenotypic variation.
J. Lascano Maillard: None. H. Ongen: None. E.T. Dermitzakis:
F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; HybridStat, Ltd.
P24.039.B Genome-wide association study of nociceptive
musculoskeletal pain treatment response in UK Biobank
Song Li
1, Rianne van Boekel2, Marieke Coenen1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health
Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Department of Anesthesiology, Pain and Palliative Medicine,
Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud university medicalcenter, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Introduction: Pain management for nociceptive musculoskeletal
pain (NMP) follows analgesic ladder, starting from nonsteroidalanti-in ﬂammatory drugs (NSAID), followed by weak or strong
opioid until pain is under control. However, effective pain
treatment is hampered by inter-individual differences andunsatis ﬁed pain treatment response (PTR) rates ranging from 34
to 79%. We aimed to elucidate the genetic background of PTR.
Materials and Methods: A genome-wide association study
(GWAS) was performed in ~23,000 participants with NMP from theUK Biobank and a subtype analysis including only NMP withinﬂammatory symptoms. In both analysis, NSAID vs. opioid userswere compared as a re ﬂection of response to NSAIDs, adjusting for
relevant co-variates. Genetic variants with p-values less than 1e-06
(suggestive threshold) were carried forward for functional
annotation e.g. regulation of nearby genes or spatially closegenes. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) heritability calcula-tion was performed.
Results: We identi ﬁed one genome-wide signi ﬁcant hit in an
intergenic region, rs549224715 (P =3.88e-08), and six signals
passing the suggestive threshold. Subtype analysis did not yieldsuggestive results. Functionally related genes that are nearby or
under the regulation of identi ﬁed SNPs include THBS4 , involved in
spinal sensitization and neuropathic pain states; CMYA5 ,SGCB ,
TMEM130 , associated with muscular dystrophy which is character-
ized by muscle pain. The SNP heritability is 16.36% (P =0.16).
Conclusions: Our GWAS identi ﬁed genes functionally related to
pain and treatment of pain. The results warrant future validation.
S. Li: None. R.V. Boekel: None. M. Coenen: None.
P24.040.C Same role but different actors: genetic regulation
of post-translational modi ﬁcation of two different proteins
Arianna Landini
1, Irena Trbojevic-Akmacic2, Pau Navarro3, Frano
Vuckovic2, Caroline Hayward3, Tea Petrovic2, Marija Vilaj2, Gordan
Lauc2,4, James F. Wilson1,3, Lucija Klaric3
1Usher Institute (University of Edinburgh), Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
2Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia,3MRC
Human Genetics Unit, Institute for Genetics and Cancer (University of
Edinburgh), Edinburgh, United Kingdom,4Faculty of Pharmacy and
Biochemistry (University of Zagreb), Zagreb, Croatia.
Post-translational modi ﬁcations (PTMs) are essential mechanisms
used by cells to diversify protein functions and dynamically
coordinate their signaling networks. Nevertheless, genetic regulationof protein N-glycosylation, similarly to other PTMs, is not yet fully
understood. To determine whether N-glycosylation PTM is regulated
by the same genetic mechanisms in different proteins, weperformed genome-wide association meta-analysis of glycosylationof two proteins - transferrin (35 N-glycan traits, N =1890) and
immunoglobulin G (IgG) (24 N-glycan traits, N =2020). In the ﬁrst
ever GWAS of transferrin N-glycosylation, we identi ﬁed 10
signiﬁcantly associated loci (P < 1.43 × 10
−9), three of which ( TF,
FOXI1 and MSR1 ) were never previously associated with the glycome
of any protein, while three others were also associated with IgG
glycosylation by previous studies. Two of the latter encoded theglycosyltransferase enzymes FUT6 and FUT8. Using colocalisation
methods, we showed that while these two enzymes alter both
proteins, there is strong support for a different causal variant in eachgene in ﬂuencing the glycosylation of each protein. Moreover, we
also suggest that core fucosylation of the two proteins is regulated
by different transcription factors, IKZF1 for IgG and HNF1A for
transferrin. We thus begin to unravel the complex genetic regulationof the PTM of two common plasma proteins. Distinct transcriptionfactors appear to regulate the same enzyme in different tissues,
while different underlying causal variants in the same gene regulate
glycosylation in a substrate-speci ﬁcm a n n e r .
A. Landini: None. I. Trbojevic-Akmacic: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory. P.
Navarro: None. F. Vuckovic: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory. C. Hayward:
None. T. Petrovic: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genos Glycoscience Research Laboratory. M. Vilaj: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genos Glycoscience Research
Laboratory. G. Lauc: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Genos Gly-
coscience Research Laboratory. J.F. Wilson: None. L. Klaric: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
595
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P24.041.D Modi ﬁer genes in NF1: results of the ﬁrst Genome-
Wide Association Study in 1,333 patients
Laurence PACOT1,2, Audrey Sabbagh3, Béatrice Parfait1,2, Anne
Boland-Auge4, Delphine Bacq-Daian4, Ingrid Laurendeau2, Salah
Ferkal5,6, Audrey Briand-Suleau1,2, Laurence Allanore5, Jean-François
Deleuze4, Michel Vidaud1,2, Dominique Vidaud1,2, members of the NF
France Network, Pierre Wolkenstein5,6,7, Eric Pasmant1,2
1Service de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, DMU
BioPhyGen, AP-HP.Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France,2Institut
Cochin, Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris,CARPEM, Paris, France,3UMR 261 MERIT, IRD, Université de Paris,
Paris, France,4CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique
Humaine, Evry, France,5Département de Dermatologie, AP-HP and
Université Paris 12, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, France,6CIC1430,
Hôpital Henri-Mondor, AP-HP, Créteil, France,7EA7379, Université
Paris Est Créteil, Créteil, France.
Background : Neuro ﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) in an autosomal
dominant disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in thetumor suppressor gene NF1. A typical sign of the disease is the
development of benign tumors of the peripheral nervous system,
called neuro ﬁbromas (NFs), which can transform into malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). Few NF1 pathogenic
variants have been correlated to a speci ﬁc presentation of the
disease, but intrafamilial phenotypic correlations and animalmodels suggested that part of the variable expressivity of NF1could be explained by modi ﬁer genes.
Methods: NF1 patients were recruited through the NF-France
network between 2003 and 2013 and molecularly characterized. Allpatients were phenotypically characterized using a standardizedquestionnaire. NF1-mutated patients were enrolled and genotyped
with the Illumina OmniExpressExome chip. Imputation and quality
controls were applied in 1,333 patients and with more than 7 millioncommon genomic variants. The cohort was divided into a discovery
(n=918) and a replication (n =415) samples. Association study
focused on three major clinical features: cutaneous (cNFs),subcutaneous (scNFs), and plexiform (pNFs) neuro ﬁbromas.
Results: Genome-wide signi ﬁcance threshold (5.10
-8) was
reached in the discovery sample on chromosome 9 for the pNFs
phenotype. Twelve, three and four regions suggestive ofassociation (p < 10-6) were identi ﬁed respectively for pNFs, cNFs,
and scNFs. Evidence of replication was observed respectively for
four, two and six loci.
Conclusion: Our study con ﬁrms the role of previously described
modi ﬁer genes and points out new candidates to explore.
L. Pacot: None. A. Sabbagh: None. B. Parfait: None. A. Boland-
Auge: None. D. Bacq-Daian: None. I. Laurendeau: None. S.
Ferkal: None. A. Briand-Suleau: None. L. Allanore: None. J.
Deleuze: None. M. Vidaud: None. D. Vidaud: None. P.
Wolkenstein: None. E. Pasmant: None.
P24.042.A List of 190 genes affecting neuroticism prioritized
by a new gene-based association analysis framework
Nadezhda M. Belonogova1, Irina V. Zorkoltseva1, Yakov A.
Tsepilov1,2, Tatiana I. Axenovich1,2
1Institute of Cytology & Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,2Department of Natural Sciences, Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Introduction: Recent genome-wide association studies have
reported that neuroticism is in ﬂuenced by about 600 genes. Little
is known about the mechanisms of their action. We aimed toconduct a more detailed analysis of genes that can regulate the
level of neuroticism.
Materials and Methods: Using UK Biobank-based GWAS
summary statistics, we performed a gene-based associationanalysis using four sets of within-gene variants, each setpossessing speci ﬁc protein-coding properties. To guard against
the in ﬂuence of strong GWAS signals outside the gene, we used a
specially designed procedure called “polygene pruning ”.
Results: We identi ﬁed 190 genes associated with neuroticism
due to the effect of within-gene variants rather than strong GWAS
signals outside the gene. Thirty eight of these genes are new.
Within all genes identi ﬁed, we distinguished two slightly over-
lapping groups obtained from using protein-coding and non-coding variants. Twenty three genes were identi ﬁed using protein-
coding SNPs, 16 of them included potentially pathogenic variants.
For 14 neuroticism genes identi ﬁed using noncoding SNPs, we
found evidence of pleiotropy with gene expression. Using a
bioinformatics analysis, we showed that candidate genes con-
ﬁrmed in our study are more relevant and speci ﬁc to neuroticism
in their functions than non-con ﬁrmed genes.
Conclusions: We prioritized the neuroticism genes and showed
that the genes that contribute to neuroticism with their within-
gene variants are the most appropriate candidate genes. Thiswork was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research(20-04-00464) and the Ministry of Education and Science of the RF
(project 0259-2021-0009/ АААА -А17-117092070032-4 and the
5-100 Excellence Program).
N.M. Belonogova: None. I.V. Zorkoltseva: None. Y.A. Tsepi-
lov: None. T.I. Axenovich: None.
P24.043.B genetic analysis on multiple sclerosis multiplex
families
Chiara Basagni
1,Nadia Barizzone1, Rachele Cagliani2, Laura
Mendozzi3, Cristina Agliardi3, Ferdinando Clarelli4, Elisabetta Mascia4,
Melissa Sorosina4, Miriam Zuccalà1, Domizia Vecchio5, Cristoforo
Comi5, Vittorio Martinelli6, Giancarlo Comi7, Massimo Filippi6,8,9,10,
Federica Esposito4, Manuela Sironi2, Diego Forni2, Filippo Martinelli-
Boneschi11,12, Franca Rosa Guerini3, Sandra D ’alfonso1
1Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont,
Novara, and IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research Center of Autoim-mune Diseases), Novara, Italy,2Bioinformatics, Scienti ﬁc Institute
IRCCS E.MEDEA, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy,3IRCCS FONDAZIONE DON
GNOCCHI, Milan, Italy,4Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurolo-
gical Disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division
of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,
5Department of Translational Medicine, University of Eastern
Piedmont, Novara, and IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research Center ofAutoimmune Diseases), Novara, Italy,6Neurology Unit, IRCCS San
Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,77Institute of Experimental
Neurology, San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,8Neuroima-
ging Research Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division ofNeuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy,
9Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc Institute, Milan,
Italy,10Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy,11Dino Ferrari
Centre, Neuroscience Section, Department of Pathophysiology andTransplantation (DEPT), University of Milan, Milan, Italy,12Fonda-
zione IRCCS Ca ’Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neurology
Unit and Multiple Sclerosis Center, Milan, Italy.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a complex genetic disease. Over 200
common susceptibility variants have been identi ﬁed. To assess the
role of rare variants, we studied one of the largest MS multiplexfamilies with 5 affected members. A weighted Genetic Risk Score
analysis suggested that the increased genetic risk in this family isAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
596
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608partly due to common known MS associated variants, suggesting
a possible role of low and rare frequency variants shared among
the affected members. Non-parametric linkage analysis identi ﬁed
5 peaks of linkage (chromosome 2, 5, 9, 10, 21). These data havebeen coupled with WES and WGS data which allowed us toidentify 10 genes ( KIF1A ,AGXT ,PTCH1 ,RNF20 ,OR13C4 ,DNTT ,
SH3PXD2A ,HEMGN ,ABCA1 ,TPTE ) harbouring coding variants, and
11 genes ( HDAC3 ,SH3RF2 ,SLC36A2 ,LINC01933 ,WHRN ,PAPPA ,
LCOR ,R3HCC1L ,BTRC ,ADD3 ,CTBP2 ) harbouring non-coding
variants, shared by all affected individuals, ﬁltered for MAF and
in-silico predictors. To further assess the possible role of these
genes in MS susceptibility, we applied the same pipeline to WES ofadditional 28 Italian MS multiplex families which allowed us toreplicate the identi ﬁcation of rare coding variants in MS patients in
5 genes ( DNTT, ABCA1 ,KIF1A ,SH3PXD2A ,TPTE) . In conclusion, our
study identi ﬁed several genes harbouring rare coding and non-
coding variants shared by affected members of a large MS family.
The extension of these analyses to other cohorts of familial and
sporadic MS patients and controls is ongoing to further assess therole in MS susceptibility of the identi ﬁed rare variants.
C. Basagni: None. N. Barizzone: None. R. Cagliani: None. L.
Mendozzi: None. C. Agliardi: None. F. Clarelli: None. E. Mascia:
None. M. Sorosina: None. M. Zuccalà: None. D. Vecchio: None. C.
Comi: None. V. Martinelli: None. G. Comi:
None. M. Filippi:
None. F. Esposito: None. M. Sironi: None. D. Forni: None. F.
Martinelli-Boneschi: None. F. Guerini: None. S. D ’alfonso: None.
P24.044.C Omingenic model of control of N-glycosylation of
immunoglobulin G
Arina Nostaeva1, Sodbo Sharapov2, Gordan Lauc3, Michel Georges4,
Yury Aulchenko2
1Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation,
2Institute of Cytology & Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,3Genos Glycoscience, Zagreb, Croatia,4GIGA Institute,
University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.
Introduction: The omnigenic model1proposes that genes
controlling a complex trait could be divided into a core pathwaythat directly affects the trait and a periphery regulating the core.The model postulates that genetic variation in the core pathway is
expected to explain a small part of the trait ’s heritability, while
large part of heritability passes through trans-regulatory net-works
2. Here, we test the omnigenic model using an exemplar of
N-glycosylation of immunoglobulin G (NgIgG); a trait, for which
the core biochemical pathways are well understood.
Materials and Methods: We used published data3to partition
SNP heritability. To reconstruct a network of genes that regulate
the core N-glycosylation pathway and to estimate network ’s
contribution to the heritability we measured NgIgG, CD19 +
transcriptomes, and genomes of 200 people.
Results: Similar to2we observed that the strongest genetic
associations lie in the regions containing genes from the core
pathway; that genetic variation near the core pathway genesexplains minor proportion of heritability; that periphery is
enriched for genes with tissue-speci ﬁc expression. We then
established the NgIgG regulatory network and attempted toestimate the lower boundary of the proportion of heritability thatcan be accounted for by the trans-regulation of the core pathway.
Conclusions: Our results con ﬁrm and elaborate the predictions
of the omnigenic model. Funding: The work was funded by theRussian Science Foundation grant number 19-15-00115. Refer-ences: 1. Boyle et al. Cell (2017) 2. Sinnot-Armstrong et al. bioRxiv
(2021) 3. Klaric et al. Sci. Adv. (2020)
A. Nostaeva: None. S. Sharapov: None. G. Lauc: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signiﬁcant; Genos Glycoscience. M. Georges: None. Y. Aulchenko: E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; PolyOmica, PolyKnomics BV.
P24.045.D Genetic association analyses identify links between
pelvic prolapse (PP) and connective tissue biology, cardiovas-
cular and reproductive health
Natàlia Pujol Gualdo
1, Maarja Lepamets1, Kristi Läll1, Riikka
Arffman2, Terhi Piltonen2, Reedik Mägi1, Triin Laisk1
1Estonian Genome Centre, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia,2PEDEGO Research Unit, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
Pelvic prolapse (PP) is characterized by a descent of the pelvic
organs into the vaginal cavity. PP affects around 40% of women
after menopause and is the main indication for major gynecolo-
gical surgery. However, the etiology of PP remains poorlyunderstood. In this study, we present the largest genome-wideassociation study (GWAS) of PP to date. In the discovery phase, we
meta-analyzed Icelandic, UK Biobank and the FinnGen R3 datasets,
comprising a total of 20118 cases and 427426 controls, and seekfor replication in an independent dataset from Estonian Biobank
(7968 cases and 118895 controls). Finally, we conducted a joint
meta-analysis combining these datasets. We looked at enrichmentof association signal on gene-set, tissue and cell type level andexamined associations with other phenotypes both at the genetic
and phenotypic level. We further constructed polygenic risk scores
(PRS) to explore options for personalized risk assessment andprevention. We detected 20 genetic loci signi ﬁcantly associated
with POP (p < 5 × 10
−8), from which 13 loci were novel and
located near genes involved in urogenital tract development
(rs7126322, p =4.35x10-15, WT1 ) and regulation of the oxytocin
receptor (rs2267372, p =4.49x10-13,MAFF ). Tissue and cell
enrichment analyses underlined the role of the urogenital system
and muscle smooth cells (p < 0.00001, FDR < 0.05). Furthermore,musculoskeletal disorders and cardiovascular disease weregenetically correlated with POP. Analyzing the best PRS as
quintiles showed association with incident disease (Harrell c-
statistic =0.614, SD =0.006). Our study provides genetic evidence
to improve the current understanding of PP pathogenesis andassesses a genetic tool for personalized risk strati ﬁcation.
N. Pujol Gualdo: None. M. Lepamets: None. K. Läll: None. R.
Arffman: None. T. Piltonen: None. R. Mägi: None. T. Laisk: None.
P24.046.A Polygenic Risk Score Estimation in North-Western
Russian Population
Valeriia Rezapova
1,2, Nikita Kolosov1,2, Oxana Rotar1, Olga
Freylikhman1, Alexander Loboda1,2, Olesya Melnik1, Alexey Sergush-
ichev2, Andreas Gnirke3, Christine Stevens3, Alexander Meissner4,
Anna Kostareva1, Alexandra Konradi1, Mark J. Daly3,5,6, Mykyta
Artomov1,2,3,6
1Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg,
Russian Federation,2ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation,3Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA,4Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,5Finnish Institute for
Molecular Medicine, Helsinki, Finland,6Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Over the last decade, genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have discovered a substantial number of associated variants for
many complex traits. However, even within European-centeredGWAS data, there are local subpopulations signi ﬁcantly under-Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
597
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608represented in these studies. For example, Russians, being one of
the largest ethnic groups among the Europeans, remained
signi ﬁcantly under-represented in GWAS for years. We used a
pilot genotyping cohort of 239 individuals from Saint-Petersburgto investigate phenotypic variance explained by polygenic riskscores (PRS) for 11 phenotypes. We used UK biobank (UKBB)
GWAS summary statistics for corresponding phenotypes and
selected optimal p-value thresholds for maximizing R
2for PRS.
Several strategies for PRS calculation were tested, including effectsof genotype imputation and usage of sex-speci ﬁc GWAS summary
statistics. In addition, we compared R2estimates for polygenic risk
models in a scenario when UKBB GWAS summary statistic isapplied to target data from UKBB itself or Biobank Japan (BBJ). Thebest utility of UKBB GWAS was observed for UKBB participants,
with predictive value for Russian-descent individuals taking an
intermediate place between UKBB and BBJ. This work wasﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher
Education of the Russian Federation (Agreement No. 075-15-2020-
901) to Al.K. and Broad Institute SPARC award to M.J.D. and A.M.
V. Rezapova: None. N. Kolosov: None. O. Rotar: None. O.
Freylikhman: None. A. Loboda: None. O. Melnik: None. A.
Sergushichev: None. A. Gnirke: None. C. Stevens: None. A.
Meissner: None. A. Kostareva: None. A. Konradi: None. M.J.
Daly: None. M. Artomov: None.
P24.047.B A data-driven review of the genetic factors of
pregnancy complications
Yury Barbitoff
1, Alexander Tsarev2, Elena Vashukova1, Evgeniia
Maksiutenko3, Ludmila Kovalenko4, Larisa Belotserkovtseva4,Andrey
Glotov1
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics, Gynaecology and reproductology, St.-
Petersburg, Russian Federation,2Bioinformatics Institute, St.-Peters-
burg, Russian Federation,3St. Petersburg State University, St.-
Petersburg, Russian Federation,4Surgut State University, Surgut,
Russian Federation.
Introduction: Over the recent years, many advances have been
made in the research of the genetic factors of pregnancy
complications. In this work, we use publicly available datarepositories, such as the National Human Genome ResearchInstitute GWAS Catalog, HUGE Gene Navigator, and the UK
Biobank genetic and phenotypic dataset to gain insights into
molecular pathways and individual genes behind a set ofpregnancy-related traits.
Materials and Methods: Using both HuGE and GWAS Catalog
data, we con ﬁrm that immune system and T-cell related pathways
are one of the most important drivers of pregnancy-related traits.
Results: Pathway analysis of the data reveals that cell adhesion
and matrisome-related genes are also commonly involved in
pregnancy pathologies. We also ﬁnd a large role of metabolic
factors that affect not only gestational diabetes, but also the othertraits. These shared metabolic genes include IGF2 ,PPARG , and
NOS3 . We further discover that the published genetic associations
are poorly replicated in the independent UK Biobank cohort.Nevertheless, we ﬁnd novel genome-wide associations with
pregnancy-related traits for the FBLN7, STK32B , and ACTR3B genes,
and replicate the effects of the KAZN and TLE1 genes, with the
latter being the only gene identi ﬁed across all data resources.
Conclusions: Overall, our analysis highlights central molecular
pathways for pregnancy-related traits and suggests a need to use
more accurate and sophisticated association analysis strategies torobustly identify genetic risk factors for pregnancy complications.This study was ﬁnancially supported in parts by grant 19-75-20033
from Russian Science Foundation.Y. Barbitoff: None. A. Tsarev: None. E. Vashukova: None. E.
Maksiutenko: None. L. Kovalenko: None. L. Belotserkovtseva:
None. A. Glotov: None.
P24.048.C LOXL1 risk variant suggests protective effect for
exfoliation syndrome and glaucoma in the cohort of Lithua-
nian Chernobyl catastrophe liquidators
Gabriele Zukauskaite , Ingrida Domarkiene, Ausra Matuleviciene,
Evelina Marija Vaiteniene, Justas Arasimavicius, Vaidutis Kucinskas,
Laima Ambrozaityte
Vilnius University, Department of Human and Medical Genetics,
Vilnius, Lithuania.
Introduction: Ionizing radiation is one of the environmental
factors that is known to affect genomes and, therefore, challenge
organisms to adapt and acquire new, more favorable traits or
evoke the protective effect of the existing variants. Until recently,there were few studies analysing genomes of individuals thatexperienced high levels of ionizing radiation at a DNA sequence
level. This study focuses on the search for the protective genome
variation in the cohort of Lithuanian Chernobyl catastropheliquidators (LCCLs).
Materials and Methods: Genome-wide genotyping using
Illumina In ﬁnium OmniExpress-24 v1.3 Kit of 93 LCCLs was
performed. A list of potentially protective SNPs was selected andused for further statistical analysis. Genotype frequency, linkage
disequilibrium and epistasis analysis were performed comparing
genotyping data of LCCLs with the general Lithuanian population.R studio and PLINK software were used. Prepared questionnaire
allowed to evaluate clinical phenotype data of LCCLs.
Results: We identi ﬁed a genome variant rs3825942 in LOXL1
(NM_005576.4:c.458G>A; Fisher ’s exact test, p =0.0192) gene,
which reached statistical signi ﬁcance in LCCLs group. Linkage
disequilibrium and epistasis analysis identi ﬁed genes LHFPL3 ,
GALNT6 ,PIH1D1 ,ANKS1B ,METRNL that may have a role in the
genetic architecture of exfoliation syndrome (XFS) and glaucoma.
Conclusions . Ambiguous LOXL1 variant is mostly considered as
having negative effect on the development of XFS and glaucoma.
The in ﬂuence of recent positive selection, allele- ﬂipping phenom-
enon and the fact, that only individuals with homozygousreference allele have glaucoma among LCCLs suggests otherwise.
This project has received funding from the Research Council of
Lithuania, agreement No. S-MIP-20-35.
G. Zukauskaite: None. I. Domarkiene: None. A. Matulevi-
ciene: None. E. Vaiteniene: None. J. Arasimavicius: None. V.
Kucinskas: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None.
P24.049.D On the use of variant pathogenicity scores to
improve rare variant association tests
Ozvan Bocher1, Thomas Ludwig1,2, Elisabeth Tournier-Lasserve3,
Gaëlle Marenne1, Emmanuelle Génin1
1Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France,2CHRU Brest,
Brest, France,3Inserm UMR ‐S1161, Paris, France.
Introduction: The implication of rare genetic variants in disease
can be studied using association tests that aggregate rare variantsin testing units and ﬁlter them based on predicted impact and
allele frequencies. Testing units are usually the genes that are
considered as a whole without accounting for the functionaldomains of encoded proteins. As an alternative, sliding windowapproaches have been proposed that avoid the pre-selection ofAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
598
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608testing units but are computationally intensive and with
performances that depend on window sizes. The ﬁltering of
variants is also often focused on coding parts, leaving out
functionally relevant intronic variants.
Methods: We used pathogenicity scores observed in GnomAD
to de ﬁne testing units and to optimize the ﬁltering of variants
included in rare variant association tests. Using case-control
exome sequence data on Moyamoya disease, we compared ourproposed strategy to the classical gene-based analysis and toWGScan, a sliding window procedure. We evaluated the
performances of these different strategies to detect the known
signal on RNF213 by burden tests.
Results and conclusions: Our strategy and the sliding window
approach were more ef ﬁcient than the gene-based approach to
detect the signal. They were able to delimit a restricted candidate
region within the gene. Moreover, our region-based strategy toﬁlter variants outperformed classical ﬁltering strategies. These
encouraging results suggest that a similar approach could also be
used in the non-coding regions of the genome where wedramatically lack of functional annotations to de ﬁne testing units
and select qualifying variants.
O. Bocher: None. T. Ludwig: None. E. Tournier-Lasserve:
None. G. Marenne: None. E. Génin: None.
P24.051.B Genome-wide association study of smoking beha-
viors in a Chinese population of Taiwan
Ming-Wei Lin
1, Chia-Yen Wu1, Pei-Yu Weng1, Ting-Yi Wu2, Yi-Ying
Wu1, Chih-Kuan Lai3, Kuang-Chieh Hsueh4, I-Fan Liu5, Hsin-Bang
Leu6, Li-Shiun Chen7, Ivy Yi-Wen Tsai8, Kung-Yee Liang9
1Institute of Public Health, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University,
Taipei, Taiwan,2Department of Health Care Management, Chang
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,3Department of Family Medicine,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,4Department of
Family Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan,5Department of Cardiology, Cheng Hsin Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan,6Healthcare Center, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan,7Department of Psychiatry, Washington University, St. Louis,
MO, USA,8Institute of Health Policy and Welfare, National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan,9Institute of Population Health
Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
Introduction: Tobacco smoking is one of the major risk factors for
many chronic diseases and is the leading cause of preventabledeath in the world. Smoking behavior is a complex, multifactorial
trait with both genetic and environmental factors contributing to
the various phenotypes. The aims of this study were to conduct agenome-wide association study (GWAS) on smoking behaviors andto investigate the association between genes, smoking behaviors
and their impact on the cardiovascular outcomes in a Chinese
population of Taiwan.
Methods: We have enrolled 860 ever-smoking subjects
recruited from the Healthcare Center and the Department of
Family Medicine in the Taipei Veterans General Hospital, and the
Department of Cardiology in the Cheng Hsin Hospital. Eachparticipant was followed-up every six month by telephoneinterview with a structural questionnaire to obtain the information
of their smoking status, smoking quantities, quitting attempt, and
major cardiovascular events in subsequent one year. The In ﬁnium
CoreExome-24 BeadChips (Illumina, San Diego, CA) were used for
the genome-wide association study. The PLINK program was used
for the analysis of genome-wide association study.
Results: We identi ﬁed several novel genes, including RIT2,
CLYBL, NFAM1, LRRC8E, FAM129B, HACD1, STK32A, CCDC88C,
LINC01804, PCAT2, ASIC2, CNTNAP2 , were associated with smokingcessation at 6 months (with p-value 1 × 10
-4). Further studies to
conﬁrm our preliminary ﬁndings are warranted.
Conclusion: Our results identi ﬁed several novel genes might be
associated with smoking cessation in a Chinese population ofTaiwan. Further study with larger sample is required to replicateour preliminary ﬁndings. Grant No: MOST 109-2314-B-010-045-
M. Lin: None. C. Wu: None. P. Weng: None. T. Wu: None. Y.
Wu: None. C. Lai: None. K. Hsueh: None. I. Liu: None. H. Leu:
None. L. Chen: None. I. Tsai: None. K. Liang: None.
P24.052.C Trans-ancestry GWAS of 118,780 individuals reveals
biological mechanisms underlying the spatial QRS-T angle, amarker of arrhythmogenesis
William Jon Young
1, Patricia B. Munroe1, Larisa Tereshchenko2,o n
behalf of the CHARGE consortium EKG working group
1Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom,
2Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
Background: The spatial QRS-T angle (spQRSTa), the angle
between QRS and T-wave spatial vectors, is an established
predictor for risk of arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death (SCD).However, the biological mechanism remains unclear. We sought
to identify novel candidate genes associated with the spQRSTa, to
improve our understanding of the underlying biology.
Methods: We performed a trans-ancestry meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies (15) imputed with 1000G / HRC
reference panels, comprising 118,780 individuals (81.3% European,
10.7% Hispanic and 7% African). Genetic correlation with otherelectrocardiogram traits was estimated using linkage disequili-brium score regression. Gene prioritization and gene-set enrich-
ment was performed using DEPICT.
Results: We identi ﬁed 61 independent loci (58 novel) in the trans-
ancestry meta-analysis and an additional novel locus in African and
Hispanic ancestry-speci ﬁc analyses. Percent variance explained by
lead variants was 3.4% (2.5% increase by novel loci). Heritability inEuropeans (UK-Biobank) was 22.3%. Genetic correlation with PR, QRS,JT and QT was low (r
g=-0.06, 0.12). Top gene-ontology terms
included cardiac/muscle cell diffe rentiation and chamber morpho-
genesis. At 11 loci, candidate genes had established relationshipswith cardiomyopathies in humans, including MYH7 and TNNT2 .A t
other loci, genes have roles in cardiac cell proliferation ( CENPA,
ERBB4 ), embryonic development ( PITX2, WNT2 ), arterial development
(ALDH1A2 ) and angiogenesis ( ANGPT1 ).
Conclusions: These analyses highlight the sarcomeric assembly,
cardiac development and vasculogenesis as key contributors to
the spQRSTa. The ﬁndings provide insight into possible mechan-
isms underlying the association with risk of arrhythmogenesis andSCD. W.J.Young is funded by the Medical Research Council (Grant
code MR/R017468/1)
W.J. Young: None. P.B. Munroe: None. L. Tereshchenko:
None.
P24.053.D A Genome-Wide Association Study of Copy Number
Variants of sepsis susceptibility
Itahisa Marcelino-Rodriguez
1,2, Tamara Hernandez-Beeftink1,3,Luis
A. Rubio-Rodríguez4, Eva Suarez-Pajes1, Beatriz Guillen-Guio1, Jose
M. Lorenzo-Salazar4, Rafaela González-Montelongo4, Almudena
Corrales1,5, M Isabel García-Laorden3,5, Miryam Prieto-González6,
Aurelio Rodríguez-Pérez7,8, Demetrio Carriedo9, Jesús Blanco5,10,
Alfonso Ambrós11, Elena González-Higueras12, Elena Espinosa13,
Arturo Muriel10, David Domínguez13, Abelardo García-de-Lorenzo14,
José M. Añón14, Javier Belda15, Jesús Villar3,5, Carlos Flores1,4,5Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
599
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 6081Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Universidad
de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,2Instituto de
Tecnologías Biomédicas (ITB), Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz
de Tenerife, Spain,3Research Unit, Hospital Universitario de Gran
Canaria Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,4Genomics
Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa
Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,5CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,6Servicio de Medicina
Intensiva, Complejo Asistencial Universitario de Palencia, Palencia,Spain,7Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital Universitario de Gran
Canaria Dr. Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,8Department
of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Universidad de Las Palmas de GranCanaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,9Intensive Care Unit,
Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de León, León, Spain,10Intensive
Care Unit, Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain,
11Intensive Care Unit, Hospital General de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real,
Spain,12Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Luz, Cuenca, Spain,
13Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital Universitario N.S. de
Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain,14Intensive Care Unit,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,15Department of
Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Hospital Clinico Universitario of
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
Introduction : Sepsis is a severe in ﬂammatory response to infections
and a major cause of death and healthcare expenditure worldwide.
To date, no genome-wide association study (GWAS) has been
conducted for sepsis susceptibility. Here, we provide the results oftheﬁrst GWAS of Copy Number Variants (CNVs) in sepsis patients.
Methods : We conducted a one-stage GWAS of CNVs in 839
sepsis cases from the Gen-Sep Network and 1453 controlsgenotyped with the Axiom Genome-Wide CEU 1 Array (ThermoFisher Scienti ﬁc). We used the software PennCNV for variant
calling, and ParseCNV and PLINK v1.9 for association testing of
common CNVs (>1% frequency), adjusting the models for gender,age, and the ﬁrst two principal components of genetic variation. A
Bonferroni adjustment was applied correcting for the number of
tested CNVs to declare signi ﬁcance ( p< 3.6E-5).
Results and conclusions : Four CNVs, including one deletion in
6p22.1 ( p=2.94E-5) and three duplications in 1q21.1 ( p=1.43E-8),
9p11.2-q21.11 ( p=8.31E-8), and 15q11.1-11.2 ( p=1.46E-05)
regions, were signi ﬁcantly associated with sepsis susceptibility. The
deletion is found in the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) region,which plays a central role in many in ﬂammatory and immunological
diseases. Our ﬁndings revealed structural variants associated with
sepsis susceptibility and provided the basis for further ﬁne-mapping
studies at these loci.
Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (CD19/00231, FI17/00177,
PI17/00610, PI20/00876), Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (RTC-
2017-6471-1; AEI/FEDER, UE), and agreement OA17/008 with ITER;ECIT CGIEU0000219140. The genotyping service was performed atCEGEN-PRB3-ISCIII, supported by grant PT17/0019, of the PE I +D+i
2013-2016, funded by ISCIII and FEDER .
I. Marcelino-Rodriguez: None. T. Hernandez-Beeftink: None.
L.A. Rubio-Rodríguez: None. E. Suarez-Pajes: None. B. Guillen-
Guio: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. R. González-Monte-
longo: None. A. Corrales: None. M.I. García-Laorden: None. M.
Prieto-González: None. A. Rodríguez-Pérez: None. D. Carriedo:
None. J. Blanco: None. A. Ambrós: None. E. González-Higueras:
None. E. Espinosa: None.
A. Muriel: None. D. Domínguez: None.
A. García-de-Lorenzo: None. J.M. Añón: None. J. Belda: None. J.
Villar: None. C. Flores: None.
P24.054.A Genetic dissection of Cloninger ’s Temperament and
Character Inventory, TCI, in an Italian isolate
Maria Pina Concas1, Alessandra Minelli2,3, Susanna Aere4, Fabrizio
Serra1, Anna Morgan1, Beatrice Spedicati4, Ginevra Morgante4,Massimiliano Cocca1, Massimo Gennarelli2,3, Paolo Gasparini1,4,
Giorgia Girotto1,4
1Institute for Maternal and Child Health –IRCCS Burlo Garofolo,
Trieste, Italy,2Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy,3Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto
Centro S. Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy,4Department
of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.
Personality has a fundamental role in underlying a series of
psychiatric symptoms. Thus, an accurate assessment of personalityand temperament is essential to search for possible correlations ofhigher-order behaviours with the underlying biology (genes).
Five hundred eighty-seven adult individuals (331 females-256
males) from Friuli Venezia Giulia Genetic Park were included in thestudy. All subjects completed the TCI scales to assess the fourtemperament dimensions (harm avoidance (HA), novelty seeking
(NS), reward dependence (RD) and persistence (P)), and the three
character dimensions (self-directedness (SD), cooperativeness (C)and self-transcendence (ST)). GWAS was performed for each scaleusing an additive model. Age, sex, education level (for NS, SD and
C) and anxiety and depression status (for HA) were added as
covariates.GWAS on TCI scales led to the identi ﬁcation of several
genes with a signi ﬁcant or suggestive p-value, expressed in the
brain and/or already associated with psychiatric disorders. In
particular, for NS scales, MAGI2 (p-value =9.14x10
-8), broadly
expressed in the brain and already associated with schizophreniaand major depressive disorder, and CNTN4 (p-value =3.39x10-7),
previously associated with neurobehavioral phenotypes. As
regards to HA scales, BTBD3 (p=2.152x10-8) already linked to
obsessive-compulsive disorder and SIAH1 implicated in Parkin-
son’s disease (p-value =8.52x10-6). Concerning RD scales, PARK2 ,
associated with young-adult onset Parkinson (p-value =
8.27x10−9).
Results : demonstrated a series of GWAS signi ﬁcant/suggestive
associations between TCI scales and genetic background. Addi-
tional studies are needed to further con ﬁrm present results and
better elucidate the role of the genes here identi ﬁed.
M. Concas: None. A. Minelli: None. S. Aere: None. F. Serra:
None. A. Morgan: None. B. Spedicati: None. G. Morgante: None.
M. Cocca: None. M. Gennarelli: None. P. Gasparini: None. G.
Girotto: None.
P24.055.B High-resolution genetic maps provide new insights
into mitochondrial dysfunction in Type 2 diabetes
Hannah Maude1, Winston Lau2, Nikolas Maniatis2, Toby Andrew1
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,2University
College London, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction is well-known to co-
occur with Type 2 diabetes (T2D); a re ﬂection of this is the fact that
multiple T2D drugs and treatments target the mitochondria.
However, there is an ongoing question as to what extent geneticmechanisms contribute to this process, particularly since T2Donset can itself impact mitochondrial function. Characterising
these mechanisms is complicated by risk variants occurring in (1)
large blocks of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and (2) non-codingregulatory elements.
Materials and Methods: Here, we use expression quantitative
trait loci (eQTL) to investigate >260 genetic risk loci signi ﬁcantly
associated with T2D risk in 5,800 T2D cases, for evidence ofregulating the expression levels of nuclear-encoded mitochondrialgenes (NEMGs) in adipose tissue. T2D loci and eQTL were mappedAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
600
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608using positional cloning by LD; an association mapping method
which utilises high-resolution genetic maps and multiple genetic
variants to offer increased power over conventional single-SNP
tests of association.
Results: The expression of 50 NEMGs were associated with T2D
risk loci. Independent cohorts validated these 50 NEMGs as being
differentially expressed in individuals with T2D or insulin
resistance, and in normoglycemic offspring with affected T2Dparents, compared to unaffected controls. These 50 NEMGsshowed more extreme differences in expression compared to all
other NEMGs, validating them as a key subset of NEMGs
associated with T2D.
Conclusions: Mitochondrial dysfunction in T2D may be driven
by the altered expression of NEMGs. Furthermore, positional
cloning by LD can be used to identify disease-associated loci,
signi ﬁcant target genes and important biological insights.
H. Maude: None. W. Lau: None. N. Maniatis: None. T. Andrew:
None.
P24.056.C Evaluation of causal relationships between varicose
veins of lower extremities and knee osteoarthritis using large-
scale genetic data
Alexandra S. Shadrina
1,Elizaveta E. Elgaeva1, Maxim B. Freidin2,
Yakov A. Tsepilov1,3
1Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation,2Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiol-
ogy, School of Life Course Sciences, King ’s College London, London,
United Kingdom,3Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian
Federation.
Introduction: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a high ly prevalent musculoske-
letal disorder and a leading caus e of disability among older adults.
Varicose veins (VVs) are a common venous pathology affecting over
one third of adults worldwide. There is increasing evidence of the link
between VVs of lower extremities and knee OA, but it is unclear ifthere are causal relationships between the disorders.
Materials and Methods: We performed a two-sample Mendelian
randomization (MR) analysis using two pairs of publicly available
genome-wide association study ( GWAS) summary statistics for
Europeans from UK Biobank (Gene ATLAS, N =452,264) and FinnGen
(N=176,899). Each trait pair in cluded non-overlapping GWAS
datasets on “VVs of lower extremities ”(I83 ICD-10 code) and
“Gonarthrosis ”(M17 ICD-10 code) gained from different biobanks.
The MR was conducted using inverse variance weighted meta-
analysis and Causal Analysis Using Summary Effect estimates (CAUSE)
approach. All the tests were run in two directions.
Results: No statistically signi ﬁcant results were obtained and no
concordance between the MR effect estimates (magnitude and
direction) was observed.
Conclusions: We provided no support for causal relationships
between VVs of lower extremities and knee OA. Conversely, evenif the causality exists, its magnitude is not clinically signi ﬁcant
since it has not been detected using such large datasets.
A.S. Shadrina: None. E.E. Elgaeva: None. M.B. Freidin: None.
Y.A. Tsepilov: None.
P25 COVID-19
P25.001.D Renin-angiotensin system polymorphisms as
potential modi ﬁer in COVID-19 outcome
Maria Sabater Molina
1,2, Elisa Nicolas Rocamora1, Asunción Iborra
Bendicho3, Elisa García Vázquez4, Fernando Dominguez Rodriguez5,
Roberto Barriales Villa6, Esther Zorio7,Cristina Gil Ortuño1, CarmenMuñoz Esparza1, Ana Isabel Rodríguez1, Ruben Jara Rubio8,A n t o n i o
Moreno3, Pedro Jorge Marcos Rodriguez9, Pablo García Pavía10, Juan
Ramon Gimeno Blanes1,2
1Inherited Cardiac Dise ase Unit. Universitary Hospital Virgen de la
Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain,2Instituto Murciano de I nvestigación Biosani-
taria, Murcia, Spain,3Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca. Service
of Microbiology, Murcia, Spain,4Hospital Universitario Virgen Arrixaca,
Department of Infectious Disease, Murcia, Spain,5Department of
Cardiology, Hospital Universita rio Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain,
6Cardiology Department, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña,
A Coruña, Spain,7Unidad de Cardiopatías Familiares y Muerte Súbita,
Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe,Valencia, Spain,8Universitary Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca. Depart-
ment of Intensive Care, Murcia, Spain,9Complejo Hospitalario
Universitario de a Coruña, A Coruña, Spain,10Cardiac Surgery
Department, Hospital Universitari o Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: Infection by the SARS-Cov-2 v i r u sp r o d u c e si nh u m a n s
a disease of highly variable and unpr edictable severity. SARS-CoV-2
requires the presence of the ACE2 protein to enter in the cell andACE2 is a regulator of the renin-ang iotensin system. Accordingly, we
studied the associations between 8 polymorphisms from AGTR1,
ACE2 and ACE genes and the severity of the disease produced by theSARS-Cov-2 virus.
Materials and methods : 316 Covid-19 patients with positive
PCR were classi ﬁed based on the severity of symptoms and group
in two: outpatients (n =103) and hospitalized patients (n =213,
which included hospitalized in plant, ICU and exitus patients). The
sex, age and comorbidities data were collected and the genotype
distributions of 8 different SNPs in all patients were analyzed.
Results: Three SNPs were associated with the hospitalization
risk. While rs2106809 was associated with an increased risk of
being hospitalized (T/T vs. T/C-C/C, OR =1.91; p =0.031), it was
found that rs2074192 and rs5186 showed a protector effect (G/Cvs. GG-AA, OR =0.41; p =0.032 and C vs. A, OR =0.66; p =0.037,
respectively).As expected, the comorbidities increased the hospi-
talization risk, nevertheless the interaction analysis showed thatdeterminate genotypes has more susceptibility than others andeven some of them had a protective effect.
Conclusion : There are ACE2 and AGTR1 polymorphisms that
could in ﬂuence severity of phenotype Covid-19 and, moreover, it
depends on gender and the presence of comorbidities.
Table 1. Baseline characteristics of patients.
Total Outpatients Hospitalized P-value
Age (mean ± SD) 59.96 52.69 ± 17.25 63.32 ± 15.92 0.000
Gender
Male 198 (62.9%) 59 (57.3%) 139 (65.6%) 0.153
Female 117 (37.1%) 44 (42.7%) 73 (34.4%)
No comorbidities 110 (35.9) 46 (48.9%) 64 (30.2%) 0.002
Comorbidities 196 (64.1%) 48 (51.1%) 148 (69.8%)
HBP 105 (34.3%) 19 (20.2%) 86 (40.6%) 0.006
Cancer 29 (9.5%) 7 (7.4%) 22 (10.4%) 0.528
Chronic lung disease 27 (8.8%) 5 (5.3%) 22 (10.4%) 0.150
Diabetes 44 (14.4%) 4 (4.3%) 40 (18.9%) 0.001
Obesity 40 (13.1%) 5 (5.3%) 35 (16.5%) 0.006
M. Sabater Molina: None. E. Nicolas Rocamora: None. A.
Iborra Bendicho: None. E. García Vázquez: None. F. Dominguez
Rodriguez: None. R. Barriales Villa: None. E. Zorio: None. C. Gil
Ortuño: None. C. Muñoz Esparza: None. A. Rodríguez: None. R.
Jara Rubio: None. A. Moreno: None. P. Marcos Rodriguez: None.
P. García Pavía: None. J. Gimeno Blanes: None.
P25.002.A Correlation testing of severe Covid-19 with genetic
risk for male androgenetic alopeciaAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
601
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Sabrina K. Henne1, Lara M. Hochfeld1, Carlo Maj2, Markus M.
Nöthen1, Stefanie Heilmann-Heimbach1
11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,2Institute for Genomic
Statistics and Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Male androgenetic alopecia (AGA) has been implicated as a
putative risk factor in severe Covid-19 based on high incidences ofAGA in male hospitalized Covid-19 patients. Androgen signaling,
which plays a central role in AGA etiology, has been associated
with severe Covid-19 symptoms in men. Given the epidemiolo-gical association and androgen-dependency of both traits, wehypothesized that a link between AGA and severe Covid-19
susceptibility may exist at the genetic level. To test this hypothesis,
we performed polygenic risk score (PRS) analyses using data fromthe UK Biobank. In a ﬁrst step, we established PRS based on SNPs
associated with AGA (p < 5 × 10
-8and p < 5 × 10-5) in a large UK
Biobank-based GWAS. No correlation was observed in sex-
separated and age-corrected logistic regression of hospitalizedvs non-hospitalized Covid-19 on these scores (p>0.05). A limitationof genome-wide PRS is the condensation of biologically distinct
mechanisms and differing effect directions. Thus, we aimed at
further dissecting a potential AGA/Covid-19 genetic association bygenerating pathway-based PRS (pPRS). SNPs were assigned to
genes via positional mapping (distance < 10kb) and genes were
mapped to pathways using KEGG, WikiPathways and Pantherlibraries. Logistic regressions were performed on pPRS per p-value-cutoff and library. Signi ﬁcant correlation of AGA-pPRS with
Covid-19-severity was found for four pathways: Vitamin metabo-
lism (p
FDR=0.02), natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity (p FDR=
0.02) and WNT-signaling (p FDR=0.02) in men as well as aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-signaling (p FDR=0.02) in women. These
data suggest that a shared genetic basis for Covid-19 and AGA
exists in speci ﬁc pathways, posing interesting links between the
pathophysiologies of both traits.
S.K. Henne: None. L.M. Hochfeld: None. C. Maj: None. M.M.
Nöthen: None. S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None.
P25.003.B Emergency ethical and legal framework for geno-
mic research during COVID-19 outbreak. Experience of threeinstitutions from the Spanish National Health Service
Carmen Ayuso1,2, Javier Ruiz Hornillos3, Lucia Llanos4, Sandra
Zazo5, Lidia Fernández-Caballero1,2, Federico Rojo5, Esperanza
García-Molina6, Teresa Escámez6, Encarna Guillen-Navarro7,8
1Department of Genetics and Genomics, IIS - University Hospital
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain,2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on
Rare Diseases, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,3Depart-
ment of Clinical Bioethics, University Hospital Infanta Elena, (IIS-FJD),
Madrid, Spain,4Clinical Research Unit. Research Ethics Committee. IIS
- University Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Universidad Autónoma
de Madrid (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain,5Department of Pathology.
FJD Biobank, IIS - University Hospital Fundación Jiménez Díaz,Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain,
6Biobank Platform IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain,7Medical Genetics
Department. University Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca,
Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,8Spanish Bioethics Committee,
Spanish Ministry of Health, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
Introduction: In March 2020, COVID-19 pandemic (WHO) and
state of alarm in Spain (Spanish government) were declared. Theemergency aroused an enormous research effort searching fordiagnostic biomarkers, therapeutics and preventive strategiestrying to solve this serious public health situation. However, the
application of ethical principles and the request of the Informed
Consent was not possible in the way in which it is regularly carried
out.
Materials and Methods: We participated in a genomic
association study aimed to stablish genetic host markers linked
to COVID-19 prognosis. According to the project design, DNA and
clinical data form 3,270 participants were collected. The protocoland the request for waiver of written informed consent, or waiverof IC at all, when not possible, were submitted to the local
research ethic committees and informed to the institutional
biobanks.
Results: In April 2020, the Spanish Bioethics Committee and
Spanish Biobank Network released the recommendations on the
ethical framework for research during and on COVID-19. Accord-
ingly, the institutional committees approved the procedure, aswell as, the waiver for written IC, in those cases where the
infectious scenario made it not possible. Therefore, digital
signature and a system to annotate the verbal consent wereestablished in electronic clinical records.
Conclusions : COVID-19 pandemic fosters a necessary discus-
sion to found out how to preserve the different ethical values
-public health and individual rights- in a dif ﬁcult scenario.
Funding: ISCIII, Ministry of Science, Spain: COVID-19 Research
Call COV20/00181; PT20/00141 FJD-Biobank and PT20/00109 IMIB-
Biobank, co- ﬁnanced by European Development Regional Fund.
C. Ayuso: None. J. Ruiz Hornillos: None. L. Llanos: None. S.
Zazo: None. L. Fernández-Caballero: None. F. Rojo: None. E.
García-Molina: None. T. Escámez: None. E. Guillen-Navarro:
None.
P25.004.C Role of the FYVE and Coiled Coil Domain
Autophagy Adaptor 1 in severity of COVID19 infection
Sandra P. Smieszek
Vanda Pharmaceuticals, Washington, DC, USA.
Coronaviruses remodel intracellular membranes to form specia-
lized viral replication compartments, such as double-membrane
vesicles where viral RNA genome replication takes place. Under-standing the factors affecting host response is instrumental todesign of therapeutics to prevent or ameliorate the course of
infection. As part of explorative tests in hospitalized patients with
conﬁrmed COVID-19 infection participating in ODYSSEY trial, we
obtained samples for WGS analysis as well as for viral genome
sequencing. Based on our data, we con ﬁrm one of the strongest
severity susceptibility locus thus far reported in association withsevere COVID-19: 3p21.31 locus with lead variant rs73064425. Wefurther examine the associated region. Interestingly based on LD
analysis we report 3 coding mutations within one gene in the
region of FYVE and Coiled-Coil Domain Autophagy Adaptor 1(FYCO1 ). We speci ﬁcally focus on the role of FYCO1 modi ﬁers and
gain-of-function variants. We report the associations between the
region and clinical characteristics in this severe set of COVID-19
patients. We next analyzed expression pro ﬁles of FYCO1 across all
466 compounds tested. We selected only those results thatshowed a signi ﬁcant reduction of expression of FYCO1 . The most
signi ﬁcant candidate was indomethacin - an anti-in ﬂammatory
that could potentially downregulate FYCO1 . We hypothesize that
via its direct effects on the ef ﬁciency of viral egress, it may serve as
a potent therapeutic decreasing the replication and infectivity of
the virus. Clinical studies will be needed to examine thetherapeutic utility of indomethacin and other compounds down-regulating FYCO1 in COVID-19 infection and other strains of
betacoronaviruses.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
602
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608S.P. Smieszek: None.
P25.005.D Post-Mendelian genetic model in COVID-19
Alessandra Renieri1,2,3, Nicola Picchiotti4,5, Elisa Benetti2, Chiara
Fallerini1,2, Sergio Daga1,2, Margherita Baldassarri1,2, Francesca
Fava1,2,3, Kristina Zguro2, Floriana Valentino1,2, Gabriella Doddato1,2,
Annarita Giliberti1,2, Rossella Tita3, Sara Amitrano3, Mirella Brut-
tini1,2,3, Laura Di Sarno1,2, Nicola Iuso1,2, Diana Alaverdian1,2, Giada
Beligni1,2, Susanna Croci1,2, Maria Palmieri1,2, Ilaria Meloni1,2, Anna
Maria Pinto3, Chiara Gabbi6, Stefano Ceri7, Antonio Esposito7, Pietro
Pinoli7, Francis P. Crawley8, Elisa Frullanti1,2, Francesca Mari1,2,3, GEN-
COVID Multicenter Study, Marco Gori4,9, Simone Furini2
1Medical genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,2Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies,University of Siena, Siena, Italy,3Genetica Medica, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,4University of Siena,
DIISM-SAILAB, Siena, Italy,5Department of Mathematics, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,6Independent Medical Scientist, Milan, Italy,
7Politecnico di Milano, DEIB, Milano, Italy,8Good Clinical Practice
Alliance-Europe (GCPA) and Strategic Initiative for Developing
Capacity in Ethical Review-Europe (SIDCER), Leuven, Belgium,
9Université Côte d ’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, Maasai, France.
Host genetics is an emerging theme in COVID-19 and few
common polymorphisms and some rare variants have beenidenti ﬁed, either by GWAS or candidate gene approach, although
an organic model is still missing. Here, we propose a new model,
called “Post-Mendelian ”, that takes into account both common
and rare germline variants applied in a cohort of 1,768 ItalianSARS-CoV-2 positive individuals. Ordered logistic regression of
clinical WHO grading on age, strati ﬁed by gender, was used to
obtain a binary phenotypic classi ﬁcation. Genetic variability from
WES was synthesized in several boolean representations differ-
entiated according to allele frequencies and genotype effect.
LASSO logistic regression was used for extracting relevant genes.We de ﬁned a group of common polymorphisms and a group of
rare variants, corresponding to classical “threshold model ”.
Extracted genes were gender speci ﬁc. The combined results can
be described as an integrative polygenic score (IPGS) computedas: (nmildness-nseverity) +F (mmildness-mseverity) where n is the
number of common driver polymorphisms, m is the number of
rare driver variants and F is a factor for appropriately weighing the
more powerful rare variants. Low IPGS is indicative of severity (thesmaller the number, the greater the severity). Further validations
are needed in order to consolidate and re ﬁne the model which
now has a prediction capacity of about 65%-70% and could beuseful for personalised adjuvant therapy. MIUR “Dipartimenti di
Eccellenza 2018-2020 ”. Intesa San Paolo 2020 charity fund N. B/
2020/0119. Tuscany Region “Bando Ricerca COVID-19 Toscana ”
2020.
A. Renieri: None. N. Picchiotti: None. E. Benetti: None. C.
Fallerini: None. S. Daga: None. M. Baldassarri: None. F. Fava:
None. K. Zguro: None. F. Valentino: None. G. Doddato: None. A.
Giliberti: None. R. Tita: None. S. Amitrano: None. M. Bruttini:
None. L. Di Sarno: None. N. Iuso: None. D. Alaverdian: None. G.
Beligni: None. S. Croci: None. M. Palmieri: None. I. Meloni: None.
A. Pinto: None. C. Gabbi:
None. S. Ceri: None. A. Esposito: None.
P. Pinoli: None. F.P. Crawley: None. E. Frullanti: None. F. Mari:
None. M. Gori: None. S. Furini: None.
P25.006.A Functional prediction and comparative population
analysis of variants in genes for proteases and innate
immunity related to SARS-CoV-2 infectionKristel Klaassen, Biljana Stankovic, Branka Zukic, Nikola Kotur,
Vladimir Gasic, Sonja Pavlovic, Maja Stojiljkovic
IMGGE, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Aiming to understand a host genetic component of COVID-19,
susceptibility and resistance to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we focused
on variants in genes encoding proteases and genes involved in
innate immunity. Analysis of sequence data of coding regions ofFURIN, PLG, PRSS1, TMPRSS11a, MBL2 and OAS1 genes in 143
unrelated individuals from Serbian population identi ﬁed 22
variants with potential functional effect. In silico analyses
(PolyPhen-2, SIFT, MutPred2 and Swiss-Pdb Viewer) predictedthat 10 variants could impact the structure and/or function of
proteins. These protein-altering variants (p.Gly146Ser in FURIN ;p .
Arg261His and p.Ala494Val in PLG; p.Asn54Lys in PRSS1 ;p .
Arg52Cys, p.Gly54Asp and p.Gly57Glu in MBL2 ; p.Arg47Gln, p.
Ile99Val and p.Arg130His in OAS1 ) may have predictive value for
inter-individual differences in the response to the SARS-CoV-2
infection. Next, we performed comparative population analysis forthe same variants using extracted data from the 1000 genomesproject. Population genetic variability was assessed using delta
MAF and Fst statistics. Our study pointed to 7 variants in PLG,
TMPRSS11a, MBL2 and OAS1 genes with noticeable divergence in
allelic frequencies between populations worldwide. Three of them,
all in MBL2 gene, were predicted to be damaging, making them
the most promising population-speci ﬁc markers related to SARS-
CoV-2 infection. In conclusion, we identi ﬁed 4 variants in genes
encoding proteases ( FURIN, PLG and PRSS1 ) and 6 in genes
involved in the innate immunity ( MBL2 and OAS1 ) that might be
relevant for the host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Acknowl-edgment: This work was supported by Ministry of Education,Science and Technological Development Republic of Serbia, EB:
451-03-68/2020-14/ 200042.
K. Klaassen: None. B. Stankovic: None. B. Zukic: None. N.
Kotur: None. V. Gasic: None. S. Pavlovic: None. M. Stojiljkovic:
None.
P25.007.B Genetic prediction of morbidity and letal outcome
for patients with severe COVID-19 pneumonia
Liliya Fishchuk
1, Zoia Rossokha1, Valeriy Pokhylko2, Yuliia Cher-
niavska2, Svitlana Tsvirenko2, Serhii Kovtun3, Natalia Medvedieva1,
Victoriia Vershyhora1, Halyna Soloviova2, Natalia Gorovenko4
1State Institution Reference-centre for Molecular Diagnostic of Public
Health Ministry of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine,2Ukrainian Medical
Stomatological Academy, Poltava, Ukraine,3Poltava Regional
Clinical Infectious Diseases Hospital of Poltava Regional Council,Poltava, Ukraine,4Shupyk National Medical Academy of Postgrad-
uate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Introduction: It is well known that the main cause of critical
complications in COVID-19 is an immune imbalance and systemic
inﬂammatory response. According to the latest data, variants of IL-
6and VDR genes which encode the relevant components of the
immune system can affect on the pathogenesis of this disease.The purpose of our study was to evaluate the impact of IL-6
(G174C, rs1800795) and VDR (TaqI or T1056C, rs731236; BsmI or
G283A, rs1544410) genes variants on the course of severe COVID-19 pneumonia.
Materials and Methods: The study group included 31 patients
(15 women and 16 men) with diagnosis "viral COVID-19
pneumonia" treated at the intensive care unit. Out of 31hospitalized patients, 6 patients died of complications caused byAbstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
603
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608COVID-19. Determination of the IL-6 and VDR genes variants was
used PCR-RFLP.
Results: It was identi ﬁed following frequency of genotypes for
G174C variant of IL-6 gene: GG - 19.4%, GC - 41.9%, CC - 38.7%.
Comparing the obtained frequenc ies with the population ones, it
was found a signi ﬁcant increase in the frequency of CC genotype and
C allele in study group (38.7%. vs 12.0% and 0.6 vs 0.4, respectively). It
was found that in the deceased compared to the non-deceasedpatients was signi ﬁcantly increased the freq uency of heterozygous
g e n o t y p e sT Ca n dG A( 1 0 0 %v s4 4 % ;1 0 0 %v s2 8 % , p < 0 . 0 5 ,
respectively) for TaqI and BsmI variants of the VDR gene.
Conclusions: The investigated variants of the IL-6 and VDR
genes may be the genetic predictor of morbidity and lethaloutcomes in patients with COVID-19.
L. Fishchuk: None. Z. Rossokha: None. V. Pokhylko: None. Y.
Cherniavska: None. S. Tsvirenko: None. S. Kovtun: None. N.
Medvedieva: None. V. Vershyhora: None. H. Soloviova: None. N.
Gorovenko: None.
P25.008.C HLA-A*11:01:01:01, HLA*C*12:02:02:01-HLA-B*52:01:
02:02, age and sex are associated with severity of Japanese
COVID-19 with respiratory failure
Seik-Soon Khor
1, Yosuke Omae1, Nao Nishida2, Masaya Sugiyama2,
Noriko Kinoshita3, Tetsuya Suzuki3, Michiyo Suzuki3, Satoshi Suzuki4,
Shinyu Izumi5, Masayuki Hojo5, Norio Ohmagari3, Masashi Mizo-
kami2, Katsushi Tokunaga1
1Genome Medical Science Project, National Center for Global Health
and Medicine Hospital, Tokyo, Japan,2Genome Medical Science
Project, National Center for Global Health and Medicine Hospital,Chiba, Japan,3Disease Control and Prevention Center, National
Center for Global Health and Medicine Hospital, Tokyo, Japan,
4Biobank, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan,5Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
the virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was
announced as an outbreak by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in January 2020 and as a pandemic in March 2020. Themajority of infected individuals have experienced no or only mildsymptoms, ranging from fully asymptomatic cases to mild
pneumonic disease. However, a minority of infected individuals
develop severe respiratory symptoms. The objective of this studywas to identify susceptible HLA alleles and clinical markers for the
early identi ﬁcation of severe COVID-19 among hospitalized COVID-
19 patients. A total of 137 patients with mild COVID-19 (mCOVID-19) and 53 patients with severe COVID-19 (sCOVID-19) wererecruited from the Center Hospital of the National Center for
Global Health and Medicine (NCGM), Tokyo, Japan for the period
of February-August 2020. High-resolution sequencing-based typ-ing for eight HLA genes was performed using next-generationsequencing. In the HLA association studies, HLA-A*11:01:01:01 [P
c
=0.013, OR =2.26 (1.27-3.91)] and HLA-C*12:02:02:01-HLA-
B*52:01:01:02 [P c=0.020, OR =2.25 (1.24-3.92)] were found to
be signi ﬁcantly associated with the severity of COVID-19. After
multivariate analysis controlling for other confounding factors and
comorbidities, HLA-A*11:01:01:01 [P =3.34E-03, OR =3.41 (1.50-
7.73)], age at diagnosis [P =1.29E-02, OR =1.04 (1.01-1.07)] and
sex at birth [P =8.88E-03, OR =2.92 (1.31-6.54)] remained
signi ﬁcant. Early identi ﬁcation of potential sCOVID-19 could help
clinicians prioritize medical utility and signi ﬁcantly decrease
mortality from COVID-19.
S. Khor: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyreceived); Signi ﬁcant; Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development. Y. Omae: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; Japan Agency for Medical Research
and Development. N. Nishida: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as
well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Japan Agency for
Medical Research and Development. M. Sugiyama: B. Research
Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant;
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development. N.
Kinoshita: None. T. Suzuki: None. M. Suzuki: None. S. Suzuki:
None. S. Izumi: None. M. Hojo: None. N. Ohmagari: None. M.
Mizokami: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development. K. Tokunaga: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Japan Agency for Medical
Research and Development.
P25.009.D Analysis of the distribution of the rs657152 and
rs11385942 associated with the severe course of COVID-19 inthe populations of Northern Eurasia
Natalia V. Ekomasova
1,2, Murat Dzhaubarmezov1,2, Anastasia
Kazantseva1, Liliya Gabidullina3, Denis Antonov3, Ekaterina Tokar-
eva3, Elza Khusnutdinova1,2
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics - Subdivision of the Ufa
Federal Research Centre of Russian Academy of Sciences (IBG UFRCRAS), UFA, Russian Federation,2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian
Federation,3Bashkir State University, UFA, Russian Federation.
According to previous GWAS involving 1980 samples from the
Western European populations of Spaniards and Italians, a severe
course of COVID-19 (respiratory failure) was associated withrs11385942 and rs657152 (Ellinghaus et al., 2020). We analyzed517 individuals from 10 populations of Northern Eurasia (Bashkirs
from the Arkhangelsk region of the Republic of Bashkortostan,
Bashkirs from the Burzyansky region of the Republic ofBashkortostan, Tatars, Chuvash, Balkars, Karachays, Kalmyks,Mordvins, Evens and Kazakhs). We found that the highest
frequency of the GA-insert rs11385942 was characteristic for the
populations of the Arkhangelsk Bashkirs and Karachays withfrequencies of 11.7% and 11.2%, respectively. In the Even
population this insert was absent. The rs657152 A-allele was
observed with the highest frequency in the populations ofBurzyan Bashkirs (53.12%) and Kazakhs (47.5%), while the lowestfrequency was shown in Evens (33.3%). Ministry of Science and
Higher Education of the Russian Federation (FZWU-2020-0027).
N.V. Ekomasova: None. M. Dzhaubarmezov: None. A.
Kazantseva: None. L. Gabidullina: None. D. Antonov: None. E.
Tokareva: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None.
P25.010.A Pharmacogenomics landscape of COVID-19 therapy
response in Serbian population and comparison with world-
wide populations
Branka Zukic , Biljana Stankovic, Nikola Kotur, Vladimir Gasic, Kristel
Klaassen, Bojan Ristivojevic, Maja Stojiljkovic, Sonja Pavlovic
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
604
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608Drug repurposing became important when treating COVID-19
patients. With limited time to test individual pharmacogenomics
markers, population pharmacogenomics could help in predicting
a higher risk of developing adverse reactions and treatmentfailure in COVID-19 patients. Aim of our study was to identifypharmacogenomics markers associated with drugs recom-
mended for COVID-19 treatment, chloroquine/hydroxychloro-
quine, azithromycin, lopinavir and ritonavir, in Serbianpopulation and other world populations. Genotype informationof 143 individuals of Serbian origin was extracted from database
previously obtained using TruSight One Gene Panel (Illumina).
Genotype data of individuals from different world populationswere extracted from the 1000 Genome Project. Fisher ’se x a c tt e s t
was used for comparison of allele frequencies. We have
identi ﬁed 11 potential pharmacogenomics markers in 7 pharma-
cogenes relevant for COVID-19 treatment. Based on highalterative allele frequencies in population and the functional
effect of the variants, ABCB1 rs1045642 and rs2032582 could be
relevant for reduced clearance of azithromycin, lopinavir andritonavir drugs and UGT1A7 rs17868323 for hyperbilirubinemia in
ritonavir treated COVID-19 patients in Serbian population.
SLCO1B1 rs4149056 is a potential marker of lopinavir response,
especially in Italian population. Our results con ﬁrmed that
pharmacogenomics pro ﬁle of African population is different
from the rest of the world. Considering population speci ﬁc
pharmacogenomics landscape, preemptive testing for pharma-
cogenes relevant for drugs used in COVID-19 treatment couldcontribute to better understanding of the inconsistency in
t h e r a p yr e s p o n s ea n dc o u l db ea p p l i e dt oi m p r o v et h eo u t c o m e
of the COVID-19 patients. Ministry of Education, Science andTechnological Development Republic of Serbia, (EB: 451-03-68/2020-14/200042) supported this work.
B. Zukic: None. B. Stankovic: None. N. Kotur: None. V. Gasic:
None. K. Klaassen: None. B. Ristivojevic: None. M. Stojiljkovic:
None. S. Pavlovic: None.
P25.011.B EMCOVID19-ReCovER study: clinical and psychoso-
cial impact of COVID-19 on the pediatric population diag-nosed with rare diseases
Lourdes Vega Hanna , Dídac Casas Alba, Leticia Pías, Mercè Bolasell,
Francesc Palau, Antonio Federico Martínez Monseny
Hospital Sant Joan de Déu d ’Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has favored the conver-
gence of several stressors, including those associated with stay-at-
home lockdowns. These stressors could aggravate the somatic,emotional and behavioral problems present in pediatric popula-tion with rare diseases (RD). We have developed a strategy to
detect and prevent the issues derived from such stressors.
Methods: Pediatric patients diagnosed with RD associated with
high physical and psychological comorbidities attended at atertiary hospital were recruited (August to October 2020). Relatives
of the participants were asked to complete a structured online
questionnaire, including socio-demographic and clinical data.Emotional and behavioral outcomes have been assessed usingPSC and ABC-C scores.
Results: Seventy-three patients with syndromic RD were
included, being 22q11 deletion, Noonan and Prader-Willi syn-dromes the most frequent. During the widespread lockdowns, we
did not observe a higher rate of emotional or behavioral problems
compared to baseline. A modest improvement was observedwhen using the ABC-C score (p =0.00). An increased risk of
COVID-19 infections was not observed. An interruption of the
multidisciplinary care for these patients has been apparent. Theuse of telemedicine to substitute their scheduled visits has been
welcomed and perceived positively. The suspension of physical
and speech therapies has elicited a negative perception on
parents about the evolution of these patients.
Conclusions: Home con ﬁnement does not seem to have had a
negative impact on pediatric population with RD. More studies are
needed to identify the protective factors. Telemedicine has proven
useful and opens up new strategies to multidisciplinary follow-upin RD.
L.V. Hanna: None. D. Casas Alba: None. L. Pías: None. M.
Bolasell: None. F. Palau:
None. A. Martínez Monseny: None.
P25.012.C Incidence and severity of COVID-19 in rare disease
populations
Zoe C. Wong, Yi-Ping Fu, Blanche P. Alter, Lisa J. McReynolds,
Manfred Boehm, Alexandra F. Freeman, Bernadette R. Gochuico,
Alisa M. Goldstein, Mary L. McMaster, Neil E. Caporaso, Nehal N.Mehta, Kenneth Olivier, D. Rebecca Prevots, Armin Raznahan, SharonA. Savage, Payal P. Khincha, Douglas R. Stewart, Swee Lay Thein,
Brigitte C. Widemann, Andrea M. Gross, Neal S. Young, Karen Usdin,
Audrey Thurm, Robert B. Hufnagel, Tiffany Powell-Wiley, Beth A. Kozel
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Introduction: By February 2021, 108 million people had been
infected by SARS-CoV-2, a disease associated with a worldwide2.2% mortality rate. Epidemiological studies show
sociodemographic-mediated differences in outcomes, but less is
known about case incidence and severity in rare diseasepopulations.
Methods: Online survey information was collected from 1,614
individuals with rare, common, or no known health conditions
over two months, ending November 2020. Participants reportedrare diagnosis status in addition to COVID-19 symptoms, test
results, and level of care required following COVID-19 diagnosis.
Results: Participants were female (62.4%) and mostly Caucasian
(86.9%), aged 0.1-90 years (M =37.04 y, SD =22.6). 88% had a rare
condition. Altogether, 51 respondents (3%) tested positive for
COVID-19. Of these, six utilized hospital/emergency room services
and one required intensive care. Rare conditions associated withmore severe outcomes included Marfan syndrome, Fragile X,Dyskeratosis Congenita, Patterned Macular Dystrophy, and Vas-
cular Ehlers Danlos. There were no deaths and no rare diagnosis
reported more than one individual with a more severe outcome.One person with no rare health conditions exhibited a more
severe outcome. When grouped by affected organ system, there
was no signi ﬁcant association between diagnosis group and
COVID-19 positivity rates, nor severe outcomes.
Conclusions: In this preliminary study, individuals in several
rare disease groups experienced more severe outcomes with
COVID-19. However, when divided by organ system, no groupsfaired signi ﬁcantly worse; more data are needed to fully under-
stand the COVID X rare disease effects. Continued investigation of
COVID-19 in rare disease backgrounds will inform diagnosis-
speci ﬁc health guidance.
Z.C. Wong: None. Y. Fu: None. B.P. Alter: None. L.J.
McReynolds: None. M. Boehm: None. A.F. Freeman: None. B.R.
Gochuico: None. A.M. Goldstein: None. M.L. McMaster: None. N.
E. Caporaso: None. N.N. Mehta: None. K. Olivier: None. D.
Prevots: None. A. Raznahan: None. S.A. Savage: None. P.P.
Khincha: None. D.R. Stewart: None. S. Thein: None. B.C.
Widemann: None. A.M. Gross: None. N.S. Young: None. K.
Usdin: None.
A. Thurm: None. R.B. Hufnagel: None. T. Powell-
Wiley: None. B.A. Kozel: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
605
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P25.013.D Effect of TNF- αand CCR5 genetic variants on
respiratory support in patients with COVID-19
Natalia Gorovenko1, Zoia Rossokha2, Liliya Fishchuk2, Valeriy
Pokhylko3, Yuliia Cherniavska3, Svitlana Tsvirenko3, Serhii Kovtun4,
Natalia Medvedieva2, Victoriia Vershyhora2, Ljudmila Brishevac1
1The Shupyk National Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education,
Kyiv, Ukraine,2State Institution Reference-centre for Molecular
Diagnostic of Public Health Ministry of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine,
3Ukrainian Medical Stomatological Academy, Poltava, Ukraine,
4Poltava Regional Clinical Infectious Diseases Hospital of Poltava
Regional Council, Poltava, Ukraine.
Introduction: It is known that tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-
α) and C-C chemokine receptor ty pe 5 (CCR5) are involved in the
various immunogenetic events, in particular, in the course of
various infectious diseases. We assumed that variants of TNF-α
and CCR5 genes may affect on the course of COVID-19
pneumonia. The aim of our study was to analyze the effect ofthe TNF- αgene (G308A, rs1800629) and the CCR5 gene (del32,
rs333) variants on the course of severe COVID-19 pneumonia in
patients.
Materials and Methods: The study group included 31 patients
(16 men and 15 women) aged 58.90 ± 18.98 years with diagnosis
"viral COVID-19 pneumonia" treated at the intensive care unit. 19
(61%) patients on admission to the hospital have already receivedoxygen therapy (using an oxygen mask). 7 (23%) patients werehospitalized for lung mechanical ventilation due to the severity of
the condition and respiratory failure. Genes variants was carried
out by a molecular method using PCR-RFLP and allele-speci ﬁc
PCR, respectively.
Results: There were found a signi ﬁcant correlation of the TNF- α
gene variants (308A-allele) and duration of intubations on lung
mechanical ventilation (r =0.967, p =0.0001). Also a signi ﬁcant
positive correlation was between del32/allele genotypes of CCR5
gene in patients and duration of stay on oxygen therapy using an
oxygen mask (r =0.455, p =0.044), stay on lung mechanical
ventilation (r =0.760, p =0.047) and the total duration of oxygen
therapy (r =0.467, p =0.029).
Conclusions: The variants of the TNF- αand CCR5 genes was the
genetic predictor of increased need for respiratory support inpatients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
N. Gorovenko: None. Z. Rossokha: None. L. Fishchuk: None.
V. Pokhylko: None. Y. Cherniavska: None. S. Tsvirenko: None. S.
Kovtun: None. N. Medvedieva: None. V. Vershyhora: None. L.
Brishevac: None.
P25.014.A Design of a cost-effective diagnosis tool for SARS-
Cov-2 variant detection through a next generation sequen-
cing (NGS) based strategy
Mª Mercedes Montero
1, Pau Rodríguez1, Juan Ramón González2,
Lluís Armengol1, Jairo Rodríguez1
1Quantitative Genomics Medicine Laboratories (qGenomics), Esplu-
gues de Llobregat, Spain,2Barcelona Institute for Global Health
(ISGlobal), Barcelona, Spain.
Current pandemic situation together with the continuous
emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 variants reveal the need ofdeveloping a more speci ﬁc tool than PCR-based methods that
allows both Covid-19 diagnosis and speci ﬁc variant detection at a
reduced cost. Thus, with the aim of providing a strategy with thesecharacteristics arises our NGS-COVID test, a NGS basedmethodology that allows differential variant diagnosis with a
similar cost to PCR assays.
This strategy works with RNA samples obtained from nasophar-
yngeal swabs which are processed with our custom protocol forsequencing with an Illumina platform. Custom pipelines forsample analysis were developed and speci ﬁc viral and control
human regions and variant associated mutations were detected.
Experiment results showed that the strategy provides highcoverage rates and demonstrates the capability to differentiatepositive and negative samples with high accuracy.
Taken together, these results suggest that our test could be in
the market in a very short-term period, providing a cost-effectivestrategy for variant diagnosis at a very reduced cost in comparisonwith the current sequencing methods. Having available a test with
these characteristics is essential for epidemiological surveillance,
providing valuable information for pandemic monitoring or forthe current vaccination strategies. Lastly, the versatility of our test
includes the capability of identifying the presence of other
common respiratory viruses as well as the possibility of addingnew variants as they emerge, making our strategy suitable forfuture pandemic situations.
This project is supported by the Generalitat de Cataluña through
an Industrial PhD grant.
M. Montero: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
qGenomics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator
or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; qGenomics, ISGlobal. E. Ownership Interest(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Modest; qGenomics. P. Rodríguez: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; qGe-nomics. J. González: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
ISGlobal. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);Modest; ISGlobal. L. Armengol: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; qGenomics. E. Ownership Interest(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; qGenomics. J. Rodríguez: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; qGenomics. B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants aswell as grants already received); Modest; qGenomics. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Modest; qGenomics.
P25.016.C Genetic predisposition to severe COVID-19 symp-
toms differs by sex within the ALFA study
Natalia Vilor-Tejedor
1,2,3,Patricia Genius1,4, Blanca Rodríguez-
Fernández1, Carolina Minguillon1,5,6, Karine Fauria1,5, Manuel Castro
de Moura7, David Piñeyro7, Manel Esteller7,8,9, Jose Luis Molinuevo1,
Roderic Guigo2,10, Arcadi Navarro1,9,11, Eider M. Arenaza-Urquijo1,5,6,
Juan Domingo Gispert1,5,10
1Barcelona βeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall
Foundation, Barcelona, Spain,2Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona,
Spain,3Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands,4University of Vic-
Central University of Catalonia, Vic, Spain,5IMIM (Hospital del Mar
Medical Research Institute), Barcelona, Spain,6Centro de Investiga-
ción Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable(CIBERFES), Madrid, Spain,7Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research
Institute (IJC), Barcelona, Spain,8Physiological Sciences Department,Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
606
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona (UB),
Barcelona, Spain,9Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain,10Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona,
Spain,11Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Department of
Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,Barcelona, Spain.
Introduction: Identi ﬁcation of genetic predisposition impacting
on COVID-19 ’s complications may hold the potential to identify
common mechanisms leading to these COVID-19 complications.
Our aim was to estimate whether genetic predisposition to a wide
range of heritable traits was associated with the estimated geneticpredisposition for the COVID-19 outcomes from the January 2021release of the Covid19 Host Genetics Initiative.
Methods: A total of 2,280 cognitively unimpaired participants
(45-74 years) from the ALFA study were included (63.3% women).Genetic predisposition for several traits (N =33), and COVID-19
outcomes (N =2) were calculated through polygenic risk scores.
Association analyses included genetic predisposition to COVID-19outcomes as the variables of interest. Models were adjusted forage, sex, the four principal genetic components and batch effects.
Strati ﬁed models by sex were also assessed. The threshold of
signi ﬁcance was established by approximating the total number
of effective tests (p <0.005).
Results: Results showed signi ﬁcant differences in genetic
predisposition to severe COVID-19 symptoms among sexes.
Higher genetic risk to larger body mass index was associatedwith higher genetic risk of critically ill COVID-19 +status in
women. In addition, we found an association between higher
genetic risk to anxiety and a protective genetic effect to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Conclusions: We provide evidence that genetic susceptibility to
some diseases was related to genetic predisposition to COVID-19
complications speci ﬁcally in women.Acknowledgements: The
research leading to these results has received funding from “la
Caixa ”Foundation (LCF/PR/GN17/10300004).
N. Vilor-Tejedor: None. P. Genius: None. B. Rodríguez-
Fernández: None. C. Minguillon: None. K. Fauria: None. M.
Castro de Moura: None. D. Piñeyro: None. M. Esteller: None. J.L.
Molinuevo: None. R. Guigo: None. A. Navarro: None. E.M.
Arenaza-Urquijo: None. J.D. Gispert: None.
P25.018.A Con ﬁrming rapid test diagnostics in SARS-CoV-2
infections using RT-PCR
Rodica Madalina Cristea
1,2, Pompilia Petruta Apostol2, Madalina
Andreea Ivan1,2, Maria Pelin1,2, Nitu Florin Robert1,2, Robert Adrian
Nitu1,2, Ortansa Csutak1
1University of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania,2SC
Clinica Sante SRL, Bucharest, Romania.
Introduction: Discovered in 2019, the novel Coronavirus can
infect human and causes acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV-
2) infection has spread to more than 200 countries, causing
thousands of deaths. Therefore, a huge need for rapidly scale-uptesting services became essential for an effective treatment andcontrol the virus spread. Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) are
equipment-free, can be used by minimally trained healthcare
workers generating rapid results. Aim: Using RT-PCR methodologyin order to verify the accuracy of some Ag RDTs.
Materials and Methods: From about 63.000 samples tested in
our laboratory until now, our study focused on 31 patients from aprison tested positive by Ag RDTs. All patients were men agedbetween 19-71. Samples were represented by nasopharyngeal
and oropharyngeal specimens. COVID-19 diagnosis entails directdetection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA by nucleic acid ampli ﬁcation
technology.
Results: The results obtained by RDTs were con ﬁrmed by RT-
PCR method, for all patients. Thus, false-positive or false-negativeresults were avoided. Weak-positive results obtained with RDTswere con ﬁrmed by a Ct value >26, which means a small viral
amount in the analysed samples.
Conclusions: The Ag RDTs proved to be reliable, all results
obtained being con ﬁrmed by RT-PCR. Rapid diagnostic tests
indicate the infection in the acute phase of the disease, the
infection in asymptomatic people, and whether the infection is
active, offer results in less than 30 minutes and are easy to apply.Choosing a kit which offer the most reliable, rapid and accuratediagnostic for SARS-CoV-2 infection its very important this
pandemic time.
R. Cristea: None. P. Apostol: None. M. Ivan: None. M. Pelin:
None. N. Florin Robert: None. R. Nitu: None. O. Csutak: None.
P25.019.B Transgenic cell lines in coronavirus research
Alexander A. Dolskiy, Sergei A. Bodnev, Anastasia A. Nazarenko,
Anastasia M. Smirnova, Irina V. Grishchenko, Tatiana V. Tregubchak,Ilnaz R. Imatdinov, Oleg V. Pyankov, Elena V. Gavrilova, Rinat A.Maksyutov, Dmitry V. Yudkin, Anna K. Matveeva
State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology “Vector ”,
Rospotrebnadzor, World-Class Genomic Research Center for Biologi-cal Safety and Technological Independence, Federal Scienti ﬁc and
Technical Program on the Development of Genetic Technologies,
Koltsovo, Novosibirsk Oblast, Russian Federation.
Introduction: SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 are coronaviruses that
have caused massive epidemics. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic is still
ongoing, it has affected millions of people worldwide and causedmore than 2 million deaths. We obtained Vero-based cell lines
with a deletion of the cytoplasmic N-tail (CT) and transmembrane
(TM) domains of the BST2 gene (Vero-BST2 Δ221) and with LAMP1
overexpression (Vero.Lu3 and Vero.Lu5), and we investigated theproduction of coronaviruses in these cell lines.
Materials and methods: A partial homozygous deletion of the
TM and CT domains of the BST2 gene was obtained using CRISPR/Cas9. LAMP1-overexpressing cell lines were obtained throughLAMP1 transgenic integration into the Vero genome based on the
Sleeping Beauty transposon system. Each manipulation with live
SARS-CoV (Urbani, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam)and SARS-CoV-2 (nCoV/Victoria/1/2020) viruses was performed
under BSL-3 conditions.
Results: We showed that SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 production
substantially decreased in cells with the CT and TM deletion of theBST2 gene, while LAMP1-overexpressing cells exhibited increased
production of both viruses. Cells were infected with viruses in the
presence and absence of TPCK-trypsin, and a signi ﬁcant impact on
viral production was not observed.
Conclusion: The TM of BST2 is targeted by viral proteins,
thereby reducing its antiviral activity. Deletion of TM resulted in
suppression of viral production due to BST2 activation. LAMP1promotes virus particle maturation by promoting suf ﬁcient pH
levels in lysosomes; therefore, LAMP1 overexpression increases
viral release.This work was supported by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (agreement # 075-15-2019-1665).
A.A. Dolskiy: None. S.A. Bodnev: None. A.A. Nazarenko:
None. A.M. Smirnova:
None. I.V. Grishchenko: None. T.V.
Tregubchak: None. I.R. Imatdinov: None. O.V. Pyankov: None.
E.V. Gavrilova: None. R.A. Maksyutov: None. D.V. Yudkin: None.
A.K. Matveeva: None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
607
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608P25.021.D Full-genome sequences of the ﬁrst nine SARS-CoV-
2 viruses from Azerbaijan
AGHARZA AGHAYEV , Valeh Huseynov, Elin Aliyev, Ramin Bayraml ı
National Hematology and Transfusiology Center, Department of
Medical Genetics, Baku, Azerbaijan.
Introduction: COVID-19, caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus,
started in China in late 2019 and soon became a pandemic
outbreak. Robust surveillance mechanisms should be implemen-
ted to control the ongoing pandemic such as rapid and scalabledetection of infection, strain evolution interrogation, and novelbiomarker identi ﬁcation. Whole-genome sequencing enables the
identi ﬁcation of the origins which makes it possible to track the
viral evolution. To gain further understanding of the molecularepidemiology of the outbreak in Azerbaijan, a full-genomesequencing was performed on nine SARS-CoV-2 isolates.
Material and methods: Shotgun transcriptome sequencing
was performed using RNA extracted from nasopharyngeal swabsof SARS-CoV-2 positive patients. Multiple sequence alignment andphylogenetic tools were utilized to compare the assembled SARS-
CoV-2 genomes to publicly available sequences.
Results: Sequenced samples from Azerbaijan fall into GR/20B
clade which is associated with European lineages. 8 out of 9sequences fall into a basal clade which is currently observed onlyin Azerbaijan. However, due to undersampling among the
neighboring countries, this lineage may be circulating more
widely. Only 1 sequence shared similarities with the genomepublished by Turkey. One viral strain presented a two previouslyunreported mutation in the ORF14 and nsp3 region, namely p.
G50N and p.N1587Y.
Conclusions: SARS-CoV-2 whole-genome sequencing is a
highly feasible and powerful approach for tracking virustransmission. Genomic data can be used to determine the most
appropriate public health decisions to control the pandemic.
Epidemiologically-de ﬁned clusters displayed speci ﬁc mutations,
suggesting molecular signatures for strains coming from areas
that were isolated during the lockdown.
A. Aghayev: None. V. Huseynov: None. E. Aliyev: None. R.
Bayraml ı:None.Abstracts from the 54thEuropean Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference
608
European Journal of Human Genetics (2022) 30:88 – 608