European Journal of Human Genetics (2020) 28:1 –140
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-00740-6
ABSTRACTS COLLECTION
Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG)
Conference: Oral Presentations
© European Society of Human Genetics 2020. Modi ﬁed from the conference website and published with permission 2020
Volume 28 | Supplement 1
Virtual ConferenceJune 6 –9, 2020
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was
reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scienti ﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract
selections.
Disclosure Information: In order to help readers form their own judgments of potential bias in published abstracts, authors
are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or
equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered “Modest ”. Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are
considered “Signi ﬁcant”.
Presenting authors are indicated with asterisks in the contributor lists.
Plenary Sessions
PL1 Opening Plenary
PL1.2
RNA splicing defects in cancer
R. K. Bradley
*
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
United States
Alternative RNA splicing, the process whereby a single
gene can give rise to many different proteins, has long
been known to be dysregulated in many cancers. Recentstudies have provided concrete genetic evidence that spli-
cing dysregulation directly promotes cancer initiation
and progression. For example, genes encoding RNA spli-cing factors are recurrently mutated in both hematologic
malignancies and solid tumors. However, uncovering the
speciﬁc mechanisms by which these mutations promote
tumorigenesis has proven challenging. Here, I will discuss
recent progress in establishing functional links betweensomatic mutations affecting RNA splicing factors and
tumorigenesis, the promise of correct mis-splicing for can-
cer therapy, and the recent creation of CRISPR/Cas-basedtechnologies for conducting mRNA isoform-level genetic
screens.
R. K. Bradley: None.
PL2 What ’s New? Highlight Session
PL2.1
Evaluation of DNA methylation episignatures for diag-
nosis and phenotype correlations in 42 Mendelian neu-rodevelopmental disorders
E. Aref-Eshghi
1, J. Kerkhof1, V. Pedro2, Groupe DI France,
M. Barat-Houari3, N. Ruiz-Pallares4, M. Alders5,M .
Mannens5, P. Henneman5, R. C. Hennekam6, A. Ciol ﬁ7,S .
Pizzi7, M. Tartaglia7, P. M. Campeau8, J. Rousseau8,M .A .
Levy1,2, L. Brick9, M. Kozenko9, T. B. Balci1,2,10,V .M .
Siu1,2, A. Stuart1, M. Kadour1,11, J. Masters1,11,K .
Takano12, T. Kleefstra13,14, N. de Leeuw13,14, M. Field15,M .
Shaw16, J. Gecz16,17, G. Merla18, P. J. Ainsworth1,2,H .
Lin1,2, D. I. Rodenhiser2,19, M. J. Friez20, M. Tedder20,J .A .1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:Lee20, B. R. DuPont20, R. E. Stevenson20, S. A. Skinner20,
C. E. Schwartz20, D. Genevieve4,21,B. Sadikovic1,2*
1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada,
2Western University, London, ON, Canada,3Universitaire de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France,4Centre Hospitalier Uni-
versitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France,5Amsterdam
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands,6Uni-
versity of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,7Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,8University of
Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada,9McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada,10Lawson Health Research Institute,
London, ON, Canada,11St. Joseph ’s Health Care, London,
ON, Canada,12Shinshu University Hospital, Nagano, Japan,
13Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,14Donders Center for Medical Neuroscience, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands,15Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia,
16The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,17South
Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide,
Australia,18IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,19Children ’s Health Research
Institute, London, ON, Canada,20Greenwood Genetic Center,
Greenwood, SC, United States,21Montpellier University,
Montpellier, France
Introduction: Genetic syndromes frequently present with
overlapping clinical features and negative or ambiguous
genetic ﬁndings which can confound accurate diagnosis and
clinical management. An expanding number of genetic
syndromes have been shown to have unique genomic DNA
methylation patterns (episignatures).
Materials and Methods : Peripheral blood episignatures
can be used for diagnostic testing as well as for the
interpretation of ambiguous genetic test results. We presenthere an approach to episignature mapping of the largest
number of genetic syndromes studied to date ( n=42), which
has allowed the identi ﬁcation of 34 robust disease-speci ﬁc
episignatures.
Results: We examine emerging patterns of overlap, as well
as similarities and hierarchical relationships across these
episignatures to highlight their key features as related to
genetic heterogeneity, dosage effect, unaffected carrier status,and incomplete penetrance. We demonstrate the necessity of
multiclass modeling for accurate genetic variant classi ﬁcation.
We demonstrate the utility of this tool in resolving ambiguousclinical cases and identi ﬁcation of previously undiagnosed
cases through mass screening of a large cohort of subjects
with developmental delays and congenital anomalies. Finally,we outline and present early data from a Canadian national
clinical trial EpiSign-CAN currently enrolling 4000 patients
to assess impact of this novel diagnostic technology ondiagnosis of neurodevelopmental conditions.Conclusions: This study more than doubles the number
of published syndromes with DNA methylation episigna-
tures, and most signi ﬁcantly, opens new avenues for
accurate diagnosis and clinical assessment in individuals
affected by these disorders.
E. Aref-Eshghi: None. J. Kerkhof: None. V. Pedro: None.
M. Barat-Houari: None. N. Ruiz-Pallares: None. M. Alders:
None. M. Mannens: None. P. Henneman: None. R. C.
Hennekam: None. A. Ciol ﬁ: None. S. Pizzi: None. M.
Tartaglia: None. P. M. Campeau: None. J. Rousseau: None.
M. A. Levy: None. L. Brick: None. M. Kozenko: None. T.
B. Balci: None. V. M. Siu: None. A. Stuart: None. M.Kadour: None. J. Masters: None. K. Takano: None. T.
Kleefstra: None. N. de Leeuw: None. M. Field: None. M.
Shaw: None. J. Gecz: None. G. Merla: None. P. J.Ainsworth: None. H. Lin: None. D. I. Rodenhiser: None.
M. J. Friez: None. M. Tedder: None. J. A. Lee: None. B. R.
DuPont: None. R. E. Stevenson: None. S. A. Skinner:None. C. E. Schwartz: None. D. Genevieve: None. B.
Sadikovic: None.
PL2.2
Identity-by-descent detection across 487,409 British
samples reveals ﬁne-scale population structure, evolu-
tionary history, and trait associations
J. Nait Saada
1*, G. Kalantzis1, D. Shyr2, M. Robinson3,
A. Gusev4,5, P. Palamara1,6
1Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom,2Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.
H Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United
States,3Department of Computer Science, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,4Brigham & Women ’s
Hospital, Division of Genetics, Boston, MA, United States,
5Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, United States,6Wellcome Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom
The sharing of identical-by-descent (IBD) genomic seg-
ments is a key indicator of genetic relatedness between
individuals and plays an important role in a wide range ofgenomic analyses. We developed a new method, called
FastSMC, that enables accurate biobank-scale detection of
IBD segments transmitted by common ancestors living upto several hundreds of generations in the past. FastSMC
combines a fast heuristic search for IBD segments with
accurate coalescent-based likelihood calculations and esti-mates the age of common ancestors transmitting IBD
regions. We applied FastSMC to 487,409 phased samples
from the UK Biobank and detected the presence of ~214billion IBD segments transmitted by shared ancestors within2 J. del Picchiathe past 1,500 years. We quanti ﬁed time-dependent shared
ancestry within and across 120 postcodes, obtaining a ﬁne-
grained picture of genetic relatedness within the past two
millennia in the UK. Sharing of common ancestors strongly
correlates with geographic distance, enabling us to localise
a sample ’s birth coordinates from genomic data with a
median error of 44 km. We analysed genomic regions with
unusually high density of shared ancestry, which is indi-
cative of recent positive selection, and detected 12 genome-wide signi ﬁcant signals, including 7 novel sites. We found
IBD sharing to be highly predictive of the sharing of ultra-
rare variants in exome sequencing samples from the UKBiobank, enabling us to detect 29 associations (20 of which
novel) with 7 blood-related traits. These results underscore
the importance of modelling distant relatedness to revealsubtle population structure, recent evolutionary history, and
rare pathogenic variation.
J. Nait Saada: None. G. Kalantzis: None. D. Shyr: None.
M. Robinson: None. A. Gusev: None. P. Palamara: None.
PL2.3
Large-scale targeted sequencing identi ﬁes risk genes for
neurodevelopmental disorders
M. Kvarnung
1,2*, T. Wang3, K. Hoekzema3, D. Vecchio4,H .
Wu5, A. Sulovari3,B .P .C o e3, M. A. Gillentine3,
A. B. Wilfert3, A. Lindstrand1,2, A. Nordgren1,2,
B. Anderlid1,2, J. A. Rosenfeld6,7, P. Liu6,7, ASID
Consortium3, I. E. Scheffer8,9,10, N. Brunetti-Perri11,12,
N. Rommelse13,14, D. G. Amaral15, G. W. E. Santen16,
E. Trabetti17, Z. Sedlá ček18, J. J. Michaelson19,E .
Courchesne20, F. R. Kooy21, The SPARK Consortium22,
C. Romano23, H. Peeters24, R. A. Bernier25, J. Gecz26,27,28,
K. Xia5,29, E. E. Eichler3,30,31, M. Nordenskjöld1,2
1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Department of Clinical
Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden,3Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,4Rare Disease and
Medical Genetics, AcademDepartment of Pediatrics, Bam-
bino Gesu Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy,5Center of
Medical Genetics & Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China,6Department of Molecular &
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,
United States,7Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, United
States,8Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Melbourne,
Australia,9Department of Paediatrics, Royal Children ’s
Hospital and Department of Medicine, Austin Health,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,10The
Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia,11Department ofTranslational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy,12Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine,
Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy,13Department of Psychiatry,
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,14Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,15Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences and the MIND Institute, University of
California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States,
16Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands,17Depart-
ment of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and MovementSciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy,
18Depart-
ment of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University
2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol,Prague, Czech Republic,
19Department of Psychiatry,
University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa city,
IA, United States,20Department of Neurosciences, UC San
Diego Autism Center, School of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States,
21Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium,22Simons Foundation, New York, NY,
United States,23Oasi Research Institute-IRCCS, Troina,
Italy,24Centre for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Leuven
Autism Research (LAuRes), Leuven, Belgium,25Department
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,26Adelaide Medical
School and the Robinson Research Institute, the University
of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia,27Genetics and
Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, SouthAustralia, Australia,
28South Australian Health and Med-
ical Research Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Austra-
lia,29CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and
Intelligences Technology (CEBSIT), Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China,30Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, UnitedStates,
31Corresponding author, Seattle, WA, United States
Introduction: Large-scale exome sequencing studies have
identi ﬁed hundreds of genes with signi ﬁcant excess of de
novo mutations (DNMs) in neurodevelopmental disorders
(NDDs). In this collaborative study, we assessed 125 can-didate and high-con ﬁdence genes in a large cohort of
NDD cases.
Materials and Methods: We targeted 63 candidate genes
for resequencing among 16,321 NDD cases and an
additional 62 high-con ﬁdence genes in 6,211 NDD cases.
In order to test for signi ﬁcance at the level of case-control
mutation burden and integrating with previously published
data, we assessed these genes among NDD cases and
compared the mutation burden to nonpsychiatric controlsfrom ExAC. These genes were assessed also in a combined
set of 17,426 NDD parent-child trios. Furthermore,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 3thorough phenotype studies for seven of the genes with
evidence of mutational burden were performed in a subset
of the patients.
Results: We identi ﬁed 48 genes (25 newly reported) with
a signi ﬁcant burden of ultra-rare (MAF < 0.01%) severe
mutations. Among the 125 targeted genes, we show that 90genes are also enriched for DNMs in parent-child trios. We
here focus on seven genes ( CTCF ,HNRNPU ,KCNQ3 ,
ZBTB18 ,TCF12, SPEN and LEO1 ) for detailed clinical
descriptions to delineate the associated phenotypes and
clinical presentation of these speci ﬁc and newly described
neurodevelopmental disorders.
M. Kvarnung: None. T. Wang: None. K. Hoekzema: None.
D. Vecchio: None. H. Wu: None. A. Sulovari: None. B. P.
Coe: None. M. A. Gillentine: None. A. B. Wilfert: None. A.Lindstrand: None. A. Nordgren: None. B. Anderlid: None. J.
A. Rosenfeld: None. P. Liu: None. -. ASID Consortium:
N o n e .I .E .S c h e f f e r :N o n e .N .B r u n e t t i - P e r r i :N o n e .N .R o m m e l s e :N o n e .D .G .A m a r a l :N o n e .G .W .E .S a n t e n :
N o n e .E .T r a b e t t i :N o n e .Z .S e d l á ček: None. J. J. Michaelson:
None. E. Courchesne: None. F. R. Kooy: None. -. TheS P A R KC o n s o r t i u m :N o n e .C .R o m a n o :N o n e .H .P e e t e r s :
None. R. A. Bernier: None. J. Gecz: None. K. Xia: None. E.
E. Eichler: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None.
PL2.4
Genomic and transcriptomic pro ﬁling of malformations
of cortical development: from tissue to single-cellresolution
S. Baldassari
1,2,3*, M. Chipaux4, E. Marsan1,2,3, S. Ferrand-
Sorbets4, G. Dorfmüller4, H. Adle-Biassette5,6,7,S .
Baulac1,2,3
1ICM Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris,
France,2Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR
S 1127, INSERM, U1127, Paris, France,3CNRS, UMR
7225, Paris, France,4Department of Pediatric Neurosur-
gery, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France,
5INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris,
France,6Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université
Paris 7, Paris, France,7Service d ’Anatomie et de Cytologie
Pathologiques, Hôpital Lariboisière, APHP, Paris, France
Introduction: Malformations of cortical brain development,
such as focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and hemi-megalencephaly (HME), are important causes of severe
pediatric drug-resistant epilepsies subjected to neurosurgery.
At neuropathological assessment, FCD-II subtype is char-acterized by enlarged dysmorphic neurons (DNs) and balloon
cells (BCs) due to mTOR pathway hyperactivation.
Methods and Results: We performed ultra-deep targeted
gene sequencing on matched blood-brain resected samplesto search for low-allele frequency variants in a panel
of mTOR pathway and FCD genes in 99 FCD patients. We
report that ~30% of FCD-I patients carried somatic loss-of-
function SLC35A2 -variants and ~60% of FCD-II/HME
patients presented somatic gain-of-function MTOR ,AKT3 ,
PIK3CA and RHEB -variants or two-hit, germline and
somatic loss-of function DEPDC5 ,NPRL3 ,TSC1 and
TSC2 variants. Analysis by droplet digital PCR of
microdissected cells demonstrated that only DNs and BCsin FCD-II/HME carry the pathogenic variants, and that loss-
of-heterozygosity in DNs in DEPDC5 -mutated cases
represents a mutational mechanism in FCD. Globalunsupervised analysis of RNAseq from frozen bulk tissues
from 20 mutated patients showed clusters independent of
the nature of the variant/gene. We therefore performedsingle-nuclei RNAseq from mutated frozen resected brain
tissues to better resolve the mosaic nature of the lesions and
investigate the cellular heterogeneity characterizing FCD.Cell-type speci ﬁc transcriptomic pro ﬁling revealed novel
insights into epilepsy pathogenic mechanisms.
Conclusions: Our novel ﬁndings represent an important
advancement in understanding the genetic etiology and
mechanisms underlying epilepsies associated to malforma-
tions of the cortical development. This work was funded bythe ERC grant n.682345 and Easi-Genomics Access grant
S. Baldassari: None. M. Chipaux: None. E. Marsan:
None. S. Ferrand-Sorbets: None. G. Dorfmüller: None. H.Adle-Biassette: None. S. Baulac: None.
PL2.5
TAD-shuf ﬂing at the FGF8 locus causes Split-Hand/
Foot Malformation type 3
G. Cova
1,2*, R. Schöp ﬂin1, R. Falcone1, B. Timmermann1,L .
Wittler1, O. Zuffardi3, M. Spielmann1,2, S. Mundlos1,2
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2Institute for Medical Genetics and Human
Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,Germany,
3Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
In recent years chromosome conformation capture assays
such as Hi-C revealed that mammalian genomes are orga-
nized in genomic units called topologically associated
domains (TADs). TADs provide the regulatory scaffold forphysical contacts between regulatory elements and their
target genes. Structural variations, such as duplications,
deletions and inversions, can result in disruptions of TADstructures, gene misexpression and consequently in human
diseases. Split-Hand/Foot Malformation type 3 is a rare
congenital limb defect affecting the central digits of handsand feet and has been associated with tandem duplications4 J. del Picchiaat the FGF8 locus. In order to investigate the molecular
pathomechanism underlying this disease we mapped 25
duplications and one inversion at the FGF8 locus and we
generated mice carrying the corresponding rearrangements
using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Capture Hi-C maps span-
ning the Fgf8 locus revealed the presence of ectopic inter-
actions between the Fgf8 endogenous regulatory elements
and an unrelated gene within the locus in mutant mice
compared to wild-type. We showed that both in the tandemduplications and the inversion, the Fgf8 enhancers are
relocated into a new TAD causing misexpression of the
neighbouring gene in an Fgf8-like pattern in the limb bud.
This ectopic expression in the apical ectodermal ridge of
developing limbs is associated with the limb phenotype
observed in mice and in human patients. Therefore, ourfunctional data show that TAD-shuf ﬂing at the Fgf8 locus is
the cause of this human limb malformation syndrome and
further highlight this new mutational mechanism and its rolein human disease.
G. Cova: None. R. Schöp ﬂin: None. R. Falcone: None. B.
Timmermann: None. L. Wittler: None. O. Zuffardi: None.M. Spielmann: None. S. Mundlos: None.
PL2.6
The enrichment of breakpoints in late-replicatingchromatin provides novel insights into chromoanagen-
esis mechanisms
N. Chatron
1,2,3*, G. Giannuzzi3, P. Rollat-Farnier1,4,
F. Diguet1,2, E. Porcu3, T. Yammine1,2, K. UGUEN5,
Z. Bellil1,2, J. Lauer Zillhardt6, A. Sorlin7, F. Ader8,
A. Afenjar9, J. Andrieux10, C. Bardel4, E. Calpena11,
S. Chantot-Bastaraud12, P. Callier7, N. Chelloug13,
E. Chopin14, M. Cordier1, C. Dubourg15,16, L. Faivre17,
F. Girard18, S. Heide19, Y. Herenger20, S. Jaillard21,
B. Keren19, S. J. L. Knight22, J. Lespinasse23, L. Lohmann24,
N. Marle7, R. Maroo ﬁan25, A. Masurel-Paulet17,
M. Mathieu-Dramard26, C. Metay27, A. T. Pagnamenta22,
M. Portnoï12, F. Prieur28, M. Rio29, J. Siffroi30,
S. Valence31,32, J. C. Taylor22, A. O. M. Wilkie11,
P. Edery1,2, A. Reymond3, D. Sanlaville1,2, C. Schluth-
Bolard1,2
1Service de Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France,2Equipe GENDEV, CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS
UMR5292 UCBL1, Lyon, France,3Center for Integrative
Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
4Cellule Bioinformatique Plateforme NGS, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Lyon, France,5Service de Génétique, CHU Brest,
Brest, France,6Unité de Diagnostic Préimplantatoire,
Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universi-taires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
7Laboratoire de
génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, CHU de Dijon,Dijon, France,8AP-HP, Département de Génétique médicale,
Cardiogénétique et myogénétique moléculaire et cellulaire,
Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,9AP-HP,
Département de Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique
clinique, hôpital d ’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,
10CHRU de Lille, Service de génétique, Hôpital Jeanne de
Flandre, Lille, France,11Clinical Genetics Group, MRC
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,12AP-HP, Département de
Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique chromosomique,
hôpital d ’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France,
13Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Service de génétique médi-
cale, CHRU Tours, Tours, France,14Centre de Biotechno-
logie Cellulaire, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France,
15Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique médicale,
CHU Rennes, Rennes, France,16IGDR, CNRS UMR 6290,
Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France,17Centre de
génétique, Hôpital d ’enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,
18Laboratoire de cytogénétique constitutionnelle et prénatale,
CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,19APHP, Département
de Génétique et Centre de Référence Dé ﬁciences Intellec-
tuelles de Causes Rares, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Paris, France,20Service de génétique médicale, CHRU
Tours, Tours, France,21Service de cytogénétique et biologie
cellulaire, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France,22Oxford NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,
23Service de génétique, CH Métropole Savoie, Chambéry,
France,24Département de génétique, Laboratoire CERBA,
Saint-Ouen l ’Aumône, France,25Institute of Neurology,
University College London, London, United Kingdom,26Ser-
vice de génétique clinique et oncogénétique, CHU Amiens-
Picardie, Amiens, France,27AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor,
Créteil, France,28Service de Génétique Clinique, Chromo-
somique et Moléculaire, CHU Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne,
France,29AP-HP, Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,30AP-HP, Départe-
ment de Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique chromosomi-
que, hôpital d ’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, Paris,
France,31Sorbonne Université, GRC n°19, pathologies
Congénitales du Cervelet-LeucoDystrophies, Paris, France,
32AP-HP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau; GHUEP, Service de
Neurologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France
The rise of pangenomic molecular assays allowed uncovering
complex rearrangements named chromoanagenesis that were
hypothesized to result from catastrophic shattering events.
Constitutional cases have typically been reported individuallypreventing identi ﬁcation of common features and uncovering
the mechanisms at play. We characterized 20 new chro-
moanagenesis and discovered yet-undescribed features. While
literature differentiates chromothripsis and its shattering event
repaired through non-homologous end joining fromAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 5chromoanasynthesis born to aberrant replicative processes,
we identi ﬁed shattered chromosomes repaired through a
combination of mechanisms. In particular, three samples
present with “rearrangement hubs ”comprising a fragmented
kilobase-long sequence threaded throughout the rearrange-
ment. To assess the mechanisms at play, we merged our datawith those of 20 published constitutional complex chromo-
somal rearrangement cases. We evaluated if the distribution of
their 1033 combined breakpoints was distinctive using boot-strap simulations and found that breakpoints tend to keep
away from haplosensitive genes suggesting selective pressure.
We then compared their distribution with that of 13,310 and468 breakpoints of cancer complex chromosomal rearrange-
ments and constitutional simple rearrangement samples,
respectively. Both complex rearrangement groups showedbreakpoint enrichment in late replicating regions suggesting
similar origins for constitutional and cancer cases. Simple
rearrangement breakpoints but not complex ones weredepleted from lamina-associated domains (LADs), possibly as
a consequence of reduced mobility of DNA ends bound to
lamina. The enrichment of breakpoints in late-replicatingchromatin for both constitutional and cancer chromoanagen-
esisprovides an orthogonal support to the premature chro-
mosome condensation hypothesis that was put forward toexplain chromoanagenesis .
N. Chatron: None. G. Giannuzzi: None. P. Rollat-Farnier:
None. F. Diguet: None. E. Porcu: None. T. Yammine: None.K. Uguen: None. Z. Bellil: None. J. Lauer Zillhardt: None. A.
Sorlin: None. F. Ader: None. A. Afenjar: None. J. Andrieux:
N o n e .C .B a r d e l :N o n e .E .C a l p e n a :N o n e .S .C h a n t o t -Bastaraud: None. P. Callier: None. N. Chelloug: None. E.
Chopin: None. M. Cordier: None. C. Dubourg: None. L.
Faivre: None. F. Girard: None. S. Heide: None. Y. Herenger:None. S. Jaillard: None. B. Keren: None. S. J. L. Knight:
None. J. Lespinasse: None. L. Lohmann: None. N. Marle:
N o n e .R .M a r o o ﬁan: None. A. Masurel-Paulet: None. M.
Mathieu-Dramard: None. C. Metay: None. A. T. Pagnamenta:
None. M. Portnoï: None. F. Prieur: None. M. Rio: None. J.
Siffroi: None. S. Valence: None. J. C. Taylor: None. A. O. M.Wilkie: None. P. Edery: None. A. Reymond: None. D.
Sanlaville: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None.
PL3 ELPAG Award Lecture
PL3.1
ELPAG Award Lecture
H. Skirton
*
University of Plymouth (retired), Plymouth, United Kingdom
The de ﬁnition of genetic counselling includes the important
terms, ‘psychological ’and ‘adaptation ’. While practisingclinically, I started my research work because I wondered
what made a difference to the family ’s ability to cope and
adapt. In this presentation I will discuss early work that
inﬂuenced me, my own research journey and thoughts for the
future of research in genetic counselling. My own studies,
undertaken from 1994 to 2019, have reinforced my belief that,although communicating scienti ﬁc information is important,
addressing the psychological issues that inevitably arise
alongside a genetic diagnosis is essential to enable the familyto adjust and adapt the information to their own lives. My
doctoral study, for example, showed that people had dif ﬁculty
in applying the scienti ﬁc information to their personal cir-
cumstances unless they believed that the practitioner related to
them as an individual, and that improving psychological
peace of mind was a major motivator for those using geneticservices. Despite the clinical advances of the past four dec-
ades, studies still indicate that family members fail to com-
municate genetic risk to each other, that genetic decisionmaking can still be fraught with distress and ambivalence and
a proportion of those who could bene ﬁt from screening and/or
treatment fail to seek it. I would argue that addressing theseissues still falls within the remit of genetic health profes-
sionals, particularly genetic counsellors, but there is a dearth
of research, particularly using qualitative methods, to informcurrent practice. Genetic counsellors can be overwhelmed by
the ever-expanding body of genomic science underpinning
our work. However, there is a continuing challenge forcounsellors in this ultra-information era to offer psychological
support to family members to enable information to be uti-
lised, support family communication and to reach those whoare unaware of their options. I emphasise the need for more
applied research, especially addressing questions initiated by
those engaged in clinical practice and using qualitativemethods where appropriate.
H. Skirton: None.
Concurrent Symposia
S01 What to Expect from Prenatal Diagnosis
S01.1
Prenatal Genomic Approach to Genetic Diseases of Bone
D. Krakow
*
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States
Skeletal dysplasia are a heterogenous group of mendelian
disorders that often present in the prenatal period. With the
expansion of available genomic technologies, many of thesetechniques have been applied to both the preimplantation and
prenatal periods. These methodologies include noninvasive6 J. del Picchiaprenatal testing for de novo or dominantly inherited skeletal
disorders, couple screening for recessively inherited skeletal
diseases, PGT for familial inherited disorders. microarray
analysis for copy number variation, gene panels for skeletal
dysplasias and related diseases, and exome analysis. The
disease genes have been identi ﬁe df o rm o s to ft h e> 4 6 0
established skeletal dysplasias, thus affording the opportunity
to address the molecular basis of most of the skeletal disorders
that will present in the prenatal period. Use of exome analysishas identi ﬁed previously unappreciated prenatal onset dis-
orders, expanding the number of de ﬁned skeletal disorders.
However, in spite of the advances in genomic technologies,the mainstay of prenatal diagnosis remains prenatal ultrasound
evaluation. Most cases of skeletal dysplasia are detected by
prenatal ultrasound and appreciation of the ultrasound ﬁnd-
ings helps guide diagnosis and genomic analyses. Key ultra-
sound ﬁndings including lethality can help guide management
pending the results of molecular diagnosis.
D. Krakow: None.
S01.2
Pandora ’s Pregnancy - A new Era for Prenatal Genetic
Testing
Y. Hashiloni-Dolev
1*, T. Nov-Klaiman2, A. Raz3
1Ben-Gurion University of the Negav, Israel, Tel Aviv,
Israel,2Ben-Gurion University of the Negav, Israel,
Munich, Israel,3Ben-Gurion University of the Negav,
Israel, Be ’er Sheva, Israel
The talk is based on conceptual analysis of seminal works
that shaped the socio-ethical discourse surrounding the
experiences of parents as well as professionals with prenataldiagnosis in the last thirty years. It delineates a shift from
the "traditional" technologies of karyotyping in PND to the
current phase of advanced genetic technologies includingnon-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), chromosomal micro-
array analysis (CMA) and whole-exome sequencing (WES)
with their higher detection rate and related abundance ofuncertain data. The talk will consider the implications of
this new era of PND for patients and health professionals by
drawing on previous studies documenting how probabilityand uncertainty affect informed consent/choice, health risks
communication, customer satisfaction and decision-making,
and parent-child bonding. I will argue that these changesmove us beyond the idioms and realities of the "tentative
pregnancy" and "moral pioneering", to uncertainty, prob-
ability-based counseling and moral/translational gambling. Iwill conclude by discussing what is needed to maintain
hope in the era of Pandora ’s pregnancy.
Y. Hashiloni-Dolev: None. T. Nov-Klaiman: None. A.
Raz: None.S02 Liquid Biopsy for Early Detection of Cancer
S02.1
Methylation Patterns of Plasma DNA in Health and
Disease
Y. Dor
*
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Each cell type has a unique and stable DNA methylation
pattern, re ﬂecting its gene expression program. We have
established a comprehensive atlas of tissue and cell type-speciﬁc human methylomes, allowing to de ﬁne multiple
loci that are unmethylated or methylated speci ﬁcally in a
given cell type. We are using these loci as biomarkers toidentify the tissue origins of cfDNA, and to infer physio-
logic and pathologic tissue dynamics. I will discuss exam-
ples for the use of tissue speci ﬁc cfDNA methylation
patterns including the detection of cardiomyocyte cfDNA
after myocardial infarction and in sepsis; the detection of
tissue-speci ﬁc cfDNA in patients with early and late stage
cancer; and a dissection of the phenomenon of elevated
cfDNA after intensive exercise.
Y. Dor: None.
S03 Our Ancestry
S03.2
What ancient humans can teach us about moderngenetic variation
J. Kelso
1,2*
1Leipzig, Germany,2Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany
Recent technological advances have made it possible to
recover genome sequences from a number of archaic andearly modern humans. These genomes offer a unique
opportunity to identify genetic changes that have come to
ﬁxation or reached high frequency in modern humans since
the divergence from our common ancestor with Neandertals
and Denisovans. Analyses of these archaic genomes have
also provided direct evidence for interbreeding betweenearly modern and archaic humans. As a result all present-
day people outside of Africa carry approximately 2%
Neandertal DNA, and some populations, largely in Oceania,also carry DNA from Denisovans. This introgressed DNA
has been shown to have both positive and negative out-
comes for present-day carriers: underlying apparentlyadaptive phenotypes as well as in ﬂuencing disease risk. In
recent work we have identi ﬁed Neandertal haplotypes thatAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 7are likely of archaic origin and determined the likely
functional consequences of these haplotypes using public
genome, gene expression, and phenotype datasets. We have
also used simulations, as well as the distribution of Nean-
dertal DNA in ancient modern humans, to understand how
selection has acted on Neandertal introgressed sequencesover the last 45,000 years.
S04 Public and Patient EngagementS04.1
The Patient ’s Role in New Disease Gene Discovery
C. P. Schaaf
*
University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
The practice of clinical genetics has been revolutionised by
the implementation of next generation sequencing. Noveldisease genes are recognised on a weekly basis, and the
number of OMIM-listed disease-gene associations con-
tinues to increase steadily.
What are the characteristics of “patient no.1 ”, and how do
you engage with your patient families to work together
beyond the initial disease gene discovery?
Here, we highlight the discovery of Schaaf-Yang
syndrome, a rare neurodevelopment disorder caused by
truncating mutations in MAGEL2 , a protein-coding gene
within the Prader-Willi syndrome domain on chromosome
15q11.2. We highlight ongoing physician-patient interac-
tions, leading to a deeper understanding of diseasephenotype, genotype-phenotype interactions, but also
molecular mechanisms and avenues towards therapeutic
development.
C. P. Schaaf: None.
S04.2
Experiences with public engagement: Estonian Bio-
bank ’s example
A. Allik
1,2*, A. Metspalu2, L. Leitsalu2, L. Milani2
1Tartu, Estonia,2Estonian Genome Center, Institute of
Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Introduction : The Estonian government launched a pro-
gram in 2018 to map the microarray-based genotypes of100,000 out of 1.3 million inhabitants. The goal of this
initiative was to introduce the collected genotype data in
Estonia ’s upgraded healthcare system for delivering perso-
nalized medicine information. Estonia ’s healthcare system
has been revolutionized by innovative e-solutions and hasbecome bene ﬁcial for patients, doctors, hospitals, and alsothe government for its convenient accessibility and rea-
sonable maintenance costs. Each citizen in Estonia has an
online e-Health record that can be accessed with the per-
son’s electronic ID-card which makes the e-Health medical
record system secure and the information easily accessible
to authorized individuals. The project has been a hugechallenge for the Estonian Biobank, considering that the
ﬁrst set of 52,000 biobank participants were recruited over a
10-year period (2002-2011). The new recruitment started in2018, afterwards an additional 150 +thousand people have
joined the biobank. In total, the biobank participants cover
approximately 20% of the adult population of Estonia. Longbefore the new recruitment, in 2015, Estonian Biobank
started providing personalized genetic feedback to the bio-
bank participants and an interest towards it is huge. by nowAround 3000 people have received their feedback reports
by now. As a result, the government of Estonia has laun-
ched the Personalized medicine program and invested 5,million €for developing state-of-the-art digital decision
support system to use the gathered genomic information in
the Estonian healthcare system.
Methods : In order to recruit an additional 15% of the
adult population of Estonia, traditional marketing tools
were applied to gain public attention and support tobeneﬁt the nationwide project with a minimized budget.
Our approaches included: explaining the bene ﬁts of using
the genetic information in healthcare system by publicmedia, involving social media in ﬂuencers, and arranging
social media challenges to draw the attention and raise
interest to the project. Enrol ment consisted of digitally
signed consents using Estonian ID-card systems, and
blood sample donations collected through a wide network
of pharmacies.
Results : By the end of 2019, there are 200,000 +biobank
participants, increasing the biobank cohort from previous
5% to 20% of adult population of Estonia in less thantwo years.
Conclusion : A lot can be done if you think out-of-the-
box! The approaches we used and experiences gainedthroughout this project can be successfully used by other
countries.
A. Metspalu: None. L. Leitsalu: None. L. Milani: None.
S04.3
My DNA, whose business is it anyway? A Citizen Forumon the Societal Impact of Genomics
W. Van Hoof
*, C. Mayeur
Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium
Precision medicine, personalized screening, prevention,
ever-expanding commercial services and the need for8 J. del Picchiamassive data sharing in genomics have led to a need to
engage the public in a discussion on the governance of
genomic information. Therefore, Sciensano and the King
Baudouin Foundation organized a Belgium citizen forum
on the ethical, legal, and so cietal implications (ELSI)
surrounding the use of genomic information. This delib-erative forum resulted in policy recommendations for the
Belgian Minister of Public Health, related experts and
stakeholders. The citizen forum consisted of an issueframing workshop, where experts indicated which ques-
tions the citizens needed to answer. This was followed by
the citizen forum, where 32 c itizens discussed these
questions over three weekends, while being informed by a
neutral information package and a wide range of resource
persons. Finally, the recomm endations of the citizens
formed the basis for a stakeholder workshop, where
experts and policy makers discussed the potential imple-
mentation of these recommendations into practice. Theentire process was supported by an expert committee and
audited by two independent researchers. The qualitative
analysis of the citizen forum showed that the citizen paneltalked about the genome as their property because it is the
most intimate part of an individual. Based on this state-
ment, citizens require autonomy in decision-makingrelated to the use of their genomic information and con-
sider that it is society ’s responsibility to provide citizens
with the rights of individual control, transparency, andtraceability in the uses of thi s information. Citizens must
use these rights responsibly to protect their privacy. The
citizen panel strongly believes that “Individuals are more
than their genome and should not be prisoners of it ”.T o
this end, protection against any form of discrimination,
categorization, and rejection of individuals based on their
genetic makeup must be established. The citizens assert
that there are many societal responsibilities to protect
citizens from downsides and promote upsides from theuse of genomic information: the precautionary principle
should guide the way in the development of a framework
for genomics. Within a well-developed framework thatinspires trust around the use of genomic data, solidarity
and reciprocity are core values that citizens support in the
context of genomic data sharing. Citizens identify a rangeof individual responsibilities in decision making in
genomics and accept that societal nudges might be
required to balance personal interests and the commongood. This citizen forum shows that citizens can make
meaningful contributions to a complex ﬁeld like ELSI in
genomics. Continued citizen involvement of the public inthe governance of genomic information in society is vital.
It ensures that societal norms and values guide the tech-
nology and not the other way around.
W. Van Hoof: None. C. Mayeur: None.S05 Development and Disease at Single Cell Resolution
S05.1
Embryo-scale, single-cell spatial transcriptomics
S. Srivatsan
1, M. Regier1, E. Barkan1, J. Packer1,P .
Grosjean1, S. Saxton1,J .L a d d2, M. Spielmann3, P. Lampe2,
J. Shendure1,4,5, K. Stevens1,C. Trapnell4,6*
1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,
2Fred Hutch Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United
States,3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany,4Brotman Baty Institute for Precision
Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States,5Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States,6Seattle, WA,
United States
Spatial patterns of gene expression span many scales, and are
shaped by both local (e.g. cell-cell interactions) and global(e.g. tissue, organ) context. However, most in situ methods for
proﬁling gene expression either average local contexts or are
restricted to limited ﬁelds of view. Here we introduce sci-
Space, a scale- ﬂexible method for spatial transcriptomics that
retains single cell resolution while simultaneously capturing
heterogeneity at larger scales. As a proof-of-concept, weapply sci-Space to the developing mouse embryo, capturing
the approximate spatial coordinates of pro ﬁled cells from
whole embryo serial sections. We identify genes includingHox-family transcription factors expressed in an anatomically
patterned manner across excitatory neurons and other cell
types. We also show that sci-Space can resolve the differentialcontribution of cell types to signalling molecules exhibiting
spatially heterogeneous expression. Finally, we develop and
apply a new statistical approach for quantifying the con-tribution of spatial context to variation in gene expression
within cell types.
S. Srivatsan: None. M. Regier: None. E. Barkan: None. J.
Packer: None. P. Grosjean: None. S. Saxton: None. J. Ladd:
None. M. Spielmann: None. P. Lampe: None. J. Shendure:None. K. Stevens: None.
S05.2
Cellular drivers of injury response and regeneration inthe zebra ﬁsh heart
J. P. Junker
*
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB),
Berlin, Germany
A key goal of developmental biology is to understand how a
single cell transforms into a full-grown organism consistingAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 9of many cells. Although impressive progress has
been made in lineage tracing using imaging approaches,
analysis of vertebrate lineage trees has mostly been lim-
ited to relatively small subsets of cells. Here we
present LINNAEUS, a strategy for massively parallel
lineage tracing on the single cell level. We exploit thefact that Cas9-induced generation of double-strand
breaks leads to formation of short insertions or deletions
(“genetic scars ”) that are variable in their length and
position. We demonstrate that these genetic scars have
very high complexity, making them ideal cellular bar-
codes for lineage analysis. Reading out scar sequencesby single-cell RNA-seq enables us to simultaneously
measure lineage relationsh ips and transcriptome pro ﬁles
in thousands of single cells. We introduce novel compu-tational methods that address the major challenges of
CRISPR/Cas9-based lineage tracing, such as preferential
creation of speci ﬁc scar sequences and stochastic
dropout events. LINNAEUS allows scaling up lineage
analysis to the level of the whole organism, which
makes it an ideal approach for studying processeslike organ regeneration after injury. Here, we use LIN-
NAEUS to identify the origin and function of transient
cell types that are generated upon heart injury, andwe identify novel cellular drivers of the regeneration
process.
J. P. Junker: None.
S05.3
Transcriptome-Scale Super-Resolved Imaging in Tis-
sues by RNA SeqFISH
L. Cai
*
Caltech, Pasadena, CA, United States
Imaging the transcriptome in situ with high accuracy has
been a major challenge in single cell biology, particularly
hindered by the limits of optical resolution and the density
of transcripts in single cells. We developed seqFISH +, that
can image the mRNAs for 10,000 genes in single cells with
high accuracy and sub-diffraction-limit resolution, in the
mouse brain cortex, subventricular zone, and the olfactorybulb, using a standard confocal microscope. The tran-
scriptome level pro ﬁling of seqFISH +allows unbiased
identi ﬁcation of cell classes and their spatial organization
in tissues. In addition, seqFISH +reveals subcellular
mRNA localization patterns in cells and ligand-receptor
pairs across neighboring cells. This technology demon-strates the ability to generate spatial cell atlases and to
perform discovery-driven studies of biological processes
in situ.
L. Cai: None.S06 Making Sense out of Nonsense
S06.1
Nonsense Mediated Decay in Neuronal Development
and Disease
M. Wilkinson
*
Univerity of California, San Diego, CA, United States
Nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD) is a highly selective
and conserved RNA turnover pathway that promotes the decay
of speci ﬁc subsets of RNAs. A critical factor in the NMD
pathway is UPF3B, an adapter protein that binds with other
NMD proteins to form a molecular complex that drives rapid
RNA decay. In humans, mutations in UPF3B cause intellectualdisability (ID) and are strongly associated with autism, atten-
tion-de ﬁcit hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia (SCZ).
To understand UPF3B ’s role in vivo, we generated a mouse
model with a null mutation in the Upf3b gene. These Upf3b-
null mice are viable but exhibit a profound defect in pre-pusle
inhibition (PPI), a measure of sensomotor gating commonlydeﬁcient in individuals with SCZ and other brain disorders.
These NMD-de ﬁcient mice also have de ﬁcits in speci ﬁcf o r m s
of learning and memory. Consistent with both their PPI andlearning defects, speci ﬁc neuronal cell subsets in Upf3b-null
mice display de ﬁcient dendritic spine maturation in vivo.
Neural stem cells from Upf3b-null mice have impaired abilityto undergo differentiation and require prolonged culture to give
rise to functional neurons with electrical activity. During the
course of our analysis, we discovered that Upf3b-null micealso have a phenotype consistent with a partial olfactory defect.
This provided an opportunity to examine the role of Upf3b in
olfactory neurogenesis, a simple and easily tractable neuraldevelopmental system. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-
seq) analysis revealed that Upf3b-null mice have speci ﬁc
defects in olfactory neurogenesis, including in olfactory stem
cells. These NMD-de ﬁcient mice also had de ﬁcits in the
olfactory receptor (OR) repertoire in olfactory sensory neuro-nal subsets at different stages of development. The nature of
these defects strongly suggested that NMD has a key role in
the OR selection process. We suggest that NMD-de ﬁcient
Upf3b-null mice will be a useful model system to decipher the
roles of NMD in neural development and function in vivo.
M. Wilkinson: None.
S06.3
Unproductive splicing and ultraconserved nonsense
L. Lareau
*
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United
States10 J. del PicchiaThe most conserved regions of any human genes are found
within alternative exons that act as switches to turn off
expression of SR splicing factors. When these ‘poison ’
exons are spliced into SR gene transcripts, they trigger
mRNA degradation by nonsense-mediated decay (Lareau
et al, 2007; Ni et al, 2007). This shifts the mRNA output ofthe gene away from the productive, protein-coding form,
allowing post-transcriptional downregulation of SR protein
expression. However, despite the intense conservation, thefunctional impact of this regulation is unknown. We set out
to identify developmental processes showing changes in the
splicing of poison exons in SR genes. Using bulk and single-cell RNA-seq data, we found that the inclusion of poison
exons changes dramatically during neurogenesis, and that
the splicing patterns of different SR poison exons followdistinct temporal pro ﬁles. To identify trans-acting regulators
of poison exon inclusion, we used publicly available CLIP-
seq data from 157 RNA-binding proteins to train motif-based classi ﬁers and predict binding in and near the poison
exons whose splicing changes during neurogenesis. We
found that SR splicing factors form a highly interconnectednetwork by binding both to their own poison exons and to
the poison exons of other SR splicing factors. During neu-
rogenesis, the expression of these splicing factors is tightlycoordinated with the splicing of several groups of exons to
which they bind. We identi ﬁed speci ﬁc regions within SR
poison exons that are bound by one or several splicingregulators which may act in concert or in opposition. We are
removing these regions, as well as full poison exons, to
measure their impact on neuronal differentiation. Our resultsindicate that poison exons function as an auto- and cross-
regulatory mechanism that tightly regulates the levels of
splicing factors during neurogenesis, and that this regulationis mediated by ultraconserved sequences.
L. Lareau: None.
S07 Abstracts Withdrawn
S08 Cardiovascular Genetics
S08.1
Challenges in Diagnostic Sequencing for InheritedCardiac Conditions
R. Walsh
*
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Diagnostic genetic sequencing has become an integral part of
clinical management for most inherited cardiac diseases.
Although identifying the Mendelian variants underlying dis-ease will inform treatment in only a minority of cases, it can be
used to con ﬁrm diagnosis and enable cascade screening inpatients ’families. However there are a number of challenges
associated with cardiovascular diagnostic sequencing that have
limited its effectiveness. The era of candidate gene studies led
to a plethora of weak and false gene-disease associations, and
subsequently a large increase in uncertain (and even false
positive) ﬁndings when incorporated into diagnostic panels.
Recent efforts through community curation initiatives such as
ClinGen and large-scale rare variant association studies have
clariﬁed many of these associations, enabling more focused
and accurate diagnostic testing panels. Variant interpretation
remains a critical and often rate-limiting step - although
widespread adoption of the ACMG/AMP guidelines havebrought standardisation and stringency to variant classi ﬁcation,
they require customisation for speci ﬁc diseases and genes and
can lead to the under-calling of pathogenic variants. A numberof approaches are being developed to address this issue,
including efforts to enhance data and knowledge sharing, high
throughput functional assays and quantitative and machinelearning variant classi ﬁcation methods. Finally, the more
complex and comprehensive gen etic basis of inherited cardiac
diseases is now being investigated in greater depth, in parti-cular though genome-wide association studies utilising multi-
centre studies and population biobanks. This research offers the
promise in the near future of more comprehensive diagnosticsequencing that may more accurately predict the risk of disease
onset, severity and outcomes in patients and family members.
R. Walsh: None.
S08.3
Identi ﬁcation and Characterization of Novel Micropro-
teins in the Human Heart
S. van Heesch
*
Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine in the
Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany
RNA translation is widespread outside of the canonical
protein-coding complement of the human transcriptome,
vastly expanding its coding potential. In a cohort of 80human hearts, we have recently identi ﬁed hundreds of
previously undiscovered microproteins translated from
upstream open reading frames (uORFs) in mRNAs andshort ORFs (sORFs) in presumed long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs) (van Heesch et al., Cell 2019). Although these
included translated lncRNAs with known functional roles inthe heart (e.g. UPPERHAND ,Myheart ,Chaer ,TRDN-AS
and GATA6-AS1 ), the biological activity of the micro-
proteins produced from these genes remained uncertain.
To address this, we characterized the subcellular
localization, cell type-speci ﬁc expression, and protein
interactomes of hundreds of cardiac microproteins in ahigh-throughput manner. Many of the investigatedAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 11microproteins (57 out of 153 tested) localized to the
mitochondria, suggesting underappreciated functionality in
cardiac energy metabolism. Using a PRISMA screen, for
which tiled 15-aa segments of 271 novel microproteins
were spotted on a membrane and incubated with cell lysate,
we catalogued microprotein interaction partners and ﬁne-
mapped precise interaction motifs, allowing us to categorize
functional microprotein classes. Among the identi ﬁed
microproteins, 18 were speci ﬁcally produced in the human
heart, most of which were cardiomyocyte-speci ﬁci na
single nucleus expression atlas with >500k sequenced
nuclei. Genetic perturbation of one of these human heartspeciﬁc microproteins primarily affected expression of
genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and calcium
handling in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. Preliminarylive-cell imaging of TTN-GFP labeled microprotein
−/−cells
revealed a likely repressive function of this microprotein on
sarcomere contraction and relaxation times.
We have identi ﬁed and characterized hundreds of novel
microproteins that are produced in the human heart, though
prevalent in other tissues. Despite the mostly evolutionaryyoung age of these microproteins, we discovered dedicated
subcellular localizations, highly speci ﬁc interaction part-
ners, cell-type speci ﬁcity, and functional involvement in
processes central to cardiac functioning.
S. van Heesch: None.
S09 Beyond Mendelian Inheritance
S09.1
From digenic combinations to oligogenic networks via a
new predictive approach
T. Lenaerts
*
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
The wide-spread use of high throughput-sequencing in the
last decades has helped immensely in unravelling the geneticarchitecture of many rare diseases as wells as identifying the
causative variant in Mendelian ones. Notwithstanding the
many successes, different issues remain unsolved: Certaincases exhibit incomplete penetrance, phenotypic variability,
locus heterogeneity, as well as non-Mendelian patterns of
inheritance. Novel technological advancements are thusrequired to move beyond this current state of the art. Our
team pushes the envelope on new pathogenicity prediction
and ranking tools for the identi ﬁcation of the oligogenic
causes of diseases. We aim to identify more complex
inheritance models, where variants in a small number of
genes cause or modulate the development of disease. In thispresentation I discuss two advancements we recently pub-
lished: a new pathogenicity predictor, developed usingpublished medical data on digenic diseases, and an online,
publicly available platform that takes the results of this
predictor, aggregates this into oligogenic networks, which
combine highly affected gene pairs, and contextualises these
results with molecular knowledge. This platform, called the
Oligogenic resource for variant analysis (or ORVAL),allows researchers to perform predictions on gene panels as
well as full exomes, receiving a full report on the potentially
relevant combinations, integrated into gene-pairs and net-works, and annotated with known protein relationships as
well as functional information for all candidate pathogenic
combinations that can be found. These two advancementsprovide researchers with a novel way to explore patient
exome data while also adding molecular knowledge and
other pieces of information. The predictor, which is calledthe variant combination pathogenicity predictor (or Var-
CoPP) assigns pathogenicity scores to variant combinations
in gene pairs, similarly to well-known monogenic patho-genicity predictors currently used in prioritisation pipelines.
Yet, as VarCoPP is trained on digenic diseases data, it
identi ﬁes other culprits than those that would be identi ﬁed in
a monogenic way, opening new routes for exploration when
the classical approaches fail. In this way, we hope to assist in
providing more accurate insights into the reasons for phe-notypic heterogeneity in diagnosed patients as well as to
raise the diagnosis level for many rare diseases.
T. Lenaerts: None.
S09.3
Resolution of Disease Phenotypes Resulting from Multi-
locus Genomic Variation
J. E. Posey
*
BCM225, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States
Elucidation of the genetic mechanisms underlying disease is a
critical step toward Genomic Medicine. As our understanding
of the role and frequency of multilocus genomic variation hasgrown, it is increasingly clear that the relationships between
an individual ’s genotype and phenotypic expression are
complex, and that such cases of multilocus variation arechallenging to ascertain clinically. We now know that least
5% of individuals for whom clinical exome sequencing (cES)
is diagnostic are identi ﬁed to have more than one molecular
diagnosis, and the rate of multiple molecular diagnoses is
increasing with continued novel disease gene discovery.
Population substructure - identity-by-descent - can drive aneven higher frequency of multilocus genomic variation:
22.0% (18/82) of cases compared to a control cohort with a
4.9% (101/2076) frequency of multilocus variation. We ﬁnd
that the observed rate of multiple molecular diagnoses is12 J. del Picchialower than that predicted, suggesting that such cases may be
under-ascertained. In seeking approaches to improve ascer-
tainment of multilocus variation, we ﬁnd that the observation
of apparent phenotypic expansion in association with a pre-
viously-described gene may actually represent unrecognized
multilocus variation. ES analysis of cases with apparentphenotypic expansion reveals a higher frequency of multiple
molecular diagnoses (31.6% [6/19]) compared to a cohort of
cases without apparent phenotypic expansion (2.3% [2/87, p=0.0004]), providing potential molecular mechanisms for the
observed clinical phenotypes in such cases. Applying a
computational approach to model genotype-phenotype rela-tionships in the setting of multilocus variation, we demon-
strate that phenotypic similarity analyses can be used to model
pairs of Mendelian conditions having distinct or overlappingphenotypic features (p =1.77 × 10
−7). Preliminary data sug-
gest that a ‘goodness-of- ﬁt’approach to modeling of patient
phenotypes and identi ﬁed molecular diagnoses may support
identi ﬁcation of cases likely to have additional molecular
diagnoses. Computational modeling of observed and expected
clinical phenotypes will play an increasing role in humangenomics as our understanding of the combinatorial effects of
variation at more than one locus increases in complexity.
J. E. Posey: None.
S10 Single Cell Cancer Genetics
S10.1
Heterogeneity
B. Thienpont
*, M. De Borre, P. Van Minsel, Q. Yu, E. Galle
KU Leuven, Laboratory for Functional Epigenetics,
Leuven, Belgium
Lung tumours are heterogeneous, being composed of a
number of stromal cell types as well as cancer cells. In this
talk, I will describe our recent efforts to unravel the het-
erogeneity of stromal cells within the lung tumour micro-environment, and describe the ongoing studies in my lab
aimed at understanding how epigenetic enzymes can drive
transcriptional heterogeneity within cancer cell populations.
B. Thienpont: None. M. De Borre: None. P. Van Minsel:
None. Q. Yu: None. E. Galle: None.
S10.3
Single cell to understand AML progression
A. Perl
*
Philadelphia, PA, United StatesAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly studied cancer
in which tumor cells have a small number of recurrent, well-
described somatic mutations in a limited number of func-
tional classes of genes. Whole genomic sequencing of AML
tumor cells con ﬁrmed these tumors to be relatively simple
genetically in individual cells, yet patients treated withmolecularly-targeted therapy often relapse with highly
polyclonal disease, including genotypes rarely if ever seen
outside of this context.
We sought to study and characterize this polyclonality
using single cell techniques in order to better understand
molecular underpinnings of drug resistance and perhapsidentify clinical approaches that would circumvent these.
This talk will describe the genetics of AML and describe
how single cell analysis for the majority of recurrentmutations seen in AML uncovered unexpected genetic
diversity and provided insight into intratumor heterogeneity
with implications for targeted therapy of other malignancies.
S11 Embryo and Placenta: Equal Partners
S11.1
The unsung hero: The essential role of the placenta for
development and lifelong health
M. Hemberger
1,2,3*
1Calgary, AB, Canada,2University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada,3Alberta Children ’s Hospital Research
Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada
The unsung hero: The essential role of the placenta for
development and lifelong health
Despite signi ﬁcant progress over the past decades in
gaining a better understanding of placental development
and the contribution of the placenta to fetal and postnatal
health, the placenta still remains a much too often
overlooked organ. Here, we present data from a recent
high-throughput phenotyping screen in which we system-atically analysed the placental morphology of mouse
mutants that cause embryonic lethality. Much in contrast
to the known ~10% of extra-embryonic defects reported forgene deletions that lead to intra-uterine demise, our
systematic analysis shows that indeed 60-70% of these
mutants are associated with a placental phenotype. Thisdiscrepancy results from the fact that the placenta is
frequently ignored in the analysis of gene mutations, and
demonstrates a great gap in knowledge as to the cohort ofgenes required for normal placentation. Linking the
placental phenotype data with embryonic phenotypes
obtained from the very same mouse lines, we observe astrong correlation between defects in placental development
and abnormalities in heart, brain and vascular development.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 13These unbiased correlations underpin the importance of the
placenta not just merely for fetal nutrition, but for
embryonic development on the whole which has long-
lasting consequences for postnatal health. In addition to
genetic mutations, pregnancy complications that are
unrelated to karyotypic abnormalities but often have theirroots in a defective placenta are well known to become
more prevalent with advanced maternal age. Here, we also
present data on the impact of maternal age on placentation,and how changes to the uterine epigenome that accumulate
with age contribute to these defects.
S11.2
Genetics of Recurrent Hydatidiform Moles: Novel
Findings and Patient Counselling
R. Slim
*
McGill University Health Centre Research Institute,
Montreal, QC, Canada
Hydatidiform mole (HM) is a human conception with
abnormal embryonic development and excessive tropho-
blastic proliferation. The common form of this condition is
sporadic, not recurrent and affects one in every 600 preg-nancies in western countries. HM are classi ﬁed according to
their morphological features (complete and partial) and
genotypes (Diploid androgenetic, monospermic and dis-permic; triploid dispermic, and diploid biparental). Recur-
rent HM affect for 1 to 9% of women with a prior HM and
may have any of the three genotypes. Biallelic mutations intwo genes, NLRP7 andKHDC3L , underlie most cases of
recurrent diploid biparental moles. Recently, we identi ﬁed
three novel genes, MEI,TOP6BL andREC114 , responsible
for androgenetic HM associated with recurrent miscarriages
and with female and male infertility. We demonstrated that
HM tissues from two patients with recessive MEI1 muta-
tions are diploid androgenetic monospermic. Androgenetic
HM were ﬁrst described in 1977, but how they occur have
remained open questions. We next investigated the occur-rence of androgenesis in Mei1 -deﬁcient female mice and
discovered that 8% of their oocytes lose all their chromo-
somes by extruding them with the spindles into the ﬁrst
polar body. We demonstrated that Mei1
−/−oocytes are
capable of fertilization and 5% of them produce androge-
netic zygotes. We therefore uncovered a novel meioticabnormality in mammals and a mechanism for the genesis
of androgenetic zygotes. Our ﬁndings will advance our
understanding of the genetic causes of reproductive failurein humans and improve patient management and genetic
counselling.
R. Slim: None.S11.3
Organoids to understand pregnancy disorders
G. J. Burton
*
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Human early pregnancy is a dif ﬁcult period to research, yet
mounting evidence indicates that many complications of
pregnancy, ranging from miscarr iage to growth restriction, are
the result of poor placental development from implantation
onwards. It is now appreciated that development of the placenta
is supported predominantly by histotrophic secretions from theuterine glands during the ﬁrst trimester. These secretions are
well recognised in domestic species, where they are generically
referred to as ‘uterine milk ’due to their high lipid content.
Research in the sheep and horse has shown how lactogenic
hormones secreted by the placenta signal to the glands and
upregulate the secretion of ‘uterine milk ’proteins and growth
factors. These in turn feedback on the placenta to stimulate
proliferation and differentiati on, in what has been referred to as
a servo-mechanism.
We have proposed an equivalent mechanism operates in the
human, but gaining evidence in vivo is dif ﬁcult for ethical
reasons. We have therefore adopted the organoid approach,generating organoid cultures of both the endometrial glands
and the placental trophoblast. T hese are genetically stable in
culture and hormonally respons ive, and can be passaged for
over one year or frozen for biobanking. The transcript pro ﬁle of
the organoids closely resembles that of the starting material.
Exposing our endometrial organoids to various combinationsof pregnancy hormones, such as human chorionic gonado-
tropin and prolactin, upregulates the transcription and secretion
of known ‘uterine milk ’proteins and growth factors that have a
mitogenic effect on the placenta.
The organoid approach therefore opens new possibilities for
researching the critical events during early placental develop-
ment in a systematic fashion. Our ﬁndings also reinforce the
concept that endometrial function and correct decidualisationduring the ﬁrst trimester are critical to pregnancy outcome.
G. J. Burton: None.
S12 Where Science and Ethics Meet
S12.1
The state of the science of heritable human genome
editing and ethical concerns
M. Ramsay
*
Sydney Brenner Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Faculty
of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa14 J. del PicchiaScienti ﬁc advances in DNA editing technologies are
approaching levels of accuracy and ef ﬁciency that bring us
closer to imagining a responsible clinical translational path-
way toward heritable human genome editing (HHGE). This
profound step would signal the acceptance of wilful manip-
ulation of human genomes, such that the changes are passedon to future generations. It has triggered the formation of two
international panels to debate a responsible way forward. The
WHO has convened an Expert Advisory Committee on
Human Genome Editing to make recommendations on
appropriate governance standards and mechanisms for over-
sight of somatic and germline human genome editing. TheUK Royal Society and US National Academies of Medicine
and Sciences convened an International Commission on the
Clinical use of Human Germline Genome Editing .T h e
Commission has been tasked with developing a framework to
inform the development guidelines for a responsible pathway
from research to potential clinical application. This should bedone in the context of international discussions of societal
implications and include considerations of access, equity and
ethical norms and practices. The speci ﬁc tasks include:
Identifying scienti ﬁc issues that should be evaluated for var-
ious classes of HHGE; identifying appropriate protocols to
guide pre-clinical validation of potential adverse effects suchas unintended on- and off-target events, mosaicism and long
term effects; considering how to assess the balance between
potential bene ﬁts and harms to the child and future genera-
tions; providing guidelines for ethics approval and consent, as
well as long-term monitoring of children born with edited
genomes; and considering potential oversight structuresincluding the scienti ﬁc criteria for establishing and monitoring
HHGE. The Commission ’s recommendations should be
applicable to the global community and guide national policydevelopment and processes. * Ramsay is a member of the
International Commission on the Clinical use of Human
Germline Genome Editing
M. Ramsay: None.
S12.2
Crack down on genomic surveillance
Y. Moreau
*
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Biometric surveillance is rapidly reshaping life in societies
across the world. Genome sequencing is revolutionizing
medicine. At the con ﬂuence of these two trends lies forensic
DNA pro ﬁling, which is touted by law enforcement and
governments as a silver bullet against crime. Serious con-
cerns emerge however when this technology becomes a
cornerstone of human rights abuse, from Xinjiang in Chinato the US-Mexico border. Moreover, consumer genomicdatabases are now putting the privacy of the entire popu-
lation in jeopardy, and clinical genomic databases might
soon as well. Even where legal frameworks protect funda-
mental rights and privacy, major failures are seen in prac-
tice. Furthermore, legal instruments are lacking to hold
corporations accountable when they recklessly supplytechnology to abusive authorities. The academic community
and scienti ﬁc publishers have also failed to uphold their
professed ethical standards, and hundreds of ethicallyquestionable papers have been published in mainstream
scienti ﬁc journals. Urgent action is needed to shore up
social norms, ethical standards, and legal frameworks toregulate biometric surveillance technology, including DNA
proﬁling.
Y. Moreau: None.
S13 Lysosomes in Health and Disease
S13.1
The lysosome in the control of cell metabolism
A. Ballabio
1,2,3*
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM),
Pozzuoli, Italy,2Neurological Research Institute, Baylor
college of Medicine, Hoston, TX, United States,3Casma
Therapeutics, Boston, MA, United States
The lysosome is the main mediator of cellular degradation
and recycling processes. Several diseases are due to lyso-
somal malfunction. We have identi ﬁed a lysosomal gene
network and a master gene, TFEB, that controls lysosomal
biogenesis and autophagy. The activity of TFEB is regu-
lated by the mTORC1 kinase complex through a lysosomalsignaling pathway that enables lysosomal function to adapt
to environmental cues, such as nutrient availability. Thus,
the lysosome acts as a signaling hub to control cell home-
ostasis and the switch between anabolism and catabolism.
Targeting lysosome-mediated signaling pathways is anattractive therapeutic strategy for a variety of disease
conditions.
A. Ballabio: Other; Signi ﬁcant; CASMA THERAPEUTICS.
S14 ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges Session on
Polygenic Risk Scores: Risky or Useful in the Clinic?
S14.2
Improving Polygenic Risk Scores,but also improvingour knowledge about them
K. Fischer
*, K. Läll, M. Mändul
Tartu University, Tartu, EstoniaAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 15In this presentation, the following aspects of implementa-
tion of the polygenic risk score (PGRS) will be discussed.
First, we consider one of the main problems in the PGRS
development - in many studies, there is some overlap
between samples used in the different steps: discovery
GWAS, score development and selection of the best PGRS,andﬁnally, validation of the ﬁnal PGRS. Next, we will
highlight that there is no unique solution for choosing the
optinal PGRS. Depending on the phenotype, differentmethodologies may lead to the best solution (simple PGRS
that uses clumping of the SNPs in the discovery study and a
p-value threshold, a PGRS with modi ﬁed weights,
MetaGRS, LDPRED and other Bayesian approaches,
machine-learning methods, etc) A thirg range of problems is
connected to the effect size estimation of the PGRS. Wewill show that incorrect time scale as well as the presence of
competing risks may lead to biased and misleading esti-
mates of the effect size. Finally, we address the question onhow to assess the added value of the PGRS to the existing
risk-prediction algorithms. We show that some results that
have been presented with some scepticism may actuallydeserve another look.
K. Fischer: None. K. Läll: None. M. Mändul: None.
S15 Detection of Structural Variation
S15.1
Detection of Structural Variation and Haplotype-Aware
Genome Assembly
T. Marschall
*
Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany
Recent breakthroughs in long-read sequencing technology
and assembly methodology enable the de novo assembly of
human genome to a quality approaching the quality of the
reference genome GRCh38. My talk will center around
creating such assemblies and how they facilitate the dis-covery of structural variation. My talk comes in three parts:
In the ﬁrst part, I will describe work done by the Human
Genome Structural Variation Consortium (HGSVC) andsummarize how we performed (reference-based) haplotype
phasing followed by local assembly to de ﬁne the sequences of
SV alleles (Chaisson et al., Nature Communications, 2019).
In the second part, I introduce a work ﬂow for fully phased
de novo genome assembly, overcoming the prevailing
genome assembly paradigm to produce sequences that"collapse" parental haplotypes into a consensus sequence.
To achieve this, we leverage the chromosome-wide phasing
and scaffolding capabilities of single-cell strand sequencing(Strand-seq) and combine them with either high- ﬁdelity
(HiFi) long sequencing reads, PacBio CLR reads, or OxfordNanopore Technology reads. Employing this strategy, we
produce completely phased de novo genome assemblies
separately for each haplotype of a single individual of
Puerto Rican origin (HG00733) in the absence of parental
data. The assemblies are accurate (QV > 40), highly
contiguous (contig N50 > 25 Mbp) with low switch errorrates (0.17%) providing fully phased single-nucleotide
variants (SNVs), indels, and structural variants (SVs).
In the third part, I sketch a way forward to leverage such
haplotype-resolved genome assemblies to build a human
pangenome. I present preliminary result on a new tool,
PanGenie, able to genotype variation, and particularly SVs,inherent to such a pangenome given a short read data set of
a study sample. This process is very scalable, going from
input Fastq to ﬁnal call set in around 20 single core CPU
hours, and provides accurate genotypes for many SVs that
used to be inaccessible by short reads.
T. Marschall: None.
S15.2
Improving the detection and genotyping of structural
variation
B. Kehr
1,2*
1Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany,2Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Structural variants (SVs) can lead to a variety of diseases,
contribute signi ﬁcantly to human genetic diversity, and are
important marks of genome evolution. Therefore, incom-plete detection and unreliable genotyping of SVs limit a
wide range of human genetic studies. As recent studies have
demonstrated that the number of SVs per human genome isat least an order of magnitude greater than the number of
SVs we routinely detect in short read data, we need to
explore opportunities to improve the detection and geno-typing of SVs. One such opportunity is the use of data from
novel technologies, e.g. long read data. Another opportunity
is joint detection of SVs in many genomes together, whichstrengthens the detection of variants shared by different
genomes. In this presentation, I will introduce computa-
tional methods for detecting and genotyping SVs in manyshort-read sequenced genomes jointly and demonstrate how
the joint approach leads to more complete and more reliable
SV call sets. Speci ﬁcally, I will give an overview of the
tools PopDel and PopIns we developed for identifying
deletions and non-reference sequence variants in up to tens
of thousands of human genomes. Finally, I will show howeven the current SV callers for long read data are limited in
detecting certain types of SVs.
B. Kehr: None.16 J. del PicchiaS15.3
Annotation and Curation of High-Con ﬁdence Structural
Variants
A. Quinlan*
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States
A typical human genome contains >4,000 structural variants
(SVs) larger than 300bp, ranging in size from hundreds tomillions of nucleotides. SVs cause diverse phenotypes, and
their size increases the potential to alter gene dosage, alter
chromatin structure, affect expression, remove regulatoryelements, and create gene fusions. However, detecting
structural variants in a human genome via whole-genome
sequencing is fraught is notoriously inaccurate. I will pre-sent recently developed methods for isolating high-con-
ﬁdence structural variants, recent advances in prioritizing
SVs that may have phenotypic consequences, and chal-lenges that remain in interpreting this important, yet com-
plex form of genetic variation.
A. Quinlan: None.
S16 Genetic Mechanisms in Haematological Neoplasias
S16.1
Inherited Myeloid Malignancies
J. Fitzgibbon
*
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
Inherited haematological malignancy syndromes are typi-
cally characterised by acute myeloid leukaemia/myelodys-plasia (AML/MDS) occurring in two or more genetically
related family members. While these syndromes are con-
sidered relatively rare, accounting for <5% of all AML/
MDS cases, it is likely that many patients with germline
mutations are not readily identi ﬁed, families may display
marked variations in disease phenotype, latency and pene-
trance across mutation carriers and these features, coupled
with an absence of comprehensive diagnostic assays andpaucity of clinical guidelines, give rise to an apparent
under-representation of familial leukaemia. Importantly,
lack of awareness regarding familial involvement may leadto the unsuspecting selection of asymptomatic family
members as stem cell donors, with several reports describ-
ing donor-derived episodes of AML. Fortunately, we arenow making signi ﬁcant progress in recognising and
understanding the molecular pathogenesis of these syn-
dromes, as highlighted by the introduction of a provisionaldiagnostic category in the World Health Organisation
(WHO) 2016 ( Myeloid neoplasms with germ linepredisposition ). To date mutations in >20 discrete loci have
been described but notably, investigators still report that
perhaps as many as 40-50% of families with an appropriate
clinical history have no readily identi ﬁable genetic lesion
from interrogation of the coding genome. Unsurprisingly,
there is a signi ﬁcant overlap between genes mutated in both
sporadic and inherited forms of leukaemia. Each gene has a
distinct clinical, biological and molecular pro ﬁle; for
example, familial CEBPA -mutated AML is a recognized
leukaemia predisposition entity where the pathological
features and long-term survival of individuals mirrors
sporadic CEBPA dm AML. We are lately beginning to
decipher the genetic evolution of leukaemia across family
members, with evidence suggesting that secondary muta-
tions may cluster within pedigrees, for example GATA2
mutations in families with germline CEBPA mutations and
JAK-STAT pathway mutations in RUNX1 pedigrees
potentially pointing to the host genotype impacting on theacquisition of somatic mutations. In the absence of stan-
dardised testing, much of our new knowledge is emerging
from individual research groups and collaborations and willrequire validation and collective evaluation across the leu-
kaemia research community. It is widely accepted that we
need to develop a network of international advisors whomay provide accessible guidance for clinicians worldwide,
particularly when rare and insightful clinical observations
may aid both clinical management and promote the detec-tion of novel syndromes. Moving forward, it would be
sensible to have an uni ﬁed approach to analyse sporadic and
familial leukaemia is now required.
J. Fitzgibbon: None.
S16.2
Genetics and Mechanisms of Acute LymphoblasticLeukemia
A. Ferrando
*
Columbia University, New York, NY, United States
Relapse acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is associated
with chemotherapy resistance and poor prognosis. Persis-
tent leukemia initiating cells with increased self-renewalcapacity, clonal heterogeneity and selection of resistance-
driving genetic alterations have been proposed as drivers of
leukemia relapse. Gain of function mutations in the 5 ′-
Nucleotidase, Cytosolic II (NT5C2) gene are selectively
present in relapsed ALL and confer resistance to che-
motherapy with 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP). Yet, the speci ﬁc
mechanisms mediating constitutive activation of NT5C2
and the role of these mutations as drivers of clonal evolution
during leukemia initiation and disease progression remainunknown. Our structure function and crystallographicAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 17analyses have uncovered new intra-molecular mechanisms of
NT5C2 regulation speci ﬁcally targeted by relapsed leukemia-
associated mutations. In addition, using an in vivo leukemia
model we demonstrate a dual role for NT5C2 R367Q, the
most frequent relapse-associated NT5C2 allele, as a loss of
ﬁtness mutation impairing cell growth in the absence of
chemotherapy, and a gain of ﬁtness mutation resulting in
disease progression and relapse in the context of 6-MP ther-
apy. These results have important implications for monitoringof leukemia relapse driving clones and for the development of
targeted therapies for the treatment of relapsed disease.
A. Ferrando: None.
S17 Cornelia de Lange Syndrome and Cohesinopathies
S17.1
Cornelia de Lange Spectrum: does deep phenotyping help?
F. Ramos
1*, A. Latorre-Pellicer1, L. Trujillano2,
M. Gil-Salvador1, M. Arnedo1, C. Lucía-Campos1,
R. Antoñanzas-Pérez1, B. Puisac1, P. Gómez-Puertas3,
J. Pié1
1University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain,2University
Hospital "Lozano Blesa", Zaragoza, Spain,3Molecular
Biology Center "Severo Ochoa", Madrid, Spain
Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS, OMIM #122470,
#300590, #610759 614701, #300882) is a multisystemic
condition characterized by a recognizable craniofacial
phenotype, characteristic limb malformations and widespectrum of symptoms from different organs and systems.
Two main clinical subgroups are currently recognized based
on the severity of manifestations: the classic (severe) CdLSand the non-classic CdLS. The ﬁrst subgroup, the most
common ( ≈60% of CdLS cases), includes the patients who
have a pathogenic variant in the gene NIPBL . These indi-
viduals have a characteristic facial appearance, distal limb
reduction defects (oligodactyly in the hands), hirsutism, andmoderate to severe growth and psychomotor retardation/
intellectual disability. The non-classic CdLS includes the
patients with milder craniofacial phenotypes and clinicalmanifestations and bearing pathogenic variants in the other
four genes associated with the syndrome ( SMC1A ,SMC3 ,
HDAC8 , and RAD21 ). Clinical diagnosis of many of these
individuals is often challenging and sometimes very dif ﬁ-
cult due to the overlapping with several syndromes that
share clinical manifestations with CdLS but are caused byother genes that may not be related to the cohesin complex.
Deep phenotyping can be de ﬁned as the precise and com-
prehensive analysis of phenotypic anomalies in which theindividual components of the phenotype are observed and
described in detail. The generalized use of the HumanPhenotype Ontology (HPO) system to annotate clinical
manifestations has contributed to standardize the terminol-
ogy and improve the accuracy of the genotype-phenotype
correlations in many dysmorphic síndromes, including
CdLS. There are a number of tools currently available to
perform quick and ef ﬁcient deep phenotyping processes and
algorithms that are able to accurately identify facial patterns
(gestalt) that match with speci ﬁc dysmorphic known sín-
dromes. These new tools, rather than substitute the clinicalskills of the clinician, are intended to help them to diagnose
patients who do not ﬁt a recognizable dysmorphic pattern.
We have used one of those deep phenotyping tools(Face2Gene
®) to check its diagnostic accuracy in 49 CdLS
patients whose clinical diagnosis was con ﬁrmed by mole-
cular testing. Thirty-three of them had pathogenic variantsinNIPBL , and the remaining in three of the other CdLS
genes (SMC1A ,HDAC8 , and RAD21 ). Average accuracy
was 83.7%, meaning that CdLS was listed as the ﬁrst
choice. In 97.9% of the cases analyzed, CdLS was included
in the top- ﬁve suggestions. In the subgroup of patients with
the classic phenotype, 88.8% of the patients were diagnosedas CdLS as the ﬁrst choice. Overall, KBG was the second
most suggested diagnosis. No differences were found in the
top-one sensitivity when the phenotypes were compared byage. Finally, we check the accuracy of the process com-
paring the facial phenotypes of the patients depending on
the genes involved. We found, as expected, a top-one sen-sitivity of 97% for patients with variants in NIPBL , 66,6%
forRAD21 , 60% for HDAC8 , and 50% for SMC1A . We can
conclude that, in general, deep phenotyping tools are usefulfor clinical geneticists and may help them in the diagnostic
process of patients with non-recognizable dysmorphic pat-
terns or in syndromes with overlapping phenotypes.
F. Ramos: None. A. Latorre-Pellicer: None. L. Trujillano:
None. M. Gil-Salvador: None. M. Arnedo: None. C. Lucía-
Campos: None. R. Antoñanzas-Pérez: None. B. Puisac:None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. J. Pié: None.
S17.3
Post-Zygotic Mutation as a Cause of Typical Cornelia
De Lange Syndrome
D. FitzPatrick
*
MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Typical Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS, MIM #122470)
is a very severe, clinically distinct multisystem disordercharacterised by intellectual disability, prenatal onset growth
retardation, limb malformations, multiple chronic medical
problems and distinctive facial features. 60-70% of affectedindividuals have de novo heterozygous, loss-of-function18 J. del Picchiamutations in NIPBL which are detectable in blood DNA.
Many of the remaining typical cases have mosaic mutations in
NIPBL usually absent in DNA derived from peripheral leu-
cocytes but detectable in saliva samples at low levels and in
uncultured skin with variant allele frequencies approaching
50%. Strikingly most of the children with mosaicism have aclinical disorder at least as severe as those with constitutional
mutations. Mosaicism may be the result of post zygotic
mutation (PZM) or rescue of a constitutional mutations viamitotic homologous recombination in blood cell progenitors.
NIPBL performs fundamental functions critical for cell sur-
vival such as mitotic segregation of chromosomes, DNArepair and developmental gene regulation. As such rescue
seemed the most plausible mechanism a priori. However
using data from whole genome sequence and tissue speci ﬁc
g e n e t i ca n a l y s i sw ec a n ﬁnd no evidence for rescue and, in a
number of cases, de ﬁnitive evidence for PZM. Given the
severity of the phenotype in mosaic cases both at a cellularand organismal level it seems likely that the mutant cells have
an advantage over wild-type cells in populating ectodermal -
neuroectodermal, in particular - lineages. This hypothesis canbe tested using in vitro differentiation cell competition assays.
D. FitzPatrick: None.
S18 Clonal Fitness of Somatic Mutations
S18.1
Somatic Evolution in Human Tissues
I. Martincorena
*
Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Cancers develop by somatic mutation and clonal selection
within our tissues. Over the past decade, the ability to
sequence cancer genomes has transformed our understanding
of the genetics and evolution of a wide range of cancers.
However, owing to technical limitations, little is known about
the earliest steps of cancer and how cells in our tissuesaccumulate mutations during normal ageing and in their
progression towards cancer. In this talk, I will present our
work unveiling a hidden and unexpected world of cellularcompetition and somatic evolution in human healthy tissues,
with implications for our understanding of cancer and ageing.
I. Martincorena: None.
S18.2
Somatic Genetic Rescue in Mendelian Haematopoietic
Diseases
P. Revy
*
Imagine Institute, Paris, FranceSomatic mutations occur spontaneously in normal indivi-
duals and accumulate throughout life. These genetic mod-
iﬁcations contribute to progressive ageing phenotypes and
are directly involved in cancer development. However, a
growing number of studies of Mendelian haematopoietic
disorders indicate that somatic genetic events called"somatic genetic rescue" can offset the pathogenic effect of
germline mutations at the cellular level, leading to genetic
mosaicism and, in some cases, resulting in a milder diseasephenotype. I will present two examples of somatic genetic
rescue that we observed in our lab.
P. Revy: None.
S18.3
Somatic Mutations and Regeneration in Chronic Liver
Disease
H. Zhu
*
University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, United States
Normal tissues accumulate genetic changes with age, but it is
unknown if somatic mutations promote clonal expansion of
non-malignant cells in the setting of chronic degenerative
diseases. Exome sequencing of diseased liver samples from82 patients revealed a complex mutational landscape in cir-
rhosis. Additional ultra-deep sequencing identi ﬁed recurrent
mutations in PKD1, PPARGC1B, KMT2D, and ARID1A.The number and size of mutant clones increased as a function
ofﬁbrosis stage and tissue damage. To interrogate the func-
tional impact of mutated genes, a pooled in vivo CRISPRscreening approach was established. In agreement with
sequencing results, examination of 147 genes again revealed
that loss of Pkd1, Kmt2d, and Arid1a promoted clonalexpansion. Conditional heterozygous deletion of these genes
in mice was also hepatoprotective in injury assays. Pre-
malignant somatic alterations are often viewed through thelens of cancer, but we show that mutations can promote
regeneration, likely independent of carcinogenesis.
H. Zhu: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Ionis. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; 28-7 Therapeutics.
S19 Data-driven Genomic Care and its Implementation
in the Clinic: A Paradigm Shift
S19.2
Empirical evidence in preventive genomics: MedSeq,BabySeq and beyond
C. Blout
*
Brigham and Women ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United StatesAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 19As genomic technologies advance and costs decline, the
ability to implement preventive genomics into everyday
medicine becomes possible. The Genomes2People (G2P)
research program is exploring the impact of implementing
genomic sequencing into routine medical care. This pre-
sentation will summarize G2P studies as well as thedevelopment of the new Brigham Preventive Genomics
Clinic. The MedSeq Project, which was the ﬁrst rando-
mized control trial of genom e sequencing (GS), enrolled
not only a disease cohort (c ardiomyopathy), but also a
healthy cohort. We enrolled 200 patients and 20 of their
health care providers. In the separate but similarlydesigned BabySeq Project, we enrolled 309 newborns
recruited from the well-baby nursery and neonatal inten-
sive care unit. Both of these NIH-funded studies explored
the medical, behavioral and economic outcomes of GS
following disclosure.
Comprehensive sequencing and interpretation revealed
that 20% of MedSeq, and 11% of BabySeq, participants
had a non-indication-based, unanticipated variant in a
gene associated with a monogenic condition. Upon re-phenotyping, after the variant was identi ﬁed, 6/20
MedSeq participants and 11/18 BabySeq participants
were identi ﬁed to have a personal and/or family history
of the disease. Carrier variants were identi ﬁed in 94% of
MedSeq and 88% of BabySeq participants. In MedSeq
there were no signi ﬁcant cost differences between
sequenced cases and controls by 6 months, and in
BabySeq there was a small but signi ﬁcant increase in
downstream health care costs over 3 months among thesequenced infants when compared to the controls. Both
studies revealed no increas es in anxiety and depression
related to genomic information. Lessons learned from thisresearch prompted the creation of the Brigham and
Women ’s Hospital Preventive Genomics clinic. This ﬁrst
of its kind service has seen over 40 clinical patients to datefor preventive genomic consultations and testing. Our
research outlines the many bene ﬁts of population genomic
screening and our experiences provide important informa-tion regarding clinical imple mentation as well as identify-
ing areas where further study is needed.
C. Blout: None.
S20 Integrating Large-scale Functional Data Into
Genome-Wide Association Studies
S20.1
Combining omics data with GWAS results
A. Gusev
1,2*
1Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States,
2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United StatesGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed
thousands of variants associated with disease, but the
underlying mechanisms through which these variants
operate remain elusive. This talk focuses on three topics
related to overcoming this challenge: First, I will discuss
some insights into disease architecture that we have gainedfrom GWAS so far. Second, I will describe a statistical
framework we have developed called MESC, which aims to
quantify the total fraction of disease heritability that can beexplained by all observed expression QTLs. Applying
MESC to large-scale eQTL and GWAS data we ﬁnd that
only ~11% of GWAS heritability appears to be mediated bymeasurable eQTLs, most of which resides in eQTLs with
very weak effects that are dif ﬁcult to detect. Finally, I will
describe a computational tool - PLASMA - that leveragesallele-speci ﬁc expression to ﬁne map such weak effect
QTLs and colocalize them with disease. In application to
real RNA-seq studies from hundreds of individuals,PLASMA increased power over conventional QTL map-
ping and colocalization by an order of magnitude.
A. Gusev: None.
S20.2
A Bayesian Framework for Joint Fine-Mapping withApplications to Immune-Mediated Diseases
J. Asimit
*
MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom
Hundreds of genetic variants have been identi ﬁed as asso-
ciated with a spectrum of diseases and related traits but
pinpointing likely causal variants ( ﬁne-mapping) has been
complicated by extended linkage disequilibrium (LD) and
ﬁnite sample sizes. In the ﬁne-mapping of single outcomes,
inaccuracies often occur when there are two or more distinct
causal variants that are both correlated with a single non-
causal variant. This motivates the development of MFM(Multinomial Fine-Mapping) for multiple diseases with
shared controls; joint ﬁne-mapping that leverages informa-
tion between outcomes in a Bayesian framework, whereprior model probabilities are formulated to favour combi-
nations of models with a degree of sharing of causal var-
iants between outcomes. Our simulation studiesdemonstrate that MFM has greater accuracy than single
disease ﬁne-mapping when there are shared causal genetic
variants between diseases, yet no precision loss if there is nosharing. In addition, MFM analysis of six immune-mediated
diseases identi ﬁes novel genetic associations that are missed
by marginal analyses. We jointly ﬁne-map association sig-
nals for six diseases and of particular interest is IL2RA ,
which is known to be associated with several autoimmune20 J. del Picchiadiseases, including multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 diabetes
(T1D), autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) and coeliac
disease. MFM has the potential to increase ﬁne-mapping
resolution in related diseases/traits without collecting larger
sample sizes and is computationally ef ﬁcient.
J. Asimit: None.
Educational Sessions
E01 New Technologies
E01.1
Manifold destiny: exploring genetic interactions in high
dimensions through massively parallel single cell RNA-seq
J. Weissman
*
UCSF/HHMI, San Francisco, CA, United States
A major principle that has emerged from modern genomic
and gene expression studies is that the complexity of cell
types in multicellular organisms is driven not by a large
increase in gene number but instead by the combinatorialexpression of a surprisingly small number of components.
This is possible because speci ﬁc combinations of genes
exhibit emergent properties when functioning together,enabling the generation of many diverse cell types and
behaviors. Understanding such genetic interactions has
important practical and theoretical applications. For exam-ple, they can reveal synthetic lethal vulnerabilities in
tumors, identify suppressors of inherited and acquired dis-
orders, guide the design of cocktails of genes to drive trans-differentiation between cell types, inform the search for
missing inheritance in genetic studies of complex traits, and
enable systematic approaches to de ﬁne gene function in an
objective and principled manner. De ﬁning how genes
interact is thus a central challenge of the post-genomic era.
The combinatorial explosion of possible genetic interac-
tions (GIs), however, has necessitated the use of scalar
interaction readouts (e.g. growth) that con ﬂate diverse
outcomes. I will present our work developing an analytical
framework for interpreting manifolds constructed from
high-dimensional interaction phenotypes. We applied thisframework to rich phenotypes obtained by Perturb-seq
(single-cell RNA-seq pooled CRISPR screens) pro ﬁling of
strong GIs mined from a growth-based, gain-of-function GImap. Exploration of this manifold enabled ordering of
regulatory pathways, classi ﬁcation of GIs in a principled
manner (e.g. identifying true suppressors), and mechanisticelucidation of synthetic lethal GIs, including an unexpected
synergy between CBL and CNN1 driving erythroiddifferentiation. Finally, we applied recommender system
machine learning to predict interactions, facilitating
exploration of vastly larger GI manifolds. We expect the
conceptual and computational frameworks presented here
will be broadly applicable to genetic interactions obtained
via other rich phenotyping approaches (e.g. proteomics,imaging) and methods of perturbation (e.g. knockdown,
knockout, mutagenesis).
J. Weissman: None.
E01.2
Nanopore Sequencing of Human Genomes: the long and
short of it.
M. Loose
*
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Notting-
ham, United Kingdom
The utility of long read sequencing has dramatically
increased in the last few years whilst costs have lowered.
We have exploited Nanopore sequencing to sequencehuman genomes (and others) on MinION, GridION and
PromethION. To do this we have been involved in devel-
oping methods to sequencing ever longer molecules, cur-rently up to 2.3 Mb in length. Alongside we have been
developing methods for targeted sequencing of speci ﬁc
regions of genomes using CAS-9 library preparationmethods and, more recently, computational methods
including adaptive sampling allowing us to direct the
sequencer to speci ﬁc regions of the genome as required. We
will present our work including sequencing over 700 cancer
gene targets and the MHC domain to 30x coverage on a
single MinION ﬂowcell.
M. Loose: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Oxford
Nanopore Technologies. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;Modest; UK BioBank.
E01.4
Optical mapping for clinical structural variantsdetection
A. Hoischen
1,2,3*
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Radboud Institute
of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Department of Internal
Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases
(RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
NetherlandsAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 21Structural variants (SVs) are an important source of genetic
variation in the human genome and they are involved in a
multitude of human diseases. SVs are enriched in repeat-
rich regions of the human genome, and several remain
undetected by conventional short-read sequencing technol-
ogies. Here I will introduce the basics of high-resolutionoptical mapping that allow the sensitive genome-wide
identi ﬁcation of SVs. I shall demonstrate its utility for
molecular cytogenetics for constitutional SVs in cases withe.g. germline micro-deletion/-duplication syndromes,
inversions and translocations. Recent advances also allow
for the sensitive identi ﬁcation of acquired i.e. somatic SVs
e.g. in leukemia samples. Finally I will showcase ﬁrst
examples of how optical mapping enables unravelling of
hidden SVs in rare disease cases that remained undetectedby classical methods, including MLPA, Sanger sequencing,
exome and/or genome sequencing. In summary, I will show
how the complementary use of mapping rather thansequencing approaches allow for comprehensive detection
of all cytogenetic abnormalities and how this can unmask
hidden SVs. I predict that ultra-long read mapping mayenable a revolution in ‘next generation cytogenetics ’.
A. Hoischen: None.
E02 Abstracts Withdrawn
E03 Pharmacogenomics in the Clinic
E03.1
Pharmacogenetics - from bench to drug label
J. Stingl
*
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, UniversityHospital of
the RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
The role of pharmacogenetic diagnostics has changed during
the past decades with a more explorative role in the beginning
explaining differences in drug metabolism and elimination,further looking at differences in individual drug response and
safety, and nowadays developing to a therapy companion
diagnostic for indications of drug therapies. With the knowl-edge on our pharmacogenome, also new methods for genetic
diagnostics arose, and large genome analyses now became
convenient, easy to handle, and relatively cheap. While incentralized countries like the Un ited States, the development of
guidelines and pharmacogenetic information in drug labels is
already advanced, in Europe, the diversity of national health
systems affects regulation for ph armacogenetic diagnostics. We
have now different sorts of pharmacogenetic information in the
drug label which could be informa tive, actionable, or obliga-
tory. The action consequence of this information depends on
the section in the label that co ntains the information. Forexample, the section on indication would most probably con-
tain information on mandatory pharmacogenetic diagnostics
prior to onset of therapy, whereas in the section on adverse
drug reactions, mostly informa tive pharmacogenetic aspects are
mentioned about variability in th e risk of side effects. Recently,
a European referral was opened that should clear the questionof a pretherapeutic testing of DPYD variants in therapy with
ﬂuoropyrimidines. The outcome of the referral (expected in
2020) could mean that for the ﬁr s tt i m ei nE u r o p e ,ap h a r m a -
cogenetic test is mandatory before onset of a common drug
therapy (so far, only genetic testing in rare disease therapy is
mandatory). Pharmacogenetics is now in the implication phasewith the use of pharmacogenetic tests for drug therapy indi-
cation, for individualized dosing and for the avoidance of side
effects. Depending also on national health systems, genetictests for therapy decisions are/and will become more and more
in use in realworld clinical practice.
J. Stingl: None.
E04 Hypermobility and the Ehlers Danlos Syndromes
E04.2
Vascular Presentation of the Ehlers Danlos Syndromes
P. Byers
*
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
Normal 0 false false false EN-US X-NONE X-NONE /*
Style De ﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-
name:"Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-
priority:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt
0in 5.4pt; mso-para-margin-top:0in; mso-para-margin-right:0in; mso-para-margin-bottom:10.0pt; mso-para-mar-
gin-left:0in; line-height:115%; mso-pagination:widow-
orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font-family:"Arial","sans-serif";}
Given that many of the types of Ehlers Danlos syndrome
(EDS) result from mutations in genes that encode proteinsthat are components of blood vessels, it should come as no
surprise that arterial dissection and rupture can complicate
the lives of people with these conditions. The ﬂagship of
these conditions is vascular EDS (vEDS), which results
from pathogenic variants in COL3A1 that encodes type III
procollagen —a major component of arterial walls. These
events are uncommon in children but prove to the related to
the cause of death in most individuals, except for those with
haploinsuf ﬁciency. One contribution to premature death
(median survival of about 50 years) is that vessel wall is
friable and, so, dif ﬁcult to suture; in addition, it is dif ﬁcult
to anticipate dissection and rupture. Aortic and large arterialvessel dissection appears to be an uncommon event in
people with classical EDS the most common kinds of22 J. del Picchiamutations ( COL5A1 haploinsuf ﬁciency) as well as those
with missense and splicing alterations. The recessively
inherited kyphoscoliotic EDS results from pathogenetic
variants in PLOD1 that encodes lysyl hydroxylase 1 (LH1),
and in FKBP14 . These affect the hydroxylation of lysyl
residues in collagens that are critical for the formation oftissue stabilizing intermolecular cross links. In both, dis-
section may occur in late childhood and early adolescence.
Surveillance protocols are not yet standardized amonggroups and there is not yet consensus recommendations for
any of these conditions. Surgical intervention can be life-
saving and should not be ignored, and the effectiveness ofmedical therapies have yet to be clearly demonstrated. The
pathway from nucleotide change to pathogenesis remains to
be explored but there are hopes that unexpected therapeutictools may be identi ﬁed from ongoing studies.
P. Byers: None.
E05 Interpreting Variation Outside of Protein-Coding
Sequence
E05.1
Functional Characterization and Therapeutic Targeting
of Gene Regulatory Elements
N. Ahituv
*
UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States
Nucleotide variation in gene regulatory elements is a major
determinant of phenotypes incl uding morphological diversity
between species, human variat ion and human disease. Despite
continual progress in the catal oging of these elements, little is
known about the code and grammatical rules that govern theirfunction. Deciphering the code an d their grammatical rules will
enable high-resolution mapping of regulatory elements, accu-
rate interpretation of nucleotid e variation within them and the
design of sequences that can deliver molecules for therapeutic
purposes. To this end, we are using massively parallel reporterassays (MPRAs) to simultaneous ly test the activity of thou-
sands of gene regulatory elements in parallel. By designing
MPRAs to learn regulatory grammar or to carry out saturationmutagenesis of every possible nucleotide change in disease
causing gene regulatory elements, we are increasing our
understanding of the phenotypic consequences of gene reg-ulatory mutations. Regulator y elements can also serve as
therapeutic targets. To highlight this role, we used CRISPR/
Cas9 activation (CRISPRa) of regulatory elements to rescuehaploinsuf ﬁcient diseases (having ~50% dosage reduction due
to having only one functional al lele) in vivo. By targeting the
Sim1 promoter or its 270kb distant hypothalamic enhancer, we
were able to rescue the haploinsuf ﬁcient obesity phenotype in
Sim1 heterozygous mice, both usin g a transgenic and adeno-associated viru s (AAV) approach. Using a similar AAV
CRISPRa approach, we also show that we can rescue the
obesity phenotype in Mc4r heterozygous mice. Our results
highlight how regulatory elements could be used as therapeutic
targets to treat numerous alt ered gene dosage diseases.
N. Ahituv: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Encoded
Therapeutics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Enhancer
Therapeutics.
E05.2
Dissecting Non-Coding Sequences in Gene Regulation
A. Stark
*
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna,
Austria, Vienna, Austria
The vast majority of disease-associated SNPs in the human
genome is located in the non-protein-coding part, which
makes it dif ﬁcult to assess the functional impact of the
sequence variants. Non-coding sequences, which make up
the largest part of the human genome, contain gene-reg-
ulatory elements - promoters and enhancers - that direct thedynamic expression of genes in complex spatial and tem-
poral patterns. The promoter and enhancer sequences con-
tain this gene regulatory information, which in the cells isrealized by transcription factor and cofactor proteins.
Today, I will ﬁrst introduce how reporter systems can be
used to understand the sequence-encoding of gene-regula-tory information and how sequence changes alter regulatory
function. I will then present our recent work towards
understanding how cells utilize this information withtranscription factor and cofactor proteins. Using an inter-
disciplinary approach in Drosophila, we study how
enhancers and the cofactor proteins they recruit activatedifferent types of core promoters, enabling distinct sets of
genes and alternative promoters of the same genes to be
regulated differently. The distinct compatibilities betweencofactors and core promoters forms the basis of speci ﬁcity
within and between gene regulatory programs.
A. Stark: None.
E06 Brain Size Matters!
E06.1
Microcephaly: genetics and disease mechanisms
G. M. S. Mancini
*
ErasmusMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam,
NetherlandsAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 23Microcephaly is de ﬁned by a head circumference (HC)
below 2 SD standard deviations for age and sex. A dis-
tinction is generally made between congenital or primary
microcephaly, i.e. a small HC for gestational age at birth,
and progressive or post-natal microcephaly, i.e. normal HC
at birth followed by insuf ﬁcient growth during infancy and
childhood. When small head circumference re ﬂects an
insufﬁcient brain growth, microcephaly is associated with
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD), such as intellectualdisability, epilepsy, autism. The most common structural
abnormality in primary microcephaly is a simpli ﬁed gyral
pattern of the cortex. Association with other malformations,e.g. lissencephaly or polymicrogyria, implies neurological
sequelae and in ﬂuences disease course. Nevertheless,
prognostic evaluation in a newborn with microcephalyremains dif ﬁcult. Compatibly with a very high mitotic rate
and scheduled cell death of neural progenitors of the
developing human cortex, the most relevant genes andprocesses affected in primary microcephaly relate to reg-
ulation of the cell cycle (e.g. mitotic spindle formation and
orientation, centrosome biology, mitotic chromosomestructure, double strand DNA repair and chromosome sta-
bility) or of scheduled apoptosis. There is partial etiologic
overlap with the pathogenesis of progressive microcephaly,which mostly affect control of DNA repair, or regulation of
intermediate metabolism. However, novel paradigms are
emerging in the pathogenesis of microcephaly, which arerelated to regulation of the balance between ER-controlled
proteostasis and cell cycle. This subtle balance might reveal
to be one of the factors determining the difference betweena stable microcephaly phenotype (as observed in many
types of primary microcephaly) to a progressive, hence
severe course as observed in many types of progressivemicrocephaly.
G. M. S. Mancini: None.
E06.2
Macrocephaly
G. Mirzaa
1*, F. Pirozzi2, A. Timms2, M. Berkseth2,R .
Shear2, G. Ruggeri2, E. Novotny3, W. Dobyns2, R. Kapur3,
J. Hauptman2, J. Ojemann2
1Seattle, WA, United States,2Seattle Children ’s Research
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States,3Seattle Children ’s
Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States
Megalencephaly: advances from genomic discoveries to
precision-based medicine
Megalencephaly disorders (MEG) constitute a growing
spectrum of developmental disorders associated with early
brain overgrowth, brain malformations including corticaldysplasia, and neurodevelopmental co-morbidities such as
intractable epilepsy, autism and intellectual disability.
Constitutional and mosaic mutations of multiple cell growth
pathways, including the PI3K-AKT-MTOR and RAS
pathways, have been identi ﬁed in this spectrum; with
promising therapeutic avenues on the horizon to amelioratethe associated neurological de ﬁcits (e.g. MTOR pathway
inhibitors). However, signi ﬁcant molecular and clinical
challenges remain. Widely used molecular diagnosticmethods, such as standard-depth exome sequencing, lack
the sensitivity to detect low-level mosaic mutations
common in MEG. These methods are also not suitable forscreening limited amounts of surgically resected brain
tissues due to their high DNA input requirements.
Ultimately, more optimal molecular diagnostic methodsand high throughput pre-clinical models are necessary to
identify and study the effects of MEG-related mutations on
brain development. To address these challenges, we utilize acombination of ultra-deep targeted sequencing employing
digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) as a new and sensitive tool for
screening common mutations in the PI3K-AKT-MTORpathway, and a quad based exome approach, sequencing
lesional (affected) tissues at a higher depth (200-250X). To
date, we performed genetic testing on a large cohort ofMEG families and have identi ﬁed both known and novel
candidate genetic variants, including ultra-low-level mosaic
mutations in the PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway. Our datadescribe a gradient of mosaicism seen within the brain in
hemimegalencephaly samples; with mutation-positive
regions ranging in alternate allele frequencies (AAF) from0.3% to 25.6% across several brain tissues. We subse-
quently aimed to model disease pathogenesis in vitro,
selecting patient-derived ﬁbroblast lines with mutations in
key upstream ( PIK3CA ) and downstream ( MTOR ) nodes in
the pathway. We generated induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) carrying the common PIK3CA
H1047Rand
MTORT1977Imutations to characterize these nodes. Our
results suggest that targeted molecular analysis for the
common PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway mutations by ddPCRis an effective molecular diagnostic approach for MEG.
Given the high sensitivity and low DNA input requirements
for this assay, ddPCR may also be an effective moleculartool for other mosaic disorders with a narrow mutational
spectrum. Our iPSC-derived lines provide a valuable model
for dissecting the functional consequences of these muta-tions and future drug screens using PI3K-AKT-MTOR
pathway inhibitors.
F. Pirozzi: None. A. Timms: None. M. Berkseth: None.
R. Shear: None. G. Ruggeri: None. E. Novotny: None. W.
Dobyns: None. R. Kapur: None. J. Hauptman: None. J.
Ojemann: None.24 J. del PicchiaE07 Genome Editing: Multiple Tools and their
Applications
E07.1
Editing the Mammalian Genome: Targets and Tools
H. O ’Neill*
University College London, London, United Kingdom
Genome editing comprises a powerful set of tools which
have enabled discovery in every model organism. CRISPR
genome editing has propelled research from bench to clinicand shows promise for both the treatment and prevention of
genetic disorders. Ongoing research into the components of
this technology highlight where improvements can be madeto sharpen editing ef ﬁciencies. This lecture explains what
CRISPR is, how it works, and dissects the CRISPR
machinery to illuminate aspects of experimental designwhich are essential for any genome editing experiment.
H. O ’Neill: None.
E07.2
Genome-Wide CRISPR-Cas9 Screening in Immune
Cells
P. Tolar
*
Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom
The advent of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing has
revolutionised genetics. One of the new experimentalapproaches afforded by the high ef ﬁciency of CRISPR/Cas9
gene editing are high-throughput gene targeting experi-
ments, such as genome-wide functional screens. Pooled-library genome-wide screens are a particularly powerful and
efﬁcient method to identify non-redundant genes regulating
a variety of cell intrinsic functions. For the ﬁrst time this
allows comprehensive molecular characterisation of cellular
processes in cells from higher organisms in which previous
approaches failed, such as in primary immune cells frommice and humans. I will discuss examples of CRISPR
screening strategies that my lab has developed for screening
of immune functions in B cells. The results of these screensshed new light on molecular pathways that control antigen-
mediated B cell activation, proliferation, cell death and dif-
ferentiation into antibody-secreting cells under healthy andpathological situations. The encouraging results of these
approaches hold promise for future advances in studies of
gene interactions, pathway mapping and molecular bases of
pathology inferred directly from diseased human cells.
P. Tolar: None.E08 Does Genetic Counselling Work?
E08.1
What Was, What Is, What If - Trends and Predictions
In Assessing Genetic Counseling
R. G. Resta
*
Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA, United States
Genetic counselling as a formalized clinical practice is
about 75 years old and as a profession is about 50 years old.
Initially (What Was) the criteria for assessing the effec-tiveness of genetic counselling focused on reproductive
outcomes, cost-savings, and avoiding disability. As genetic
technologies have advanced, social values have changed,and research sophistication has increased, (What Is) the
effectiveness of genetic counselling has been assessed by
patient focused outcomes such as empowerment, adapta-tion, and personal disease risk reduction and avoidance.
Nonetheless, recurring themes of cost-savings and disability
avoidance continue to be proposed and used as measures ofgenetic counselling success. Ultimately, the measures of the
"success" of genetic counselling re ﬂect social, ethical, cul-
tural, geographic, and historical factors, as well as who ismeasuring genetic counselling outcomes and for what pur-
poses. As genetic technologies and ethical values evolve
(What If), different measures of effective genetic counsel-ling will likely emerge.
This presentation reviews the different measures of the
effectiveness of genetic counselling and their relationship tosociocultural and historical in ﬂuences and speculates on
emerging, potential, and speculative ways of assessing the
effectiveness of genetic counselling. Ultimately, the "effec-tiveness" of genetic counselling depends upon how
effectiveness is de ﬁned, who is de ﬁning effectiveness, and
why they are de ﬁning effectiveness. The effectiveness of
genetic counselling is de ﬁned not so much by its
practitioners as it is by the sociocultural, medical, andhistorical context in which genetic counselling takes place.
R. G. Resta: None.
E08.2
How to help society interact with genomic technology
A. Middleton
*
Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom
The‘Your DNA, Your Say ’project is a global online survey
gathering public attitudes towards genomic data sharing.
This project explores how society is responding to genomictechnology and articulates the hopes and concerns thatAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 25individuals have. I will share results from 37,000 members
of the public, from 22 countries (survey gathered data 15
languages) and offer insight into awareness of genomics,
interest in donating one ’s data for research and clinical use
and fears around what would happen if a person is identi ﬁed
from their data. I will also explore what trust looks like tomembers of the public. I was also share details of another
study, ‘Music of Life ’that explores how to explain genetics
using metaphor in ﬁlm. Films are being trialled at Adden-
brookes Hospital in Cambridge and I will share some of
these. All of my work focusses on how to build a bridge to
society so that we can help society interact with genomics.Twitter: @genomethics, website: genomethics.org
A. Middleton: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
RareMark, Congenica.
E10 Therapy for Rare Disorders
E10.1
Gene therapy in genetic disorders
M. Cavazzana
1,2,3,4,5*
1Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France,
2Biotherapy Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades,
Paris, France,3Biotherapy Clinical Investigation Center,
Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Ouest, Paris, France,
4Paris Descartes –Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France,5INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory
of Human Lymphohematopoiesis, Paris, France
Over the last ﬁfteen years, gene therapy has shown its
powerful outcome to successfully treat genetic diseases
such as X-SCID. Moreover the results of several other trialshave con ﬁrmed the clinical potential of gene therapy
approaches in other settings such as ADA de ﬁciency and b-
hemoglobinopathies where the bone marrow content of the
different stem and precursor cells and the cells ’relationship
with the stroma have very speci ﬁc characteristics. The
optimization of gene therapy requires better characterization
or identi ﬁcation of bone marrow homeostasis features in
disease settings. Recent progress has been achieved in theharvesting and expansion of healthy hematopoietic stem
and progenitor cells (HSPCs) but also in identifying the
appropriate tools. The use of SIN retroviral vectors hassigniﬁcantly reduced the risk of insertional mutagenesis and
has been the best choice for the introduction of a therapeutic
gene into autologous HSPCs than ﬁrst-generation gamma
retroviral vectors. The use of autologous gene-corrected
HSPCs reduced the risk of alloreactive immune responses
and decreases the risk of infectious complications. Althoughthis progress is of great value, caution is required when
translating these ﬁndings into a diseased HSPC setting: (i)in order to allow an engraftment of the corrected cells, gene-
modiﬁed autologous HSPCs need a conditioning regimen
that could be responsible for acute and chronic toxicity, (ii)
HSPCs derived from children under the age of 10 behave
differently in culture. Lastly, genome editing and homo-
logous recombination technologies have undergone spec-tacular developments over the last couple of decades. In
view of the impressive progress reported for the gene
addition strategy, offering gene-editing approaches topatients affected by inherited disorders would move gene
therapy one step forward but would raise a number of other
scienti ﬁc questions.
M. Cavazzana: None.
E10.2
Trial readiness, trial endpoints and stakeholdercollaboration
V. Straub
*
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, New-
castle, United Kingdom
Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) are rare diseases caused by
abnormalities in four anatomical structures: 1) the anteriorhorn cell, 2) the axon of the 2
ndmotor neuron, 3) the neu-
romuscular junction and 4) the skeletal muscle cell itself.
Mutations in more than 600 genes causing 1000 differentdiseases have so far been identi ﬁed to cause genetic NMD.
The spectrum of phenotypes reaches from ﬂoppy babies to
late onset degenerative diseases. Most NMD are associatedwith profound disability and many have a reduced life
expectancy. The clinical approach to NMD has changed
quite dramatically over the past 30 years from a rathernihilistic and paternalistic to a research active and forward
looking approach. Life changing treatments have now been
approved for a number of genetic NMD, including genereplacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy type 1, and
many interventional trials and registration studies are ongo-
ing. This change in attitude was helped by improvements indiagnostics, a better understanding of pathomechanisms and
joint international collaborations on trial readiness. Within
the past 15 years, a ﬁeld with a profound lack in clinical trial
culture has changed into a specialty that is at the forefront of
advanced therapy activities. This change was amongst other
things made possible by TREAT-NMD, a patient centredcollaborative infrastructure programme supported by patient
advocacy groups and the European Commission. The project
started as a network of excellence within the EU FrameworkProgram 6 with the aim to accelerate the elaboration of
clinical trials for rare genetic NMD. Over the past 13 years
the network has established standardised operating proce-dures for the assessment of various animal models, standard26 J. del Picchiaof care guidelines for a number of NMD, patient registries, a
care and clinical trial site inventory, a registry for outcome
measures, the TREAT-NMD advisory committee for ther-
apeutics (TACT), a global communication programme,
training and education activities, a consortium of biobanks
and close interactions with the regulatory authorities. Thesuccessful translational infrastructure has helped to overcome
the fragmentation that existed in the ﬁeld and shaped the way
all stakeholders are working together. The presentationreﬂects on the achievements of TREAT-NMD and on lessons
learned.
V. Straub: None.
E11 Heritability Estimations
E11.1
Heritability estimation and gene-environment
correlation
A. Young
*
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United
States
Heritability measures the frac tion of trait variation in a popu-
lation due to genetic inheritance. However, when genetic var-
iants and environment are correlated, heritability becomes
harder to measure. Sources of gene-environment correlationinclude population strati ﬁcation and indirect genetic effects
from relatives. indirect genetic effects are effects of genetic
variants in one individual on another individual ’s trait through
the environment. indirect genetic effects have been shown to be
substantial for educational att ainment, and likely affect other
human traits. In this talk, I discuss how to use genetic data onfamilies to separate out the direct causal effects of inherited
genetic variants from indirect genetic effects and population
stratiﬁcation. The particular genetic variant that an individual
inherits is the outcome of random segregation in the parent of
that individual during meiosis . This randomisation, indepen-
dent of environment, enables unbiased estimation of direct
effects of SNPs and heritability by using genetic data on par-
ents and offspring. We discuss results of applying such meth-ods and compare them to results from methods that do not
account for gene environment correlation.
A. Young: None.
E11.2
Flexible Heritability Estimation from Summary
Statistics
D. Speed
*
Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies, Aarhus, DenmarkTheﬁeld of SNP-based heritability analysis began in 2010,
when Yang et al showed it was possible to estimate SNP
heritability, the total proportion of phenotypic variation
explained by single nuclotide polymorphisms, from gen-
ome-wide association study (GWAS) data. Since then,
many related methods have been proposed (e.g, methods forestimating heritability enrichments, genetic correlations and
confounding bias), that allow us to further interrogate the
genetic architecture of complex traits.
I will begin by providing an introduction to the ﬁeld, and
describing methods that use individual-level data. Then I
will discuss the second-generation methods, that requireonly GWAS summary-statistics (and thus allow us to
analyze ever-increasing amounts of data). I will explain
how a crucial feature of all methods is the choice ofheritability model, which re ﬂects our prior information
about the relative contributions of different SNPs. I will
ﬁnish by providing examples not only of how these
methods have improved our understanding of complex
traits (e.g., allowed us to determine which types of SNPs are
most important, and to infer the impact of selection), buthow this information can be utilized in other areas of
statistical genetics (e.g., to enable us to produce more
accurate polygenic risk scores).
D. Speed: None.
E12 Abstracts WithdrawnE13 Mainstreaming Mitochondrial Replacement
Techniques?
E13.1
Mitochondrial replacement techniques: Exploring thebiological consequences
M. Herbert
*, G. Hudson, Y. Takeda
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom
Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are maternally
inherited and can cause a broad range of debilitating andfatal diseases. Reproductive technologies, commonly
known as “mitochondrial replacement ”(MR) have been
developed to enable women who carry pathogenic muta-tions to have a genetically related child with a greatly
reduced risk of transmitting mtDNA disease. Such tech-
nologies involve transplantation of the nuclear DNA fromthe egg of an affected woman to an enucleated egg from an
unaffected donor, effectively rescuing the nuclear genome
from its defective mitochondrial environment. The nuclearDNA is transferred in a karyoplast containing a minimal
amount of cytoplasm, which can contain mitochondria.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 27Under optimal conditions, the fraction of mtDNA co-
transferred with the nuclear genome typically accounts for
0-2% of the mtDNA content of MR embryos. Despite this, a
minority of embryonic stem (ES) cell lines derived from
MR embryos revert to the nuclear donor ’s mitochondrial
genome. While the relevance to development in vivo isunclear, reversion in ES cell lines remains a consideration in
the therapeutic application of MR. Our ongoing research,
focussed on understanding the drivers of reversion and ondeveloping techniques to prevent it, has revealed new
insights into mitochondrial homeostasis during pre-
implantation development.
M. Herbert: None. G. Hudson: None. Y. Takeda: None.
E14 Repeat Expansions: From Detection to TreatmentE14.2
Therapeutic advances in Huntington ’s disease with
relevance to other repeat expansion disorders
S. J. Tabrizi
*
University College London, London, United Kingdom
Huntington ’s disease (HD) is one of the CAG repeat
expansion disorders, it is a devastating autosomal dom-
inantly inherited neurodegenerative disease for which there
is currently no effective disease modifying therapy. Thegenetic predictability of HD provides an opportunity for
early therapeutic intervention many years before overt
symptom onset and at a time when reversal or prevention ofneural dysfunction may still be possible. As HD is mono-
genic, fully penetrant, and characterised by a long pre-
manifest phase, it is emerging as a potential model forstudying therapeutic intervention in other neurodegenera-
tive conditions such as Alzheimer ’s or Parkinson ’s disease
where no preclinical diagnostic tests exist. In addition, HD
manifests with a broad range of clinical symptoms and
signs, many of them common to these other diseases, andinvolves widespread pathology throughout most of the
brain. Understanding of HD pathogenesis is evolving, and I
will present recent ﬁndings on identifying novel genetic
modiﬁers of age of onset and disease progression, and their
relevance for designing new therapeutics. In the main body
of my lecture, I will give an overview of importantapproaches in development for targeting mutant HTT DNA
and RNA, and in particular I will focus on the recent suc-
cessful phase 1b/2a clinical trial testing the effects ofRG6042 (formerly known as IONIS HTT Rx) in patients
with early Huntington ’s Disease and present the results of
theﬁrst successful HTT-lowering drug trial.S. J. Tabrizi: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; F.
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Takeda Pharmaceuticals Ltd. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant; Genentech.
Concurrent Sessions
C01 From Carrier Screening to Infertility and Fetal
Diagnostics
C01.1
Consistency of carrier screening guidelines across sevenpopulations and 408,00 individuals
A. Arjunan
*, R. Ben-Shachar, R. Torres, K. Johansen
Taber, K. E. Kaseniit, D. Muzzey
Myriad Women ’s Health, South San Francisco, CA, United
States
Introduction: Current American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines recommend pan-ethnic carrier screening for two conditions: cystic ﬁbrosis
and spinal muscular atrophy. In addition, ACOG recom-
mends screening for approximately a dozen conditions incertain ethnicities. Here we analyzed carrier rates of
176 serious conditions to determine whether current
guidelines support consistent care across all ethnicities.
Methods: Population-speci ﬁc carrier rates of 176 Men-
delian conditions were estimated using self-reported
ethnicity in a cohort of over 408,000 individuals undergoingexpanded carrier screening. Carrier screening guidelines
were then analyzed to determine consistency across
ethnicities.
Results: We analyzed 44 population-condition combina-
tions, and found that the least frequent was cystic ﬁbrosis
(CF) in the Southeast Asian population (population-
condition carrier rate 0.6%, 1 in 161). We then posited
the question: how many disorders not recommended forscreening are as frequent or more frequent than the least
frequent disorder currently recommended by carrier-screen-
ing guidelines? Searching across other permutationsrevealed 191 additional population-condition carrier rates
in excess of 0.6%, suggesting that current guidelines are not
consistently capturing reproductive risk across populationsor conditions.
Conclusions : Many conditions have population-speci ﬁc
incidence comparable to CF in the Southeast Asianpopulation —the rarest population-condition pair currently
recommended for carrier screening by ACOG. Expanding
guidelines to include pan-ethnic screening of additionalconditions with comparable or higher incidence in select28 J. del Picchiapopulations would improve equitability of medical care
across all populations.
This study was funded by Myriad Genetics, Inc.
A. Arjunan: None. R. Ben-Shachar: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Own-
ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or otherintellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Myriad Genetics, Inc.
R. Torres: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Myriad Genetics, Inc. K. Johansen Taber: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Myriad Women ’s Health. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. K.
E. Kaseniit: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Myriad Women ’s Health. F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Signi ﬁcant; Myriad Women ’s Health. D. Muzzey: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Myriad
Women ’s Health. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Myriad Genetics, Inc.
C01.2
Expanded carrier screening of recessive disorders
(CarrierTest) in clinical practice
J. Diblík
*, M. Bittóová, F. Lhota, F. Zembol, L. Dohnalová,
Z. Vilímová, I. Soldátová, M. Hrabíková, I. Pavlechová, M.Koudová, D. Stejskal
GENNET s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic
Introduction : Screening for carrier status of recessive dis-
orders is a standard part of preconception care. Expandedscreening is based on simultaneous detection of variants in
multiple genes that covers mutations prevalent in different
human populations.
Methods : CarrierTest is a custom designed test based on
amplicon sequencing of target regions in 77 genes for
detection of 835 pathogenic mutations causing more than 61inherited disorders.
Results : We have examined 10752 individuals from
couples with infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss betweenApril 2017 and October 2019. In total we have detected
3899 pathogenic variants, most often in following genes:
GJB2 (in 4.9 % of individuals), CFTR (3.6 %), SERPINA1
(2.6 %), DHCR7 (2.6 %), SMN1 (2.5 %), PAH (2.3 %),
NBN (1.8 %), CYP21A2 (3.3 %), ATP7B (1.2 %), PMM2
(1.1 %), ACADVL (1.1 %) and ACADM (1 %). We have
found a high risk of autosomal recessive disorder in 67
couples (1.25 %), most often both partners were carriers of
mutations in GJB2 (18×), CFTR (13×), SMN1 (6×),
CYP21A2 (6×), SERPINA1 (3×), PAH (3×), MEFV (3×),DHCR7 (2×), PMM2 (2×), ACADVL (2×), ACADM (2×),
HEXA (2×) and ARSA (2×).
Conclusion : Results of CarrierTest provide the couples
with information about the risk for their offspring. The
severity depends on the gene and exact mutations. The
ﬁndings thus must be assessed and communicated by a
clinical geneticist so that couples can make informed
decisions. The available preventive measures include
preimplantation genetic testing, prenatal diagnosis as wellas postnatal diagnosis for early treatment.
J. Diblík: None. M. Bittóová: None. F. Lhota: None. F.
Zembol: None. L. Dohnalová: None. Z. Vilímová: None. I.Soldátová: None. M. Hrabíková: None. I. Pavlechová:
None. M. Koudová: None. D. Stejskal: None.
C01.3
Exome sequencing reveals variants in known and novel
candidate genes for severe sperm motility disorders
M. S. Oud
1*, B. J. Houston2, L. Volozonoka3,4,F .K .
Mastrorosa4, B. Alobaidi4, P. F. de Vries1, G. Astuti1,
L. Ramos5, R. Burke2, R. I. McLachlan6,M .K .O ’Bryan2,
J. A. Veltman1,4, H. E. Chemes7, H. Sheth4,8
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Monash School of Biological Sciences,
Clayton, Australia,3Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia,
4Biosciences Institute Newcastle University, Newcastle,
United Kingdom,5Department of Gynaecology and Obste-
trics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,66Hudson
Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Australia,7Center
for Research in Endocrinology, Buenos Aires Children ’s
Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina,8Foundation for
Research in Genetics and Endocrinology, Ahmedabad,India
Severe sperm motility disorders are a form of male inferti-
lity characterized by immotile sperm, often in combination
with a spectrum of structural abnormalities of the sperm
ﬂagellum. Depending on the sub-categorization, genetic
factors explain up to 50% of these patients. We performed
exome sequencing on 21 patients with severe sperm moti-
lity disorders to identify the underlying genetic defects. Adiagnosis was reached in 9/21 patients (42.9%) due to
variants in previously described genes CFAP43 (3 patients),
CFAP44 (2 patients), QRICH2 (2 patients), DNAH1 (1
patient) and DNAH6 (1 patient). Furthermore, we identi ﬁed
seven patients with variants in novel spermatogenesis-rela-
ted candidate genes: CFAP58 ,DNAH12 ,DRC1 ,MDC1 ,
PACRG ,SSPL2C and TPTE2 . One other patient carried
variants in four candidate genes. Electron microscopy
imaging was available to further characterize the spermﬂagellum phenotype in 4/9 diagnosed patients and 5/8Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 29patients with variants in candidate genes. This revealed
short, irregular tails with thickening of the ﬁbrous sheath (9/
9 patients), abnormal outer dense ﬁbers (5/9) and absence of
dynein arms (2/9 patients), central microtubule pairs (6/9
patients) or mitochondrial sheath (9/9). RNA interference
study in Drosophila melanogaster conﬁrmed that loss of
DNAH6 ,DNAH12 andQRICH2 expression resulted in male
infertility, thus suggesting an evolutionary conserved role
for these genes. Our results con ﬁrm an important role for
ﬁve known genes and demonstrate that exome sequencing is
an effective method to diagnose patients with severe moti-
lity disorders. Sequencing of additional patient cohorts isneeded to further strengthen the role of the novel candidate
genes in motility disorders.
M. S. Oud: None. B. J. Houston: None. L. Volozonoka:
None. F. K. Mastrorosa: None. B. Alobaidi: None. P. F. de
Vries: None. G. Astuti: None. L. Ramos: None. R. Burke:
None. R. I. McLachlan: None. M. K. O ’Bryan: None. J. A.
Veltman: None. H. E. Chemes: None. H. Sheth: None.
C01.4
Identi ﬁcation of novel causes for male infertility: loss-of-
function variants in MSH4 andMSH5
M. J. Wyrwoll
1,2*, C. Friedrich1, E. Kaminsky3,
C. Krallmann2, S. Kliesch2, F. Tüttelmann1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany,2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and
Andrology, Department of Clinical and Surgical Androl-
ogy, University Hospital, Münster, Germany,3Praxis für
Humangenetik Kaminsky, Hamburg, Germany
Infertility affects around 7% of all men and is in part due to
azoospermia. Testicular sperm extraction (TESE) from
biopsies in azoospermic patients offers the possibility to
recover sperm that can be used for assisted reproduction.However, 2-10% of azoospermic patients have meiotic
arrest (MeiA). If MeiA is complete, TESE will not succeed.
We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 68patients with MeiA and negative TESE procedures. Alter-
native causes for infertility were excluded in advance. WES
data was screened with focus on rare, biallelic variants[maximum allele frequency (MAF) < 1% in all databases],
which are likely pathogenic (stop-, frameshift-, and splice
site-mutations). We detected two novel genes, MSH4 and
MSH5 , as possible causes for MeiA in men. Both genes are
expressed predominantly in germ cells in humans and are
associated with premature ovarian insuf ﬁciency in women.
One of our MeiA patients carries biallelic loss of function
variants in MSH4 , while three azoospermic patients have
homozygous variants in MSH5 . MSH4 and MSH5 form a
heterodimer, which binds DNA strands during prophase 1,stabilising the interaction between homologous chromo-
somes. Based on our data we propose that pathogenic var-
iants in MSH4 andMSH5 cause autosomal recessive MeiA.
If validated, screening of MSH4 andMSH5 in azoospermic
patients before testicular biopsy may prevent unnecessary
surgical procedures, if there is no chance of ﬁnding mature
spermatozoa in the testis. This work was carried out within
the frame of the DFG Clinical Research Unit ‘Male Germ
Cells: from Genes to Function ‘(CRU 326).
M. J. Wyrwoll: None. C. Friedrich: None. E. Kaminsky:
None. C. Krallmann: None. S. Kliesch: None. F.
Tüttelmann: None.
C01.5
Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis by genome-wide haplo-
typing of cell-free plasma DNA
H. Che
1*, D. Villela1,2, E. Dimitriadou1, C. Melotte1,N .
Brison1, M. Neofytou1, K. Van Den Bogaert1, O. Tsuiko1,K .
Devriendt1, E. Legius1, M. Zamani Esteki1,3,4, T. Voet1,J .R .
Vermeesch1
1Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
2Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Insti-
tute of Biosciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,Brazil,
3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,
4Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, GROW School
for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht
University, Maastricht, Netherlands
Introduction: While non-invasive prenatal testing for
aneuploidies (NIPT-A) is widely implemented, there is an
increasing need for universal approaches for noninvasiveprenatal testing for monogenic diseases (NIPT-M). Here,
we present a cost-effective, generic cell-free fetal DNA
(cffDNA) haplotyping approach to scan the fetal genomefor the presence of inherited monogenic diseases.
Methods: Families participating in the preimplantation
genetic testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) programwere recruited for this study. 250000 SNPs captured from
maternal plasma DNA along with genomic DNAs from
family members were massively parallel sequenced.Parental genotypes were phased via an available genotype
from a close relative, and the fetal genome-wide haplotype
and copy number were determined using cffDNA haplotyp-ing analysis based on estimation and segmentation of fetal
allele presence in the maternal plasma.
Results: In all families tested, mutational pro ﬁles from
cffDNA haplotyping are consistent with embryo biopsy
proﬁles. Genome-wide fetal haplotypes are on average 97%
concordant with the newborn haplotypes and embryohaplotypes.30 J. del PicchiaConclusion: We demonstrate that genome-wide targeted
capture and sequencing of polymorphic SNPs from
maternal plasma cell free DNA (cfDNA) allows haplotyp-
ing and copy number pro ﬁling of the fetal genome during
pregnancy. The method enables the accurate reconstruction
of the fetal haplotypes and can be easily implemented inclinical practice.
Grants: This work was funded by KULeuven funding
(C1/018), the Horizon 2020 WIDENLIFE: 692065 to J. R.V. and T.V and by the Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk
Onderzoek (FWO-Vlaanderen: G080217N) to J. V. D. V.
was supported by FAPESP (2017/23448-8).
H. Che: None. D. Villela: None. E. Dimitriadou: None. C.
Melotte: None. N. Brison: None. M. Neofytou: None. K.
Van Den Bogaert: None. O. Tsuiko: None. K. Devriendt:None. E. Legius: None. M. Zamani Esteki: None. T. Voet:
None. J. R. Vermeesch: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; Agilent.
C01.6
Trio exome/whole exome sequencing in prenatal diag-nosis: Experiences from >400 cases shows a high
diagnostic yield and a great bene ﬁt for pregnancy
management and genetic counselling.
H. Gabriel
1*, C. Wilhelm2, F. Battke1, E. Goldmann2,
C. Bus2, S. Biskup1
1CeGaT, Tuebingen, Germany,2Praxis für Humangenetik,
Tuebingen, Germany
Whole exome sequencing (WES) and trio exome sequen-
cing is becoming the ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test for many
unclear genetic conditions. However, in prenatal testing,
several challenges have to be addressed: turn-around-time,
patient acceptability, additional ﬁndings, interpretation of
unclear variants, and ethical dilemmas. A cohort of >400
unselected fetuses with varying structural anomalies seen
during routine ultrasonography were analysed after amnio-centesis or chorionic villus sampling. In 326 samples, trio
exome sequencing was performed. Only likely pathogenic
and pathogenic (according to the current ACMG guideline;Richards et al., 2015), in genes to be potential involved in
the observed fetal phenotype were considered. 30% of the
cases were clearly solved by trio exome sequencing,meaning that class 4 or 5 variants consistent with the fetal
phenotype were found. An additional 12% cases with var-
iants very likely causative for the phenotype were detected.In most of these cases only limited clinical information was
available or only soft markers (e.g. increased nuchal trans-
lucency) were present. The mean turn-around-time (TAT)was 18 days with a shortest TAT of 5 days. In this study, wehave shown the value of trio exome sequencing for the
prenatal genetic diagnosis of fetuses with varying structural
anomalies. A fast, stable, and reliable process including
sample processing, data analysis, and comprehensive
reporting is required to provide patients with the maximal
beneﬁt. In summary, prenatal exome sequencing offers a
feasible diagnostic approach for fetuses with anomalies, but
a multidisciplinary team to cover all ethical, psychological,
social and medical aspects is required.
H. Gabriel: None. C. Wilhelm: None. F. Battke: None. E.
Goldmann: None. C. Bus: None. S. Biskup: None.
C02 Intellectual Disability
C02.1
SCAF4 loss of function in humans and Drosophila
implicates mRNA transcriptional termination in neuro-
developmental disorders
A. Fliedner
1*, P. Kirchner1, K. E. Agre2, I. de Graaf-van de
Laar3, M. Dutra Clarke4, L. Davis-Keppen5, A. B. Ekici1,A .
Gregor1, N. Lippa6, K. McWalter7, G. Mirzaa8, G. Noh9,L .
Ohden5, D. A. Scott10, S. Lalani10, R. Straussberg11,12,R .
Cohen13,12, A. Wiesener1, C. Zweier1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer-
sität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany,2Clinical
Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States,
3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,4Divi-
sion of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, University of California-Irvine, School of
Medicine, Irvine, CA, United States,5University of South
Dakota, Sanford School of Medicine, Sioux Falls, SD,
United States,6Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States,
7Clinical Genomics, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United
States,8Department of Pediatrics, University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, WA, United States,9Department of Genetics,
Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Fontana,
CA, United States,10Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, UnitedStates,
11INeurogenetics Clinic, Neurology Unit, Schneider
Children Medical Center, Petah Tikvah, Israel,12Sackler
School of Medicine Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel,
13Neurology Institute and Epilepsy Center, Schneider
Children Medical Center, Petah Tikvah, Israel
Regulation of gene expression is highly complex and
involves a large number of different processes including
mRNA termination at polyA sites. This is mediated byRNA polymerase II and requires binding of SR-related and
CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4). SCAF4 represses theAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 31usage of early polyA sites and thus prevents usage of
alternative last exons (ALEs) and formation of truncated,
non-functional proteins. SCAF4 is expressed in all adult and
fetal tissues, with high expression in brain, and has not been
associated with disease, yet. By exome sequencing and
international matchmaking we assembled six truncating,two splice-site and one missense variant in SCAF4 , all but
one de novo. All individuals presented with a variable
neurodevelopmental disorder with developmental delay,mild to severe intellectual disability and various other
aspects such as epilepsy (6/9), behavioral anomalies (6/9)
and skeletal (3/9) or renal (3/9) anomalies. Knockdown oftheSCAF4 orthologue CG4266 in the model organism
Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor
function in the climbing assay and impaired learning andshort-term memory tested by the courtship conditioning
paradigm. Furthermore, we observed an increased number
of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, repre-senting large glutamatergic synapses. These observations
indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development
and function and support a role of its human orthologueSCAF4 in neurodevelopmental disorders. We establish
likely gene-disruptive variants in SCAF4 as causative for a
variable neurodevelopmental disorder and thus implicatedisturbed mRNA termination in impairment of neurodeve-
lopment and cognition.
A. Fliedner: None. P. Kirchner: None. K. E. Agre: None.
I. de Graaf-van de Laar: None. M. Dutra Clarke: None. L.
Davis-Keppen: None. A. B. Ekici: None. A. Gregor: None.
N. Lippa: None. K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. G. Mirzaa: None. G. Noh:
None. L. Ohden: None. D. A. Scott: None. S. Lalani: None.
R. Straussberg: None. R. Cohen: None. A. Wiesener: None.C. Zweier: None.
C02.2
Mutation-speci ﬁc pathophysiological mechanisms in a
new SATB1 -associated neurodevelopmental disorder
J. den Hoed
1*, E. de Boer2,3, N. Voisin4, N. Guex4,L .
Snijders Blok1,2,3, J. Chrast4, The DDD study, L.
Manwaring5, M. Willing5, A. Waheeb6,7, M. Osmond7,K .
McWalter8, A. Vitobello9,10, F. Demurger11,A .
Lavillaureix12, S. Odent12, B. Mazel10, L. Faivre10,I .
Thiffault13,14, C. Schwager13,14, S. M. Amudhavalli13,14,J .A .
Rosenfeld15, K. Radtke16, E. Preiksaitiene17,18,E .
Ranza19,20, C. Depienne21, A. Kuechler21, S. Mohammed22,
Y. Hamzavi Abedi23,24, V. R. Bonagura25,24, B. Zuccarelli26,
B. Horist27, V. Krishnamurthy27, A. A. Kattentidt-
Mouravieva28, L. Granger29, A. Petersen29, K. L. Jones30,31,
M. Sinnema32, A. P. A. Stegmann2,32, R. Newbury-Ecob33,
U. Kini34, D. F. Newbury35, C. Gilissen2,36, H. Brunner2,3,32,T. Kleefstra2,3, A. Reymond4, L. E. L. M. Vissers2,3,S .E .
Fisher1,3
1Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Don-
ders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijme-gen, Netherlands,
4University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland,5Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO, United States,6Children ’s Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada,7Children ’s Hospi-
tal of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON,
Canada,8GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,9Uni-
versité de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France,
10Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France,
11Vannes hospital, Vannes, France,12Rennes University,
Institute of Genetics and Development of Rennes (IGDR),
Rennes, France,13University of Missouri-Kansas City
School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, United States,
14Children ’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United
States,15Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States,16Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States,
17Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,18Vilnius University
Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania,19University
of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,20University Hospitals of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,21University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany,22Guy’s
Hospital, London, United Kingdom,23Northwell Health,
Great Neck, NY, United States,24Donald and Barbara
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hemp-
stead, NY, United States,25Feinstein Institutes for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY, United States,26The University
of Kansas School of Medicine Salina Campus, Salina, KS,
United States,27Pediatrics & Genetics Alpharetta, Alphar-
etta, GA, United States,28Zuidwester, Middelharnis,
Netherlands,29Randall Children ’s Hospital at Legacy
Emanuel, Portland, OR, United States,30Children ’s
Hospital of the King ’s Daughters, Norfolk, VA, United
States,31Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA,
United States,32Maastricht University Medical Center +,
Maastricht, Netherlands,33St Michael ’s Hospital Bristol,
University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol,
United Kingdom,34Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom,35Oxford
Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom,36Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen,Netherlands
Introduction: Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein-1
(SATB1 ) is a transcription factor that has not been impli-
cated in neurodevelopmental disorders, but was recently
identi ﬁed as a dominant candidate gene in two large-scale
meta-analyses, together comprising >65,000 patients with32 J. del Picchianeurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual dis-
ability (ID) and/or autism spectrum disorders. A homo-
zygous knockout of the orthologous Satb1 leads to mice
lethality, demonstrating its importance in early
development.
Methods and results: Here, we report on 26 individuals
with SATB1 variants. Seventeen patients have missense
variants predicted to be deleterious, and nine have
truncating variants, three of which predicted to escapenonsense-mediated decay. 21 of 26 variants (80%) were
conﬁrmed to be de novo in origin. Patients showed a broad
phenotypic spectrum, including ID and/or neurodevelop-mental delay, epilepsy, dental abnormalities and aspeci ﬁc
brain MRI ﬁndings. Additionally, patients with missense
variants are more severely affected than those withtruncating variants. We characterized the effects of eight
different missense mutations, including two recurrent
variants, in cell-based assays. Compatible with a gain-of-function effect of missense variants, mutated SATB1
proteins showed altered nuclear localization and increased
transcriptional repression on two characterized targets (IgH-MAR site and the IL2 promoter). Consistent with this
hypothesis, ﬂuorescent recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP) experiments demonstrated a decrease in mobilityof mutant SATB1, suggesting stabilization of DNA binding
underlying the increased transcriptional activity. Transcrip-
tome analysis is currently ongoing to further substantiatethese ﬁndings.
Conclusions: In summary, through multi-center colla-
borations, we show that SATB1 is associated with an
autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental disorder, resulting
from distinct mutation-speci ﬁc pathophysiological
mechanisms.
J. den Hoed: None. E. de Boer: None. N. Voisin: None.
N. Guex: None. L. Snijders Blok: None. J. Chrast: None. L.
Manwaring: None. M. Willing: None. A. Waheeb: None.M. Osmond: None. K. McWalter: None. A. Vitobello:
None. F. Demurger: None. A. Lavillaureix: None. S. Odent:
None. B. Mazel: None. L. Faivre: None. I. Thiffault: None.C. Schwager: None. S. M. Amudhavalli: None. J. A.
Rosenfeld: None. K. Radtke: None. E. Preiksaitiene: None.
E. Ranza: None. C. Depienne: None. A. Kuechler: None. S.Mohammed: None. Y. Hamzavi Abedi: None. V. R.
Bonagura: None. B. Zuccarelli: None. B. Horist: None. V.
Krishnamurthy: None. A. A. Kattentidt-Mouravieva: None.L. Granger: None. A. Petersen: None. K. L. Jones: None.
M. Sinnema: None. A. P. A. Stegmann: None. R. Newbury-
Ecob: None. U. Kini: None. D. F. Newbury: None. C.Gilissen: None. H. Brunner: None. T. Kleefstra: None. A.
Reymond: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. S. E.
Fisher: None.C02.3
De novo frameshift variants in the neuronal splicing
factor NOVA2 result in a common C-terminal part and
cause a severe form of neurodevelopmental disorder
F. Mattioli
1*, G. Hayot1, N. Drouot1, B. Isidor2,J .
Courraud1, M. Hinckelmann1, F. Tran Mau-Them3,4,C .
Sellier1, A. Goldman5, A. Telegra ﬁ6, A. Boughton7,C .
Gamble7, S. Moutton3,4, A. Quartier1, N. Jean3,4, P. Van
Ness5, S. Grotto8, S. Nambot3,4, G. Douglas6,Y .S i6,J .
Chelly1,9, Z. Shad10, E. Kaplan10, R. Dineen10, C. Golzio1,
N. Charlet1, J. Mandel1, A. Piton1,9
1IGBMC, Illkirch, France,2CHU de Nantes, Nantes,
France,3CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France,4Burgundy
University, Dijon, France,5Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States,6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD,
United States,7Cook Children ’s Genetics, Fort Worth, TX,
United States,8AP-HP Robert-Debré, Paris, France,
9Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,10University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, United States
Monogenic forms of intellectual disability (ID) are char-
acterized by an extreme heterogeneity, with more than 700genes now implicated. The most frequent cause of mono-
genic ID - the fragile X-syndrome- is due to the absence of
the RNA-binding protein (RBP) FMRP. Many other IDgenes have been implicated in the RNA metabolism.
NOVA2 is a RBP known to regulate neuron speci ﬁc
alternative splicing (AS). We identi ﬁed 6 individuals with
de novo frameshift variants in NOVA2 affected with a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by ID, motor
and speech delay, autistic features, spasticity or ataxic gaitand abnormal brain MRI. All variants cluster in a small GC-
repeat rich region, located in the last exon, indicating that
the mutated transcript might escape to nonsense mediated
decay. All 6 frameshift variants lead to the addition of a
novel common C-terminal part instead of the last KH RNA-binding domain, suggesting a dominant negative mechan-
ism. We detected 41 genes differentially spliced after
downregulation of NOVA2 in human neuronal cells. TheNOVA2 variant protein shows decreased ability to bind
target RNA sequences and to regulate target AS events. It
also fails to complement the effect on neurite outgrowthinduced by NOVA2 downregulation in vitro and to rescue
alterations of retinotectal axonal path ﬁnding induced by loss
of NOVA2 ortholog in zebra ﬁsh. Our results showed that
truncating mutations in NOVA2 cause a syndromic form of
ID, suggesting a hypomorphic mechanism rather than a full
heterozygous loss of function, although a speci ﬁc con-
tribution of the novel C-terminal extension cannot be
excluded.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 33F. Mattioli: None. G. Hayot: None. N. Drouot: None. B.
Isidor: None. J. Courraud: None. M. Hinckelmann: None.
F. Tran Mau-Them: None. C. Sellier: None. A. Goldman:
None. A. Telegra ﬁ: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Genedx. A. Boughton: None. C. Gamble: None.
S. Moutton: None. A. Quartier: None. N. Jean: None. P.Van Ness: None. S. Grotto: None. S. Nambot: None. G.
Douglas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDx. Y. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. J. Chelly: None. Z. Shad: None. E.
Kaplan: None. R. Dineen: None. C. Golzio: None. N.
Charlet: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None.
C02.4
Location, location, location: protein truncating variants
in different loci of SRCAP cause three distinct neurode-
velopmental disorders, associated with distinctive DNA
methylation signatures
D. Rots
1*, E. Chater-Diehl2, A. J. M. Dingemans1, M. Siu2,
C. Cytrynbaum2, N. Hoang2, S. Walker2, S. Scherer2,R .
Pfundt1, T. Rinne1, T. Gardeitchik1,B .B .A .d eV r i e s1,C .T .
R. M. Stumpel3, S. J. C. Stevens4, J. van Harssel5,D .G .M .
Bosch5, K. L. I. van Gassen5, E. van Binsbergen5,C .M .d e
Geus6, M. Hempel7, D. Lessel7, J. Denecke8, A. Slavotinek9,
J. Strober9, L. B. Ousager10, M. Larsen10, L. Schultz-
Rogers11, E. Morava11, E. W. Klee11, I. R. Berry12,J .
Campbell13, K. Lindstrom14, A. M. Neumeyer15,J .A .
Radley16, C. Phornphutkul17, W. G. Wilson18, B. Schmidt18,
S. Meyn2, K. Ounap19, K. Reinson19, S. Pajusalu19,20,C .
Ruivenkamp21, A. van Haeringen21, R. Cuperus22, GeneDx
inc., L. E. L. M. Vissers1, H. G. Brunner1,4, T. Kleefstra1,D .
A. Koolen1, R. Weksberg2
1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Department of
Clinical Genetics and GROW-School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,4Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,5University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,6University
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,Groningen, Netherlands,
7Institute of Human Genetics,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany,8Department of Pediatrics, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,9Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United
States,10Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark,
11Mayo Clinic, Rochester, NY, United States,12St. James ’s
University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom,13Chapel
Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom,14Phoenix
Children ’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States,15Massa-
chusetts General Hospital for Children, Harvard MedicalSchool, Boston, MA, United States,16Birmingham Women ’s
and Children ’s Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Birming-
ham, United Kingdom,17Warren Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States,18Uni-
versity of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA,
United States,19Tartu University Hospital and Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia,20Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States,21Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,22Depart-
ment of Paediatrics, Juliana Children ’s Hospital HAGA,
the Hague, Netherlands
SRCAP functions in a chromatin remodeling complex,
involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Pro-
tein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the last two exons of
SRCAP cause Floating-Harbor syndrome (FLHS), which is
characterized by typical facial features, short stature with
delayed bone age and expressive speech delay. We report
on novel genotype-phenotype correlations, associated withSRCAP PTVs outside the FLHS locus.
We identi ﬁed 21 probands with PTVs upstream, and 5
with PTVs downstream of the reported FLHS locus. Mostpatients presented with speech delay and intellectual
disability. In contrast to FLHS, they have normal height
and bone age. Moreover, facial-recognition algorithms on2D-photos showed that patients with upstream and down-
stream PTVs do not cluster with the FLHS-facial gestalt.
The upstream PTVs result in subtle facial dysmorphism,autism spectrum disorder, severe behavioral problems and
joint issues, such as hypermobility and premature degen-
eration. In contrast, patients with downstream PTVs haveneurodevelopmental delay and Marfanoid habitus.
At the molecular level, FLHS is characterized by a unique
DNA methylation (DNAm) signature consisting of ~570differentially methylated CpGs. The DNAm pro ﬁles of the
upstream and downstream PTVs yielded different signa-
tures from FLHS.
In summary, we delineate the phenotype of patients with
SRCAP PTVs outside the FLHS locus. None of the patients
show clinical features typical for FLHS. Analysis at the
molecular level suggests that each clinical entity is
associated with its own molecular mechanism. We proposethat the upstream PTVs result in haploinsuf ﬁciency,
whereas the downstream PTVs and FLHS-causing variants
result in distinct dominant-negative or gain-of-functioneffect.
D. Rots: None. E. Chater-Diehl: None. A. J. M. Dinge-
mans: None. M. Siu: None. C. Cytrynbaum: None. N. Hoang:None. S. Walker: None. S. Scherer: None. R. Pfundt: None.
T. Rinne: None. T. Gardeitchik: None. B. B. A. de Vries:
N o n e .C .T .R .M .S t u m p e l :N o n e .S .J .C .S t e v e n s :N o n e .J .van Harssel: None. D. G. M. Bosch: None. K. L. I. van
Gassen: None. E. van Binsbergen: None. C. M. de Geus:34 J. del PicchiaNone. M. Hempel: None. D. Lessel: None. J. Denecke: None.
A. Slavotinek: None. J. Strober: None. L. B. Ousager: None.
M. Larsen: None. L. Schultz-Rogers: None. E. Morava:
N o n e .E .W .K l e e :N o n e .I .R .B e r r y :N o n e .J .C a m p b e l l :
None. K. Lindstrom: None. A. M. Neumeyer: None. J. A.
Radley: None. C. Phornphutkul: None. W. G. Wilson: None.B. Schmidt: None. S. Meyn: None. K. Ounap: None. K.
Reinson: None. S. Pajusalu: None. C. Ruivenkamp: None. A.
van Haeringen: None. R. Cuperus: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers:None. H. G. Brunner: None. T. Kleefstra: None. D. A.
Koolen: None. R. Weksberg: None.
C02.5
Mechanistic dissection of chromatin topology disruption
in the 5q14.3 MEF2C locus as an indirect driver of
neurodevelopmental disorders
K. Mohajeri
1,2,E. D ’haene3*, R. Yadav1,2,H .G u4,5,B .
Menten3, A. Presser Aiden4,5, C. Lowther1,2, S. Erdin1,2,E .
Lieberman Aiden4, J. Gusella1,2, S. Vergult3,M .
Talkowski1,2
1Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,2Program in Medical
and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA,United States,
3Center for Medical Genetics, Dept. of
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium,
4The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,5Department
of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
Structural variants have the potential to create long-range
positional effects, uncouple genes from regulatory elements,and facilitate aberrant 3D chromatin folding. In an inde-
pendent study, we revealed a signi ﬁcant enrichment of
intergenic balanced chromosomal abnormality (BCA)breakpoints from congenital anomaly cases at chromosome
5q14. 3. All 11 5q14.3 BCA carriers had breakpoints dis-
rupting the topologically associated domain (TAD) housingMEF2C , a known driver of neurodevelopmental disorders.
In a second study, we showed, using 4C-seq, that MEF2C
forms proximal and distal interaction loops within thisTAD, contacting multiple neuronal enhancers.
To understand the functional impact of these BCAs, we
performed a mechanistic dissection of the 3D regulatorynetwork at the 5q14.3 locus and its constituent functional
elements using Cas9-based genome editing. We generated
>200 cell lines, representing deletions of MEF2C alongside
ﬁveMEF2C TAD boundary and interaction loop targets in
iPS-derived neural stem cells (NSCs) and cortical induced
neurons (iNs). We pro ﬁled changes in expression and 3D
chromatin interactions within these models using RNA-seqand 4C-seq. MEF2C was variably differentially expressed
upon deletion of proximal and distal MEF2C loop regions,
with effects depending on cell type and variant class.
Underlying chromatin interaction patterns revealed evi-
dence of loop maintenance in these models, possibly via
CTCF buffering, highlighting compensatory mechanismsagainst 3D chromatin disruption. In contrast, deletion of the
proximal TAD boundary facilitated increased contacts with
predicted enhancers in the adjacent TAD.
Our results suggest novel regulatory mechanisms driving
phenotypic outcomes for the 5q14.3 region, with signi ﬁcant
implications for interpretation of pathogenic structuralvariation.
K. Mohajeri: None. E. D ’haene: None. R. Yadav: None.
H. Gu: None. B. Menten: None. A. Presser Aiden: None. C.Lowther: None. S. Erdin: None. E. Lieberman Aiden: None.
J. Gusella: None. S. Vergult: None. M. Talkowski: None.
C02.6
Crispr-Cas9-engineered Pigv
341Emouse model mirrors
the human phenotype, reveals a hippocampal synaptic
defect and suggests a major role of impaired Abl1/Ephrin signaling pathway in GPI anchor de ﬁciency
M. Rodríguez de los Santos
1,2,3*, M. Rivalan4,F .S .
David3,5, A. Knaus3, A. Stumpf6, L. Moreno Velasquez6,A .
Voigt6, D. Mattei7, M. Long4, L. Wittler8, B. Timmermann9,
D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,2,10, U. Kornak1,10, D. Schmitz6,Y .
Winter4, P. M. Krawitz3
1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics,
Charité –Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, FG Devel-
opment and Disease, Berlin, Germany,3Institute for
Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany,4Animal Outcome Core Facility of the
NeuroCure Center, Charité –Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Institute of Cognitive Neurobiology, Humboldt Uni-
versity Berlin, Berlin, Germany,5Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Bonn, Faculty of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,6Neuroscience
Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin,Berlin, Germany,
7Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology
and Toxicology, University of Zurich, UZH-Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland,8Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Department Developmental Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
9Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Sequencing
Core Facility, Berlin, Germany,10Berlin-Brandenburg
Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité –Universitäts-
medizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Pathogenic germline mutations in PIGV result in a glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis de ﬁciency (GPIBD).Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 35Patients with biallelic mutations in genes of this molecular
pathway show cognitive impairments, a psychomotor delay
and often suffer from epilepsies. Thus far, the pathophy-
siology underlying the disease remains unclear and suitable
rodent models were lacking. Hence, we generated a mouse
model using CRISPR-Cas9 to introduce the most prevalenthypomorphic mutation observed in European patients, that
is also conserved in mice Pigv:c.1022 C>A (p.Ala341Glu).
At the behavioral level, Pigv
341Emice mutants showed
deﬁcits in motor coordination and cognitive impairments in
long-term spatial memory. Furthermore, Pigv341Emice
displayed alterations in social behavior and sleep patternsreﬂecting the human phenotype. Immunohistochemistry
showed a decreased synaptophysin immunoreactivity in
hippocampal CA1 and electrophysiology recordingsdemonstrated a reduced hippocampal synaptic transmission
inPigv
341Emice that may explain impaired memory for-
mation. In addition, we performed single cell RNAsequencing of hippocampal cells of adult Pigv
341Emice that
exhibit changes of gene expression, most prominently in a
microglia subtype, subicular neurons and CA3 pyramidalneurons. A signi ﬁcant reduction of Abl1 transcripts in
several cell clusters suggests a link to the signaling pathway
of GPI-anchored ephrins, which are known to play a majorrole in synapse formation and plasticity. In summary, we
present here the ﬁrst mouse model with a patient-speci ﬁc
hypomorphic mutation that mirrors the human phenotypeand will allow us to explore the pathophysiology in
GPIBDs in future studies.
M. Rodríguez de los Santos: None. M. Rivalan: None. F.
S. David: None. A. Knaus: None. A. Stumpf: None. L.
Moreno Velasquez: None. A. Voigt: None. D. Mattei:
None. M. Long: None. L. Wittler: None. B. Timmermann:None. D. Horn: None. S. Mundlos: None. U. Kornak: None.
D. Schmitz: None. Y. Winter: None. P. M. Krawitz: None.
C03 Novel Bioinformatic and Machine-Learning
Methods
C03.1
Reconciling GWAS and Mendelian genetics through
core-gene identi ﬁcation
O. B. Bakker
1*, A. Claringbould1, H. Westra1, S. Mulcahy
Symmons1, M. Swertz1, I. H. Jonkers1, L. Franke1,P .
Deelen1,2
1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Nether-
lands,2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed
thousands of disease susceptibility loci, however theomnigenic model suggests that many of the genes in these
loci might not directly be involved in core disease pathways.
The omnigenic model postulates that most genes in the
GWAS loci are peripheral genes that exert smaller down-
stream effects on genes that directly affect the phenotype
(core genes). These core genes are expected to overlap withgenes that result in rare Mendelian diseases when mutated.
In order to map the relationships between peripheral and
core genes, we re-analysed 31,499 publicly available RNA-seq samples from various tissues and cell-types to calculate
a gene-gene co-regulation network. We then integrated the
co-regulation network with GWAS summary statistics toidentify genes that are co-regulated with a large number of
GWAS genes. We hypothesise that these genes are more
likely to be core disease genes.
As a proof of concept, we applied this gene prioritization
strategy to a height GWAS and show that prioritized core
genes are strongly enriched for Mendelian disease genes forboth disproportionate short and tall stature (AUC 0.69 and
0.86 respectively) as expected under the omnigenic model.
The enrichment of Mendelian disease genes among the
predicted core genes suggest that complex disease and rare
disease genetics are on two ends of the same spectrum. We
therefore expect that our method can ultimately be used tobetter understand common diseases and we hope to predict
new rare disease genes.
O. B. Bakker: None. A. Claringbould: None. H. Westra:
None. S. Mulcahy Symmons: None. M. Swertz: None. I. H.
Jonkers: None. L. Franke: None. P. Deelen: None.
C03.2
Improved de novo mutation detection through deep
learning
K.Šablauskas
*, W. Steyaert, D. Rots, R. Pfundt, H. G.
Yntema, H. G. Brunner, A. Hoischen, L. E. L. M. Vissers, C.
Gilissen
Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
De novo mutations (DNMs) are an important cause of
genetic disorders. The accurate identi ﬁcation of DNMs is
therefore fundamental to rare disease research and diag-
nostics. Unfortunately, identifying reliable DNMs remains a
major challenge due to sequence errors, uneven coverageand mapping artifacts.
Here, we developed a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) DNM caller: deNovoCNN. We trained deNovoCNNby encoding the sequence alignment reads for a trio as
164x160 resolution images. We trained our model (80/20%
training/validation split) on 4,868 high-quality DNMs fromwhole exome sequencing (WES) data of 2,018 trios with36 J. del Picchiaintellectual disability (ID). We then compared the DNM
calls in 20 separate trios to those of three other de novo
callers: GATK, DeNovoGear (DNG), and Radboudumc in-
house tool (IH). The identi ﬁed variants were manually
inspected though IGV.
deNovoCNN outperformed other calling approaches with
an accuracy of 99.38% (GATK 75.69%, DNG 30.97%, IH
97.54%). Additional Sanger validation for a subset of
mutations is ongoing. When applying deNovoCNN to 278unresolved trios, we identi ﬁed 5 previously missed DNMs
in monoallelic ID genes ( CDK13 ,PAFAH1B1 ,TCF20 ,
SMC1A and PRKAR1A ), that provide a likely diagnosis
based on ACMG criteria. All of these mutations were
conﬁrmed to be de novo events by Sanger sequencing.
Overall, deep convolutional neural networks are a
powerful tool for DNM discovery, and have the potential
to call clinically relevant DNMs missed by existing
approaches.
K.Šablauskas: None. W. Steyaert: None. D. Rots: None.
R. Pfundt: None. H. G. Yntema: None. H. G. Brunner:
None. A. Hoischen: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. C.Gilissen: None.
C03.3
GestaltMatch: breaking the limits of rare Mendeliandisorder diagnosis by matching patients with next-
generation phenotyping
T. Hsieh
1*, A. Bar-Haim2, G. Nadav2, T. J. Pantel3,N .
Fleischer2, P. Krawitz1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn,
Germany,2FDNA, Boston, MA, United States,3Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Introduction: Recent advances in next-generation pheno-
typing (NGP) for syndromology such as DeepGestalt havelearned phenotype representations of multiple disorders by
training on thousands of patient photos. However, many
Mendelian syndromes are still not represented by existingNGP tools as only handful of patients were diagnosed. We
therefore propose “GestaltMatch ”which utilizes the simi-
larity among patients to identify syndromic patients by theirfacial gestalt in order to extend the coverage of NGP tools.
Methods: We compiled a dataset consisting of 23,000
patients with 1,500 different rare disorders. For eachindividual a frontal photo and the molecularly con ﬁrmed
diagnosis were available. We utilized deep convolutional
neural networks to train a model on patient ’s frontal photos,
and facial embeddings were further extracted to construct a
Clinical Face Phenotype Space (CFPS). Joint Bayesian was
used to quantify the similarity among patients and correctthe confounding effects of age and ethnicity in CFPS.Results: The patients with similar phenotype were
located in close proximity in the CFPS. Ranking syndromes
by distance in CFPS, we achieved 80% top-10 accuracy in
identifying super rare Mendelian diseases that are not yet
represented in DeepGestalt. Moveover, as a tool for
matching patients of unknown cause, more than 100 pairsof unrelated patients were identi ﬁed that show a similarity
comparable to patients with the aforementioned super rare
disorders, suggesting novel phenotypes of shared molecularetiology.
Conclusions: GestaltMatch opens the door to extend the
coverage of syndromes recognized by NGP tools and toenable further exploration of the unknown phenotype-
genotype associations.
T. Hsieh: None. A. Bar-Haim: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; FDNA. G. Nadav: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; FDNA. T. J. Pantel: None.
N. Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
FDNA. P. Krawitz: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; FDNA.
C03.4
Untranslated region (UTR) variant analysis across
71,702 genomes to build a framework for variant
interpretation
S. Pajusalu
1,2,3*, N. J. Lake1,4,M .L e k1
1Department of Genetics, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Universityof Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
3Department of Clinical Genetics,
United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia,4Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Royal
Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia
The importance of UTRs in the regulation of gene expression
has been widely appreciated. However, UTR variants asso-
ciated with Mendelian disorders have been understudied. This
is due to our inability to interpret the functional impact ofUTR variants and a lack of clear interpretation guidelines.
To investigate human UTR variants, we gathered
1,049,754 single nucleotide substitutions in canonical 5 ′
UTRs and 5,289,132 in canonical 3 ′UTRs from gnomAD
v3 database. Notably, this is more than a 2-fold increase of
UTR variants from the previous gnomAD release. Weassessed the effects of variants affecting upstream open
reading frames (uORFs), Kozak sequences, polyadenylation
signals, and miRNA-binding sites. These data were used tobuild a publicly available variant annotation tool which is
the basis of our UTR variant interpretation framework.
Using a genome-wide heptamer model of constraint
enabled us to identify that UTRs show less variation thanAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 37expected; this is even more pronounced across 5 ′UTRs and
functional elements like uORFs. By assessing UTR
constraint and the absence of variants with strong regulatory
effects, we were able to prioritize novel candidate disease
genes. For example, MDGA1, a regulatory synaptic protein,
is under strong constraint for 5 ′UTR and none of its 55
putative uORF-creating variants exist in gnomAD indicat-
ing strong negative selection.
We demonstrate the utility of the framework by
classifying variants reported in the literature and databases,
as well as present results from large neuromuscular disease
cohorts where we have applied this framework to improvethe interpretation of UTR variants.
Grant: PUTJD827
S. Pajusalu: None. N. J. Lake: None. M. Lek: None.
C03.5
Hotspot detection in homologous protein domains using
de novo mutations from 31,058 patients identifycandidate developmental disorder genes
L. van de Wiel
1,2*, H. Venselaar2, L. E. L. M. Vissers3,G .
Vriend2, J. A. Veltman3,4, C. Gilissen1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Centre for Molecular
and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute forMolecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
3Department of Human
Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition andBehaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,
4Institute of Genetic Medicine, International
Centre for Life, Newcastle University, Newcastle uponTyne, United Kingdom
Identi ﬁcation of disease-causing variants is an ongoing
effort, and requires integration of various biologically
relevant prioritization strategies. We have previously shown
that genetic variation can be aggregated through homo-logous protein domains and used to interpret variants of
unknown signi ﬁcance. Here, we show that we can use this
concept to robustly identify critical hotspots of de novomutations (DNMs) that suggest novel disease gene candi-
dates. We used a dataset of 45,221 DNMs from 31,058
patients with developmental disorders (DD). Of these,15,392 DNMs locate to protein domain regions, belonging
to 2,311 protein domain families across 6,910 genes. We
curated this list for unique genomic positions and mappedthese onto aggregated domain families. We subsequently
used a binomial test to identify signi ﬁcantly enriched
positions as domain-based hotspots. From 12,389 aggre-gated domain positions, we found three hotspotssigniﬁcantly enriched for missense DNMs, all in the “ion
transport protein ”(PF00520) domain family (position 96,
p=3.6 × 10
−2; 102, p =7.1 × 10−5; and 231, p=8.0 × 10−6),
and no hotspots enriched for protein truncating or synon-
ymous DNMs. The 57 missense var iants driving enrichment
are located in 25 genes. So far, 20 of these genes (with 52DNMs) have been previously associated with DD (p =6.3 ×
10
−15), suggesting that our approach is able to identify true
disease genes. In the remaining 5 genes, genetic intoleranceand molecular gene function suggest KCNH5 ,KCNG1 ,a n d
TPCN1 as putative novel candidate genes for DD. Thus, we
show a novel approach based on hotspot identi ﬁcation in
homologous protein domains that may be used to identify
candidate disease genes.
L. van de Wiel: None. H. Venselaar: None. L. E. L. M.
Vissers: None. G. Vriend: None. J. A. Veltman: None. C.
Gilissen: None.
C03.6
Cell type speci ﬁc genetic regulation of gene expression
across human tissues
S. Kim-Hellmuth
1,2*, F. Aguet3, M. Oliva4, S. Kasela2,M .
Muñoz-Aguirre5, V. Wucher5, GTEx Consortium, R. Guigó5,
B. E. Stranger6, K. G. Ardlie3, T. Lappalainen2,7
1Dr. von Hauner Children ’s Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich,Germany,
2New York Genome Center, New York, NY,
United States,3The Broad Institute of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cam-bridge, MA, United States,
4Section of Genetic Medicine,
Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, United States,5Centre for Genomic Regulation
(CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technol-
ogy, Barcelona, Spain,6Center for Genetic Medicine,
Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States,
7Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New
York, NY, United States
Introduction: The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx)
project has identi ﬁed expression and splicing quantitative
trait loci (eQTLs and sQTLs) in cisfor the majority of genes
across a range of human tissues. However, the interpretation
of these e/sQTLs has been limited by the heterogeneity ofcell type abundances in bulk tissue.
Materials and Methods: Here, we applied cell type
deconvolution to characterize the cell type speci ﬁcity of
eQTLs and sQTLs for 43 cell type-tissue combinations,
using seven cell types across 35 tissues from up to 838
individuals.38 J. del PicchiaResults: Across cell types and tissues, we detected 3,347
genes with a cell type interacting eQTL (ieQTL) and 987
genes with a cell type interacting sQTL (isQTL) at 5%
FDR. Furthermore, ieQTL-genes (ieGenes) had a larger
number of independent eQTLs in standard eQTL mapping
and were enriched among tissue-speci ﬁc eGenes, indicating
that cell type-speci ﬁc regulatory activity drives cell type-
speciﬁc eQTL effects that contribute to allelic heterogeneity
and tissue-speci ﬁcity of eQTLs. Cell type ieQTLs were also
enriched in sex-biased eQTLs suggesting that these higher
order G x E interactions are driven by cell composition
changes. Finally, colocalization analysis of cell type ieQTLsand isQTLs with 87 complex traits not only pinpointed the
cellular speci ﬁcity of known eQTLs but identi ﬁed novel
colocalized loci that were masked in bulk tissue.
Conclusions: Our results emphasize the importance of
identifying genetic effects on gene expression at the cellular
level and demonstrate that cell type-speci ﬁc effects can be
uncovered in bulk tissues by integrating increasingly
available single-cell and cell type-speci ﬁc
transcriptomic data.
S. Kim-Hellmuth: None. F. Aguet: None. M. Oliva:
None. S. Kasela: None. M. Muñoz-Aguirre: None. V.
Wucher: None. R. Guigó: None. B. E. Stranger: None. K.G. Ardlie: None. T. Lappalainen: None.
C04 Cancer Genetics I: Basic Research in CancerC04.1
Unique somatic mutation lanscape enhances tumorpredisposition in the kidney proximal tubule
I. Franco
1*, H. T. Helgadottir1, A. Moggio1, M. Larsson2,
P. Vrtacnik1, A. Johansson3, N. Norgren4, P. Lundin5,D .
Mas-Ponte6, J. Nordström7, T. Lundgren7, P. Stenvinkel7,L .
Wennberg7, F. Supek6, M. Eriksson1
1Karolinska Institutet, HUDDINGE, Sweden,2Science for
Life Laboratories, LINKÖPING, Sweden,3Science for Life
Laboratories, UPPSALA, Sweden,4Science for Life
Laboratories, UMEÅ, Sweden,5Science for Life Labora-
tories, STOCKHOLM, Sweden,6Institute for Research in
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), BARCELONA, Spain,7Kar-
olinska University Hospital, HUDDINGE, Sweden
Introduction: Somatic mutations accumulating in the
genome of human cells can be used to track mutagen
exposure and to identify cancer-prone cell types.
Materials and methods: To detect somatic mutations in
single genomes from healthy, human cells, biopsies were
obtained from six healthy donors undergoing kidneyexplant for donation. Donors´ age spanned from 30 to 69.
Single cells from kidney, skin, blood, subcutaneous andvisceral fat were clonally expanded and subjected to both
whole genome sequencing and gene expression analyses.
Multi-organ biopsies from each donor allowed well-
controlled comparison of somatic mutation landscapes in
different tissues.
Results: Somatic mutation and gene expression data
identi ﬁed a population of kidney tubule progenitors that
showed a mutation pro ﬁle similar to progenitor cells from
other tissues (fat, skeletal muscle and blood) and lowamount of mutations, indicating protection from mutagen
exposure. Conversely, de-differentiated cells derived from
damaged proximal tubules showed a mutation pro ﬁle
similar to the most common cancer tumor subtypes (clear
cell renal cell- and papillary-carcinoma). High mutation
burden and a unique mutation landscape, characterized bymutation enrichment in active chromatin, regulatory and
transcribed regions, caused 6-fold faster accumulation of
potential, cancer-driver mutations.
Conclusions: Our somatic mutation data support the
existence of a stem cell-like population protected from
mutations in the kidney tubules. Conversely, the proximaltubule of healthy, human kidneys is exposed to unique
mutagenic processes that increase tumor predisposition.
Fundings from Swedish Research Council, Center for
Innovative Medicine, Engkvist, Hagelen, Österman and
Jeanssons Foundations, Svenska Läkaresällskapet and
Riksbankens Jubileumsfond
I. Franco: None. H. T. Helgadottir: None. A. Moggio:
None. M. Larsson: None. P. Vrtacnik: None. A. Johansson:
None. N. Norgren: None. P. Lundin: None. D. Mas-Ponte:None. J. Nordström: None. T. Lundgren: None. P.
Stenvinkel: None. L. Wennberg: None. F. Supek: None.
M. Eriksson: None.
C04.2
TFEB constitutive activation underlies polycystic kidney
and renal carcinoma in Birt-Hogg-Dube ’syndrome
C. Di Malta
*, G. Napolitano, A. Esposito, M. Matarese, V.
Benedetti, A. Zampelli, D. Siciliano, A. Venuta, M. Cesana,
C. Vilardo, E. Nusco, J. Monfregola, A. Ballabio
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM),
Pozzuoli (NA), Italy
Loss of function mutations in the Folliculin ( FLCN ) gene
are responsible for the autosomal dominant inherited Birt-
Hogg-Dube ’(BHD) syndrome, a genetic disorder char-
acterized by benign skin tumors, lung and kidney cysts andkidney cancers. Renal tumors represent the most severe
manifestation of the disease and develop following a
somatic second-hit mutation leading to the inactivation ofthe remaining FLCN allele. To date, the pathogeneticAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 39mechanisms downstream FLCN depletion are still
unknown. FLCN acts a GTPase-activating protein (GAP)
for the Rag family GTPase, in particular RagC/D, con-
verting them to their active forms, which signal amino acid
sufﬁciency to the mechanistic Target Of Rapamycin Com-
plex 1 (mTORC1), a key regulator of cell metabolism,highly implicated in cancer. Previous studies indicated that
kidney-speci ﬁcFlcn deletion in mice recapitulates kidney
phenotype observed in BHD patients. Here we show thatloss of FLCN induces a constitutive activation of the
Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), the master regulator of
lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, which drives upre-gulation of several target genes relevant for disease phe-
notype, in particular Rag C/D, thus leading to
hyperactivation of mTORC1 signaling. Remarkably,depletion of Tfeb inFlcn-KO mice, which was achieved by
generating Flcn/Tfeb double KO mice, fully rescued kidney
phenotype and associated lethality, thus pointing to TFEBas the major driver of BHD syndrome. Interestingly,
increased TFEB nuclear localization is also observed in
renal tumors from BHD patients, hence suggesting thattargeting this transcription factor could be a valuable ther-
apeutic strategy for the treatment of this genetic disorder.
C. Di Malta: None. G. Napolitano: None. A. Esposito:
None. M. Matarese: None. V. Benedetti: None. A.
Zampelli: None. D. Siciliano: None. A. Venuta: None. M.
Cesana: None. C. Vilardo: None. E. Nusco: None. J.Monfregola: None. A. Ballabio: F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; CASMA Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge,
MA 02139.
C04.3
Oncogenic transcription factors are over-represented in
mutated active DNA binding sites in neuroblastoma andWilms tumor
V. A. Lasorsa
1,2*, F. Cimmino1,2, M. Avitabile1,2,S .
Cantalupo1,2, A. Montella1,2, B. De Angelis3, M. Morini4,C .
de Torres5, A. Castellano3, F. Locatelli3,6, A. Iolascon1,2,M .
Capasso1,2,7
1CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy,2Depart-
ment of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology,
Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy,
3Department of Pediatric Haematology and Oncology,
IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy,
4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Genova, Italy,5Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory and Department
of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain,6Department of Paedia-
trics, Sapienza University of Rome, Roma, Italy,7IRCCS
SDN, Napoli, ItalyIntroduction: The contribution of coding mutations to
oncogenesis has been largely clari ﬁed whereas little is
known about somatic mutations in noncoding DNA and
their role in driving tumors remains controversial. Here, we
used an alternative approach to interpret the functional
signiﬁcance of noncoding somatic mutations in promoting
tumorigenesis.
Methods: Noncoding somatic mutations of 151 neuro-
blastomas (NB) and of 81 Wilms tumours (WT) were, inparallel, integrated with ENCODE data to locate somatic
mutations in regulatory elements speci ﬁcally active in
tumor cells (of NB and WT), non-speci ﬁcally active in
tumor cells (of NB and WT), and non-active. Within these
types of elements, we identi ﬁed transcription factors (TFs)
whose binding sites (BS) were enriched or depleted inmutations. For these TFs, a gene expression signature was
built to assess their implication in NB and WT.
Results: For both tumor types, the pathogenicity of
mutations was signi ﬁcantly higher in TFBS of regulatory
elements speci ﬁcally active in tumor cells, as compared to
the others. Here, we found over-represented TFs mainlyinvolved in cell cycle phase transitions ( n=18 and n=35 for
NB and WT, respectively), and under-represented TFs
primarily regulating cell differentiation ( n=15 and n=21 for
NB and WT, respectively). A gene expression signature
based on over-represented TFs correlated with poor survival
and unfavourable prognostic markers.
Conclusions: We propose a novel approach to study the
involvement of regulatory variants in NB and WT that
could be extended to other cancers and provide furtherevidence that alterations of gene expression may have
relevant effects in tumour development.
V. A. Lasorsa: None. F. Cimmino: None. M. Avitabile:
None. S. Cantalupo: None. A. Montella: None. B. De
Angelis: None. M. Morini: None. C. de Torres: None. A.
Castellano: None. F. Locatelli: None. A. Iolascon: None. M.Capasso: None.
C04.4
Characterization of circRNA pro ﬁles in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia
A. Gutierrez-Camino
1,2*, M. Caron2, C. Richer2, E. Lopez-
Lopez1, I. Martin-Guerrero1, B. Frutos1, P. St-Onge2,A .
Bataille2, D. Sinnett2,3
1University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain,2Division
of Hematology-Oncology, Sainte-Justine University HealthCenter, Montreal, QC, Canada,
3Department of Pediatrics,
Montreal University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL) represents
one of the most frequent causes of death by disease in40 J. del Picchiachildren. Accurate patient diagnosis is fundamental to obtain
higher cure rates. In recent years, a new type of non-coding
RNAs, circRNA, has emerged as a promising biomarker for
cancer diagnosis, however little is known about their roles in
cALL development and treatment response. We propose to
investigate and characterize a circRNAs in cALL, whichmight allow a more precise diagnosis and prognosis assess-
ment, thus opening the door to better outcomes. Towards this
goal we have performed a transcriptome analysis (RNA-Seq)of 156 cALL patients (124 B-ALL and 26 T-ALL) from two
independent cohorts. CircExplorer was used to quantify,
annotate and characterize circRNAs. A total of 187,504 cir-cRNAs were identi ﬁed in the discovery cohort. The size of
the circRNAs was on average 820 bp, with a mean of 5 exons
per circRNA. The overall expression of circRNA variants wasbetween 1 and 452 per gene with a mean of 14,6. Unsu-
pervised clustering analysis showed that circRNAs could
properly stratify cALL subtypes. Differential circRNAexpression between ALL and controls showed a total of 726
deregulated in the whole cohort (390 upregulated and 336
downregulated). The 50% of circRNAs were unique forspeciﬁc subtypes. These results were validated in an inde-
pendent cohort. In conclusion, we have de ﬁned circRNA
characteristics in cALL and identi ﬁed subtype-speci ﬁcc i r -
cRNAs. In addition to protein-coding genes and other non-
coding RNAs, we have shown that circRNA expression
proﬁles can accurately classify cALL subtypes.
A. Gutierrez-Camino: None. M. Caron: None. C. Richer:
None. E. Lopez-Lopez: None. I. Martin-Guerrero: None. B.
Frutos: None. P. St-Onge: None. A. Bataille: None. D.Sinnett: None.
C04.5
Patient-derived PDAC organoids recapitulate tumor cell
state heterogeneity and functional hierarchy in vitro
T. G. Krieger
1*, J. Jabs2, S. LeBlanc3, A. Giri1, O. Strobel3,
R. Eils1, C. Conrad1
1Digital Health Center, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH)/
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany,2Division of
Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer ResearchCenter (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany,
3European Pan-
creas Center, Department of Surgery, Heidelberg Uni-
versity Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is projected to
be the second leading cause of cancer mortality by 2030,
and responses to current therapy differ markedly betweenpatients. Transcriptomic analyses have established two
subtypes of PDAC: ‘classical ’tumors characterised by a
higher level of differentiation, and ‘basal-like ’tumors
showing aggressive clinical behaviour. Recent single-cellsequencing studies have demonstrated that PDAC tumors
comprise diverse cell populations, but the functional inter-
play and evolutionary hierarchy of PDAC cells remains
elusive.
We derived PDAC organoids from primary tumors of 18
patients, together with two matched samples from livermetastases. By scRNA-seq, we determined that PDAC
organoids consist of ductal cells with patient-speci ﬁc
expression of several gene groups. Organoids derived fromhigher-grade tumors tend to show more ‘basal-like ’gene
expression, consistent with previous data. However,
‘classical ’and ‘basal-like ’cells may coexist within the
same tumor, and the level of subtype heterogeneity within
tumors is independently linked to poor prognosis.
Despite intertumor heterogeneity, we identi ﬁed several
tumor cell states shared across patients, including a cycling
progenitor cell state and a differentiated secretory state,
which are connected by a differentiation hierarchy. Byintegrating scRNA-seq data from PDAC organoids and
primary tumors, we show that these cell states and hierarchy
are mirrored within the ductal cell compartment inprimary PDAC.
Our results uncover a hierarchy of functional PDAC cell
states in organoids and primary tumors, supporting the useof PDAC organoids as a clinically relevant model for
in vitro studies of tumor heterogeneity.
T. G. Krieger: None. J. Jabs: None. S. LeBlanc: None. A.
Giri: None. O. Strobel: None. R. Eils: None. C.
Conrad: None.
C04.6
Integrative analyses of 100 genomes of Basal Cell
Carcinoma in the context of transcription and methyla-
tion pro ﬁles
S. I. Nikolaev
1*, A. Yurchenko1, A. Sartori2, I. Padioleau1,
F. Rajabi1, L. Parmentier3, D. Salomon4, E. Dermitzakis2,
H. Ongen5
1Gustave Roussy, VILLEJUIF, France,2Univeristy of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,3Hospital of Sierre, Sierre,
Switzerland,4Seujet Dermatological Clinics, Geneva,
Switzerland,5University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) of skin is the commonest
human malignancy with the lifetime risk of 30% andincreasing incidence. BCC is characterized by constitutive
activation of the Sonic hedgehog pathway and by hyper-
mutator phenotype due to UV. In this study we presentWhole Genome Sequences (WGS) of 96 and Whole Exome
Sequences of 259 BCC. These data are complemented by
RNA-Seq and Methylation pro ﬁling of BCC and adjacent
skin. Over 20 million point mutations allowedAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 41unprecedentedly detailed analysis of UV-induced muta-
genesis in skin cancer and revealed differences between
BCC and melanoma. Variation in spectrums and cluster-
ization of mutations across genomic regions with different
sets of genomic covariates including tumor-derived tran-
scriptomes and methylomes was used for decompositioninto separate biological processes. Driver discovery, per-
formed with multiple methods, validated known genes
including PTCH1, SMO, MYCN, PTPN14 and others aswell as rendered a handful of novel drivers in other cancer
pathways. RNA-Seq analysis uncovered the most important
pathways involved in BCC pathogenesis and histologicalheterogeneity. Numerous structural variants and gene
fusions were retrieved using both WGS and RNA-Seq.
These events as well as a list of 23 focal deletions suggestednovel putative tumor suppressor genes in BCC. Functional
non-coding genomic variation was assessed with somatic
cis-eQTL analyses which revealed consequences of somaticmutations in promoters at the allelic expression of nearby
genes including putative cancer drivers. This work repre-
sents a ﬁrst large scale genomic study of BCC dissecting
mutational mechanisms and functional consequences of
coding and non-coding somatic mutations.
S. I. Nikolaev: None. A. Yurchenko: None. A. Sartori:
None. I. Padioleau: None. F. Rajabi: None. L. Parmentier:
None. D. Salomon: None. E. Dermitzakis: None. H.
Ongen: None.
C05 Elucidating the Function of Cardiac Genes
C05.1
Investigating the role of KMT2C in heart development
S. C. Borland
*, G. Tenin, R. Monaghan, S. Williams, M. Zi,
C. Wilson, S. Prehar, E. Cartwright, S. Abraham, B.
Keavney
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Man-
chester, Manchester, United Kingdom
Histone modi ﬁers have been implicated as candidate genes
in congenital heart disease indicating they are important inheart development. Previously, our lab performed exome
sequencing of 829 tetralogy of Fallot patients which iden-
tiﬁed 18 mutations in KMT2C that are absent in gnomAD
and have a combined annotation dependent depletion
(CADD) score of more than 20. KMT2C is a H3K4
methyltransferase active predominantly at enhancers. Usingin situ hybridisation we have shown Kmt2c expression
during key stages of mouse heart development. Human
embryonic hearts also show KMT2C expression during
equivalent stages. We have studied a mouse model where
the SET domain of KMT2C is deleted making the proteincatalytically inactive. Homozygous deletion results in neo-
natal lethality. Homozygous embryos and pups with the
deletion have an incompletely penetrant congenital heart
defect phenotype. They have ventricular septal defects with
or without an overriding aorta (as in tetralogy of Fallot). In
homozygous pups and embryos the ventricular myocardiumis abnormal resembling non-compaction. At day 16.5 of
development the compact myocardium of the left ventricle
is signi ﬁcantly thinner (p<0.05) in homozygous embryos
compared to wild-type. Adult heterozygous mice have a
signiﬁcantly prolonged PR interval (p =0.01) compared to
wild-type (measured by unconscious ECG). All otherelectrocardiography and echocardiography parameters
measured were not signi ﬁcantly different compared to wild-
type. Our data for the ﬁrst time shows that KMT2C plays a
role in cardiac development and congenital heart disease.
We have also identi ﬁed a novel role for KMT2C in myo-
cardium formation and cardiac function. Grant reference:BHF FS/16/58/32734
S. C. Borland: None. G. Tenin: None. R. Monaghan:
None. S. Williams: None. M. Zi: None. C. Wilson: None. S.Prehar: None. E. Cartwright: None. S. Abraham: None. B.
Keavney: None.
C05.2
Mutations in KDR , encoding for vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 2, contribute to Tetralogy
of Fallot
D. Skoric-Milosavljevic
1*, N. Lahrouchi1, F. Bosada1,G .
Dombrowsky2, F. Tjong1, I. El Bouchikhi3, M. Hababa1,S .
Williams4, R. Walsh1, L. Beekman1, A. Ilgun1, R. Lesurf5,E .
Audain2, J. Breckpot6, B. J. Mulder1, S. Clur1, S. Mital5,B .
Keavney4, M. Hitz2, V. Christoffels1, E. M. Lodder1,A .V .
Postma1, C. R. Bezzina1
1Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Neth-
erlands,2University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein,
Kiel, Germany,3University of Sidi Mohammed Ben
Abdellah, Fez, Morocco,4The University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom,5The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,6Center for Human
Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) are the most
common birth defects. Although there is a clear geneticcomponent, a substantial proportion of CHD cases remain
genetically unexplained. Family based studies are suitable
to identify rare, highly penetrant variants in novelcandidate genes.
Material and Methods: We conducted whole-exome
sequencing in a family with two children affected withtetralogy of fallot (TOF). We generated and studied knock-42 J. del Picchiain mice carrying variants homologues to two missense
variants in the gene KDR , which likely underlie the TOF
phenotype in the family. Furthermore, we screened a cohort
of TOF probands of European descent for likely disease-
causing variants in KDR and performed a burden test for
rare genetic variants in this gene in an ancestry-matchedcase-control dataset.
Results: Both affected children are compound hetero-
zygous for two missense variants in KDR (p.Gly345Trp/p.
Gly537Arg), encoding vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2. While mice that were compound heterozygous
for these variants displayed no CHD, mice homozygous forthe p.Gly537Arg variant displayed embryonic lethality with
defective vasculogenesis and pericardial edema, mimicking
the phenotype of Kdr knock-out mice. Compared to the
gnomAD database there seems to be an enrichment of
protein-truncating variants (PTVs) among a set of 1,226
TOF probands of European descent (P =5x10
−7). Further-
more, we identi ﬁed a signi ﬁcant burden of rare
(MAF<0.1%) missense variants and PTVs in KDR in
European TOF patients versus controls (P =9x10−4).
Conclusions: Based on a family study and case-control
analysis, we highlight the importance of KDR in the
pathogenesis of CHD in humans.
D. Skoric-Milosavljevic: None. N. Lahrouchi: None. F.
Bosada: None. G. Dombrowsky: None. F. Tjong: None. I.
El Bouchikhi: None. M. Hababa: None. S. Williams: None.R. Walsh: None. L. Beekman: None. A. Ilgun: None. R.
Lesurf: None. E. Audain: None. J. Breckpot: None. B. J.
Mulder: None. S. Clur: None. S. Mital: None. B. Keavney:None. M. Hitz: None. V. Christoffels: None. E. M. Lodder:
None. A. V. Postma: None. C. R. Bezzina: None.
C05.3
Bi-allelic loss-of-function mutations in PLD1 cause
congenital right-sided cardiac valve defects and neonatal
cardiomyopathy
N. Lahrouchi
1*, A. Postma2, C. M. Salazar3,D .D e
Laughter4, F. Tjong1, L. Piherová5, F. Z. Bowling6,D .
Zimmerman1, E. M. Lodder1, A. Ta-Shma7, Z. Perles7,L .
Beekman1, A. Ilgun8, Q. Gunst8, M. Hababa1,D . Škorić‐
Milosavljevi ć1, P. de Knijff9, R. de Leeuw9, J. Y. Robinson10,
S. C. Burn11, H. Mustafa11, M. Ambrose12, T. Moss13,J .
Jacober14, D. M. Niyazov14, A. Rousounides15, A. Aristidou-
Kallika16, G. Tanteles17, M. Magliozzi18, F. C. Radio19,G .
W. E. van Santen20, J. C. Herkert21, O. Elpeleg22,M .v a n
den Hoff8, B. Mulder1, M. V. Airola6, S. Kmoch5,J .V .
Barnett10, S. Clur23, M. A. Frohman3, C. R. Bezzina1
1Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Heart Center;
Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology,
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam,Netherlands,2Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam
UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,3Department of Pharma-
cological Sciences and Graduate Program in Molecular
and Cellular Pharmacology, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, New York, NY, United States,4Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Schoolof Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States,
5Research Unit
for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adoles-
cent Medicine, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Universityand General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic,
6Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, New York, NY, United States,
7Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hadassah, Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,8Department
of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Nether-lands,
9Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands,10Department of
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,Nashville, TN, United States,
11University of Minnesota,
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Women ’s Health,
Minneapolis, MN, United States,12University of Minnesota,
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology,
Minneapolis, MN, United States,13University of Minnesota,
Department of Pediatrics, Minneapolis, MN, United States,
14Department of Pediatrics, Ochsner Clinic, Tulane Uni-
versity, University of Queensland, New Orleans, LA, United
States,15Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus,
16Ultrasound and Fetal Medicine Diagnostic Centre,
Nicosia, Cyprus,17Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine,
Nicosia, Cyprus,18Genetic and Rare Disease Research
Division, Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital IRCCS, Rome,
Italy,19Genetic and Rare Disease Research Division,
Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital IRCC, Rome, Italy,
20Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands,21University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Depart-ment of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands,
22Monique and
Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadas-
sah, Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,
23Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Emma Children ’s
Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Mutations in PLD1 , which encodes phos-
pholipase D1, were recently associated with severe con-genital cardiac valve defects in two families. However, the
consequences of the mutations on PLD1 protein function
and the mechanism by which PLD1 dysfunction leads tocongenital valve abnormalities remained unknown.
Methods: We established an international cohort of
patients with autosomal-recessive mutations in PLD1 .W e
assessed the location of the disease-causing missense
mutations on the 3-dimensional structure of PLD1 and testedAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 43their effect on PLD1 enzymatic activity in a cellular assay. To
investigate the involvement of PLD1 in endocardial-
m e s e n c h y m a lt r a n s i t i o n( E n d o M T )w eu s e da ni nv i t r oa s s a y
to asses EndoMT in atrioventricular cushion explants.
Results: We identi ﬁed 26 patients with bi-allelic PLD1
mutations. While most patients presented with right-sidedcongenital cardiac valve defects (24/26), two patients
displayed isolated severe fetal/neonatal cardiomyopathy.
Using haplotype analyses, we established that p.I668F is afounder mutation among the Ashkenazi-Jews (AJS, minor-
allele frequency in gnomAD-ASJ =2%). We found that
disease-causing PLD1 missense mutations cluster in regions
of the protein critical for catalytic activity. Correspondingly,
a drastic reduction in enzymatic activity was observed for
the mutant proteins. We demonstrate that PLD1 inhibitiondecreases EndoMT, an established pivotal early step in
valvulogenesis.
Conclusion: We here provide the genetic and phenotypic
characterization of the largest cohort of PLD1 patients.
Genotyping of the p.I668F founder mutation using popula-
tion-based carrier screening may be justi ﬁed to assess risk
of cardiac defects among ASJ-descendants. Finally, our
results demonstrate that functional testing is useful for
clinical interpretation of variants in PLD1.
N. Lahrouchi: None. A. Postma: None. C. M. Salazar:
None. D. De Laughter: None. F. Tjong: None. L. Piherová:
None. F. Z. Bowling: None. D. Zimmerman: None. E. M.Lodder: None. A. Ta-Shma: None. Z. Perles: None. L.
Beekman: None. A. Ilgun: None. Q. Gunst: None. M.
Hababa: None. D. Škorić-Milosavljevi ć: None. P. de Knijff:
None. R. de Leeuw: None. J. Y. Robinson: None. S. C.
Burn: None. H. Mustafa: None. M. Ambrose: None. T.
Moss: None. J. Jacober: None. D. M. Niyazov: None. A.Rousounides: None. A. Aristidou-Kallika: None. G.
Tanteles: None. M. Magliozzi: None. F. C. Radio: None.
G. W. E. van Santen: None. J. C. Herkert: None. O.Elpeleg: None. M. van den Hoff: None. B. Mulder: None.
M. V. Airola: None. S. Kmoch: None. J. V. Barnett: None.
S. Clur: None. M. A. Frohman: None. C. R. Bezzina: None.
C05.4
Pathogenic variants in THSD4 ,encoding the ADAMTS-
Like 6 protein, predispose to inherited thoracic aortic
aneurysm
S. Elbitar
1,2*, M. Renard3, P. Arnaud1,4,5, N. Hanna1,4,5,M .
Jacob1, D. Guo6, K. Tsutsui7, M. Gross1, K. Kessler8,L .
Tosolini1, V. Dattilo9, S. Dupont1, J. Jonquet1,M .
Langeois5, L. Benarroch1,10, M. Aubart1,11, Y. Ghaleb1,2,Y .
Abou Khalil1,2, M. Varret1, P. El Khoury1,2, B. Ho-Tin-
Noé1, Y. Alembik12, S. Gaertner13, B. Isidor14, L. Gouya5,O .
Milleron5, K. Sekiguchi7, D. Milewicz6, J. De Backer3,C .L eGoff1, J. Michel1, G. Jondeau1,5, L. Y. Sakai15,C .
Boileau1,4,5, M. Abifadel1,2
1Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science, INSERM
U1148, Université de Paris, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire
Xavier Bichat, Paris, France,2Laboratory of Biochemistry
and Molecular Therapeutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Saint-
Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon,3Center for Medical
Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,4Département
de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Xavier
Bichat, Paris, France,5Hôpital Bichat, Centre de Référence
Maladies Rares, Syndrome de Marfan et pathologiesapparentées, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France,
6Department of Internal Medicine, McGovern
Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center,Houston, TX, United States,
7Institute for Protein Research,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan,8Centre for
Evolution and Cancer, Division of Molecular Pathology,Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, United Kingdom,
9IRCCS Istituto
Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia,Italy,
10Inserm UMRS_974, Centre de recherche en
myologie, G. H. Pitié-Salpétrière, 47 boulevard de
l’Hôpital, Paris, France,11Service de Neuropédiatrie,
Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres, Paris,
France,12Department of Clinical Genetic, Hôpitaux
Universitaires de Strasbourg, 67091, Strasbourg, France,
13Department of Hypertension, Vascular Diseases and
Pharmacology, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France,14Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Hôtel-
Dieu, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, 44093,
Nantes, France,15Shriners Hospital for Children, Mole-
cular & Medical Genetics and Biochemistry & MolecularBiology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
OR, United States
Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) is a life-
threatening disease with often unrecognized inherited forms
(hTAAD). Although pathogenic variants have been foundin several genes, the majority of hTAAD cases are of
unknown etiology. We identi ﬁed in probands and families
with TAAD, ﬁve functional variants in THSD4 of which
two heterozygous variants leading to a premature termina-
tion codon. THSD4 encodes ADAMTSL6 (member of the
ADAMTS/L superfamily), a micro ﬁbril-associated protein
that promotes ﬁbrillin-1 matrix assembly. The THSD4
variants studied lead to haplo-insuf ﬁciency or impaired
assembly of ﬁbrillin-1 micro ﬁbrils. Thsd4
+/-mice showed
progressive dilatation of the thoracic aorta. Histologic
examination of aortic samples from a patient carrying a
THSD4 variant and from Thsd4+/-mice, revealed typical
medial degeneration and diffuse disruption of extracellular
matrix. These ﬁndings highlight the role of ADAMTSL6 in44 J. del Picchiaaortic physiology and TAAD pathogenesis. They will
improve genetic screening for hTAAD and could help
develop new targeted therapies.
S. Elbitar: None. M. Renard: None. P. Arnaud: None. N.
Hanna: None. M. Jacob: None. D. Guo: None. K. Tsutsui:
N o n e .M .G r o s s :N o n e .K .K e s s l e r :N o n e .L .T o s o l i n i :N o n e .V. Dattilo: None. S. Dupont: None. J. Jonquet: None. M.
Langeois: None. L. Benarroch: None. M. Aubart: None. Y.
Ghaleb: None. Y. Abou Khalil: N o n e .M .V a r r e t :N o n e .P .E l
Khoury: None. B. Ho-Tin-Noé: None. Y. Alembik: None. S.
Gaertner: None. B. Isidor: None. L. Gouya: None. O. Milleron:
None. K. Sekiguchi: None. D. Milewicz: None. J. De Backer:None. C. Le Goff: None. J. Michel: None. G. Jondeau: None.
L. Y. Sakai: None. C. Boileau: None. M. Abifadel: None.
C05.5
Functional characterization of rare SHOX2 variants
identi ﬁed in sinus node dysfunction and atrial
ﬁbrillation
S. Hoffmann
1,2*, C. Paone3, S. A. Sumer1,2, S. Diebold3,B .
Weiss1, R. Roeth1, S. Clauss4,5, I. Klier4,5, S. Kääb4,5,A .
Schulz6, P. S. Wild6, A. Ghrib7,8, T. Zeller7,8,R .B .
Schnabel7,8, S. Just3, G. A. Rappold1,2
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of
Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany,2DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular
Research), Partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Heidelberg,
Germany,3Department of Internal Medicine II, University
of Ulm, Ulm, Germany,4Department of Medicine I,
Klinikum Grosshadern, University of Munich (LMU),
Munich, Germany,5DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovas-
cular Research), Partner site Munich, Munich, Germany,
6Preventive Cardiology and Preventive Medicine, Center
for Cardiology, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany,7Depart-
ment of General and Interventional Cardiology, University
Heart Center Hamburg (UHZ), University Hospital Ham-burg/Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
8DZHK (German
Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner site Ham-
burg/Kiel/Luebeck, Hamburg, Germany
Sinus node dysfunction (SND) and atrial ﬁbrillation (AF)
often coexist; however, the molecular mechanisms linking
both conditions remain elusive. Mutations in the homeo-box-containing SHOX2 gene have been recently associated
with early-onset and familial AF. Shox2 is a key regulator
of sinus node development, and its de ﬁciency leads to
bradycardia, as demonstrated in animal models. We inves-
tigated SHOX2 as a susceptibility gene for SND and AF by
screening 98 SND patients and 450 individuals with AF.The functional relevance of the novel mutations wasinvestigated in vivo and in vitro. A heterozygous missense
mutation (p.P33R) was identi ﬁed in the SND cohort and
four heterozygous variants (p.G77D, p.L129 =, p.L130F, p.
A293=) in the AF cohort. Overexpression of the pathogenic
predicted mutations in zebra ﬁsh revealed pericardial edema
for p.G77D, whereas the p.P33R and p.A293 =variants
showed no effect. In addition, a dominant-negative effect with
reduced heart rates was detected for p.G77D. In vitro reporter
assays demonstrated for both missense variants p.P33R and p.G77D signi ﬁcantly impaired transactivation activity. Also, a
reduced Bmp4 target gene expression was revealed in zebra-
ﬁsh hearts upon overexpression of the p.P33R mutant. This
study associates rare variants in the SHOX2 gene implicated
in the susceptibility to arrhythmias and allows frequency
estimations in an AF cohort (3/990). We also demonstrate fortheﬁrst time a genetic link between SND and AF involving
SHOX2 . This work was supported by grants from the DFG
(RA 380/14-4) and DZHK (81X2500107).
S. Hoffmann: None. C. Paone: None. S. A. Sumer: None.
S. Diebold: None. B. Weiss: None. R. Roeth: None. S.
Clauss: None. I. Klier: None. S. Kääb: None. A. Schulz:None. P. S. Wild: None. A. Ghrib: None. T. Zeller: None.
R. B. Schnabel: None. S. Just: None. G. A. Rappold: None.
C06 Sensory Disorders
C06.2
Whole Exome Sequencing, Molecular Assays, Immu-
nohistology and Animal Models associate USP48 to
Hereditary Hearing Loss
S. Bassani
1*, A. Morgan2, M. Cocca3, N. Voisin4,J .
Chrast4, S. Pradervand4, N. Guex4, B. Delprat5, M. Rossel5,
H. Locher6, E. Van Beelen6, M. Tangui5, P. Gasparini2,3,G .
Girotto2,3, A. Reymond4
1University of Lausanne, Laussane, Switzerland,2Depart-
ment of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University
of Trieste, Trieste, Italy,3IRCCS Materno Infantile Burlo
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy,4Centre for Integrative Genomics,
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,5MMDN,
University of Montpellier, EPHE-INSERM U1198, Mon-tpellier, France,
6Department of ORL-HNS, Leiden Uni-
versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Non-Syndromic Hearing Loss (NSHL) is a sensorineural
disorder with high genetic heterogeneity and 115 genes
already associated. We identi ﬁed through exome sequencing
and data aggregation an Italian family with six affected
individuals and two unrelated NSHL Dutch patients with
predicted-to-be deleterious missense variants in USP48 .W e
uncovered a ninth patient presenting unilateral cochlear nerve
aplasia and a de novo splice variant in the same gene. USP48Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 45encodes a ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase under evo-
lutionary constraints according to GnomAD (pLI =1; Zmis-
sense=4.37). Pathogenicity of the patients ’missense variants
is supported by the three-dimensional representation of the
encoded peptide. For example, the Italian missense variant
affects a ﬂexible loop that controls binding to ubiquitin thus
l e a d i n gt oa ni n c a p a c i t yt oh y d r o l y z et e t r a - u b i q u i t i ni no u r
in vitro assays. Consistent with a contribution of USP48 to
auditory function, immunohistology showed that the encodedprotein is expressed in human hair cells/stereocilia of the
utricle, the dark cell area, the Reissner ’s membrane, the stria
vascularis and the developing organ of Corti. Engineeredzebraﬁshes knocked-out for the USP48 paralog presented
with delayed primary motoneurons development, decreased
swimming velocity and circling swimming behavior indica-tive of vestibular dysfunction and hearing impairment. Cor-
roboratingly, acoustic startle response assays revealed a
reduced auditory response of zebra ﬁsh lacking usp48 with a
signiﬁcant decrease at 600Hz and 800Hz frequencies, high-
lighting the role of this gene in auditory function. In con-
clusion, we describe a novel NSHL gene through amultipronged approach combining Exome Sequencing, Ani-
mal Modelization, Immunohistology and Molecular Assays.
S. Bassani: None. A. Morgan: None. M. Cocca: None. N.
Voisin: None. J. Chrast: None. S. Pradervand: None. N.
Guex: None. B. Delprat: None. M. Rossel: None. H.
Locher: None. E. Van Beelen: None. M. Tangui: None. P.Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None. A. Reymond: None.
C06.3
Ablation of the congenital microcoria (MCOR) criticalregion on 13q32.1 activates common-type glaucoma
signaling pathways challenging a developmental etiology
of MCOR-associated glaucoma.
C. Angee
1*, B. Nedelec1, P. David2, S. Gerber1, S. Crippa3,
B. Passet4, J. Vilotte4, N. Chassaing5, J. Kaplan1,C .
Costic3, P. Calvas5, J. Rozet1, L. Fares-Taie1
1Imagine Institute - Laboratory of Genetics in Ophtalmol-
ogy (LGO), Paris, France,2Imagine Institute - Transgen-
esis Platform, Paris, France,3Jules Gonin Eye Hospital,
Lausanne, Switzerland,4INRA - Animal Models for the
Differentiation of Tissue (MoDiT), Jouy-en-Josas, France,
5Purpan Hospital, Toulouse, France
The iris is essential to controlling the intraocular pressure,
the elevation of which leads to glaucoma. Accordingly,
glaucoma is frequent in individuals with irido-dysgenesis,including congenital microcoria (MCOR), a rare dominant
disease of dilator muscle (DM) development (>30%).
MCOR is due to deletions within a 1Mb TAD on 13q32. 1.We generated deletions at/or around the 35-Kb criticaldeletion (CD) in the mouse to investigate the regulatory
architecture of the region and its role in iris development
and glaucoma. Heterozygous mice carrying the CD devel-
oped normally, except for moderate reduction in pupil
diameter (p<0.01). RNAseq revealed ectopic expression of
Sox21 , downstream of the CD. Other genes within the TAD
were unaffected. Smaller deletions encompassing CTCF-
insulators within the CD did not alter Sox21 regulation,
suggesting adoption of a nearby enhancer by Sox21 pro-
motor in CD mice. ChIPseq-H3K27Ac identi ﬁed two
enhancers of Dctinvolved in melanin synthesis, at the 5 ′
boundary of the TAD. Consistent with a role of Dct
enhancer(s), immunohistology detected Sox21 in the pig-
mented epithelium (PE). It was undetectable in the anterior
layer where the DM develops, but ChIPseq identi ﬁed a
trophic factor among Sox21 targets, the mRNA and product
of which were elevated in the iris and aqueous humor (AH)
of CD mice as determined by RNAseq (p<0.01) and ELISA(p<0.01), respectively. Knowing that AH elevation of this
factor is associated with primary open-angle glaucoma
(POAG), we suggest that both DM malformation andglaucoma in MCOR are secondary to Sox21-mediated
activation of a POAG paracrine signaling in the PE.
C. Angee: None. B. Nedelec: None. P. David: None. S.
Gerber: None. S. Crippa: None. B. Passet: None. J. Vilotte:
None. N. Chassaing: None. J. Kaplan: None. C. Costic:
None. P. Calvas: None. J. Rozet: None. L. Fares-Taie: None.
C06.4
Mouse and human studies support a role for CAPN15
variants in cataract and microphthalmia
C. Zha
1, C. A. Farah1,R. J. Holt2*, F. Ceroni2, L. AlAbdi3,4,
A. O. Khan4,5,6, R. Helaby4, F. S. Alkuray4,7, A. Kraus8,N .
K. Ragge2,9, W. S. Sossin1
1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,2Oxford
Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom,3King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,5Eye
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UnitedArab Emirates,
6Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of
Medicine at Case Western University, Cleveland, OH,
United States,7Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
8Leeds General In ﬁrmary, Leeds, United Kingdom,9West
Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birming-
ham Health Partners, Birmingham Women ’s and Chil-
dren’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and colo-
boma (AMC) are genetically heterogeneous developmental46 J. del Picchiaeye anomalies, with variants in over 100 genes implicated.
However, only 25-60% of affected individuals are geneti-
cally diagnosed, depending on the phenotype. Calpains are
a group of intracellular cysteine proteases important in
development. Calpain 15 (CAPN15 ) is located at chromo-
some 16p13.3, a region previously implicated in an indi-vidual with cataracts and microphthalmia. We describe a
Capn15 mouse knockout with cataract and microphthalmia,
and three human families with developmental eye anoma-lies and CAPN15 recessive variants.
Materials and Methods: A mouse Capn15 knockout
was generated using embryonic stem cells from theInternational Mouse Phenotyping Consortium. Variants in
human AMC cases were identi ﬁed through whole exome
sequencing of 55 individuals from a UK patient cohort,examination of the Deciphering Developmental Disorders
Study cohort, and from a clinical diagnostic laboratory.
Results: During mouse development Capn15 was widely
expressed throughout the central nervous system, including
in the brain and eyes. Capn15 knockout mice presented
with a signi ﬁcant growth de ﬁcit and a range of structural
eye disorders, including cataract (31%), microphthalmia
(26%) and anophthalmia (18%). Three human cases with
phenotypes including growth delay (2/3), cataracts (1/3),coloboma (2/3) and microphthalmia (2/3) were identi ﬁed
with homozygous or compound heterozygous likely
pathogenic variants in CAPN15 .
Conclusions: We present evidence that variants in
CAPN15 are associated with AMC. Testing for variants in
this gene can be used to enhance AMC patient diagnosis,and meets criteria for clinical diagnostic testing, including
those of Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) and
Genomics England.
C. Zha: None. C. A. Farah: None. R. J. Holt: None. F.
Ceroni: None. L. AlAbdi: None. A. O. Khan: None. R.
Helaby: None. F. S. Alkuray: None. A. Kraus: None. N. K.Ragge: None. W. S. Sossin: None.
C06.5
DYNC2H1 hypomorphic or retina-predominant variants
cause non-syndromic retinal degeneration
A. V. Vig
1,2*, J. A. Poulter3, D. Ottaviani4, E. Tavares1,K .
Toropova5, A. M. Tracewska6,7, A. Mollica1, J. Kang1,O .
Kehelwathugoda1, T. Paton1,8, J. T. Maynes1, G. Wheway9,
G. Arno4,10, K. N. Khan3, M. McKibbin3, C. Toomes3,M .
Ali3, M. Di Scipio1,S .L i1, J. Ellingford11, G. Black11,12,A .
Webster4,10, M. Rydzanicz7, P. Stawi ński7,R .P łoski7,A .
Vincent1,2, M. E. Cheetham4, C. F. Inglehearn3, A. Roberts5,
E. Heon1,2
1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,
2The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,3StJames ’University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom,4UCL
Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom,
5Birbeck University of London, London, United Kingdom,
6PORT Polish Center for Technology Development, Wroc-
law, Poland,7Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw,
Poland,8The Centre for Applied Genomics, Toronto, ON,
Canada,9University of Southampton, Toronto, ON,
Canada,10Moor ﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United King-
dom,11The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,12Saint Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester, United
Kingdom
Introduction: The cytoplasmic dynein-2, heavy chain 1
gene ( DYNC2H1 ) encodes a motor protein important for
retrograde ciliary intra ﬂagellar transport. DYNC2H1 var-
iants have been associated with severe syndromic condi-tions such as Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy
(JATD), with rare retinal involvement.
Material and Methods: Genome and exome sequencing
were performed for 5 unrelated cases of IRD with no
identi ﬁed variant. In vitro assays were developed to validate
the variants identi ﬁed;ﬁbroblast ciliation assay, iPSC-
derived retinal organoids, and an in vitro dynein
motility assay.
Results: Four novel DYNC2H1 variants (V1,
g.103327020_103327021dup; V2, g.103055779 A>T; V3,
g.103112272 C>G; V4, g.103070104 A>C) and one
previously reported (V5, g.103339363 T>G) were identi-ﬁed. V1 introduced a premature termination codon (PTC),
whereas V2 disrupted the exon 41 splice donor site causing
incomplete skipping of exon 41. V1 and V2 impaireddynein-2 motility in vitro and perturbed IFT88 distribution
within cilia. V3 is predicted to cause a PTC in a retina-
predominant transcript. Analysis of retinal organoidsshowed that expression of this transcript increased with
organoid differentiation.
Conclusions: The DYNC2H1 variants discussed were
either hypomorphic or affect a retina-predominant tran-
script. This is the ﬁrst report of dynein variants, speci ﬁcally
DYNC2H1 variants, causing non-syndromic IRD.
Funding: Foundation Fighting Blindness Canada and
USA, University of Toronto McLaughlin Centre WGSInitiative, Henry Brent Chair in Innovative Pediatric
Ophthalmology Research, Brenda Eye Research Fund, Fight
For Sight UK, NIH Research, Moor ﬁelds Eye Charity,
Wellcome Trust, Cancer Research UK, Medical Research
Council, Retina UK, IRDC Leeds and Manchester, National
Science Center Poland, Royal Society, BBSRC.
A. V. Vig: None. J. A. Poulter: None. D. Ottaviani: None.
E. Tavares: None. K. Toropova: None. A. M. Tracewska:
None. A. Mollica: None. J. Kang: None. O. Kehelwathu-goda: None. T. Paton: None. J. T. Maynes: None. G.
Wheway: None. G. Arno: None. K. N. Khan: F. Consultant/Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 47Advisory Board; Modest; Advisory board fees from
MeiraGTx, Advisory board fees from Roche. M. McKibbin:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Educational travel grant from Novartis,
Educational travel grant from Bayer, Educational travelgrant from Allegran. C. Other Research Support (supplies,
equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support);
Modest; Personal research funding from Alcon, Personalresearch funding from Roche. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Lecture or advisory board feed from
Novartis, Lecture or advisory board feed from Bayer. C.Toomes: None. M. Ali: None. M. Di Scipio: None. S. Li:
None. J. Ellingford: None. G. Black: None. A. Webster:
None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawi ński: None. R. P łoski:
None. A. Vincent: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Adverum Technologies. M. E. Cheetham: None. C. F.
Inglehearn: None. A. Roberts: None. E. Heon: F. Con-sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Deep Genomics, Sano ﬁ.
C06.6
Proteasome subunit PSMC3 variants cause neurosen-
sory syndrome combining deafness and cataract due to
proteotoxic stress
A. Kröll-Hermi
1, F. Ebstein2, C. Stoetzel1, V. Geoffroy1,E .
Schaefer1, S. Scheidecker1, S. Bär3, M. Takamiya4,K .
Kawakami5, B. Zieba2, F. Studer6, V. Pelletier6, C. Speeg-
Schatz7, V. Laugel8, D. Lipsker9, F. Sandron10,S .
McGinn10, A. Boland10, J. Deleuze10, L. Kuhn11,J .
Chicher11, P. Hammann11, S. Friant3, C. Etard12,E .
Krüger2,J. Muller1*, U. Strähle4, H. Dollfus1
1U1112, Strasbourg, France,2Institut für Medizinische
Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IMBM), Greifswald,
Germany,3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Géno-
mique, Microbiologie (GMGM), UMR7156, Centre
National de Recherche Scienti ﬁque (CNRS), Université de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Strasbourg, France,
4Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of
Toxicology and Genetics (ITG), Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen,
Germany., Karlsruhe, Germany,5Laboratory of Molecular
and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Genetics,
and Department of Genetics. SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Mishima, Japan, Mis-hima, Japan,
6Centre de Référence pour les affections rares
en génétique ophtalmologique, CARGO, Filière SENS-
GENE, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,France, Strasbourg, France,
7Department of Ophthalmol-
ogy, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France, Strasbourg, France,8Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpi-
taux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 1 avenue Molière,
Strasbourg, France, Strasbourg, France,9Faculté deMédecine, Université de Strasbourg et Clinique Dermato-
logique, Hôpitaux Universitaires, Strasbourg, France.,
Strasbourg, France,10Centre National de Recherche en
Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de Biologie
François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91057,
Evry, France., Evry, France,11Institut de Biologie Molé-
culaire et Cellulaire (IBMC), Plateforme Protéomique
Strasbourg —Esplanade, CNRS FRC1589, 67084 Stras-
bourg, France, Strasbourg, France,12Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology (KIT), Institute of Toxicology and Genetics
(ITG), Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany., Strasbourg,
France
Patients with a very rare association of early-onset cataracts
and severe deafness as part of a neurological, sensorial and
cutaneous novel syndrome were explored by Whole Gen-ome Sequencing in a very large family. A unique deep
intronic homozygous variant was identi ﬁed in the PSMC3
gene (encoding the proteasome ATPase subunit Rpt5)leading to the transcription of a cryptic exon. The ubiquitin-
proteasome system represents the most important non-
lysosomal cellular protein degradation machinery. By wayof the 26S proteasome as the degradative enzyme complex,
it is tightly connected with the ubiquitin-dependent timely
degradation of regulatory proteins involved in signallingcascades and the elimination of mis-folded proteins. The
proteasome content and activity in patient ’sﬁbroblasts was
however unaffected. Nevertheless, patient ’s cells exhibited
impaired protein homeostasis characterized by accumula-
tion of ubiquitinated proteins suggesting severe proteotoxic
stress. Indeed, the TCF11/Nrf1 transcriptional pathwayallowing proteasome recovery after proteasome inhibition is
permanently activated in the patient ’sﬁbroblasts. Upon
chemical proteasome inhibition this pathway was impairedin patient ’s cells, which were unable to compensate for
proteotoxic stress although a higher proteasome content and
activity was observed. PSMC3 knock-out in zebra ﬁsh
remarkably reproduced the human phenotype with inner ear
development anomalies as well as cataracts suggesting thatRpt5 plays a major role in inner ear, lens and central ner-
vous system development. This report is the ﬁrst description
of a recessive pathogenic variant in a proteasomal ATPase.19S subunits are highly expressed in the central nervous
system and appear to be of utmost importance for neuronal
/sensorial protein homeostasis and development.
A. Kröll-Hermi: None. F. Ebstein: None. C. Stoetzel:
None. V. Geoffroy: None. E. Schaefer: None. S. Schei-
decker: None. S. Bär: None. M. Takamiya: None. K.Kawakami: None. B. Zieba: None. F. Studer: None. V.
Pelletier: None. C. Speeg-Schatz: None. V. Laugel: None.
D. Lipsker: None. F. Sandron: None. S. McGinn: None. A.Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. L. Kuhn: None. J.
Chicher: None. P. Hammann: None. S. Friant: None. C.48 J. del PicchiaEtard: None. E. Krüger: None. J. Muller: None. U. Strähle:
None. H. Dollfus: None.
C07 Impact of Genomic Medicine on Public and PatientsC07.1
Implementing a hybrid clinical/research model in
genomic medicine: post 100,000 Genomes Project
C. Patch
1,2,3*, E. Thomas1, F. Maleady Crowe1, R. Wier1,T .
Fowler1, M. Bishop4, A. Pichini4
1Genomics England, London, United Kingdom,2Wellcome
Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom,3Shefﬁeld
Hallam University, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,4Genomics
Education Programme, Health Education England, Bir-
mingham, United Kingdom
Building on the UK 100,000 Genomes Project and existing
NHS genomic infrastructure, the creation of the NHS
Genomics Medicine service by NHS England together with
Genomics England has established the principle of patientchoice to both have a diagnostic test and agree to use of
their data for the research. Through the national test direc-
tory whole genome sequencing (WGS) has been commis-sioned for clinical diagnostic use for 21 rare disease clinical
indications and 4 cancer indications ( https://www.england.
nhs.uk/publication/national-genomic-test-directories/ ). All
persons agreeing to the WGS testing will be offered the
opportunity to agree to the use of their data and available
samples within the National Genomic Research Library.This will be part of the clinical pathway. The development
of the model and the development of the necessary complex
implementation processes was underpinned by collabora-tion and informal co-design. This included ensuring the
choice model was compliant with current understandings of
governance across the clinical and research interface,
development of the Genomics England research environ-
ment, development of materials to support patients and theclinical workforce and formalising processes for clinical
implementation. Implementation was informed by a series
of multi-agency task and ﬁnish groups and by consultation
with health care professionals, educationalists, participants
of the 100,000 genomes project and other stakeholders.
Here we present the ﬁnalised products for the ﬁrst stage of
the Genomics Medicine Service. The long-term aim being
to create an ethically robust and trusted research ecosystem
as a routine part of clinical care.
C. Patch: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genomics England. E. Thomas: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genomics England. F. Maleady
Crowe: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;Genomics England. R. Wier: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Genomics England. T. Fowler: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genomics
England. M. Bishop: None. A. Pichini: None.
C07.2
A tailored approach towards informing relatives at riskof inherited cardiac diseases: preliminary results of a
randomized controlled trial
L. M. Van den Heuvel
1*, Y. M. Hoedemaekers2,A .F .
Baas3, M. J. H. Baars1, E. M. A. Smets1, J. P. van Tintelen3,
I. Christiaans4
1Amsterdam UMC, location AMC, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands,2Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands,4University Medical Centre Groningen, Gro-
ningen, Netherlands
Introduction: If undetected, inherited cardiac diseases can
lead to sudden cardiac death, while preventive and treat-ment options are available. Predictive DNA testing is
advised for at-risk relatives. Currently, probands are asked
to inform relatives with a family letter. However, only halfof relatives attends genetic counselling.
Methods: Current practice was compared to a tailored
approach, in which probands were asked to decide to(initially) inform relatives themselves or by the counsellor,
and family letters were sent directly 1 month after
disclosure of the probands ’test result with consent of the
proband. Outcomes were uptake of counselling in the ﬁrst
year (using pedigrees), and impact on psychological/family
functioning, and evaluation of the approach (measured withsurveys at 3 (T1) and 9 (T2) months after disclosure).
Results: 96 probands were included; 549 relatives were
eligible for counselling. Preliminary ﬁndings showed no
signiﬁcant difference in uptake of genetic counselling
between the control (34.5%) and the intervention (36.7%)
group. At T1, 92% of probands in the intervention groupreported that all relatives were informed, compared to 73%
in the control group. In both the intervention and control
group, probands were satis ﬁed with the approach (resp.
95% vs. 88%) and reported no impact on family functioning
(resp. 94.6% vs. 92.3%).
Conclusions: Preliminary ﬁndings of this trial show no
differences in uptake, impact on family functioning and
satisfaction between the tailored and current approach,
despite more relatives being informed using the tailoredapproach. Data collection of uptake and T2 surveys will be
ﬁnished in November 2020.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 49L. M. Van den Heuvel: None. Y. M. Hoedemaekers:
None. A. F. Baas: None. M. J. H. Baars: None. E. M. A.
Smets: None. J. P. van Tintelen: None. I. Christiaans: None.
C07.3
Measuring the burden of direct-to-consumer genetic
testing on clinical genetics services
J. M. Tiller1*, M. Millward2, M. Bogwitz3, H. Kincaid4,S .
Taylor3, A. Trainer3,2, P. Lacaze1
1Public Health Genomics, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia,2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
3Genomic Medicine & Parkville Familial Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Australia,4Monash Health, Melbourne,
Australia
Introduction: Direct-to-consumer genetic testing
(DTCGT) is increasing in popularity, as is the practice ofconsumers interrogating their resultant genotype data with
third-party software tools to generate unvalidated imputed
disease risk estimates. This is suspected to be creating aburden on clinical genetic health services, as consumers
seek assistance with interpretation. However, few studies
have collected recent evidence regarding the extent of thisburden.
Methods and results : We administered an online survey
to Australian clinical genetic services, asking questionsrelated to DTCGT-related referrals over the past 10 years.
Eleven publicly-funded clinical genetic services completed
the survey, reporting over 100 DTCGT-related referrals.Most referrals (83%) were made by general practitioners to
aid interpretation of DTCGT results. Over 30% of referrals
were related to imputed disease risk estimates generatedfrom third-party web-based software tools. Services
reported low validation rates for DTCGT results (<10%).
Procedures for managing DTCGT referrals and grantingappointments were variable between services, with most
services (8/11) lacking speci ﬁc procedures.
Conclusions : Our study provides evidence that the
increasing popularity of DTCGT is causing a material
burden on publicly-funded Australian clinical genetics
services. We also report a sizeable portion of that burdenresulting from the use of third-party genetic risk-imputation
software tools. The impact of DTCGT is likely to increase
in coming years, if the use of DTCGT continues to grow.Ourﬁndings are relevant for other countries with publicly-
funded or single-payer clinical genetics services, which will
have to contend with the growing popularity of DTCGT inthe near future.
J. M. Tiller: None. M. Millward: None. M. Bogwitz:
None. H. Kincaid: None. S. Taylor: None. A. Trainer:None. P. Lacaze: None.C07.4
Critical components of informed consent for genetic
testing: Results of a Delphi Consensus process
K. E. Ormond
1*, M. Borensztein1, A. H. Buchanan2,W .
Faucett2, M. L. G. Hallquist2, H. L. Peay3, M. E. Smith4,E .
Tricou1, W. R. Uhlmann5, K. E. Wain2, C. R. Coughlin II6
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,2Gei-
singer Health Care, Danville, PA, United States,3RTI,
Research Triangle Park, NC, United States,4Northwestern
University, Chciago, IL, United States,5University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States,6University of
Colorado, Denver, CO, United States
Background: Genetic testing has historically been tied to
pre-test genetic counseling to facilitate informed consent.
While core concepts exist for general informed consent,
there is not speci ﬁc guidance de ﬁning them around the
clinical use of genetic testing.
Method: We conducted a scoping literature review that
identi ﬁed 77 concepts, and used a modi ﬁed Delphi
methodology to survey experts. Participants used 5 point
likert scales to determine how “critical ”each concept was
for a “typical patient ”to make an informed decision, and
ranked the top choices within each subcategory of concepts
over 2 rounds.
Findings: There were 25 respondents (9 medical
geneticists, 8 genetic counselors, 9 bioethicists), 60% of
whom regularly consent for genetic testing. The most highly
endorsed concepts for inclusion were: (1) condition(s)tested; (2) management implications; (3) primary and (4)
secondary results to be returned, and options for choice; (5)
To whom results will be reported; (6) voluntariness oftesting; (7) test limitations (8) potential to learn unexpected
information about family relationships; (9) potential impact
on personal health, (10) on treatment/screening, and (11) on
the family (health, emotions, relationships); (12) risks for
discrimination and/or stigma. A larger survey, meant tovalidate whether medical geneticists and genetic counselors
more broadly agree with the Delphi results, will be
conducted in spring 2020 and included in the presentation.
Discussion: Deﬁning the minimal critical concepts to
allow clients to reach informed decisions about genetic
testing is important as genetic testing increases exponen-tially and the consent process is increasingly done by non-
genetics healthcare providers.
K. E. Ormond: None. M. Borensztein: None. A. H.
Buchanan: None. W. Faucett: None. M. L. G. Hallquist:
None. H. L. Peay: None. M. E. Smith: None. E. Tricou:
None. W. R. Uhlmann: None. K. E. Wain: None. C. R.Coughlin II: None.50 J. del PicchiaC07.5
Public attitudes towards human germline gene editing: a
baseline survey in the Netherlands
D. Houtman1*, M. Polak2, B. Vijlbrief1, P. Verheggen3,R .
Hofstra1, S. Riedijk1
1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Eras-
mus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,3Moti-
vaction International B. V., Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: A multidisciplinary consortium is organizing
a public dialogue about human germline gene editing(GLGE) in the Netherlands. Challenges of public dialogue
include ensuring inclusivity, designing appropriate content
for engagement, and evaluating the impact of the dialogueon opinion formation. The current study provides a baseline
measurement, which will later be used to evaluate the
impact of the dialogue. For now, we aim to use this mea-surement to identify subgroups of society based on their
attitudes towards human GLGE and their willingness to
engage in science and technology.
Materials and Methods: A representative sample of
1185 adults ﬁlled out an online survey, measuring their
acceptance of different applications of human GLGE andtheir willingness to discuss new technologies and how to
deal with them.
Results: By means of exploratory analyses we found that
in our sample 68.9% agreed with application to prevent a
severe muscle disease, 37.0% agreed with application to
prevent an infection disease, and 7.8% agreed withapplication to increase intelligence. Willingness to discuss
new technologies and how to deal with them was associated
with income ( χ²(3)=15.577, p< 0.01), educational level
(χ²(2)=25.830, p< 0.01), and personal values ( χ²(7)=
68.930, p< 0.01). Comparatively, people who did not want
to discuss new technologies and how to deal with them
(36.5%) showed lower educational-level, lower income, and
more traditional and consumption-oriented values.
Conclusions: Our data provide insights into attitudes of
the Dutch population towards different applications of
human GLGE and into the identi ﬁcation of subgroups of
society for whom participation is not self-evident.
D. Houtman: None. M. Polak: None. B. Vijlbrief: None.
P. Verheggen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;Motivaction International B. V. R. Hofstra: None. S.
Riedijk: None.
C07.6
Does Genetic Counseling lead to effective coping with
genetic risk information?
B. B. Biesecker
1*,M .T .C h o21RTI, International, Bethesda, MD, United States,2NHGRI,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
Patient coping has been intermittently studied as a practice
outcome of genetics services. Yet, assessments have been
inconsistent and coping strategies have been reported
without evidence of their effectiveness. Discrepant theore-tical and methodological approaches may have distracted
attention from compelling evidence that genetic counseling
can enhance effective patient coping and, with time, adap-tation to genetic information. We report key ﬁndings from a
systematic literature review of 68 abstracts that met our
inclusion criteria for studies of coping with genetic risk or acondition. The studies represent 12,006 patients. Study
designs included: cross-sectional (31), longitudinal (10),
randomized (5), and observational (1). Among qualitativestudies were semi-structured interviews (16) and focus
groups (3). The majority were studies conducted in cancer
genetics, yet most specialty settings were represented. Asynthesis of outcomes generated ﬁve hypotheses: H1: The
effectiveness of coping strategies depends on their congruence
with the stress source and its actionability. H2: In the face ofgenetic risk, avoidant coping is most likely to result in psy-
chological distress, unless used to avoid learning unwanted
genetic information. H3: Family history, risk perception andpersonality traits mediate effective use of coping strategies to
manage illness-related stress. H4: Identifying unhelpful cop-
ing strategies and offering useful ones reduces risk-relateddistress and promotes adaptation. H5: Enhancing patient
coping self-ef ﬁcacy improves coping effectiveness. Overall,
the evidence that generated these hypotheses suggests thatgenetics providers have important clinical opportunities to
enhance coping effectiveness as a valuable outcome in help-
ing patients adapt to genetic risk or a condition.
B. B. Biesecker: None. M. T. Cho: None.
C08 Impact of Diagnostics Improvements in Healthcare
C08.1
Project Baby Bear: The ﬁrst state-funded quality
improvement project of rapid Whole Genome Sequen-
cing in neonatal and pediatric intensive care units inthe USA
K. A. Ellsworth
1*, S. Caylor1, W. Benson1, C. Ashburner2,
J. Carmichael2, E. Cham3, S. Chowdhury1, J. Cleary4,A .
D’Harlingue3, L. Farnaes1, J. Hunt4, C. Hobbs1,K .
Houtchens3, P. Joe3, J. Knight4, A. Kochhar2, M. Joseph2,J .
Limon2, M. Martin5, S. Nahas1, K. A. Rauen5, A. Schwarz4,
S. P. Shankar5, R. Spicer2, M. Rojas2, O. Vargas-Shiraishi4,
K. Wigby1, N. Zadeh4, S. Kingsmore1, D. Dimmock1Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 511Rady Children ’s Institute for Genomic Medicine, San
Diego, CA, United States,2Valley Children ’s Healthcare,
Madera, CA, United States,3University of California –San
Francisco, Benioff Children ’s Hospital Oakland, Oakland,
CA, United States,4Children ’s Hospital of Orange County,
Orange, CA, United States,5University of California Davis
Children ’s Hospital, Sacramento, CA, United States
Previous studies showed that rapid Whole Genome
Sequencing (rWGS) results in improved outcomes andreduced costs for acutely ill infants in the intensive care unit
(ICU) when compared to standard of care. Currently, rWGS
is not a reimbursed test under California Medicaid (Medi-Cal), private insurers or federal Medicare programs. Cali-
fornia ’s State Department of Health Care Services appro-
priated $2,000,000 for rWGS Quality Improvement PilotProgram, known as Project Baby Bear (PBB) with a goal to
identify the clinical and economic bene ﬁts of rWGS for
critically ill pediatric patients enrolled in Medi-Cal. rWGSwas performed on 116 babies admitted to ﬁve medical
centers in California. Data was collected on the outcomes of
patients and costs to evaluate the clinical and economicbeneﬁts of rWGS. The clinical utility of diagnoses and
changes in outcome were determined by patients ’medical
teams. To date, 43% of those sequenced received a mole-cular diagnosis, with turnaround time for provisional results
in <72 hrs. In >35% of cases, rWGS altered the clinical
management. Collectively, patients avoided >225 hospitaldays, numerous invasive procedures and diagnostic tests. In
the preliminary analysis of PBB cases, it was estimated a
charge expenditure saving of up to $2.4M across all epi-sodes of care. In conclusion, the preliminary data from PBB
demonstrated the clinical utility and cost effectiveness of
utilization of rWGS in the pediatric ICU setting. PBBprovided evidence that rWGS should become a Medi-Cal
covered bene ﬁt, and presented the framework for future
studies in other states to show the utility of rWGS.
K. A. Ellsworth: None. S. Caylor: None. W. Benson:
None. C. Ashburner: None. J. Carmichael: None. E. Cham:None. S. Chowdhury: None. J. Cleary: None. A. D ’Harlin-
gue: None. L. Farnaes: None. J. Hunt: None. C. Hobbs:
None. K. Houtchens: None. P. Joe: None. J. Knight: None.A. Kochhar: None. M. Joseph: None. J. Limon: None. M.
Martin: None. S. Nahas: None. K. A. Rauen: None. A.
Schwarz: None. S. P. Shankar: None. R. Spicer: None. M.Rojas: None. O. Vargas-Shiraishi: None. K. Wigby: None.
N. Zadeh: None. S. Kingsmore: None. D. Dimmock: None.
C08.2
Integration of genome sequencing into health care -
experiences from 3211 rare disease patients show high
diagnostic rates across multiple clinical entitiesA. Lindstrand
1,2*, H. Stranneheim1,3,4, K. Lagerstedt-
Robinson1,2, M. Kvarnung1,2, N. Lesko1,3, D. Nilsson1,2,B .
Anderlid1,2, H. Arnell5, C. Backman Johansson3,M .
Barbaro3, E. Björck1,2, H. Bruhn3, J. Eisfeldt1,2,4,M .
Engvall3, C. Freyer3, G. Grigelioniene1,2, P. Gustavsson1,2,
A. Hammarsjö1,2, M. Hellström-Pigg1,2, A. Jemt6,M .
Laaksonen7, S. Lind Enoksson8, M. Magnusson1,7,H .
Malmgren1,2, K. Naess3, M. Nordenskjöld1,2, M. Oscarson3,
M. Pettersson1,2, C. Rasi4, A. Rosenbaum7, E. Sahlin1,2,T .
Stödberg3,5,B .T e s i1,2, E. Tham1,2, H. Thonberg1,2, U. von
Döbeln3, S. Vonlanthen8, A. Wikström8, J. Wincent1,2,O .
Winqvist8, A. Wredenberg3, S. Ygberg3,5, R. H. Zetterström3,
P. Marits8, M. Johansson-Soller1, M. Johansson Soller1,2,
A. Nordgren1,2, V. Wirta4,6,7, A. Wedell1,3
1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karo-
linska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stock-holm, Sweden,
3Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,
4Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Microbiology,
Tumour and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden,5Department of Women ’s and Children ’s Health,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,6Genomic Med-
icine Center Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden,7Science for Life Laboratory, School of
engineering sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology andHealth, KTH Royal Institutet of Technology, Stockholm,
Sweden,
8Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfu-
sion Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,Sweden., Stockholm, Sweden
We report the ﬁndings from 4553 samples (3211 cases) that
have been analyzed by genome sequencing at the GenomicMedicine Center Karolinska-Rare Diseases (GMCK-RD).
GMCK-RD represents a long-term collaborative initiative
between Karolinska University Hospital and SciLifeLab to
establish advanced, genomics-based diagnostics in the
Stockholm healthcare setting. Our bioinformatic analysispipeline includes SNVs, Indels, CNVs (including SMN),
balanced structural variants and short tandem repeat
expansions. Visualization of results for clinical interpreta-tion is carried out in Scout - a custom-developed decision
support system. Both singleton (84%) and trio/family (16%)
analysis is performed. The variant interpretation is done by15 expert teams at the hospital involving staff from three
clinics and for patients with complex phenotypes data is
shared between the teams. Overall 33% of the patientsreceive a molecular diagnosis (1208 positive ﬁndings)
ranging from 30% to 60% for speci ﬁc disease groups. There
is extreme heterogeneity regarding causative genes ( n=701)
with some of the most common being SCN1A (n=13; epi-
lepsy), TNFRSF13B (n=5; inborn errors of immunity) and52 J. del PicchiaARID1B (n=8; intellectual disability). Some of the causa-
tive variants were recurrent; including both previously
known founder mutations, known recurrent de novo muta-
tions and novel recurrent variants. Overall, GMCK-RD has
had dramatic results as a large number of patients have
received speci ﬁc molecular diagnoses. Furthermore, nega-
tive cases are systematically included in research studies
that have led to the discovery of 21 novel disease-causing
genes. To facilitate discovery of new disease genes,GMCK-RD has joined international data sharing initiatives,
including ClinVar, UDNI, Beacon and MatchMaker
Exchange.
A. Lindstrand: None. H. Stranneheim: None. K. Lager-
stedt-Robinson: None. M. Kvarnung: None. N. Lesko:
None. D. Nilsson: None. B. Anderlid: None. H. Arnell:None. C. Backman Johansson: None. M. Barbaro: None. E.
Björck: None. H. Bruhn: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. M.
Engvall: None. C. Freyer: None. G. Grigelioniene: None. P.Gustavsson: None. A. Hammarsjö: None. M. Hellström-
Pigg: None. A. Jemt: None. M. Laaksonen: None. S. Lind
Enoksson: None. M. Magnusson: None. H. Malmgren:None. K. Naess: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. M.
Oscarson: None. M. Pettersson: None. C. Rasi: None. A.
Rosenbaum: None. E. Sahlin: None. T. Stödberg: None. B.Tesi: None. E. Tham: None. H. Thonberg: None. U. von
Döbeln: None. S. Vonlanthen: None. A. Wikström: None. J.
Wincent: None. O. Winqvist: None. A. Wredenberg: None.S. Ygberg: None. R. H. Zetterström: None. P. Marits: None.
M. Johansson-Soller: None. M. Johansson Soller: None. A.
Nordgren: None. V. Wirta: None. A. Wedell: None.
C08.3
Genomic loci susceptible to systematic sequencing bias
in clinical whole genomes
T. M. Freeman
1*, Genomics England Research
Consortium, D. Wang1, J. Harris2
1The University of Shef ﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,
2Personalis Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States
Introduction: Accurate massively parallel sequencing
(MPS) of genetic variants is key to many areas of scienceand medicine, including diagnosing genetic diseases. Cer-
tain genomic positions can be prone to higher rates of
systematic sequencing and alignment bias that limit accu-racy, resulting in false positive variant calls. Current stan-
dard practices to differentiate between loci that can and
cannot be sequenced with high con ﬁdence utilise consensus
between different sequencing methods as a proxy for
sequencing con ﬁdence. These practices have signi ﬁcant
limitations and alternative methods are required toovercome these.Materials and Methods: We have developed a novel
statistical method based on summarising sequenced reads
from whole genome clinical samples and cataloguing them
in“Incremental Databases ”that maintain individual con-
ﬁdentiality. Allele statistics were catalogued for each
genomic position that consistently showed systematic biaseswith the corresponding MPS pipeline.
Results: We found systematic biases present at ~1-3% of
the human autosomal genome across ﬁve patient cohorts.
We identi ﬁed how susceptible different genomic regions
were to systematic biases, including large homopolymer
ﬂanks (odds ratio =23.29-33.69) and the NIST high
conﬁdence genomic regions (odds ratio =0.154-0.191). We
conﬁrmed our predictions on a gold-standard reference
genome and showed that these systematic biases can lead tosuspect variant calls within clinical panels.
Conclusion: Our results recommend increased caution to
address systematic sequencing biases. This study imple-ments a novel statistical approach to enhance quality control
of clinically sequenced samples by ﬂagging variants at
suspect loci for further analysis or exclusion.
This work has recently been accepted for publication in
Genome Research .
T. M. Freeman: None. D. Wang: None. J. Harris: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Personalis Inc.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Personalis Inc.
C08.4
Systematic analysis of short tandem repeats in 38,256
exomes provides additional diagnostic yield
B. P. G. H. van der Sanden
1,2*, M. de Groot1,J .
Corominas1, M. Pennings1, R. P. P. Meijer1,L .E .L .M .
Vissers1,2, E. Kamsteeg1, C. Gilissen1,3
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Short tandem repeats (STRs) are de ﬁned as tandemly
repeated nucleotide motifs of 2-12 base pairs in length andoccur across the genome. Extreme expansion of speci ﬁc
STRs can lead to approximately 30 different human genetic
disorders. Despite the extensive application of whole exomesequencing (WES) in routine diagnostic genetic testing,
STRs are not routinely identi ﬁed from these data. Here, we
present our results of a systematic analysis for STRexpansion disorders in our cohort of 38,256 clinical
exomes.
We evaluated four different tools, exSTRa, STRetch,
ExpansionHunter, and GangSTR, on a validation cohort ofAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 5311 patients with known pathogenic repeat expansion allele
(s). ExpansionHunter demonstrated highest sensitivity
(91%) and speci ﬁcity (100%), after which we applied it to
2,900 exomes from movement and muscle disorder patients.
We identi ﬁed 49 patients with a likely aberrant STR
length. Validation by GeneScan ®and/or triplet repeat-
primed PCR technologies con ﬁrmed the presence of
aberrant expansion allele(s) for 18 (0.6%). Importantly, 10
STR expansions had not previously been identi ﬁed using
conventional genetic testing, and may result in novel
diagnoses. Three expansions were detected in ATXN7 ,
known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 7, for whichincrease in repeat size between generations may cause
extreme anticipation. We subsequently tested the remainder
of our diagnostic WES cohort, including over 30 clinicallyand genetically heterogeneous disorders, and currently
1,187 aberrant expansion alleles are being validated.
Our results show that systematic STR evaluation may
increase diagnostic WES yield by 0.6%, and should become
a routine part of WES data analysis in genetic testing
laboratories.
B. P. G. H. van der Sanden: None. M. de Groot: None. J.
Corominas: None. M. Pennings: None. R. P. P. Meijer:
None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. E. Kamsteeg: None. C.Gilissen: None.
C08.5
A cost-effectiveness and utility analysis of genomicsequencing in a prospective versus historical cohort of
complex pediatric patients
A. Yeung
1,2*, N. B. Tan1,T .Y .T a n1,2,3, Z. Stark1,2,3,N .
Brown1,3, M. J. Hunter4,5, M. Delatycki1,3, C. Stutterd1,3,R .
Savarirayan1,3, G. McGillivray1, R. Stapleton1, S. Kumble1,
L. Downie1, M. Regan4,5, S. Lunke1, B. Chong1, D. Phelan1,
G. Brett1, A. Jarmolowicz1, Y. Prawer4, G. Valente6,Y .
Samarinsky1, M. Martin7,2,3, C. McEwan2, I. Goranitis7,8,C .
Gaff7,2,3, S. M. White1,2,3
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children ’s
Research Institute, Parkville, Australia,2Melbourne Geno-
mics Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia,3Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia,
4Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia,
5Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Mel-
bourne, Australia,6Genetics in the North East, Austin
Health, Melbourne, Australia,7Murdoch Children ’s
Research Institute, Parkville, Australia,8Centre for Health
Policy, Melbourne School of Population and Global
Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
The diagnosis of children with genetic conditions places a
signiﬁcant economic burden on health care services. Thelack of well-de ﬁned comparative cohorts has been a lim-
itation of health economic studies comparing ﬁrst-line
genomic sequencing (GS) against traditional approaches.
Aim: To evaluate utility and cost effectiveness of early
GS in pediatric patients with complex monogenic condi-
tions compared to a matched historical cohort.
Method: Data, including diagnosis rate and investigation
costs, were collected in a prospective cohort of 92 pediatric
patients who underwent singleton GS over an 18-monthperiod (2016-2017). Inclusion required patients to have two
of the following: a condition with high morbidity or
mortality, a multi-system disease involving three or moreorgan systems, or severe limitation of daily function. For
comparison, data were collected in a historical patient
cohort ful ﬁlling the inclusion criteria who underwent
traditional investigations in the two years (2012-2013) prior
to the availability of clinical genomic sequencing.
Results: Genomic sequencing yielded a diagnosis in 42%
while traditional investigations yielded a diagnosis in 23%
(p=0.003). 75% of diagnosed patients experienced a
change in management, compared to 33% of diagnosedpatients who underwent traditional investigations. In the GS
cohort, four times fewer invasive investigations were
observed. Compared to traditional investigations, singletongenomic sequencing at a cost of $3100 AUD resulted in a
mean saving per person of $2780 AUD (95%CI $1585 -
$3974).
Conclusion: Early genomic sequencing is highly cost-
effective while doubling the diagnostic yield of traditional
approaches and improving the care of patients with complexgenetic conditions.
A. Yeung: None. N. B. Tan: None. T. Y. Tan: None. Z.
Stark: None. N. Brown: None. M. J. Hunter: None. M.Delatycki: None. C. Stutterd: None. R. Savarirayan: None.
G. McGillivray: None. R. Stapleton: None. S. Kumble:
None. L. Downie: None. M. Regan: None. S. Lunke: None.B. Chong: None. D. Phelan: None. G. Brett: None. A.
Jarmolowicz: None. Y. Prawer: None. G. Valente: None. Y.
Samarinsky: None. M. Martin: None. C. McEwan: None. I.Goranitis: None. C. Gaff: None. S. M. White: None.
C08.6
The impact of the 100,000 Genomes Project on rare
disease in national healthcare
D. Smedley
1,2*, S. Abbs3, G. Arno4, E. Baple5, M. Barnes1,
P. Beales6, M. Bitner-Glindzicz6, G. Black7, P. Brennan8,G .
Chan2, P. Chinnery3,9, V. Cipriani1, S. Ellard5,J .
Ellingford7, P. Elliott6, H. Firth3, F. Flintner10, K. Ibanez
Garikano1,2, H. Houlden6, M. Irving10, J. Jacobsen1,E .
McDonagh2, D. McMullan11, L. Moutsianas1,2,W .
Newman7, W. H. Ouwehand3,9,12, T. Ratnaike3, A. Rueda
Martin2, C. Penkett3,12, F. Raymond3,9, J. Sayer8, R. Scott2,6,54 J. del PicchiaK. Smith2, H. Stark9,12, K. Stirrups9,12, J. Taylor13,E .
Thomas2, A. Tucci2,1,6, J. Vandrovcova6, L. Vestito6,A .
Webster4, W. Wei9, M. Wielscher2, H. Williams6,A .
Wilkie13, C. Wright5, A. Rendon2,9, M. Caul ﬁeld2,1,. NIHR
BioResource3, . Genomics England Research Consortium2
1Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom,2Genomics England, London, United Kingdom,
3Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,4Moor ﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United King-
dom,5University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,6Uni-
versity College London, London, United Kingdom,
7University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
8The Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, New-
castle, United Kingdom,9University of Cambridge, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom,10Guys and St Thomas ’NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,11Birmingham
Women ’s and Children ’s NHS Trust, Birmingham, United
Kingdom,12NHS Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,13University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Introduction: The UK 100,000 Genomes Project was cre-
ated to de ﬁne the role of whole genome sequencing (WGS)
in rare disease, cancer and infection. For rare disease a
diagnostic pipeline and research environment was built toaddress the needs of patients who remained undiagnosed
following standard testing in the National Health Service
(NHS) in England.
Methods: Detailed clinical features on enrolled partici-
pants were captured, WGS performed and automated
variant interpretation run based on gene panels (PanelApp)as well as phenotype-based prioritisation (Exomiser).
Prioritised variants were returned to the NHS for laboratory
review and clinical reporting.
Results: We report on the ﬁrst 4660 participants across a
broad spectrum of rare disease. Diagnostic yields varied by
family structure (highest in trios and larger pedigrees) and
disease. Likely Mendelian disorders had higher yields
(37%) with intellectual disability, hearing and eye disordersachieving 40-50%. Those with more complex causes (e.g.
familial cancer) had lower yields (11%), particularly where
known loci had been excluded by standard tests. The overalldiagnostic yield was 26%, involving 470 unique diagnoses.
Clinical phenotypes (Human Phenotype Ontology terms)
were critical to performance of the automated pipeline indetecting 90% of SNV/indel diagnoses. WGS enabled
diagnoses that would be missed by other technologies: 4%
involved non-coding variation, 9% with structural variants,and 8% in coding regions with no/low coverage by whole
exome sequencing. Finally, cohort-wide analysis detected
numerous novel disease-gene associations.
Conclusions: Our ﬁndings will inform healthcare
uptake and utilisation of WGS world-wide, identifyingand enabling prioritization of clinical indications for
adoption.
D. Smedley: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Congenica Ltd. S. Abbs: None. G. Arno: None. E. Baple:
None. M. Barnes: None. P. Beales: None. M. Bitner-
Glindzicz: None. G. Black: None. P. Brennan: None. G.Chan: None. P. Chinnery: None. V. Cipriani: None. S.
Ellard: None. J. Ellingford: None. P. Elliott: None. H. Firth:
None. F. Flintner: None. K. Ibanez Garikano: None. H.Houlden: None. M. Irving: None. J. Jacobsen: None. E.
McDonagh: None. D. McMullan: None. L. Moutsianas:
None. W. Newman: None. W. H. Ouwehand: None. T.Ratnaike: None. A. Rueda Martin: None. C. Penkett: None.
F. Raymond: None. J. Sayer: None. R. Scott: None. K.
Smith: None. H. Stark: None. K. Stirrups: None. J. Taylor:None. E. Thomas: None. A. Tucci: None. J. Vandrovcova:
None. L. Vestito: None. A. Webster: None. W. Wei: None.
M. Wielscher: None. H. Williams: None. A. Wilkie:None. C. Wright: None. A. Rendon: None. M. Caul ﬁeld:
None. NIHR BioResource: None. Genomics England
Research Consortium: None.
C09 Metabolic and Mitochondrial Disorders
C09.1
The Australian Genomic Health Alliance Mitochondrial
Flagship - A national approach to genomic diagnostics
D. Thorburn
1,2,3*, N. Baker3, S. Balasubramaniam4,D .
Bratkovic5, D. Coman6, A. Compton1, M. Delatycki3,C .
Ellaway4, M. Fahey7, J. Fletcher8, A. Frazier1, R. Ghaoui8,
H. Goel9, D. Hock10, M. Kava11,N .L a k e12, P. Lamont13,J .
Lee14, J. Panetta7, L. Phillips8, R. Rius1, M. Ryan15,N .
Smith5, D. Stroud10, M. Tchan16, M. Walsh7, M. Wallis17,A .
Welch1, C. Wools7, J. Christodoulou1,2,3
1Murdoch Children ’s Res Inst, Melbourne, Australia,2Uni-
versity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,3Victorian
Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia,4Sydney
Children ’s Hospitals Network, Sydney, Australia,
5Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia,
6Queensland Children ’s Hospital and Wesley Hospital,
Brisbane, Australia,7Royal Melbourne Hospital, Mel-
bourne, Australia,8Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide,
Australia,9Hunter Genetics, John Hunter Hospital, New-
castle, Australia,10Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotech-
nology Institute, Melbourne, Australia,11Perth Children ’s
Hospital, Perth, Australia,12Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, United States,13Royal Perth Hospital, Perth,
Australia,14Royal Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia,15Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia,16Westmead Hospital,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 55Sydney, Australia,17Tasmanian Clinical Genetics Service,
Hobart, Australia
Introduction : The Australian Genomics Health Alliance is
a nationally funded health services research project focused
on bringing genomic technologies to the clinic. The Mito-
chondrial Disease (MD) Flagship brings together expertclinicians from around Australia, specialist diagnostic
laboratories and researchers expert in functional character-
ization of MD to examine the clinical utility of genomicsequencing for ef ﬁcient diagnosis of MD.
Methods: We recruited 134 paediatric and adult
individuals with a probable or de ﬁnite MD diagnosis, based
on modi ﬁed Nijmegen criteria. Their blood DNA was
randomized to either whole genome sequencing or whole
exome plus mitochondrial DNA sequencing.
Results: Our de ﬁnitive diagnostic yield is currently
~36% for both whole genome and whole exome/
mitochondrial DNA approaches, with most diagnosedcases having a primary defect in the nuclear genome. Not
surprisingly, 14% of individuals with con ﬁrmed molecu-
lar diagnoses had mutations in non-MD genes, re ﬂecting
phenotypic overlap. Unsolved patients have been triaged
to one or more targeted functional tests, quantitative
proteomics, RNAseq or long-read genome sequencing.This enabled re-categorisin g of numerous class 3 variants
and identi ﬁcation of novel disease genes and mechanisms,
including a de novo duplication within the ATAD3 locus
resulting in a presumably toxi c fusion protein (see Frazier
et al. abstract).
Conclusions : Our collaborative effort has demonstrated
that using a consistent national approach for clinically
triaging cases for genomic sequencing is both effective and
efﬁcient, usually obviates the need for invasive biopsies and
in some cases enables targeted therapies. Supported by
grants from an NHMRC Targeted Call for Research
(GNT1113531) and the Mito Foundation.
D. Thorburn: None. N. Baker: None. S. Balasubrama-
niam: None. D. Bratkovic: None. D. Coman: None. A.Compton: None. M. Delatycki: None. C. Ellaway: None.
M. Fahey: None. J. Fletcher: None. A. Frazier: None. R.
Ghaoui: None. H. Goel: None. D. Hock: None. M. Kava:None. N. Lake: None. P. Lamont: None. J. Lee: None. J.
Panetta: None. L. Phillips: None. R. Rius: None. M. Ryan:
None. N. Smith: None. D. Stroud: None. M. Tchan: None.M. Walsh: None. M. Wallis: None. A. Welch: None. C.
Wools: None. J. Christodoulou: None.
C09.2
High resolution respirometric analysis of a Barth
Syndrome disease modelG. Oemer
1*, K. Lackner1, J. Koch1, E. R. Werner1,C .
Doerrier2, G. Krumschnabel2, G. Leman1, S. Dubrac1,R .
Houtkooper3, J. Zschocke1, M. A. Keller1
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria,
2Oroboros Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria,3Amsterdam
Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Barth Syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder that is char-
acterized by mitochondrial dysfunction leading to severecardiomyopathy, growth delay, muscle weakness and neu-
tropenia. The affected TAZ gene encodes the CoA-indepen-
dent transacylase tafazzin that remodels the acyl chains ofcardiolipins. This phospholipid, which is synthesized and
localized in mitochondrial membranes, is functionally
involved in cristae formation, protein anchoring, super-complex assembly, ROS scavenging and apoptotic signaling.
Cardiolipin has a unique structure with four fatty acyls ren-
dering cardiolipins the most diverse phospholipid class. Wegenerated a Barth Syndrome disease model by CRISPR/Cas9-
mediated HEK TAZ-knockout cell lines and have thoroughly
characterized the induced alterations on cardiolipin home-ostasis and mitochondrial functions. Furthermore we applied a
recently developed LC-MS/MS lipidomics method to quali-
tatively, quantitatively and structurally characterize changes inthe cardiolipin composition. In combination with systematic
alteration of the lipid environment by BSA-mediated fatty
acid supplementation, we obtained new insights in the com-plex mitochondrial - and partially rescuable - phenotypes of
Barth Syndrome. As such, we observed fatty acid dependent
mitochondrial ﬁssion and oxidative stress in TAZ-knockouts.
Most strikingly, high-resolution respirometry revealed a shift
in the OXPHOS ﬂux control from NADH-depended to suc-
cinate-linked pathways without affecting the mitochondrialcentral carbon metabolic network or ß-oxidation. This indi-
cates a compensatory adaptation caused by the altered mito-
chondrial lipid homeostasis in TAZ-deﬁcient cells.
G. Oemer: None. K. Lackner: None. J. Koch: None. E. R.
Werner: None. C. Doerrier: None. G. Krumschnabel: None.G. Leman: None. S. Dubrac: None. R. Houtkooper: None.
J. Zschocke: None. M. A. Keller: None.
C09.3
Recurrent de novo ATAD3 duplications cause fatal
perinatal mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, persistent
hyperlactacidemia, encephalopathy and heart-speci ﬁc
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation complex I
deﬁciency.
A. E. Frazier
1,2,A. G. Compton1,2*, Y. Kishita3,D .H .
Hock4, A. E. Welch1, S. S. C. Amarasekera1,2, R. Rius1,2,L .
E. Formosa5, A. Imai-Okazaki3,6, D. Francis7, M. Wang1,N .
J. Lake1,2,8, S. Tregoning1,7, J. S. Jabbari9, A. Lucattini9,K .56 J. del PicchiaR. Nitta3, A. Ohtake10, K. Murayama11, D. J. Amor1,2,G .
McGillivray7, F. Y. Wong12, M. S. van der Knaap13,14,R .J .
Vermeulen15, E. J. Wiltshire16, J. M. Fletcher17, B. Lewis18,
G. Baynam19,20, C. Ellaway21,22, S. Balasubramaniam21,K .
Bhattacharya21,22, M. L. Freckmann23,R .J .T a f t24,S .
Sadedin1,7, M. J. Cowley25,26, A. E. Minoche26,S .E .
Calvo27, V. K. Mootha27, M. T. Ryan5, Y. Okazaki3,D .A .
Stroud4, C. Simons1,28, J. Christodoulou1,2,7,D .R .
Thorburn1,2,7
1Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia,2Department of Paediatrics, University of Mel-
bourne, Melbourne, Australia,3Diagnostics and
Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease
Research Center, Juntendo University, Graduate School ofMedicine, Tokyo, Japan,
4Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular Science and
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Mel-bourne, Australia,
5Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Insti-
tute, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia,6Division of
Genomic Medicine Research, Medical Genomics Center,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan,7Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch
Children ’s Research Institute, Royal Children ’s Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia,8Department of Genetics, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States,
9Australian Genome Research Facility Ltd, Victorian
Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia,
10Department of Pediatrics & Clinical Genomics, Saitama
Medical University Hospital, Saitama, Japan,11Department
of Metabolism, Chiba Children ’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan,
12Ritchie Centre, Hudson Institute of Medical Research;
Department of Paediatrics, Monash University; and
Monash Newborn, Monash Children ’s Hospital, Mel-
bourne, Australia,13Child Neurology, Emma Children ’s
Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije
Universiteit and Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,14Functional Genomics, Center for Neuroge-
nomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit and
Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
15Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, Netherlands,16Department of Paedia-
trics and Child Health, University of Otago Wellington and
Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, NewZealand,
17Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathol-
ogy, SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia,18Department of
Clinical Biochemistry, PathWest Laboratory MedicineWestern Australia, Perth, Australia,
19Western Australian
Register of Developmental Anomalies and Genetic Services
of Western Australia and King Edward Memorial Hospitalfor Women Perth, Perth, Australia,
20Telethon Kids Instituteand School of Paediatrics and Child Health, The University
of Western Australia, Perth, Australia,21Genetic Metabolic
Disorders Service, Sydney Children ’s Hospital Network,
The Children ’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia,
22Disciplines of Genomic Medicine and Child and Adoles-
cent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney,Sydney, Australia,
23Clinical Genetics, The Canberra
Hospital, Canberra, Australia,24Illumina, Inc., San Diego,
CA, United States,25Children ’s Cancer Institute, and St
Vincent ’s Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Austra-
lia,26Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia,27Broad
Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Depart-
ment of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospi-
tal; and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, UnitedStates,
28Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Mitochondrial disorders are clinically heterogeneous and
comprise over 350 different genetic conditions. However,
the molecular diagnosis is unknown in ~50% of cases,
partly due to some genomic regions being refractory tostandard genomic analysis. One such region is the ATAD3
locus consisting of 3 highly homologous tandemly arrayed
genes ( ATAD3C ,ATAD3B and ATAD3A ) encoding mito-
chondrial proteins implicated in processes including cho-
lesterol metabolism, and mitochondrial replication,
dynamics and morphology. Recessive deletions and domi-nant duplications in this locus have recently been reported
to cause rare, lethal perinatal mitochondrial disorders
characterised by pontocerebellar hypoplasia or cardiomyo-pathy, respectively. We report 17 subjects from 16 unrelated
families with cardiomyopathy, persistent hyperlactacidemia,
encephalopathy and frequently corneal clouding or cataractsdue to de novo ATAD3 duplications. The six different 68 Kb
duplications were consistently identi ﬁable from whole
genome and exome sequencing, but usually missed on
microarray. The duplications all resulted in the formation of
an identical chimeric ATAD3A/ATAD3C fusion protein,which appears to act in a dominant manner causing altered
ATAD3 complexes and a striking reduction in mitochon-
drial oxidative phosphorylation complex I and its activity inheart tissue. In our experience, the ATAD3 locus is one of
theﬁve most common causes of nuclear-encoded paediatric
mitochondrial disease but the repetitive nature of the locusmeans ATAD3 diagnoses may be frequently missed by
current genomic strategies. Supported by grants from the
Australian NHMRC 1164479 and 1113531, US DoDCDMRP PR170396; the Japanese AMED 19ek0109273,
18ek0109177, 19kk0205014 and 18kk0205002; Japanese
JSPS 19H03624 and the Australian Mito Foundation.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 57A. E. Frazier: None. A. G. Compton: None. Y. Kishita:
None. D. H. Hock: None. A. E. Welch: None. S. S. C.
Amarasekera: None. R. Rius: None. L. E. Formosa: None.
A. Imai-Okazaki: None. D. Francis: None. M. Wang: None.
N. J. Lake: None. S. Tregoning: None. J. S. Jabbari: None.
A. Lucattini: None. K. R. Nitta: None. A. Ohtake: None. K.Murayama: None. D. J. Amor: None. G. McGillivray:
None. F. Y. Wong: None. M. S. van der Knaap: None. R. J.
Vermeulen: None. E. J. Wiltshire: None. J. M. Fletcher:None. B. Lewis: None. G. Baynam: None. C. Ellaway:
None. S. Balasubramaniam: None. K. Bhattacharya: None.
M. L. Freckmann: None. R. J. Taft: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. S. Sadedin: None. M.
J. Cowley: None. A. E. Minoche: None. S. E. Calvo: None.
V. K. Mootha: None. M. T. Ryan: None. Y. Okazaki: None.D. A. Stroud: None. C. Simons: None. J. Christodoulou:
None. D. R. Thorburn: None.
C09.4
Hyperuricemia and gout caused by missense mutation in
D-lactate dehydrogenase, revealing novel enzymatic
activity
M. Drabkin
1*, Y. Yogev1, L. Zeller2, R. Zarivach1,R .Z a l k1,
D. Halperin1, O. Wormser1, E. Gurevich3, D. Landau4,R .
Kadir1, Y. Perez1, O. S. Birk1
1Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel,2Soroka Med-
ical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel,3"Clalit" Health Services,
Beer-Sheva, Israel,4Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel
Introduction: Gout is caused by deposition of monosodium
urate crystals in joints when plasma uric acid levels are
elevated beyond saturation threshold, mostly due to renalunder-excretion of uric acid. While molecular pathways of
this under-excretion have been elucidated, its etiology
remains mostly unknown. We studied a consanguineousBedouin kindred affected with gout and hyperuricemia.
Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing,
linkage analysis, protein structure modeling, mass-spectro-metry, metabolomics, confocal microscopy, in-vivo meta-
bolic studies, co-immunoprecipitation, proteomics,
knockout mouse model.
Results: We demonstrate that gout can be caused by a
mutation in LDHD within the putative catalytic site of the
encoded D-lactate dehydrogenase, resulting in augmentedblood and urine levels of D-lactate, a stereoisomer of L-
lactate, normally present in human blood in miniscule
amounts. Consequent excessive renal secretion of D-lactatein exchange for uric acid reabsorption culminated in
hyperuricemia and gout. Metabolome analysis of patient ’s
blood and urine using mass-spectrometry revealed elevatedlevels of intermediate metabolites of purine degradation,which ultimately lead to uric acid production. Further
metabolome analyses performed on LDHD knockout mice
generated using CRISPR-Cas9 recapitulated the human
phenotype. We showed that LDHD expression is enriched
in tissues with high metabolic rate and abundant mitochon-
dria, and that D-lactate dehydrogenase resides in themitochondria of cells overexpressing the human LDHD
gene. In line with the human phenotype, injection of D-
lactate to naïve mice resulted in hyperuricemia.
Conclusion: Hyperuricemia and gout can result from
accumulation of D-lactate and possibly additional metabo-
lites whose renal excretion is coupled to uric acidreabsorption.
M. Drabkin: None. Y. Yogev: None. L. Zeller: None. R.
Zarivach: None. R. Zalk: None. D. Halperin: None. O.Wormser: None. E. Gurevich: None. D. Landau: None. R.
Kadir: None. Y. Perez: None. O. S. Birk: None.
C09.5
Metabolite set enrichment improves biomarker identi ﬁ-
cation and detection in untargeted metabolic pro ﬁling
(UMP) data for patients with inborn errors ofmetabolism
B. Hoegen
1*, U. F. H. Engelke2, K. L. M. Coene2,J .E .
Hampstead1, P. Kulkarni2, R. A. Wevers2, H. G. Brunner3,
C. Gilissen1
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory (TML),
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands,3Department of Human Genetics, Donders Center for
Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands
Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are a large, pre-
dominantly recessive class of genetic disorders associated
with the congenital disruption of one or more metabolicpathways. Untargeted metabolomic pro ﬁling (UMP) allows
the simultaneous measurement of hundreds of metabolites,
including diagnostic biomarker metabolites for IEM dis-orders, in a single test and can aid in the interpretation of
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance (VUS) in genes with a
known or suspected metabolic phenotype. However, thelarge amount of data generated in a single UMP run limits
its diagnostic utility. Here, we present a metabolite set
enrichment method (MSEA) that leverages biologicalpathway information to prioritise clinically relevant meta-
bolites and their associated pathways in UMP data. We
further cluster enriched pathways into pathway sets toeliminate redundancy. We ran MSEA across 43 diagnosed58 J. del Picchiapatient plasma samples with pathway information available
in databases (KEGG =317, SMPDB =901) spanning 21
distinct IEMs, and show that MSEA prioritises known
diagnostic biomarkers better than a naive ﬁltering approach
in 18 samples across 10 IEMs without a genetic prior
(p=0.00015). This has particular relevance for patients
with unresolved IEMs, or novel IEMs not included on
standard gene panels. Additionally, our method identi ﬁes
putative novel biomarkers for at least one IEM. MSEAimproves the analysis of UMP data for patient diagnostics,
and provides a ﬁrst approach to opening the metabolome.
These approaches will be crucial for the interpretation ofvariants of unknown signi ﬁcance from WES data, and for
the integration of WES and WGS results with untargeted
metabolomics data.
B. Hoegen: None. U. F. H. Engelke: None. K. L. M.
Coene: None. J. E. Hampstead: None. P. Kulkarni: None. R.
A. Wevers: None. H. G. Brunner: None. C. Gilissen: None.
C09.6
A genome-wide association study for a proxy non-
alcoholic fatty liver phenotype identi ﬁes novel loci and
trait-relevant candidate genes
M. Vujkovic
1,2, S. Ramdas3, K. Gawronski4, K. Lorenz1,3,5,
M. Serper1,2,6, D. E. Kaplan1,2, R. Carr1,2,K .M .L e e7,S .
Saiju Pyarajan8,9, T. Edwards10,11, D. Klarin8,12,13,Y .V .
Sun14,15, D. R. Miller16,17, P. D. Reaven18,19,L .S .
Phillips14,20,C .J .O ’Donnell8,9, J. B. Meigs21,22,23,P .W .F .
Wilson24,25, R. Vickers-Smith1,26, H. R. Kranzler1,27,A .C .
Justice28,29, M. Gaziano9,30, S. Muralidhar31, S. L. DuVall32,
T. L. Assimes33,34, J. S. Lee33,34,P .S .T s a o33,34,D .J .
Rader2,3,35, C. D. Brown3, S. M. Damrauer1,36,J .A .
Lynch32,37, D. Saleheen38,39,B. F. Voight1,3,5*,K .M .
Chang1,2, on behalf of the VA Million Veteran Program
1Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center,
Philadelphia, PA, United States,2Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, UnitedStates,
3Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylva-
nia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,4Cellular and
Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Penn-sylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
5Department of
Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, UnitedStates,
6Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics,
Philadelphia, PA, United States,7VA Salt Lake City Health
Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, United States,8VA Boston
Healthcare System, Boston, MA, United States,9Depart-
ment of Medicine, Brigham Women ’s Hospital, Boston, MA,
United States,10Nashville VA Medical Center, Philadel-
phia, PA, United States,11Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,United States,12Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,13Divi-
sion of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy,
University of Florida School of Medicine, Gainesville, FL,
United States,14Atlanta VA Health Care System, Atlanta,
GA, United States,15Department of Epidemiology, Emory
University Rollins School of Public Health, Atlanta, GA,
United States,16Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial VA
Hospital, Bedford, MA, United States,17Department of
Health Law, Policy and Management, Boston University
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States,
18Phoenix VA Health Care System, Pheonix, AZ, United
States,19College of Medicine, University of Arizona,
Tuscon, AZ, United States,20Division of Endocrinology,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, UnitedStates,
21Division of General Internal Medicine, Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,
22Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States,23Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Boston, MA, United States,24Atlanta VA Medical
Center, Atlanta, GA, United States,25Division of Cardiol-
ogy, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA,
United States,26University of Louisville, Louisville, KY,
United States,27Department of Psychiatry, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,28Veterans
Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT,
United States,29Yale School of Medicine and Yale School of
Public Health, New Haven, CT, United States,30Massa-
chusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information
Center, Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Boston,MA, United States,
31Ofﬁce of Research and Development,
Veterans Health Administration, Washington, DC, United
States,32VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure, VA
Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT,
United States,33VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo
Alto, CA, United States,34Department of Medicine,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,35Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-
phia, PA, United States,36Department of Surgery,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United
States,37University of Massachusetts College of Nursing
and Health Sciences, Boston, MA, United States,38Depart-
ment of Medicine and Cardiology, Columbia University
Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States,
39Center for Non-Communicable Diseases, Karachi,
Pakistan
Introduction: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is
a prevalent, heritable trait that can progress to cirrhosis,
liver failure, and cancer. Elucidation of its etiology has been
stymied by the lack of human genomics data at scale. Wepreviously reported a proxy phenotype for NAFLD: elevated
serum alanine aminotransferase levels across multiple timeAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 59points without alternate causes of liver disease, recovering all
previously associated variants. Using this de ﬁnition, we per-
formed genome-wide association in a cohort of United States
Veteran participants in the Million Veteran Program.
Methods: Trans-ethnic meta-analysis included 95,940
cases and 145,858 controls of European, African, Asian,and Latinx ancestries. Gene prioritization was based on
linkage with coding variants or co-localization (COLOC
P4 > 0.8) with quantitative trait loci (QTL) from GTEx.Enrichment analyses were performed via GREGOR and
DEPICT; heritability analyses via LD-score regression.
Results: 75 loci exceeded genome-wide signi ﬁcance,
with 3 additional loci identi ﬁed in an African-American
speciﬁc scan. Candidate genes at 34 loci were prioritized
based on coding or QTL variation tightly linked with leadvariants, with 9 variants predicted damaging or had reduced
expression associated with lower incidence of our proxy
trait. Total liability scale h
2was estimated at 16% (95% CI:
12-19%). Functional genomic annotations and gene-sets
demonstrated enrichment of liver biology at associated sites.
Causal inference analyses indicated that body mass index(BMI) and waist-hip ratio adjusted for BMI were associated
with our proxy trait (P < 10
−10).
Conclusion: We identi ﬁed novel loci with 34 candidate
genes plausibly associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease.
M. Vujkovic: None. S. Ramdas: None. K. Gawronski:
None. K. Lorenz: None. M. Serper: None. D. E. Kaplan:
N o n e .R .C a r r :N o n e .K .M .L e e :N o n e .S .S a i j uP y a r a j a n :
None. T. Edwards: None. D. Klarin: None. Y. V. Sun: None.D. R. Miller: None. P. D. Reaven: None. L. S. Phillips: None.
C. J. O ’Donnell: None. J. B. Meigs: None. P. W. F. Wilson:
None. R. Vickers-Smith: None. H. R. Kranzler: None. A. C.Justice: None. M. Gaziano: None. S. Muralidhar: None. S. L.
DuVall: None. T. L. Assimes: None. J. S. Lee: None. P. S.
Tsao: None. D. J. Rader: None. C. D. Brown: None. S. M.Damrauer: None. J. A. Lynch: None. D. Saleheen: None. B.
F. Voight: None. K. M. Chang: None.
C10 Rare and Common Variants in Personalized
Medicine
C10.1
Recessive vs dominant GWAS of 82,516 coding variants
on electronic health records in a population-wide ana-lysis of 176,899 Finns
H. O. Heyne
1,2,3*, J. Karjalainen1,2,3, S. M. Lemmelä1,4,
FinnGen, A. S. Havulinna1,4, M. Kurki1,2,3, A. Palotie1,2,3,
M. J. Daly1,2,3
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finnland: FIMM, Hel-
sinki, Finland,2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States,3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA, United States,4Finnish Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
Rare genetic variants in ﬂuencing diseases often have large
effect sizes with potential dir ect treatment implications;
studying their effects comprehensively requires however large
cohort sizes. The population- wide cohort of FinnGen offers an
unprecedented opportunity to investigate phenotype associa-tions of rare variants because the founding bottleneck of
Finland concentrates them to h igher population frequencies.
This ‘Finnish disease heritage ’applies particularly to recessive
variants. Here, we studied rec essive, dominant and additive
effects of 82,516 coding variants on 2,264 disease endpoints
using nation wide electronic health record data of 176,899Finns. Globally, variant effe cts in different GWAS models
were in agreement with inherita nce modes of the respective
genes in OMIM (recessive, dominant or “both”). However,
there were many exceptions e.g. 33 genes listed only as
recessive in OMIM had coding va riants with dominant asso-
ciations (p < 10
−7). One example was XPA (recessive disease:
Xeroderma pigmentosa), where a heterozygous truncating
variant was associated with skin cancer (p =8×1 0−11,b e t a=
1.24). Another example was a variant in SCN5A associated
with sick sinus syndrome in recessive state. Interestingly, in
heterozygous form it had a protective effect for cardiac
arrhythmia phenotypes (p =2×1 0−8,b e t a=−0.48, repli-
cated in UK Biobank with p =0.04, beta =−0.39). Our data
also included 6794 coding variants listed in ClinVar. We
found signi ﬁcantly more phenotype associations than for
random intergenic variants in 498 (likely) pathogenic/con-
ﬂicting, but also 4019 “benign ”variants in dominant and
recessive genes. We report new ﬁndings from associations of
coding variants with population wide electronic health record
data in FinnGen.
H. O. Heyne: None. J. Karjalainen: None. S. M.
Lemmelä: None. A. S. Havulinna: None. M. Kurki: None.
A. Palotie: None. M. J. Daly: E. Ownership Interest (stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Maze Therapeutics.
C10.2
Germline genetic testing following tumor sequencing in
cancer patients has a remarkably high yield of clinically
important ﬁndings that inform patient care
S. Lincoln
*, K. Das, N. Ngo, S. Michalski, S. Yang, D.
Pineda, E. Esplin, S. Aradaya, R. Nussbaum
Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States60 J. del PicchiaIntroduction: Recent ESMO guidelines recommend
germline genetic testing following tumor sequencing, but
only for certain genes in speci ﬁc patients (PMID
31050713). We examined the utility of germline ﬁndings in
patients receiving both test types.
Methods: 1849 consecutive patients were analyzed, who:
(a) received germline testing, and (b) previously had
received tumor sequencing. Indications for germline testing
were diverse and included: tumor ﬁndings of potential
germline origin, treatment/surgical planning, personal/
family history, and patient concern. 238 patients had
colorectal cancer, 227 breast, 208 prostate, 189 lung, 173pancreas, and the remainder had other cancers. 12% had
multiple primary diagnoses.
Results: 31% of patients harbored a high or moderate
penetrance pathogenic germline variant (PGV) in a known
cancer predisposition gene. Mutations in certain genes
were more likely to be germline compared to others(Table) and PGVs were prevalent among most cancer
types studied. Most PGVs were potentially actionable, but
25% of PGVs failed to meet ESMO criteria for germlinetesting. 8.6% of PGVs were not reported by tumor
sequencing as either somatic or germline ﬁndings, often
because of test limitations. 9.3% of patients had PGVsidenti ﬁed only after presenting with a second, possibly
preventable, cancer.
Conclusions: Germline testing following tumor sequen-
cing often produces clinically important ﬁndings. Our
results suggest that such testing may however be under-
utilized and that guidelines for re ﬂex testing appear
effective although conservative.
Germline and Somatic Findings in 1849 Patients (Genes with no
germline ﬁndings are not listed)
Genes Total
Findings#Germline
(%Findings)Met ESMO
criteria?Potential
Utility
BRCA1/2 765 295 (39%) Yes MG, PT, CT
ATM 136 58 (43%) No MG, CT
MLH1, MSH2,
MSH6, PMS2182 55 (30%) Yes MG, PT, CT
CHEK2 68 49 (72%) No MG, CT
PALB2 60 44 (73%) Yes MG, CT
BRIP1 24 10 (42%) Yes MG, CT
TP53 357 14 (4%) 10/14 No* MG, CT
RET 23 8 (35%) Yes MG, CT
BAP1 33 7 (21%) 3/7 No* MG, CT
CDKN2A 105 6 (6%) No MG
NF1 41 6 (15%) Yes MG
SDHA 13 5 (39%) Yes MG
FH 6 5 (83%) 3/5 No* MG(continued)
Germline and Somatic Findings in 1849 Patients (Genes with no
germline ﬁndings are not listed)
Genes Total
Findings#Germline
(%Findings)Met ESMO
criteria?Potential
Utility
NBN 11 5 (46%) No MG, CT
CDH1 67 4 (6%) No MG
RAD51C 4 4 (100%) Yes MG, CT
Others 312 28 (9%) varies varies
*ESMO criteria for this gene specify patient age and/or tumor types
**MG: Management Guidelines, PT: Precision Therapy (FDA), CT:
Clinical Trials
S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Illumina,
Thermo Fisher. K. Das: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Amarin Dx. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Amarin Dx. N. Ngo: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. S. Michalski: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. S. Yang: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. D. Pineda: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. E.
Esplin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Invitae. S. Aradaya: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. R. Nussbaum: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae.
C10.3
The ﬁrst genotype-phenotype study on European
carriers of CDH1 germline mutations
J. García-Peláez
1*, R. Monteiro1, L. Sousa1, H. Pinheiro1,
S. Castedo1,2,3, L. Garrido2, M. Teixeira4,5, G. Michils6,V .
Bours7,8,5, R. de Putter9,5, L. Golmard & M. Blanluet10,C .
Colas10,5, P. Benusiglio11, S. Aretz & I. Spier12,13,5,R .
Hüneburg13,14, L. Gieldon15,16, E. Schröck15,16,5,E .
Holinski-Feder & V. Steinke17,18,5, D. Calistri & G.
Tedaldi19, G. Ranzani20, M. Genuardi21,22, C. Silveira & I.
Silva23, M. Krajc & A. Blatnik24,5, S. Novakovic24,A .
Patiño-García25, J. Soto26, C. Lázaro27,5, G. Capellá27,5,J .
Brunet-Vidal28,5, J. Balmaña29,5, E. Domínguez-Garrido30,
M. Ligtenberg31,5, E. Fewings32, R. Fitzgerald33,E .
Woodward34,35,5, G. Evans36,5, H. Hanson37, K. Lagerstedt-
Robinson38, S. Bajalica-Lagercrantz38,5, C. Egas39,C .
Martínez-Bouzas et al.40,41, K. Dahan & D. Feret42,N .
Hoogerbrugge31,5, M. Tischkowitz32,5, C. Oliveira43Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 611IPATIMUP/i3S, Porto, Portugal,2Centro Hospitalar
Universitário S ãoJ oão (CHSJ), Porto, Portugal,3Faculty
of Medicine of the University of Porto (FMUP), Porto,
Portugal,4IPO, Instituto Português de Oncologia do Porto,
Porto, Portugal,5European Reference Network on Genetic
Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS), Nijmegen,Netherlands,
6Centre for Human Genetics, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium,7Laboratory of Human Genetics, GIGA-
Institute, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium,8Center of
Genetics, University Hospital (CHU), Liège, Belgium,
9Clinical Genetics department, University Hospital of
Ghent, Ghent, Belgium,10Genetic Department, Institut
Curie, Paris, France,11Département de Génétique, GH
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France,12Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,13National
Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany,14Department of Internal Medicine
I, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,15Institut für
Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav
Carus, Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany,16Core Unit for Molecular Tumordiagnostics
(CMTD), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) site
Dresden, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)Heidel-
berg, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Dresden,Germany,
17Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Campus
Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Ziems-
senstr, Münich, Germany,18MGZ - Medizinisch Genet-
isches Zentrum, Münich, Germany,19Biosciences
Laboratory, Istituto Scienti ﬁco Romagnolo per lo Studio e
la Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, Meldola, Italy,
20Department of Biology and Biotechnology “Lazzaro
Spallanzani ”, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,21Fonda-
zione Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli ”IRCCS, UOC
di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy,22Istituto di Medicina
Genomica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy,23Genomed Diagnósticos de Medicina Molecular, S.
A., Lisbon, Portugal,24Institute of Oncology Ljubljana,
Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
25Clinical Genetics Unit and CIMA LAB Diagnostics.
University Clinic of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain,26Molecu-
lar Genetics Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche,
Spain,27Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, CIBER-
ONC, Barcelona, Spain,28Catalan Institute of Oncology,
IDIBELL, IDIBGI, Barcelona-Girona, Portugal,29Hospital
Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,30Molecular Diagnostics
Laboratory, Fundación Rioja Salud, Logroño, Spain,
31Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular LifeSciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
32Academic Laboratory
of Medical Genetics. National Institute for Health Research
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UKUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
33MRC Cancer Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre,University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
34NW Genomic Laboratory hub, Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,35Division
of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom,
36Manche-
ster Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester Centre forGenomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom,
37St
Georges NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,
38Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Kar-
olinska Institutet and Department of Clinical Genetics,
Karolinska Univ Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,39Advanced
Services Unit, Biocant - Biotechnology Innovation Center,Cantanhede, Portugal,
40Biocruces Health Research Insti-
tute, Barakaldo, Spain,41Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
Genetics Service, Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo,Spain,
42Institut de Génétique et de Pathologie, IPG,
Gosselies, Belgium,43i3S & Ipatimup & FMUP & ERN-
GENTURIS & CDH1-ClinGen working Group, Porto,Portugal
Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer-HDGC syndrome, pre-
disposing for diffuse gastric cancer-DGC and lobular breastcancer-LBC, is caused by germline CDH1 Pathogenic-P
and Likely Pathogenic-LP variants. Surveillance/prophy-
lactic surgery is life-saving in asymptomatic carriers, butclinical management remains challenging in carriers lacking
clinical criteria. Through genotype-phenotype analysis in P/
LP variant carrier-families, we studied CDH1 -associated
spectrum and age-of-disease onset to optimize clinical
management. We collected/curated variant classi ﬁcation,
family phenotypes and clinical-criteria of 506 coding andsplice-site CDH1 -variant ’carriers, registering 1361 pheno-
types of 1302 family members from 10 European ERN-
GENTURIS countries. From 506 families, 160 (31.6%)
fulﬁlled HDGC clinical-criteria and 87.5% of these carried
P/LP actionable variants (96.4% truncating). From 346(68.3%) families lacking criteria, 13.3% carried such var-
iants (100% truncating). Among P/LP-variant bearing
families ful ﬁlling criteria, 48% of family phenotypes was
DGC and 6% was LBC, both before 50 and without
enrichment of other cancer types. In families lacking cri-
teria, LBC increases to 24%, and DGC drops to 8%, still inthe 40-50 age-range. CDH1 missense variant carrier-
families were almost completely excluded after clinical
classi ﬁcation. Still, the ones remaining as P/LP revealed an
enrichment in non-speci ﬁed breast cancer and other cancer
types, rarely presenting DGC and LBC. This is the ﬁrst P/
LPCDH1 variant-driven genotype-phenotype analysis. It
demonstrates that clinically-actionable CDH1 variants are
mainly truncating, most carriers ful ﬁll HDGC clinical-62 J. del Picchiacriteria, reinforcing use in clinical practice; supports 50 as
the upper age-limit for CDH1 testing; supports widening
criteria to accommodate family history of LBC, and; high-
light a likely irrelevant role of missense variants in HDGC.
J. García-Peláez: None. R. Monteiro: None. L. Sousa:
None. H. Pinheiro: None. S. Castedo: None. L. Garrido:None. M. Teixeira: None. G. Michils: None. V. Bours:
None. R. de Putter: None. L. Golmard & M. Blanluet:
None. C. Colas: None. P. Benusiglio: None. S. Aretz & I.Spier: None. R. Hüneburg: None. L. Gieldon: None. E.
Schröck: None. E. Holinski-Feder & V. Steinke: None. D.
Calistri & G. Tedaldi: None. G. Ranzani: None. M.Genuardi: None. C. Silveira & I. Silva: None. M. Krajc &
A. Blatnik: None. S. Novakovic: None. A. Patiño-García:
None. J. Soto: None. C. Lázaro: None. G. Capellá: None. J.Brunet-Vidal: None. J. Balmaña: None. E. Domínguez-
Garrido: None. M. Ligtenberg: None. E. Fewings: None. R.
Fitzgerald: None. E. Woodward: None. G. Evans: None. H.Hanson: None. K. Lagerstedt-Robinson: None. S. Bajalica-
Lagercrantz: None. C. Egas: None. C. Martínez-Bouzas
et al.: None. K. Dahan & D. Feret: None. N. Hoogerbrugge:None. M. Tischkowitz: None. C. Oliveira: None.
C10.4
Enhancing rare variant interpretation in inheritedarrhythmias through quantitative analysis of 5182 cases
from long QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome
consortia cohorts and gnomAD population controls
R. Walsh
1*, N. Lahrouchi1, C. Glinge1,2, C. Krijger1,D .
Skoric-Milosavljevic1, N. Whif ﬁn3, F. Mazzarotto4,J .S .
Ware3, R. Tadros5, International Brugada Syndrome
Genetics Consortium, International LQTS Genetics
Consortium, C. R. Bezzina1
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,3Imperial
College, London, United Kingdom,4University of Florence,
Florence, Italy,5Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, QC,
Canada
Introduction : Guidelines for variant interpretation in
Mendelian disease set stringent criteria to report variants as(likely) pathogenic, prioritising control of false positive rate
over test sensitivity and diagnostic yield, and require cus-
tomisation for the speci ﬁc genetic characteristics of gene-
disease dyads. Inherited arrhythmias like long QT syndrome
(LQTS) and Brugada syndrome (BrS) are genetically het-
erogeneous, with missense variants constituting the pre-ponderance of disease-causing variants. Evidence from
family segregation or functional assays to con ﬁrm patho-
genicity are often unavailable or impractical in clinicalgenetic testing, leading to high rates of variants of uncertain
signiﬁcance and false negative test results.
Materials and Methods : We compared rare variant
frequencies from 1847 LQTS ( KCNQ1 ,KCNH2 ,SCN5A )
and 3335 BrS ( SCN5A ) cases from the International LQTS/
BrS Genetics Consortia to population-speci ﬁc gnomAD
data. We propose disease-speci ﬁc criteria for ACMG/AMP
evidence classes - rarity (PM2/BS1 rules) and enrichment of
individual (PS4) and domain-speci ﬁc (PM1) variants in
cases over controls.
Results : Rare SCN5A variant prevalence differed between
BrS cases with spontaneous (28.7%) versus induced(15.8%) type 1 Brugada ECG (p =1.3 × 10
−13) and
between European (20.8%) and Japanese (8.9%) patients
(p=8.8 × 10−18). Transmembrane regions and speci ﬁcN -
terminus ( KCNH2 ) and C-terminus ( KCNQ1 /KCNH2 )
domains were characterised by high enrichment of case
variants and >95% probability of pathogenicity. Applyingthe customised rules, 17.5% of European BrS cases and
73.7% of European LQTS cases had variants classi ﬁed as
(likely) pathogenic, compared to estimated diagnostic yields(case excess over gnomAD) of 19.3%/82.6%.
Conclusions : Large case/control datasets enable quanti-
tative implementation of ACMG/AMP guidelines andincreased sensitivity for inherited arrhythmia genetic testing.
R. Walsh: None. N. Lahrouchi: None. C. Glinge: None.
C. Krijger: None. D. Skoric-Milosavljevic: None. N.Whifﬁn: None. F. Mazzarotto: None. J. S. Ware: None.
R. Tadros: None. C. R. Bezzina: None.
C10.5
Genome wide association study based on cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging in 23,634 individuals identi ﬁesﬁve new
loci associated with left atrial enlargement
G. Ahlberg
1,2*, L. Andreasen1,2, J. Ghouse1,2, S. Haunsoe1,3,
J. H. Svendsen3,4, M. S. Olesen1,2
1Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, Department of
Cardiology, Centre for Cardiac, Vascular, Pulmonary
and Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, University Hospital
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenha-
gen, Denmark,3Department of Clinical Medicine, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
4Department of Cardiology, Centre for Cardiac, Vascular,
Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Uni-
versity Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Background : Left atrial enlargement is associated with
mortality due to cardiovascular disease. The pathology
behind and the association with cardiovascular outcomesAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 63are, however, poorly characterised. Compromised atrial
function predisposes for stroke.
Methods : We obtained data from the UK Biobank
cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) protocol con-
taining CMR scans from ~31,000 individuals at the time of
study. Genome-wide association studies were carried out onstate-of-the-art imaging variables exposed to machine
learning algorithms to investigate the genetic basis of left
atrial volume and function.
Results : We tested 10.6 million variants for association
with left atrial (LA) minimum/maximum volumes and LA
emptying fraction in 23,624 European individuals withoutprevalent myocardial infarction or heart failure. We
identi ﬁedﬁve genetic loci located in close proximity to
the genes EIF2D, C9orf3, ANKRD1, FGFR2 , and MYO18B .
We observed a notable genetic correlation between both
maximum and minimum LA volumes and stroke and
cardioembolic stroke.
Conclusions : We report on ﬁve genetic loci and suggest
several plausible candidate genes important for atrial
structural pathology. Genetic correlation analyses indicatethat the genetic determinants of LA volumes could be
markers of stroke risk. These ﬁndings enhance our under-
standing of the importance of the LA and are potential noveltherapeutic targets for cardiovascular disease, including
stroke.
G. Ahlberg: None. L. Andreasen: None. J. Ghouse: None.
S. Haunsoe: None. J. H. Svendsen: None. M. S.
Olesen: None.
C10.6
Genetic interactions modulate lipid plasma levels and
cellular uptake
M. Zimon
1*, Y. Huang2, A. Trasta1, J. Liu2, C. Chen2,A .
Halavatyi1, P. Blattmann1, B. Klaus1, C. Whelan2,D .
Sexton2, S. John2, E. Tsai2, W. Huber1, R. Pepperkok1,H .
Runz2
1EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany,2Biogen Inc., Cambridge,
MA, United States
Introduction: Genetic Interactions (GIs), where variants in
two genes collectively cause non-additive phenotypes dif-
ferent from the sum of the variants ’individual effects, are
considered a foundational element in the genetic archi-tecture of complex traits. In humans, however, GIs have
remained largely elusive. Here, we combined exome-
sequencing and genotyping in the UK Biobank with sys-tematic cell-based RNA-interference (RNAi) to assess
whether GIs between lipid genes contribute to changes inplasma lipid levels as risk factors for coronary artery
disease (CAD).
Materials and Methods: We systematically tested for
modi ﬁer effects between 30 lipid- regulatory genes derived
from GWAS loci associated with plasma LDL, HDL, TG,
TC or CAD using robust linear model ﬁtting with three
complementary data types: pr otein-truncating variants
(PTVs) from whole-exome sequencing of 161,508 UK
Biobank participants; GWAS lead SNPs from 378,033UK Biobank participants; and results from a combinator-
ial RNAi screen measuring cellular LDL-uptake.
Results: We show that additive effects between lipid
genes are pervasive, consistent with the use of summed
effect sizes in polygenic risk scores. Yet, all three
approaches also indicated existence of non-additive GIs,with one GI identi ﬁed from PTV-based, 26 from SNP-
based, and 20 from cell-based analyses, respectively.
Integrating genetic and functional data validated threeGIs as modulating both plasma lipid levels and cellular
uptake.
Conclusions: Our combined genetic and functional
analyses propose distinct gene pairs that modulate plasma
and cellular lipid levels via additive and non-additive
effects. Our results can help prioritize drug target pairs forthe development of lipid-lowering combination therapies.
M. Zimon: None. Y. Huang: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. A. Trasta: None. J. Liu: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. C. Chen: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. A. Halavatyi:
None. P. Blattmann: None. B. Klaus: None. C. Whelan: A.Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. D. Sexton:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. S. John: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E. Tsai: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. W. Huber:
None. R. Pepperkok: None. H. Runz: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Biogen Inc. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁ
cant; Biogen Inc.64 J. del PicchiaC11 Multiple Malformation Syndromes I
C11.1
Biallelic variants in KYNU cause a multisystemic syn-
drome with hand hyperphalangism
N. Ehmke1*, K. Cusmano-Ozog2, R. Koenig3,M .
Holtgrewe4,5, B. Nur6, E. Mihci6, H. Babcock7, C. Gonzaga-
Jauregui8, J. D. Overton9,J .X i a o10, B. Fischer-Zirnsak1,C .
Huber11, U. Kornak1, S. H. Elsea12, V. Cormier-Daire13,C .
R. Ferreira14,15
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism Labora-
tory, Children ’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC,
United States,3Department of Human Genetics, University
of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany,4Core Unit Bioinfor-
matics –CUBI, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany,
5Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
6Department of Pediatric Genetics, Akdeniz University
Medical School, Antalya, Turkey,7Rare Disease Institute,
Children ’s National Health System, Washington, DC,
United States,8Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Tarrytown, Tarrytown, NY, UnitedStates,
9Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharma-
ceuticals Inc. TarrytownInstitute of Medical Genetics and
Human Genetics, Tarrytown, NY, United States,10Depart-
ment of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,11Department of
Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital
Necker Enfants MaladesInstitute of Medical Genetics and
Human Genetics, Paris, France,
12Department of Molecu-
lar and Human Genetics, Baylor College of MedicineIn-
stitute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Houston,
TX, United States,13Department of Genetics, INSERM
UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker Enfants
Malades, Paris, France,14Institute of Medical Genetics and
Human GeRare Disease Institute, Children ’s National
Health Systemnetics, Washington, DC, United States,
15National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
Catel-Manzke syndrome is characterized by the combina-
tion of Pierre Robin sequence and radial deviation, short-
ening as well as clinodactyly of the index ﬁngers, due to an
accessory ossi ﬁcation center. Mutations in TGDS have been
identi ﬁed as one cause of Catel-Manzke syndrome, but
cannot be found as causative in every patient with the
clinical diagnosis. We performed a chromosome microarrayand/or exome sequencing in three patients with hand
hyperphalangism, heart defect, short stature, and mild tosevere developmental delay, all of whom were initially
given a clinical diagnosis of Catel-Manzke syndrome. In all
patients, we detected biallelic variants in KYNU , mainly
missense variants. Plasma and urine metabolomic analysis
of two patients indicated a block along the tryptophan
catabolic pathway and urine organic acid analysis showedexcretion of xanthurenic acid. Biallelic loss-of-function
mutations in KYNU were recently described as a cause of
NAD de ﬁciency with vertebral, cardiac, renal and limb
defects; however, no hand hyperphalangism and excretion
of xanthurenic acid were described in those patients, and
Catel-Manzke syndrome was not discussed as a differentialdiagnosis. In conclusion, we present unrelated patients
identi ﬁed with biallelic variants in KYNU leading to
kynureninase de ﬁciency and xanthurenic aciduria as a very
likely cause of their hyperphalangism, heart defect, short
stature, and developmental delay. We found urine organic
acid analysis as a simple method that will facilitate differ-ential diagnosis in patients with hyperphalangism and sus-
pected Catel-Manzke syndrome. Funding resources: Rahel-
Hirsch program (Charité); Intramural Research Program,National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health.
N. Ehmke: None. K. Cusmano-Ozog: None. R. Koenig:
None. M. Holtgrewe: None. B. Nur: None. E. Mihci: None.
H. Babcock: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center
from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. J. D. Overton: None.
J. Xiao: None. B. Fischer-Zirnsak: None. C. Huber: None.
U. Kornak: None. S. H. Elsea: None. V. Cormier-Daire:None. C. R. Ferreira: None.
C11.2
Integrated genome and transcriptome analyses solvesabout one third of the patients with rare developmental
disorders and negative ﬁrst-line molecular investigations
A. Vitobello
1,2*, F. Tran Mau-Them1,2, A. L. Bruel1,2,Y .
Duffourd1, E. Tisserant1, P. Callier1,2, S. Moutton1,3,S .
Nambot1,3, D. Lehalle1,3, N. Jean-Marçais3, J. Delanne1,3,
C. Racine1, J. Thevenon3, C. Poe1, T. Jouan1, M. Chevarin1,
M. Willems4, C. Coubes4, D. Geneviève4,5, N. Houcinat1,3,
A. Masurel-Paulet3, A. Mosca-Boidron1,2, A. Sorlin1,2,3,B .
Isidor6, S. Heide7, A. Afenjar8, D. Rodriguez9, C. Mignot7,
D. Heron7, M. Vincent6, P. Charles7, S. Odent10,C .
Dubourg11, A. Faudet7, B. Keren7, B. Cogné12, A. Boland13,
R. Olaso13, C. Philippe1,2, J. F. Deleuze13, L. Faivre1,3,C .
Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3
1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental
disorders, Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon,France,
2Unité Fonctionnelle d ’Innovation diagnostique
des maladies rares, Pôle de Biologie, CHU DijonAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 65Bourgogne, Dijon, France,3Centre de Référence maladies
rares « Anomalies du Développement et syndrome mal-
formatifs » de l ’Est, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France,4Département de Génétique
Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée,
Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies duDéveloppement et Syndromes Malformatifs ADSOOR,
CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
5Université Mon-
tpellier, Unité Inserm U1183, Montpellier, France,6CHU
de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France,
7AP-HP, Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-
Salpêtrière, 75013, Paris, France et Centre de Référence"déﬁciences intellectuelles de causes rares", 75013, Paris,
France,
8APHP, Département de génétique et embryologie
médicale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, F-75012, Paris,France,
9Centre de Référence de Neurogénétique et Service
de Neurologie Pédiatrique, AP-HP, Hôpital Armand
Trousseau, GHUEP ; Sorbonne Université, GRC n°19,pathologies Congénitales du Cervelet-LeucoDystrophies,
Paris, France,
10CHU de RENNES, Génétique; Univ
Rennes, CNRS, IGDR (Institut de Génétique et Développe-ment de Rennes) UMR 6290, Rennes, France,
11Service de
Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, BMT-HC « Jean
Dausset », CHU Pontchaillou, 2 rue Henri Le Guilloux,35033, Rennes, France,
12L’institut du thorax, INSERM,
CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France.,
Nantes, France,13Centre National de Recherche en
Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de Biologie
François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay and LabEx
GENMED, F-91057, Evry, France
Exome sequencing (ES) represents the ﬁrst-tier diagnostic
test in patients presenting with syndromic developmental
delay with suspected monogenic etiology. Yet, about 50%of these patients remain unsolved, arguing the interest to
extend the genetic investigations beyond the protein-coding
genome and to integrate multi-omics approaches. We
launched a multi-centric pilot study gathering 53 unsolved
patients, after trio ES and array-CGH results, presentingwith heterogeneous mild to severe syndromic intellectual
disabilities. We performed genome sequencing (GS) com-
bined with transcriptome analysis, highlighting a molecularcause in 32% of the cohort (18/53 patients). GS identi ﬁed 7
causative structural variants, including 1 deletion, 2
balanced inversions, 1 balanced translocation and 3 com-plex variants. The molecular readouts of such variants were
all validated and furtherly investigated by RNAseq. One
deep intronic SNV causing the activation of a cryptic exon,changing the open reading frame of the transcript, was
detected by RNAseq. Two frameshift-causing indels were
identi ﬁed in protein-coding regions not captured by ES.
Three variants were identi ﬁed in genes not yet known as
disease-causing at the time of the ES analysis. Finally,genotype-phenotype correlation could establish 3 additional
diagnoses not identi ﬁed during the ES analysis. In addition,
we detected 2 complex structural variants of unknown
signiﬁcance, not resolvable by short-read GS, as well as
new candidate genes identi ﬁed through RNA-seq differ-
ential expression analysis. Overall, GS and RNAseq ana-lyses allowed the identi ﬁcation of the molecular
mechanisms underlying 1/3 of previously unsolved patients,
and additional candidate variants requiring further investi-gation (3
rd-generation sequencing, 3C techniques) to
demonstrate their causality.
A. Vitobello: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. L.
Bruel: None. Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant: None. P.
Callier: None. S. Moutton: None. S. Nambot: None. D.
Lehalle: None. N. Jean-Marçais: None. J. Delanne: None.C. Racine: None. J. Thevenon: None. C. Poe: None. T.
Jouan: None. M. Chevarin: None. M. Willems: None. C.
Coubes: None. D. Geneviève: None. N. Houcinat: None. A.Masurel-Paulet: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: None. A. Sorlin:
None. B. Isidor: None. S. Heide: None. A. Afenjar: None.
D. Rodriguez: None. C. Mignot: None. D. Heron: None. M.Vincent: None. P. Charles: None. S. Odent: None. C.
Dubourg: None. A. Faudet: None. B. Keren: None. B.
Cogné: None. A. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. C.Philippe: None. J. F. Deleuze: None. L. Faivre: None. C.
Thauvin-Robinet: None.
C11.3
Characterization and treatment of overactive K
ATP
channels associated with Cantú syndrome in zebra ﬁsh
H. I. Roessler1*, S. S. Singareddy2, C. McClenaghan2,S .
Savelberg1, F. Tessadori3, J. Bakkers3, R. Tyron2,C .G .
Nichols2, G. van Haaften1
1Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
2Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and Center
for the Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases(CIMED), Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United
States,
3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical
Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
Cantú Syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by
gain-of-function (GoF) mutations in genes encoding the
pore-forming (Kir6.1, KCNJ8 ) and regulatory (SUR2,
ABCC9 ) subunits of cardiovascular ATP-sensitive potas-
sium (K ATP) channels. CS patients consistently present with
hypertrichosis and facial anomalies alongside a varyingrange of cardiovascular abnormalities. CS is debilitating
with no targeted therapy available. To further elucidate the
complex pathophysiology of CS and to perform therapeuticdrug screening, we introduced patient-speci ﬁc point66 J. del Picchiamutations in the germline of zebra ﬁsh orthologues of
ABCC9 andKCNJ8 . Applying RT-PCR and patch-clamp-
ing of isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes (VCMs) and
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) we con ﬁrm for the
ﬁrst time that expression, composition and functional
properties of cardiovascular K ATPchannels are conserved
between zebra ﬁsh and mammals. CS-related GoF in mutant
ﬁsh was validated and is re ﬂected by a shift in ATP sen-
sitivity in VCMs and a greater basal K conductance inVSMCs. It is postulated that by directly targeting over-
active K
ATPchannels repurposing channel blockers, it may
be possible to reverse consequences of GoF. Thus, wetested the in vivo ef ﬁcacy of glibenclamide and repaglinide,
clinically applied to block GoF K
ATPchannels involved in
neonatal diabetes, and the Kir6.1 inhibitor PNU-37883.Glibenclamide resulted in signi ﬁcant correction of CS car-
diac phenotypes in abcc9 knock-in (KI) larvae, whereas
repaglinide revealed similar effects in kcnj8 KI mutants.
These results indicate that zebra ﬁsh represent a suitable
model to study pathophysiology and therapy options for CS
and further disorders involving aberrant cardiovascularK
ATPchannels.
E-Rare 2014 ‘CantuTreat ’(I-2101-B26) to GvH.
H. I. Roessler: None. S. S. Singareddy: None. C.
McClenaghan: None. S. Savelberg: None. F. Tessadori:
None. J. Bakkers: None. R. Tyron: None. C. G. Nichols:
None. G. van Haaften: None.
C11.4
Biallelic MADD variants cause a phenotypic spectrum
ranging from developmental delay to a multisystemdisorder
P. E. Schneeberger
1*, F. Kortüm1, G. C. Korenke2,M .
Alawi3, R. Santer4, M. Woidy4, D. Buhas5, S. Fox5,D .
McKnight6, M. Alfadhel7, B. D. Webb8, E. G. Coci9,R .
Abou Jamra10, A. Finck10, M. Siekmeyer11, S. Biskup12,C .
Heller12, E. M. Maier13, P. Javaher-Haghighi14,M .F .
Bedeschi15, P. F. Ajmone16, M. Iascone17, H. Peeters18,K .
Ballon19, J. Jaeken20, A. Rodríguez Alonso21,M .
Palomares-Bralo22, F. Santos-Simarro22,M .E .C .
Meuwissen23, D. Beysen24, R. Kooy25, H. Houlden26,D .
Murphy26, M. Doosti27, E. G. Karimiani27, M. Mojarrad28,
R. Maroo ﬁan26, B. D. Gelb8, I. Kurth29, M. Hempel1,K .
Kutsche1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,2Klinik für
Neuropädiatrie und angeborene Stoffwechselerkrankungen,
Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany,3Bioinfor-
matics Core Unit, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,
4Department of Pediatrics,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,Germany,5Division of Medical Genetics, Department of
Specialized Medicine, McGill University Health Centre,
Montreal, QC, Canada,6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD,
United States,7Division of Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, King Abdullah specialized Children ’s Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,8Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, United States,9Department for
Neuropediatrics, University Children ’s Hospital, Ruhr
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany,10Institute of
Human Genetics, University Medical Center Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany,11Universitätsklinikum Leipzig - AöR,
University of Leipzig, Hospital for Children and Adoles-
cents, Leipzig, Germany,12CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für
Humangenetik Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,13Dr. von
Hauner Children ’s Hospital, University of Munich, Munich,
Germany,14Medicover Humangenetik Hannover, Hanover,
Germany,15Medical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca ’
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy,
16Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatric Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan,Italy,
17Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, ASST Papa
Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy,18Center for Human
Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,19Centre for
Developmental Disabilities, Department of Development
and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,20Center
for Metabolic Diseases, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
21Unidad de Patología Compleja, Servicio de Pediatría,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain,22Instituto
de Genética Médica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario LaPaz, IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain,
23Center of
Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium,24Department of Pediatric Neurology, University
Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,25Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Bel-
gium,26Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL
Queen Square Institute of Neurology and The National
Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, United
Kingdom,27Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad,
Iran, Islamic Republic of,28Department of Medical
Genetics, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mash-
had, Iran, Islamic Republic of,29Institute of Human
Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
We report a new pleiotropic disorder with a unique con-
stellation of neurological, endocrine, exocrine, and hema-
tological ﬁndings that is caused by biallelic MADD variants.
MADD, the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)activating death domain protein, regulates various cellular
functions, such as vesicle traf ﬁcking, activity of the Rab3
and Rab27 small GTPases, tumor necrosis factor- α(TNF-
α)-induced signaling and prevention of cell death. Through
international collaboration, we collected 20 patients with 18Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 67different pathogenic MADD variants identi ﬁed by next-
generation sequencing. We clinically evaluated the patients
and categorized the phenotypes in two groups. Eleven
patients in Group 1 had severe developmental delay,
endocrine and exocrine dysfunction, impairment of sensory
and autonomic nervous system, and hematological anoma-lies. Nine patients in Group 2 presented with predominant
neurological phenotype comprising developmental delay,
hypotonia, speech impairment, and seizures. Relativequanti ﬁcation of MADD mRNA and protein in patients ’
ﬁbroblasts showed drastic reduction or loss of MADD.
Treatment of patient-derived ﬁbroblasts with TNF- αresul-
ted in reduced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, enhanced acti-
vation of the pro-apoptotic caspase-3 and -7 and increased
apoptosis compared to control cells. Internalization study ofepidermal growth factor (EGF) in patient cells revealed a
defect in endocytosis of EGF. We conclude that MADD
deﬁciency underlies multiple cellular defects that can be
attributed to alterations of TNF- α-dependent signaling
pathways and defects in vesicular traf ﬁcking. Our data
highlights the multifaceted role of MADD as signalingmolecule in different organs and reveals its physiological
role in regulating the function of the sensory and autonomic
nervous system and endocrine and exocrine glands.
P. E. Schneeberger: None. F. Kortüm: None. G. C.
Korenke: None. M. Alawi: None. R. Santer: None. M.
Woidy: None. D. Buhas: None. S. Fox: None. D.McKnight: None. M. Alfadhel: None. B. D. Webb: None.
E. G. Coci: None. R. Abou Jamra: None. A. Finck: None.
M. Siekmeyer: None. S. Biskup: None. C. Heller: None. E.M. Maier: None. P. Javaher-Haghighi: None. M. F.
Bedeschi: None. P. F. Ajmone: None. M. Iascone: None.
H. Peeters: None. K. Ballon: None. J. Jaeken: None. A.Rodríguez Alonso: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. F.
Santos-Simarro: None. M. E. C. Meuwissen: None. D.
Beysen: None. R. Kooy: None. H. Houlden: None. D.Murphy: None. M. Doosti: None. E. G. Karimiani: None.
M. Mojarrad: None. R. Maroo ﬁan: None. B. D. Gelb: None.
I. Kurth: None. M. Hempel: None. K. Kutsche: None.
C11.5
Modelling the developmental spliceosomal craniofacialdisorder Burn-McKeown Syndrome using induced
pluripotent stem cells
K. A. Wood
*, C. Rowlands, H. Thomas, S. Woods, J.
O’Flaherty, S. Kimber, W. Newman, R. O ’Keefe
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
The developmental craniofacial disorder Burn-McKeown
Syndrome (BMKS) is caused by compound heterozygousmutations in the pre-messenger RNA splicing factorTXNL4A/DIB1 . Patients with BMKS have a 34 base pair
deletion in the promoter region of one allele of TXNL4A
combined with a loss-of-function mutation in the other
allele, resulting in reduced TXNL4A expression. However, it
is unclear how reduced expression of this spliceosome
protein results in craniofacial defects during development.Here we reprogramme BMKS patient and parent blood cells
into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and differentiate
the iPSCs into induced neural crest cells (iNCCs). We ﬁnd
that patient-derived iPSCs proliferate more slowly than
parent- and unrelated control-derived iPSCs. Patient iPSCs
show defective differentiation into iNCCs compared toparent and unrelated control iPSCs, in particular undergoing
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. RNA-seq analysis
of the iNCCs reveals considerable differential geneexpression and mis-splicing in genes relevant to craniofacial
development. The mis-spliced genes share common physi-
cal properties such as length and splice site strengths, sug-gesting that splicing of certain subsets of genes is
particularly sensitive to changes in TXNL4A expression. We
are comparing mis-expressed and mis-spliced genes iniPSCs and iNCCs from patients with parent and unrelated
control lines to delineate why neural crest cells are parti-
cularly affected by reduced TXNL4A expression. Using this
disease-relevant model, we will study properties such as
migration and the cell cycle in patient-speci ﬁc iNCCs to
unravel how BMKS-speci ﬁc mutations in TXNL4A result in
craniofacial defects.
Grant references: MRC (1916606; 1926882), BBSRC
(BB/N000358/1), NIHR Manchester Biomedical ResearchCentre (IS-BRC-1215-20007) .
K. A. Wood: None. C. Rowlands: None. H. Thomas:
None. S. Woods: None. J. O ’Flaherty: None. S. Kimber:
None. W. Newman: None. R. O ’Keefe: None.
C11.6
A novel Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba (BRRS)/CLOVES
syndrome model in Xenopus tropicalis, by CRISPR/
Cas9
D. Dimitrakopoulou
*, S. Demuynck, K. Vleminckx
Ghent Univeristy, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: Xenopus has been widely used in disciplines
of developmental biology and functional genomics and theCRISPR/Cas9 breakthrough has signi ﬁcantly expanded its
use for human disease modeling. Activating mutations in
thePIK3CA gene and PTEN loss of function mutations
generate PIK3CA-related overgrowth syndromes (PROS/
CLOVES) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba (BRRS) syn-
drome, respectively. Although the genetic mutations thatdrive these syndromes are different, disease phenotypes68 J. del Picchiaoverlap. Here we describe a BRRS/CLOVES model by
CRISPR/Cas9 targeting of the pten gene in X. tropicalis .
Materials and methods: X.tropicalis 4-cell stage
embryos were injected with pten+myc+notch1* andpten
+notch1* sgRNA complexed with Cas9. After 5 weeks,
froglets ’limbs and main body demonstrated overgrowths
and at critical point, animals were sacri ﬁced. Overgrowths
and internal organs were histologically processed. The
mutation pattern of overgrowths was evaluated by targeteddeep sequencing.
Results: The pten mutant animals, that presented over-
growths were dissected. These animals demonstratedmuscle hyperthrophy and abdominal haemorrhage. Histo-
logical analysis characterized the overgrowths as lipoma-
tous tumors. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis oflipomas demonstrated highly activated PI3K/AKT pathway.
Internal organs displayed disorganized architecture and
highly activated PI3K/AKT pathway. Samples from over-growths were sequenced, revealing that bi-allelic inactiva-
tion of the pten gene is suf ﬁcient for CLOVES
development. Pten mutants will be used for validating our
model by testing BYL719, a PIK3CA inhibitor with
efﬁcacy in treating human CLOVES patients.
Conclusion: We generated the ﬁrst amphibian model in
BRRS/CLOVES syndrome. We believe that a Xenopus
tropicalis BRRS/CLOVES model could become a valid
experimental platform for further compound testing oridenti ﬁcation of new drug targets.
D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. S. Demuynck: None. K.
Vleminckx: None.
C12 Neuropsychiatry
C12.1
Polygenic background of psychotic disorders and
genetic determinants of disease severity
A. V. Ahola-Olli
1*, Z. Misiewicz2, N. Mars2,M .
Lähteenvuo3, B. Neale1, T. Männynsalo4, E. Isometsä5,A .
Wegelius5, J. Hietala6, W. Haaki6, O. Kampman7,J .
Veijola8, J. Tiihonen3, T. Kieseppä9, J. Suvisaari9,S .
Hyman1, M. Daly2, A. Palotie2
1Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
United States,2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland
(FIMM), Helsinki, Finland,3Department of Forensic
Psychiatry, University of Eastern Finland, Niuvanniemi
Hospital, Kuopio, Finland,4Department of Psychiatry,
Helsinki City Health Centre, Helsinki, Finland,5Depart-
ment of Psychiatry, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,6Department of
Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland,
7Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, TampereUniversity, Tampere, Finland,8Department of Psychiatry,
Research Unit of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oulu,
Oulu, Finland,9Department of Public Health Solutions,
Mental Health Unit, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
Introduction: SUPER-Finland is a nationwide study which
has recruited 10,075 patients with psychotic disorder across
the country. Because of comprehensive national registers,
longitudinal data on education, employment, hospitaliza-tions, drug prescriptions and cause of death can be drawn
from registers and linked to information collected at study
visit using national social security number. Our aim is toshed light to genetic basis of different psychotic disorders.
Materials and Methods: Illumina Global Screening
Array was used to genotype 10,075 subjects from SUPER-Finland study. Genotypes were imputed using population-
speciﬁc Sequencing Initiative Suomi panel as reference.
Polygenic risk scores were calculated with LDpred softwareusing publicly available genome-wide association study
summary statistics. Data on hospitalizations, duration of
involuntary hospitalization and psychosocial functioning athospitalization and discharge was drawn from registers.
Results: When comparing PRSs for schizophrenia and
major depression jointly, subjects with schizoaffectivedisorder have different polygenic background than those with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Schizoaffective disorder is
also different from psychotic depression. Subjects with highpolygenic risk for schizophrenia have lower psychosocial
functioning at hospital discharge, possibly re ﬂecting residual
disease. They also have more involuntary hospital days.
Conclusions: Schizoaffective disorder seems to have
different polygenic background from other forms of
psychotic illnesses. This supports the idea of maintainingit as separate disorder in psychiatric disease classi ﬁcation.
High polygenic risk for psychotic illness predisposes to
more severe disease forms.
Funding: The Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research at
the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Orion ResearchFoundation, Finnish Cultural Foundation.
A. V. Ahola-Olli: None. Z. Misiewicz: None. N. Mars:
None. M. Lähteenvuo: None. B. Neale: None. T. Männyn-salo: None. E. Isometsä: None. A. Wegelius: None. J.
Hietala: None. W. Haaki: None. O. Kampman: None. J.
Veijola: None. J. Tiihonen: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;Modest; Lundbeck. Other; Modest; Eli Lilly, Janssen-Cilag.
T. Kieseppä: None. J. Suvisaari: None. S. Hyman: None. M.
Daly: None. A. Palotie: None.
C12.2
Autism-linked Cullin3 germline haploinsuf ﬁciency
impacts cytoskeletal dynamics and cortical neurogenesisthrough RhoA signalingAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 69M. Amar1, A. Pramod1, V. Munive Herrera1,N .Y u2,L .R .
Qiu3, P. Moran-Losada1, P. Zhang1, C. A. Trujillo1,J .
Ellegood3, J. Urresti1, K. Chau1, J. Diedrich2, J. Chen1,J .
Gutierrez1, J. Sebat1, D. Ramanathan1, J. P. Lerch3,J .R .
Yates III2, A. R. Muotri1, L. M. Iakoucheva1*
1University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United
States,2The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA,
United States,3Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Introduction: E3-ubiquitin ligase Cullin3 ( Cul3 ) is a high
conﬁdence risk gene for Neurodevelopmental Disorders
(NDD) including Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and
Developmental Delay (DD). To better understand the
impact of ASD-associated Cul3 mutations on brain devel-
opment, we generated Cul3-haploinsuf ﬁcient mouse model
using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology.
Materials and Methods: We investigated brain anatomy,
behavior, molecular, cellular, and circuit-level mechanisms
dysregulated by Cul3 mutations. Brain MRI, transcriptomic
and quantitative proteomic pro ﬁling of cerebral cortex,
hippocampus, and cerebellum of Cul3 -haploinsuf ﬁcient
mice were carried out at three developmental periods
(embryonic, early postnatal and adult) to understandspatiotemporal impact of Cul3 mutations.
Results: Brain MRI of Cul3 mutant animals found
profound abnormalities in half of brain regions, includingdecreased volume of cortical regions and increased volume
of subcortical regions. Cul3 mutant mice exhibited social
and cognitive de ﬁcits, and hyperactive behavior. Spatio-
temporal transcriptomic and proteomic pro ﬁling of the brain
implicated neurogenesis and cytoskeletal defects as key
drivers of Cul3 functional impact. Cortical neurons from
mutant mice had reduced dendritic length and loss of
ﬁlamentous actin puncta, along with reduced spontaneous
network activity. Inhibition of small GTPase RhoA, a
molecular substrate of Cul3 ligase, rescued dendrite length
phenotype.
Conclusions: Novel CRISPR/Cas9 Cul3 -haploinsuf ﬁ-
cient mouse model implicated dysregulation of RhoA
pathway and downstream cytoskeletal and neurogenesisdefects during early brain development in autism. This
study identi ﬁed RhoA signaling as a potential mechanism,
through which Cul3 mutation impacts early brain
development.
Funding: NIH grants MH108528, MH109885,
MH105524, MH104766, and Simons Foundation forAutism Research #345469.
M. Amar: None. A. Pramod: None. V. Munive Herrera:
None. N. Yu: None. L. R. Qiu: None. P. Moran-Losada:None. P. Zhang: None. C. A. Trujillo: None. J. Ellegood:
None. J. Urresti: None. K. Chau: None. J. Diedrich: None.J. Chen: None. J. Gutierrez: None. J. Sebat: None. D.
Ramanathan: None. J. P. Lerch: None. J. R. Yates III: None.
A. R. Muotri: None. L. M. Iakoucheva: None.
C12.3
Tissue-speci ﬁc transcriptional and functional signatures
in reciprocal genomic disorders : Insights from inte-grated mouse and human neuronal models
R. Yadav
1,2,3*, D. JC Tai1,2,3, J. Wang4,5, T. Aneichyk1,2,S .
Erdin1,3, B. B Currall1,2,3,K .O ’Keefe1,2, A. Stortchevoi1,2,
U. Rudolph6, R. H. Perlis4,5, J. F Gusella1,2,3,7,M .E
Talkowski1,2,3
1Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Neurol-
ogy, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, UnitedStates,
2Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States,3Program in Medical
and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT andHarvard, Cambridge, MA, United States,
4Center for
Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine, and
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital,Boston, MA, United States,
5Department of Psychiatry,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,
67Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States,7Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boton, MA, UnitedStates
Reciprocal genomic disorders (RGDs) involve large copy
number variation (CNV) mediated by ﬂanking segmental
duplications. Though individually rare, the collective con-
tribution of RGDs to developmental disorders is substantial.Here, we compared the tissue-speci ﬁc functional and tran-
scriptional signatures associated with two RGDs: 16p11.2
(740 kb, 29 genes) and 15q13.3 (1.5 Mb, 7 genes). For16p11.2 we generated 304 RNAseq libraries across three
tissues cerebellum, prefrontal cortex, and striatum from 101
total mice, and isogenic CRISPR-engineered human neuralstem cells (NSCs, n =27 lines) and NGN2-induced neurons
(iNs, n =19 lines), while 119 libraries were analyzed for
15q13.3 across NSCs (24 lines), iNs (23 lines), and braintissue from 48 mice. Transcriptome pro ﬁling of both the
RGDs revealed that the strongest and most consistent
effects occurred within the CNV segment while most sec-ondary regulatory effects were tissue-speci ﬁc. Co-expres-
sion analyses isolated modules that were enriched for RGD
genes, DEGs, and highly constrained and genes associatedwith NDD and autism. Genes regulating actin ﬁlament and
cytoskeleton organization, neuron projection, calcium sig-
naling pathway, and ion channel activity were signi ﬁcantly
altered in 15q13.3 iNs. Using a weighted z-score meta-70 J. del Picchiaanalysis, we discovered convergence on shared molecular
pathways across the RGDs, most prominently including
alterations to genes involved in myelin sheath formation,
dendritic function, and mitochondrial function. Intriguingly,
neuron phenotyping assays revealed signi ﬁcant antagonistic
effect of these RGDs on neurite length and number ofbranchpoints in iNs. These results suggest the pathogenic
mechanisms associated with recurrent RGDs may converge
on common molecular signatures.
R. Yadav: None. D. JC Tai: None. J. Wang: None. T.
Aneichyk: None. S. Erdin: None. B. B Currall: None. K.
O’Keefe: None. A. Stortchevoi: None. U. Rudolph: None. R.
H. Perlis: None. J. F Gusella: None. M. E Talkowski: None.
C12.4
Autism Comorbidities: Role of CHD8 during the
Development of the Enteric Nervous System
G. L. Hayot
*, C. Weber, C. Golzio
IGBMC, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France
Introduction: CHD8 is mutated in 0.21% of total autism
spectrum disorders (ASD) cases. Recently, clinical reas-
sessment highlighted the high prevalence of gastrointestinal(GI) defects in ASD. Transient suppression of chd8 in
zebra ﬁsh led to a reduced number of enteric neurons and a
decreased gut mobility which likely drive the GI problems(Bernier et al. Cell, 2014).
Materials and Methods: To understand how the loss of
chd8 causes the loss of mature enteric neurons, we
generated and characterized a stable mutant zebra ﬁsh line:
Tg(chd8
sa19827;phox2bb:GFP ) in which the neuronal pro-
genitors (i.e. enteric neural crest cells, eNCCs) are labeledwith GFP.
Results: First, we observed a migration delay and
reduced proliferation of eNCCs during early developmentand a decreased number of mature neurons and more
speciﬁcally serotonergic neurons at 5 days post-fertilization.
Second, transcriptomic analyses of eNCCs revealed theupregulation of the serotonin receptor htr6 and the
dysregulation of several actors of the Wnt/Planar Cell
Polarity and RhoA pathways, extracellular matrix compo-nents, and several genes from the human morbid genome.
Third, behavioral analyses showed i) hyperactivity of the
mutant chd8 larvae and ii) normal sociability and no
aggressive behavior in the adult mutants.
Conclusion: We showed that the decreased number of
enteric neurons in absence of chd8 is due to a combination
of proliferation, migration and differentiation defects of the
eNCCs. Moreover, our transcriptomic data identi ﬁed
druggable targets in chd8 -associated signaling pathwaysand we are currently performing rescue experiments with
small molecules in the chd8 mutants.
Grants: ANR-10-IDEX-0002-02, ANR-10-LABX-0030-
INRT
G. L. Hayot: None. C. Weber: None. C. Golzio: None.
C12.5
A human single-cell atlas of the Substantia nigra reveals
novel cell-speci ﬁc pathways associated with the genetic
risk of Parkinson ’s disease and neuropsychiatric
disorders.
D. Agarwal
1, C. Sandor2, V. Volpato2, T. Caffrey1,J .
Monzon-Sandoval2, R. Bowden1, J. Alegre-Abarrategui1,R .
Wade-Martins1,C. Webber2,1*
1Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom,2UK Demen-
tia Research Institute, Cardiff, United Kingdom
We sequenced ~ 17,000 nuclei from both the Cortex and
Substantia Nigra (SN) of ﬁve human brains and generated
theﬁrst human single-nuclei transcriptomic atlas of the SN,
a region playing important roles in reward and movement.
By mapping genetic variants associated with different
human traits to SN cell-type-speci ﬁc gene expression pat-
terns, we demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that Parkinson ’s
disease (PD) genetic risk, for which the symptoms are
caused by loss of SN dopaminergic neurons (DaNs), isindeed associated with DaN-speci ﬁc gene expression
affecting pathways such as mitochondrial organisation and
functioning, protein ubiquitination and vesicle transport.However, we also identify a distinct cell type association
between PD risk and oligodendrocyte-speci ﬁc gene
expression. Unlike Alzheimer ’s disease (AD), we ﬁnd no
association between PD risk and microglia or astrocytes,
suggesting that neuroin ﬂammation plays a less causal role
in PD than AD. Beyond PD, we ﬁnd other neuropsychiatric
disorders, particularly schizophrenia (SCZ), to be associated
to SN DaNs and GABAergic neurons. Nevertheless, we ﬁnd
that each neuropsychiatric disorder is associated with adistinct set of genes within those neuronal types. On the
contrary, we ﬁnd an overlapping component of risk between
neuropsychiatric disorders in the association to glial cells,particularly oligo-precursor cells (OPCs). This atlas pro-
vides the ﬁrst objective associations between genetic risk of
multiple disorders and the midbrain cell types these riskslikely manifest through, thereby directing our aetiological
understanding.
D. Agarwal: None. C. Sandor: None. V. Volpato: None.
T. Caffrey: None. J. Monzon-Sandoval: None. R. Bowden:
None. J. Alegre-Abarrategui: None. R. Wade-Martins:
None. C. Webber: None.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 71C12.6
Clinical and molecular complexity of X-linked clustering
epilepsy, a disorder of cellular mosaics
J. Gecz1*, K. Kolc1, L. Sadleir2, C. Depienne3, C. Marini4,I .
E. Scheffer5, R. S. Moller6, M. Trivisano7, N. Specchio7,R .
Kumar1, D. Pham1, R. Roberts1
1The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,2Univer-
sity of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand,3University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany,4University of Florence,
Florence, Italy,5University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia,6The Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Den-
mark,7Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hospital, Rome, Italy
PCDH19 is a well-established neurodevelopmental dis-
ability (NDD) gene implicated in an early onset seizure
disorder, X-linked clustering epilepsy or XCE. XCE is
one of the most frequent epilepsies. It is a disorder ofcellular mosaics, i.e. hete rozygous females (due to X-
inactivation mosaicism) or postzygotic somatic mosaic
males. Hemizygous males without functional PCDH19are not affected. In the present study we investigated
the complexity of the XCE NDD phenotype as well as
the cellular and molecular determinants of its variable(~80%) penetrance. Firstly, using standardized survey
tools we have assessed executive function (Behavior
Rating Inventory) and psychiatric comorbidities (SocialResponsiveness Scale, Social Communication Ques-
tionnaire, Strengths and Dif ﬁculties Questionnaire, and
Dimensional Obsessive Compulsive Scale) on 112 indi-viduals with deleterious PCDH19 variant, males and
females. Genetic, seizure, an d developmental information
were also collected. Developmental delay prior to seizureonset occurred in 18%, executive dysfunction and ASD in
60% of individuals. 21% of in dividuals met criteria for
obsessive-compulsive disorder, distinct from ASD. There
were no phenotypic differences between heterozygous
females and somatic mosaic ma les attesting to the cellular
mosaicism as the disease dri ver. Secondly, we assessed
322 PCDH19 missense variants, 45 of which we tested
experimentally using in vitro assays to engineer a highaccuracy PCDH19 variant predictor toolbox. Thirdly,
using patient-derived skin ﬁbroblast cell lines we identi-
ﬁed genetic (mRNA, protein) and epigenetic (methyla-
tion) biomarkers of the penetrance of XCE even among
discordant monozygotic twins . Our research set founda-
tions of a Phase III international clinical trial of ganax-olone in XCE.
J. Gecz: None. K. Kolc: None. L. Sadleir: None. C.
Depienne: None. C. Marini: None. I. E. Scheffer: None. R.S. Moller: None. M. Trivisano: None. N. Specchio: None.
R. Kumar: None. D. Pham: None. R. Roberts: None.
C13 3D Genome ArchitectureC13.1
Landscape of cohesin-mediated chromatin loops in the
human genome
F. Grubert
1*, R. Srivas1, D. Spacek1, M. Kasowski1,M .
Ruiz-Velasco2, N. Sinnott-Armstrong1, P. Greenside1,A .
Narasimha1, Q. Liu1, B. Geller1, A. Sanghi1, M. Kulik3,S .
Sa1, M. Rabinovitch1, A. Kundaje1, S. Dalton3, J. Zaugg2,
M. Snyder1
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,2EMBL,
Heidelberg, Germany,3University of Georgia, Athens, GA,
United States
Physical interactions between distal regulatory elements in the
genome play a key role in regulating gene expression, yet the
extent to which these interactions vary between cell types andcontribute to cell type-speci ﬁcg e n ee x p r e s s i o na n dh o wt h e y
are related to overall gene function remains unclear. To address
these questions as part of ENCODE Phase III, we mappedcohesin-mediated chromatin loops, using a high-resolution
ChIA-PET assay, and gene expression in 24 diverse human
cell types, including core ENCODE cell lines. We ﬁnd that
28% of all chromatin loops vary across cell types, and these
changes are effective at grouping cell types based on their
tissue of origin, indicating commonalities in three-dimensional(3D) genome architecture amongst related cell types. This also
applied to different cell types that were derived from the same
individual, demonstrating that the observed variation is mainlydue to epigenetic changes. Cell type-speci ﬁc loops show dif-
ferent patterns of chromatin states, with stem cell loops being
depleted of active promoter states and transcription, and enri-
ched in bivalent states. We further ﬁnd that the connectivity of
genes corresponds to different functional classes, with house-keeping genes being connected by few loops, and dosage-
sensitive genes being highly connected to enhancer elements.
Finally, we demonstrate that genetic variants identi ﬁed
in GWAS are enriched in variable loops in disease-relevant
cell types. Overall, our results provide important insights
on how variation in 3D chromatin organization correspondsto cell type-speci ﬁc functions and identity.
F. Grubert: None. R. Srivas: None. D. Spacek: None. M.
Kasowski: None. M. Ruiz-Velasco: None. N. Sinnott-Armstrong: None. P. Greenside: None. A. Narasimha: None.
Q. Liu: None. B. Geller: None. A. Sanghi: None. M. Kulik:
None. S. Sa: None. M. Rabinovitch: None. A. Kundaje:None. S. Dalton: None. J. Zaugg: None. M. Snyder: None.72 J. del PicchiaC13.2
Analysis of chromatin looping at joint endometrial-
ovarian cancer risk loci to identify candidate target genes
D. Glubb*, I. Jeong, A. Spurdle, T. O ’Mara
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia
We have previously identi ﬁed 11 joint risk endometrial-
ovarian cancer loci through analysis of genome-wide
association study (GWAS) data from the two largest studies
of these diseases. To ﬁnd candidate target genes at joint risk
loci, we performed HiChIP chromatin looping analysis of
three endometrial and three ovarian cancer cell lines. To
enrich for enhancer-promoter interactions, a mechanismthrough which GWAS-identi ﬁed variation may target
genes, we captured loops associated with H3K27Ac histone
(characteristic of promoters and enhancers). We identi ﬁed
60,208-182,001 replicated loops per cell line, 28-44% of
which contacted a promoter. Intersection of promoter-
associated loops with statistically credible risk variantshighlighted 59 genes, at eight joint risk loci, as candidate
targets in both endometrial and ovarian cancer cell lines.
These genes included those with well-established oncogenicroles (e.g. TERT ,MYC andCCND1 ). Among the candidate
target genes, there was a two-fold enrichment (p =0.01) for
genes differentially expressed in endometrial or ovariantumours. Network analysis prioritised a set of proteins that
interact with those encoded by candidate target genes. This
set was 16-fold enriched (p =2×10
−15) for endometrial or
ovarian cancer drivers and included proteins encoded by
mismatch repair genes MLH1 ,MSH2 andMSH6 , for which
variants are penetrant for endometrial cancer and ovariancancer. Lastly, candidate target genes and prioritised inter-
acting proteins were over-represented in pathways related to
endometrial and ovarian cancer development. In summary,
we have identi ﬁed biologically relevant candidate genes and
pathways, providing insight into endometrial and ovariancancer aetiology.
Funded by NHMRC project grant #1158083 (DG
and TOM)
D. Glubb: None. I. Jeong: None. A. Spurdle: None. T.
O’Mara: None.
C13.3
When the silent genome gets loud: transcription of
repeated genomic elements at the single-cell resolution in
K27M-mutated high-grade gliomas
M. Coutelier
1,2*, V. Lisi2,3, S. Hébert1,2, D. Faury4,3,B .
Krug4,3,N .D eJ a y1,2, N. Jabado4,3, C. L. Kleinman1,21Department of Human Genetics, McGilll University,
Montreal, QC, Canada,2Lady Davis Institute for Medical
Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC,
Canada,3The Research Institute of the McGill University
Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Department of
Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
Introduction: High-grade gliomas are a leading cause of
cancer-related death in children and young adults, and no
targeted treatments are currently available. A recurrentlysine-to-methionine substitution at position 27 of histone 3
variants has been shown to induce alterations of repressive
and active chromatin landscapes, respectively a global lossof H3K27 trimethylation, and a pervasive gain of H3K27
acetylation. Repeated genomic elements are particularly
targeted by this de-repression, leading to an exquisitesensitivity of H3K27M cells to agents triggering viral
mimicry.
Materials and methods: In K27M-mutated gliomas, we
combine single-nuclei (sn)RNA-sequencing and snATAC-
sequencing to investigate the intra-tumoral heterogeneity of
genomic repeats expression.
Results: In several samples bearing K27M mutations in
all three variants of histone 3, we consistently identi ﬁed
gradients of repeats expression. These gradients correlatedwith gene signatures speci ﬁc of K27M gliomas, a result
corroborated by snATAC-sequencing. Cells displaying high
repeats expression also showed a higher enrichment fortargets of the repressive methylation complex PRC2, as well
as a transcriptomic pro ﬁle resembling less differentiated
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells.
Conclusions: We have implemented an approach to
detect expression of genomic repeats at the single cell level
and demonstrate gradients of expression in high-gradegliomas. Our results corroborate the existence of tumor
compartments in K27M-tumors that consist of progenitor-
like, aggressive malignant cells, displaying higher expres-
sion of the silent genome. They advocate for the potential of
viral mimicry trigger as therapeutic option for theseuntreatable tumors.
M. Coutelier: None. V. Lisi: None. S. Hébert: None. D.
Faury: None. B. Krug: None. N. De Jay: None. N. Jabado:None. C. L. Kleinman: None.
C13.4
CDH1 regulatory noncoding elements: a hidden master
for tissue-speci ﬁc E-cadherin expression
C. São José
1,2,3*, A. R. Monteiro1, A. André1, A. Qamra4,R .
Acuna-Hidalgo3, P. Tan4, S. Mundlos3,5,6, C. Oliveira1,2
1Instituto de Investigaç ão e Inovaç ão em Saúde da
Universidade do Porto (i3S)/Institute of MolecularAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 73Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
(Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal,2Faculty of Medicine of the
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal,3Max Planck Institute
for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,4Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, Singapore,5Insti-
tute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité Universi-tätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany,
6Berlin-Brandenburg Center
for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitäts-
medizin, Berlin, Germany
Introduction : Germline CDH1/ E-cadherin loss of function
(LoF) causes inherited gastric and breast cancer; and
somatic LoF occurs during progression of most epithelialcancers. Classical genetic/epigenetic/post-transcriptional
inactivation mechanisms fail to explain CDH1 LoF in most
inherited/somatic contexts. We hypothesized that CDH1
LoF occurs due to defects in the CDH1 regulatory network
and explored potential expression modi ﬁer sequences con-
trolling CDH1 expression.
Materials and Methods : Six gastric-cancer cell lines
were submitted to Capture Hi-C (cHi-C) and 4C-seq with a
CDH1 promoter viewpoint. Interactors ’expression patterns
in normal tissues were explored in GTex. Interactors ’
regulatory function was assessed in mouse embryo LacZ-
reporter assays, followed by tissue-speci ﬁcβ-galactosidase
expression analysis in transgenic embryonic stomach,
esophagus, duodenum, liver (endoderm), heart (ectoderm)
and skin (mesoderm).
Results : We found simultaneous interactions between
CDH1 promotor and (1) a new lncRNA at chromosome#2
short-arm, and (2) a CDH1 -intronic cis-regulatory element
(CDH1 -iCRE). These were speci ﬁc for CDH1 non-expres-
sing cells, and undetected in CDH1 -expressing cells,
highlighting a potential negative regulatory network. GTExdata revealed that lncRNA and CDH1 have mutually
exclusive expression patterns, with CDH1 being expressed
across epithelial tissues, and the lncRNA restricted to brain
and testis. CDH1 expression was 100-fold higher than
lncRNA expression. The interacting CDH1 -iCRE showed
tissue-speci ﬁcity in endodermal-derived tissues where E-
cadherin exerts a primordial function (stomach, esophagus
and duodenum).
Conclusion : We found a potential negative regulatory
network in gastric cancer cell lines through CDH1 promoter
cisandtrans interactions, and evidence for tissue-speci ﬁc
regulation. These ﬁndings suggest a novel mechanism
triggering CDH1 /E-cadherin LoF.
C. São José: None. A. R. Monteiro: None. A. André:
None. A. Qamra: None. R. Acuna-Hidalgo: None. P. Tan:
None. S. Mundlos: None. C. Oliveira: None.C13.5
Local gene co-expression: molecular characterisation,
tissue speci
ﬁcity and its genetic control
D. Ribeiro1,2*, A. Ramisch3,2, E. Dermitzakis3,2,O .
Delaneau1,2
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland,
3University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Many Eukaryotic genes tend to be expressed together.
Recent studies highlight the existence of structural andregulatory domains orchestrating the organised expression
of nearby genes (Delaneau et al. 2019 Science 364(6439)).
Yet, the molecular mechanisms, genetic control and tissuespeciﬁcity of local gene co-expression are far from being
understood. Here, we developed a novel method to identify
groups of nearby genes (within 1Mb) that are co-expressed,using genome-wide RNA-seq datasets from large popula-
tions (e.g. >200 individuals). First, we identi ﬁed 9548 high-
conﬁdence co-expressed gene pairs (FDR 1%) from 358
human lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) samples from the
Geuvadis dataset. These constitute 52.5% of the protein-
coding and lincRNA genes expressed in LCLs, demon-strating that local gene co-expression is highly prevalent.
Next, by integrating various molecular assays (e.g. ChIP-
seq, Hi-C), we determined the relative contribution ofseveral molecular features towards local gene co-expres-
sion. For instance, we found that CTCF binding plays a role
in determining which gene pairs can be co-expressed,whereas chromatin contacts between genes shown to be key
only when these are distant (>200kb) from each other.
Notably, developing novel QTL mapping approaches, wefound that the co-expression of more than 50% of the gene
pairs is controlled by nearby genetic variants (co-QTLs),
many of whom falling within shared regulatory elements,
such as enhancers. Finally, we applied our novel approaches
across 53 human GTEx tissues to study in-depth the tissue-speciﬁcity and genetic control of local gene co-expression,
ultimately improving the functional interpretation of QTL
and GWAS ﬁndings.
D. Ribeiro: None. A. Ramisch: None. E. Dermitzakis:
None. O. Delaneau: None.
C13.6
Structural variants in HDAC9 that disrupt TWIST1
transcriptional regulation but not HDAC9 protein
function are associated with craniofacial and limbmalformations
R. Y. Birnbaum
1,2*, N. Hirsch374 J. del Picchia1Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel., Beer-
Sheva, Israel,2Center of Evolutionary Genomics and
Medicine, The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer
Sheva, Israel,3Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of
Natural Sciences, The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,Beer-Sheva, Israel
Structural variants (indels, translocations and inversions) are
associated with human variations. SVs affecting proteincoding sequences and\or regulatory elements are associated
with human disorders. However, SVs disrupting protein
coding sequences that also function as transcriptional reg-ulation are yet to be demonstrated. Here, we show that
patients with SVs involving HDAC9 protein coding
sequence are associated with craniosynostosis due to dis-ruption of TWIST1 regulatory elements that reside in
HDAC9 sequence and not due to disruption of HDAC9
protein. By generating CRISPR\Cas9 mouse models, wedeleted Hdac9 protein coding sequence that also function as
Twist1 transcription enhancers ( eTw5-7
Δ/Δ) that altered
Twist1 expression and led to signi ﬁcant craniofacial phe-
notype and polydactyly, resemble Saethre-Chotzen syn-
drome. Furthermore, deletion of Hdac9 sequence
encompasses CTCF site ( CTCFΔ/Δ) disrupted Twist1
enhancer-promoter interactions which led to craniofacial
phenotype and polydactyly. Using RNA-seq and 4C-seq,
we demonstrate that in both Hdac9 deletion models Twist1expression, but not Hdac9, was reduced and the effect on
the downstream targets of Twist1 elucidated unexpected
pathways. Finally, we generated a large inversion of theentire Hdac9 sequence ( Hdac9
INV/+) that does not disrupt
Hdac9 coding sequence but rather reposition Twist1 reg-
ulatory elements. We showed reduction of Twist1 expres-sion, but not of Hdac9, that led to craniofacial phenotype
and polydactyly. Thus, we elucidated the TWIST1 tran-
scriptional machinery that reside in HDAC9 sequence,
suggesting that SVs encompass protein coding sequences
could lead to a phenotype that is not attributed to the proteinfunction but rather a disruption of the transcription regula-
tion of nearby gene, such as TWIST1.
R. Y. Birnbaum: None. N. Hirsch: None.
C14 Internal Organs
C14.1
Implication of FOXD2 in autosomal recessive
syndromic CAKUT
K. M. Riedhammer
1,2*, M. Nguyen3, B. Alhaddad1,S .J .
Arnold4, G. J. Kim4, U. Heemann2, M. Schmidts5,J .
Hoefele11Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Institute of
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany,5Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
Freiburg University Hospital, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany
Introduction: 50% of chronic kidney disease up to age 30
can be attributed to congenital anomalies of the
kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). CAKUT is genetically
complex: Although more than 40 genes have beenlinked to monogenic CAKUT and familial clustering is
frequent, monogenic causes can only be identi ﬁed in about
12% of cases. Exome sequencing (ES) has become avaluable tool for the analysis of genetically heterogeneous
diseases both in diagnostics and research. We report a
multiplex consanguineous Arab family with several indi-viduals segregating syndromic kidney hypoplasia in
which ES identi ﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant in
FOXD2 and show functional characterization of Foxd2
knockout (KO).
Material & Methods: Analysis of the index patient by
ES, Sanger sequencing of relatives. CRISPR/Cas9-mediatedKO of Foxd2 (Foxd2
−/−) in murine metanephric mesench-
yme cells (mk4). RNA sequencing of KO cells.
Results: ES identi ﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant
inFOXD2 NM_004474.3:c.789dup, p.(Gly264Argfs*228)
in the index patient (bilateral hypoplastic kidneys, facial
dysmorphism, developmental delay). Sanger sequencingconﬁrmed segregation of the variant in the family. Pathway
analysis of RNA data from Foxd2
−/−cells vs. WT revealed
signiﬁcant enrichment of differential expression of renal
developmental genes. Pax2 and Wnt4 were notable
signiﬁcantly downregulated genes.
Discussion: FOXD2 is a transcription factor with strong
expression in the developing kidney. Foxd2−/−mice can
show a CAKUT phenotype. Our data implicate FOXD2 in
autosomal recessive syndromic CAKUT. RNA sequencing
results suggest that KO of Foxd2 leads to impaired
transition from metanephric mesenchyme to epithelium inthe developing kidney via the Pax2 -Wnt4 axis.
K. M. Riedhammer: None. M. Nguyen: None. B.
Alhaddad: None. S. J. Arnold: None. G. J. Kim: None. U.Heemann: None. M. Schmidts: None. J. Hoefele: None.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 75C14.2
Heterozygous DACT1 mutations in patients with renal
anomalies and features of Townes-Brocks syndrome
A. Christians1, E. Kesdiren1, I. Hennies2, A. D. Hofmann3,
M. Trowe4, F. Brand1,H. Martens1*, I. A. Kindem5,Z .
Gucev6, M. Zirngibl7, R. Geffers8, T. Seeman9, A. Kispert4,
H. Billing7, A. Bjerre5, V. Tasic6, D. Haffner2,J .
Dingemann3, R. G. Weber1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Department of Pediatric
Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,3Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,
4Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany,5Division of Pediatric and Adolescent
Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,6Med-
ical Faculty Skopje, University Children ’s Hospital, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,7Depart-
ment of Pediatric Nephrology, University Children ’s
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,8Genome Analy-
tics Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research, Braunschweig, Germany,9Department of Pedia-
trics, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
Less than 20% of patients with congenital anomalies of the
kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) carry variants in the
approximately 50 known CAKUT genes, indicating that
this disorder is genetically highly heterogeneous. To iden-tify novel genes associated with CAKUT, we applied
whole-exome sequencing to a patient with renal anomalies,
i.e. left-sided agenesis and right-sided duplex, who also hadextrarenal abnormalities, e.g. anorectal and sacral mal-
formation, thus detecting a rare heterozygous missense
variant in the dishevelled binding antagonist of beta catenin
1(DACT1 ) gene. As combined renal, anorectal, and skeletal
defects, features overlapping Townes-Brocks syndrome,were previously described in a family carrying a DACT1
nonsense variant and in Dact1 -deﬁcient mice, the identi ﬁed
DACT1 variant was presumed causative in our patient.
Therefore, we aimed to determine the frequency of DACT1
variants in patients with renal anomalies. Taken together,
we identi ﬁed seven maternally inherited, heterozygous,
likely pathogenic DACT1 missense variants in 8 of 209
families (3.8%) with renal agenesis/dysplasia/hypoplasia
and other features of Townes-Brocks syndrome. Immuno-precipitation revealed reduced dishevelled segment polarity
protein 2 (DVL2) binding capacity of mutant DACT1. By
RNA in situ hybridization on murine embryo sections,Dact1 expression was detected in different organs including
anal canal and kidney, whereby renal expression wasconﬁned to the mesenchyme of ureter, kidney capsule,
cortical and medullary stroma. CRISPR/Cas9-derived
Dact1 -deﬁcient murine inner medullary collecting duct cells
showed impaired tubule formation. Altogether, we demon-
strate a statistically signi ﬁcant overrepresentation of rare
heterozygous hypomorphic DACT1 variants in patients with
renal anomalies versus controls. (DFG grant no. KO5614/2-
1)
A. Christians: None. E. Kesdiren: None. I. Hennies:
None. A. D. Hofmann: None. M. Trowe: None. F. Brand:
None. H. Martens: None. I. A. Kindem: None. Z. Gucev:
None. M. Zirngibl: None. R. Geffers: None. T. Seeman:None. A. Kispert: None. H. Billing: None. A. Bjerre: None.
V. Tasic: None. D. Haffner: None. J. Dingemann: None. R.
G. Weber: None.
C14.3
Loss of UNC45A causes microvillus inclusion disease-
like by impairing myosin-dependent epithelialmorphogenesis
R. Duclaux-Loras
1, F. Charbit-Henrion1, C. Lebreton1,O .
Nicolle2, M. Rabant3, C. Guerrera4, A. Fabre5, L. Faivre6,
G. Michaux2, H. Uligh7, F. Ruemmele3, N. Cerf-
Bensussan1,M. Parlato1*
1Institut Imagine, Paris, France,2CNRS, UMR6290, Institut
de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France,
3Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterol-
ogy, Paris, France,4Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker,
Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de
Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris,
France,5Service de pédiatrie multidisciplinaire, Hôpital de
la Timone Enfants, APHM, Marseille, France,6Centre de
Génétique, Hôpital d ’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,
7Department of Pediatrics, University of Oxford; Transla-
tional Gastroenterology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom
Introduction: Congenital diarrhea disorders (CDDs) are
rare inherited diseases characterized by chronic enteropathy
starting early in life. Recently, mutations in UNC45A ,
coding for a myosins- co-chaperone, have been associated
with a complex syndrome combining cholestasis, diarrhea,
deafness and bone fragility. We aimed to investigate thepathomechanism underlying the intestinal defect in
UNC45A de ﬁcient patients.
Materials and Methods: We investigated 4 unrelated
patients with history of intestinal failure due to congenital
diarrhea. We used next generation sequencing to uncover
the underlying gene defect and immunohistochemistry/electron microscopy to analyse intestinal tissue. UNC45A76 J. del Picchia−/−CaCo2 cells were generated by CRISPR/Cas9 editing
and cultured in matrigel to form cysts. UNC45A inter-
actome was investigated by mass spectrometry. Organoids
were generated from controls and from patients using
blood-derived pluripotent stem cells.
Results: Exome analysis identi ﬁed biallelic mutations in
UNC45A in all patients. Abnormal PAS and CD10
accumulation throughout the subapical cytoplasm was
found on patient duodenal biopsies. Microvesicles andmicrovilli inclusions were associated with microvillous
atrophy. UNC45A
−/−CaCo2 cells developed into multilu-
mens-cysts, indicating a defect in epithelial morphogenesis.Mass spectrometry con ﬁrmed MYO5B as UNC45A-HSP90
client and expanded the number of non-muscle myosins-II,
dependent on UNC45A for proper folding and maturation.Patient ‘s organoids displayed features of microvillus
inclusion disease.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed 6 novel mutations in
UNC45A causative of a complex syndrome including
congenital diarrhea. EM on patient derived organoids
recapitulates the defects of morphology and polarizationobserved in patient ’s biopsies. Overall, our results under-
score the important role of UNC45A in shaping epithelial
morphogenesis in the gut.
R. Duclaux-Loras: None. F. Charbit-Henrion: None. C.
Lebreton: None. O. Nicolle: None. M. Rabant: None. C.
Guerrera: None. A. Fabre: None. L. Faivre: None. G.Michaux: None. H. Uligh: None. F. Ruemmele: None. N.
Cerf-Bensussan: None. M. Parlato: None.
C14.4
A comprehensive exome study of the genetic architec-
ture of asthma reveals a putative novel patient subgroup
deﬁned by ﬁlaggrin truncating variants
S. R. Cameron-Christie
1*, H. Olsson2, A. Mackay2,Q .
Wang3, M. Hühn2, D. Muthas2, G. Lassi1, J. Lindgren4,G .
Povysil5, D. B. Goldstein5, G. Bel ﬁeld4, I. Dillmann4,Y .
Ohne6, S. Cohen7, S. Young8, A. Platt2, S. Petrovski1
1Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and
Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge,United Kingdom,
2Translational Science and Experimental
Medicine, Research and Early Development, Respiratory,
Inﬂammation and Autoimmune (RIA), R&D BioPharma-
ceuticals, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK, Gothenburg,
Sweden,3Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Med-
icine and Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca,Waltham, MA, United States,
4Translational Genomics,
Discovery Sciences, R&D BioPharmaceuticals, AstraZe-
neca, Gothenburg, Sweden, Gothenburg, Sweden,5Institute
for Genomic Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, New York, New York, New York, NY, United States,6Bioscience Asthma, Research and Early Development,
Respiratory, In ﬂammation and Autoimmune (RIA), Bio-
Pharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden,
7Bioscience Asthma, Research and Early Development,
Respiratory, In ﬂammation and Autoimmune (RIA), Bio-
Pharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UnitedKingdom,
8Precision Medicine, Oncology R&D, AstraZe-
neca, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Asthma is a highly heterogenous disease with considerable
unmet need. Understanding the genetic architecture may
enable a precision medicine approach. We studied exome data
from 24,584 asthma cases from the UKBiobank (UKB) andSAGA, an AstraZeneca study. Controls were 120,557 UKB
participants with FEV/FVC ratio >70%, without respiratory
illness. In addition to all-comer asthma (n =24,584), we stu-
died familial (n =1,065) and early-onset (age<18yrs, n =
5,962) asthma subsets. Gene- and variant-level analyses iden-
tiﬁed statistically signi ﬁcant signals from moderate-to-common
protein-truncating variants (PTVs), including in FLG,w h i c h
has previously been associated with asthma. Asthma risk was
signiﬁcantly increased not only by common FLG PTVs, but
also the collection of rare-to-private FLG PTVs. This signal
was driven by early onset asthma, with no measurable impact
on diagnoses >18 years old (p =0.91, OR =1.00). Risk was
strongest among atopic asthma (diagnoses<18 y.o., p =
1.13 × 10
−37,O R=2.32), but remained signi ﬁcant after cor-
recting for allergies and related phenotypes (p =1.26 × 10−13,
OR=1.4). Finally, we found FLG-associated asthma does not
correlate with eosinophil levels. In addition, a single splice
variant in IL33, rs146597587-C, previously proposed as a
protective, loss-of-function PTV ( Smith D (2017) PLoS
Genet ), was replicated as protective (p =8.0 × 10−10,O R=
0.58). We further observed signi ﬁcantly lower carrier rates of
this splice-variant among early-onset asthmatics (0.36%)
compared to later onset (0.61%) (Mann-Whitney p =0.001).
While we did not ﬁnd evidence of novel asthma genes among
current samples, we did identify a putative novel patient sub-
group from the recognised FLG asthma loci, namely FLG
PTV carriers, whose prevalence in UKB is 12%.
S. R. Cameron-Christie: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. H. Olsson: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. A. Mackay: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. Q.
Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. M. Hühn: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. D. Muthas: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. G. Lassi: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. J.
Lindgren: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. G. Povysil: None. D. B. Goldstein: F.Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZeneca. G. Bel-
ﬁeld: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 77AstraZeneca. I. Dillmann: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. Y. Ohne: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Cohen: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Young:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
A. Platt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
C14.5
Random plasma glucose GWAS in 479,678 individuals:
genetic relationships with impaired lung function and
intestinal health
M. A. Kaakinen1,2*, L. Jiang2,3, A. Ulrich2, L. Zudina1,2,Z .
Balkhiyarova1,2, P. Todorov4, T. H. Pers4, V. Lagou5,I .
Prokopenko1,2, MAGIC Investigators
1University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom,2Imper-
ial College London, London, United Kingdom,3The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia,4University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,5VIB Center for
Brain & Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium
Fasting glucose and 2-hour post-prandial glucose are used
as the gold standard tests for diagnosing type 2 diabetes
(T2D). High non-fasting i.e. random plasma glucose (RG)
levels may also indicate abnormal glucose homeostasis. Wesought to characterise the genetic architecture of RG and its
genetic relationships with other traits by performing a
genome-wide association study of 8.1M SNPs withMAF>1% for RG in non-diabetic individuals from 17
European studies, including UK Biobank, adjusted for i)
age, sex, population structure (N =479,678) and ii) addi-
tionally for time since last meal (N =438,678). We eval-
uated the results from each model and their combination.
The LD score regression was used to evaluate the geneticcorrelation between RG and other traits. We identi ﬁed
156 signals at 117 loci associated with RG at genome-wide
signiﬁcance ( P<5×1 0
−8), including 38 novel signals for
glycaemic traits and T2D. These include ﬁve common
coding variants within GCKR ,TET2 ,RREB1 ,NMT1 and
WIPI1 , and three low-frequency nonsynonymous variants
within EDEM3 ,NEUROD1 and GLP1R genes. The LD
score regression revealed signi ﬁcant genetic correlations
between RG and glycaemic/obesity traits and T2D, as wellas a novel inverse genetic correlation with forced vital
capacity (r
g=−0.088, SE =0.022, P=6.04 × 10−5). The
latter ﬁnding brings molecular clues to the observational
studies showing an impairment in lung function in indivi-
duals with T2D. DEPICT analysis of large-scale humanexpression data showed signi ﬁcant enrichment of genes at
RG-associations in ileum and pancreas, indicating a role of
the digestive tract in RG level regulation.
Funding: H2020-SC1-HBC-28-2019-LONGITOOLS,
WCRF-2017/1641.
M. A. Kaakinen: None. L. Jiang: None. A. Ulrich: None.
L. Zudina: None. Z. Balkhiyarova: None. P. Todorov: None.
T. H. Pers: None. V. Lagou: None. I. Prokopenko: None.
C14.6
A complementary study approach unravels novel
players in the pathoetiology of Hirschsprung ‘s disease
T. Mederer1,S. Schmitteckert1*, J. Volz1, C. Martinez1,2,R .
Röth1,3, T. Thumberger4, V. Eckstein5, J. Scheuerer6,C .
Thöni6, F. Lasitschka6, L. Carstensen7, P. Günther7,S .
Holland-Cunz8, R. Hofstra9, E. Brosens9, D. Schriemer10,I .
Ceccherini11, M. Rusmini11, J. Tilghman12, B. Luzón-
Toro13,14, A. Torroglosa13,14, S. Borrego13,14, C. Szeman
Tang15, M. Garcia-Barcelo15, P. Tam15, N. Paramasivam16,
M. Bewerunge-Hudler17, C. de la Torre18, N. Gretz18,G .
Rappold1,19, P. Romero7, B. Niesler1,3,19
1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany,2Lleida Institute
for Biomedical Research Dr. Pifarré Foundation, Lleida,
Spain,3nCounter Core Facility, Department of Human
Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Hei-delberg, Germany,
4Center for Organismal Studies, Heidel-
berg University, Heidelberg, Germany,5FACS Core
Facility, Campus Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,6Insti-
tute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidel-
berg, Germany,7Pediatric Surgery Division, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany,8Pediatric
Surgery, University Children ’s Hospital, Basel, Switzer-
land,9Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,10Department of
Neuroscience, University Medical Center, Groningen,
Netherlands,11UOSD Genetica e Genomica delle Malattie
Rare, IRCCS, Instituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,
12Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, UnitedStates,
13Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics
and Reproduction, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS),
University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University ofSeville, Seville, Spain,
14Centre for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville, Spain,
15Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China,16Divi-
sion of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany,17Genomics and78 J. del PicchiaProteomic Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany,18Center of Medical Research,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany,19Inter-
disciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
Introduction: Hirschsprung ’s disease (HSCR, OMIM
142623) involves congenital intestinal obstruction caused
by dysfunction of neural crest cells and their progeny during
enteric nervous system (ENS) development. HSCR is amultifactorial disorder and risk genes have only been
identi ﬁed in a minority of cases. Due to its complex genetic
architecture, de ﬁning novel disease-relevant gene variants
remains challenging.
Material and Methods: To identify candidate genes,
whole exome sequencing (WES) of two HSCR patients andtheir non-affected parents was performed. To examine their
disease-causing relevance, a complementary study approach
has been established. This included transcriptome analysisof murine embryonic ENS-relevant tissues, in silico
network analyses, expression analyses as well as functional
assays assessing migration, differentiation, proliferation andcell survival capability of genome-edited cell clones.
Results: WES data were nailed down to four novel
HSCR candidate genes: ATP7A ,SREBF1 ,ABCD1 and
PIAS2 . Further rare variants in these genes were identi ﬁed
in additional HSCR patients, indicating disease relevance.
In addition, transcriptomics revealed that these genes areexpressed in embryonic and fetal gastrointestinal tissues.
Functional analyses using candidate gene-speci ﬁc, neuro-
nal-like CRISPR/Cas9-edited knockout cell clones demon-strated impaired differentiation, proliferation and/or cell
survival capacity.
Conclusions: Our approach identi ﬁed and validated
candidate HSCR genes and provided further insight into
underlying pathomechanisms of HSCR.
Major Funding: This study was supported by the
Heidelberg Stiftung Chirurgie, the Heinz and Heide Dürr
Stiftung and the Dres. Majic/Majic Schlez Stiftung.
T. Mederer: None. S. Schmitteckert: None. J. Volz: None.
C. Martinez: None. R. Röth: None. T. Thumberger: None.
V. Eckstein: None. J. Scheuerer: None. C. Thöni: None. F.Lasitschka: None. L. Carstensen: None. P. Günther: None.
S. Holland-Cunz: None. R. Hofstra: None. E. Brosens:
None. D. Schriemer: None. I. Ceccherini: None. M.Rusmini: None. J. Tilghman: None. B. Luzón-Toro: None.
A. Torroglosa: None. S. Borrego: None. C. Szeman Tang:
None. M. Garcia-Barcelo: None. P. Tam: None. N.Paramasivam: None. M. Bewerunge-Hudler: None. C. de
la Torre: None. N. Gretz: None. G. Rappold: None. P.
Romero: None. B. Niesler: None.C15 Best Posters 1
C15.01
START: The STudy of Assisted Reproductive
Technologies
R. Lyle
1*, C. Page2, Y. Lee2, K. L. Haftorn2, A. Jugessur2,J .
Bohlin2, H. K. Gjessing2, P. Magnus2, S. Håberg2
1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,2Norwegian
Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway
In the last few decades there have been marked changes in
patterns of fertility and family structure in rich countries.
These include increasing age at childbirth, a lower number
of children born to each woman or man, greater use ofassisted reproductive technology (ART), higher frequency
of family disruptions and increasingly complex family
structures. The Centre for Fertility and Health (CeFH;www.cefh.no ) consists of a multidisciplinary research team
of epidemiologists, geneticists, demographers, sociologists
and economists with research themes including fertilityproblems and intergenerational transmission of health. The
START project aims to understand the causes and health
consequences of subfertility and how genetic in ﬂuences and
epigenetic differences are associated with subfertility and
Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART). ART may
introduce epigenetic changes in the embryo since the pro-cedures are during a period of extensive epigenetic repat-
terning. It is unknown which genes may be affected and the
potential health consequences for the children. START usesdata from the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort
Study (MoBa; https://www.fhi.no/en/studies/moba/ ), which
follows more than 110 000 children and their parents. Wehave collected genetic and epigenetic data from 1000 trios
with children born after ART, and 1000 trios from naturally
conceived children analyzed with the Illumina EPIC array
and the Illumina HumanCoreExome chip. Investigations are
focussed on the effect of ART treatment on imprinted genesand fertility genes, and how epigenetic age acceleration
interacts with fertility and ART treatment. Our results show
DNA methylation changes due to both parental subfertilityand ART procedures.
R. Lyle: None. C. Page: None. Y. Lee: None. K. L.
Haftorn: None. A. Jugessur: None. J. Bohlin: None. H. K.Gjessing: None. P. Magnus: None. S. Håberg: None.
C15.02
Evaluating diagnostic challenges with ABCA4-relatedretinal disease - experience with a 7500 IRD patient
cohort sent for genetic diagnosticsAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 79J. Känsäkoski*, K. Kämpjärvi, S. Tuupanen, K. Wells, L.
Sarantaus, P. von Nandelstadh, K. Merkkiniemi, H.
Västinsalo, E. Mårtensson, R. Perez Carro, E. Sankila, J.
W. Koskenvuo, S. Myllykangas, T. Alastalo
Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland
Introduction: ABCA4 variants cause autosomal recessive
Stargardt disease (STGD1), the most prevalent hereditary
macular disease. Major challenges in STGD1 moleculardiagnostics include (i) non-coding variants typically not
targeted by available genetic tests (ii) copy number variants
(CNV) missed by standard testing, and (iii) interpretationchallenges with common hypomorphic variants. We eval-
uated the signi ﬁcance of challenging ABCA4 variants and
their contribution to STGD1 diagnostic yield in a cohort ofinherited retinal disease (IRD) patients.
Materials and Methods: We included 7500 IRD patients
tested at a CLIA laboratory between 2017 and 2019.Sequencing analysis, including established non-coding
ABCA4 variants and high resolution CNV detection, was
done by using in-house developed and validated NGSplatform.
Results: Two disease-causing ABCA4 variants were
identi ﬁed in 663 patients, of which 20 (20/663; 3%) had an
established non-coding variant and 11 (11/663; 1.5%) a
CNV. In 192 patients with clinically diagnosed ABCA4-
related disease, only one disease-causing variant wasidenti ﬁed. Among those, the hypomorphic allele ABCA4
c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile) was identi ﬁed in 109 patients
(109/192: 57%), with a signi ﬁcantly increased allele
frequency (126/384 =0.328) compared to controls in
gnomAD (AF 11928/282712 =0.042) (OR: 11.087, 95%
CI: 8.953-13.73, p < 0.001). The median age at genetictesting among the 109 patients was 56 years, which was
signiﬁcantly higher compared to 37 years among the 663
patients with two disease-causing variants.
Conclusions: Non-coding variants and CNVs contribute
signiﬁcantly to diagnostic yield in ABCA4-related disease.
Our large dataset supports the important role of the
hypomorphic allele ABCA4 c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile)
in diagnostics of late-onset STGD1.
J. Känsäkoski: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S.
Tuupanen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Sarantaus: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. P. von Nandelstadh: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Merkkiniemi:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. H. Västinsalo: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Mårtensson: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. R.
Perez Carro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. W. Kosken-
vuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual
property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Blueprint
Genetics.
C15.03
Insights into the retinal function of ciliopathy proteinsgained through zebra ﬁsh models
M. Masek, R. Bachmann-Gagescu
*
University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland
Ciliopathies are disorders caused by dysfunction of primary
cilia, ubiquitous organelles involved in signal transduction.
In retinal photoreceptors (PRs), light sensation occurs in theouter segments (OSs), which represent highly specialized
ciliary compartments. Consequently, retinal disease is a
common manifestation in ciliopathy patients. Our efforts toelucidate the molecular functions of ciliopathy proteins rely
on zebra ﬁsh mutants in genes associated with Joubert syn-
drome, an iconic ciliopathy associated with retinal diseasein 25% of patients. We focus on genes that encode proteins
participating in distinct ciliary complexes: Cc2d2a at the
transition zone, representing the gate to the cilium, or Tal-pid3/KIAA0586 at the basal body (BB), anchoring the
cilium in the cell. While both mutants display decreased
visual function, we identify distinct ultra-structural pheno-types indicating speci ﬁc roles for each protein in primary
cilium function. We ﬁnd that Cc2d2a organizes the vesicle
fusion machinery at the periciliary margin and provides adocking point for incoming vesicles through a chain of
interactions linking CC2D2A to NINL-MICAL3-RAB8. In
contrast, Talpid3 is involved in BB docking and ciliogen-esis upstream of Rab8a activation. Retina-speci ﬁc tran-
scriptomics identi ﬁes both shared and distinct effects on
gene transcription: while transcription of phototransductiongenes is decreased in both mutants, likely as a secondary
effect, we observe downregulation of the BBSome, a multi-
protein complex associated with the ciliopathy Bardet-Biedlsyndrome, only in talpid3 mutants, while Nek8 is80 J. del Picchiaupregulated only in cc2d2a mutants. In conclusion, our
ﬁndings demonstrate how mutations in genes causing the
same human disorder result in similar phenotypes through
distinct mechanisms.
M. Masek: None. R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None.
C15.04
Functional characterization of a Xenopus tropicalis
knockout and a human cellular model of RCBTB1-
associated inherited retinal disease shows involvement ofRCBTB1 in the cellular response to oxidative stress
M. Carron
1,2*, T. Naert1, G. Ascari2, S. Demuynck1,T .V a n
Nieuwenhuyzen1, T. Rosseel2, D. Priem3,4, A. Kremer4,H .
Van Landeghem1, S. Hoogstoel2, F. Coppieters2,C .
Guérin5, K. Vleminckx1, E. De Baere2
1Ghent University, Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent,
Belgium,2Ghent University, Center for Medical Genetics
and Dept of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium,
3Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,4VIB-UGent Center
for In ﬂammation Research, Ghent, Belgium,5VIB Bioima-
ging Core, Ghent, Belgium
Introduction: The function of RCBTB1, recently impli-
cated in syndromic and non-syndromic inherited retinal
disease (IRD), remains unknown so far. Patients with
biallelic missense variants in RCBTB1 display diverse IRDphenotypes such as retinitis pigmentosa. Here, we tested the
hypothesis that RCBTB1 is involved in NRF2-regulated
protection against reactive oxygen species in the eye, morespeciﬁcally in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE).
Materials and Methods: A Xenopus tropicalis rcbtb1-/-
knockout (KO) was generated using CRISPR/Cas9 editing.Histology and three-dimensional electron microscopy was
performed on retinas of rcbtb1-/- frogs. RNA-seq analysis
was performed on RCBTB1-mutated patients ’lymphocytes,
treated with H2O2, as well as on embryos from the rcbtb1-/-
KOs treated with CdCl2. An RCBTB1 knockdown cell line
was generated in ARPE-19 cells and functional assays ( ﬂow
cytometry, MTT-assay, cell death kinetics) assessed the
consequences of RCBTB1 loss-of-function.
Results: Rcbtb1-/- animals showed changes in the RPE,
similar to observations in human cases, including loss of
apical-basal cell polarity, cuboidal cell morphology,
spreading of the pigment granules and vacuolisation.NRF2 downstream targets and several metallothioneins
were found to be differentially expressed, both in the KO
and cellular models. Functional assays in ARPE-19 cellsrevealed that RCBTB1 depletion affects cellular responses
to external insults of oxidative stress.
Conclusion: We showed that the Xenopus tropicalis
rcbtb1-/- KO recapitulates the human IRD phenotype. Bothin vivo and in vitro functional data show involvement of
RCBTB1 in the cellular response to oxidative stress. This
provides insight into the mechanism underlying RCBTB1-
associated IRD and uncovers potential therapeutic
opportunities.
Funding: FWO/1802220N; FWO/1S52818N; BOF15/
GOA/011; BOF20/GOA/023.
M. Carron: None. T. Naert: None. G. Ascari: None. S.
Demuynck: None. T. Van Nieuwenhuyzen: None. T. Rosseel:None. D. Priem: None. A. Kremer: None. H. Van Land-
eghem: None. S. Hoogstoel: None. F. Coppieters: None. C.
Guérin: None. K. Vleminckx: None. E. De Baere: None.
C15.05
Loss of function of RIMS2, a synaptic membrane
exocytosis gene, causes a new phenotype characterizedby congenital cone-rod synaptic disease associated with
neurodevelopmental and pancreatic involvement
S. Mechaussier
1*, B. Almoallem2, C. Zeitz3, K. Van Schil2,
L. Jeddawi4, J. Van Dorpe5, C. Condroyer3, O. Pelle6,M .
Polak7, N. Boddaert8, N. Bahi-Buisson9, M. Cavallin10,J .
Bacquet11, A. Mouallem-Bézière11, O. Zambrowski11,12,J .
Sahel3,13,14, I. Audo3,14,15, J. Kaplan1,11, J. Rozet1,E .D e
Baere2, I. Perrault1
1Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO),
INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagineand Paris University, Paris, France,
2Center for Medical
Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium,3Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS,
Institut de la Vision, Paris, France,4Pediatric Ophthalmol-
ogy Division, Dhahran Eye Specialist Hospital, Dharan,
Saudi Arabia,5Department of Pathology, Ghent University
and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,6Cell
Sorting Facility, INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic
Diseases, Imagine and Paris University, Paris, France,
7Endocrinology, Gynecology and Pediatric Diabetology
Department, University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades,Paris, France,
8Department of Pediatric Radiology, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris University, Paris, France,
9Pediatric Neurology Department, University Hospital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,10Laboratory of
Embryology and genetics of human malformation, INSERM
UMR1163, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine and ParisUniversity, Paris, France,
11Service d ’Ophtalmologie,
Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil (CHIC),
Créteil, France,12Ophthalmology Department, University
Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,
13Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Pitts-
burgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States,
14Centre Hospitalier National d ’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-
Vingts, INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, Paris, France,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 8115Institute of Ophthalmology, University College of London,
London, United Kingdom
Introduction : Anomalies in pre- and post-synaptic trans-
mission of visual information from photoreceptors to
bipolar cells are responsible for stationary congenital night
blindness (CSNB). Pre-synaptic disorders, characterized bycongenital nystagmus and photophobia, night blindness, are
known as cone-rod synaptic disorder (CRSD) can be mis-
taken for Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). Full- ﬁeld
electroretinogram is crucial for the differential diagnosis,
but it can be dif ﬁcult to perform in young children. Here, we
report (i) the identi ﬁcation of biallelic mutations in the
RIMS2 gene encoding a pre-synaptic protein not yet asso-
ciated with human diseases in 3/4 families initially referred
for LCA and (ii) the diagnostic adjustment to CRSD withvariable associated alteration including autistic behavior
and insulinopathy.
Methods : Exome sequencing combined with targeted
RIMS2 testing were performed in 46 prescreened patients
with CRSD and 94 with LCA. Biallelic RIMS2-mutated
cases underwent ophthalmologic, neurologic and metabolicassessment. RIMS2 immunostaining was performed on
human retina, brain and pancreas. Nonsense variants were
functionally investigated in mammalian cells. Results.Biallelic RIMS2 sequence variants were found in four
unrelated families. RIMS2, a protein regulating synaptic
membrane exocytosis localizes in the human retinal outerplexiform layer, Purkinje cells and pancreatic islets. Apart
from CRSD, neurodevelopmental disease was observed in
all cases, and abnormal glucose homeostasis in the eldestpatient.?Nonsense variants lead to truncated RIMS2 and
decreased insulin secretion in mammalian cells.
Conclusion : This is the ﬁrst report of syndromic CRSD
with neurodevelopmental or pancreatic involvement due to
RIMS2 loss-of-function. The disease presentation is con-
sistent with the localization and function of RIMS2.
S. Mechaussier: None. B. Almoallem: None. C. Zeitz:
None. K. Van Schil: None. L. Jeddawi: None. J. VanDorpe: None. C. Condroyer: None. O. Pelle: None. M.
Polak: None. N. Boddaert: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None.
M. Cavallin: None. J. Bacquet: None. A. Mouallem-Bézière: None. O. Zambrowski: None. J. Sahel: None. I.
Audo: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. E. De Baere:
None. I. Perrault: None.
C15.06
Genetic and molecular analysis of urinary magnesium
concentration in Scottish and Croatian populations
C. B. Joseph
1*, C. M. Stanton1, C. Drake1, T. S. Boutin1,J .
F. Wilson2, O. Polasek3, O. Devuyst4, T. Hurd1,C .
Hayward11MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom,2Centre for Global Health Research,
Usher Institute for Population Health Sciences and
Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom,3Split Medical School, Split, Croatia,4Institute of
Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Magnesium is the second most abundant bivalent cation in
the body and is essential for many cellular processes. Renalmagnesium handling plays an important role in maintaining
magnesium homeostasis, however the exact biological
mechanisms remain unclear. A recent genome-wide asso-ciation study (GWAS) identi ﬁed an association between
urinary magnesium concentration (uMg) and variants in the
ARL15 gene on chromosome 5. ARL15 encodes a GTP-binding protein that regulates the magnesium transporter
channel TRPM6, and other proteins involved in magnesium
homeostasis in physiologically relevant cell lines. Weconducted meta-analyses for urinary magnesium in 11, 617
individuals from Scottish and Croatian populations to
determine possible genes involved in these traits. Massspectrometry analysis was conducted to determine inter-
actors of Arl15 and in-vitro knockout models of Arl15 was
established using CRISPR-Cas9. The top SNP associatedwith uMg in our meta-analyses lies within a transcription
factor binding site in an enhancer region of ARL15. Indi-
viduals homozygous for the alternate allele of rs35931 haslower urinary magnesium levels compared to individuals
with the homozygous reference allele. Arl15 interacts with
magnesium transporters within the distal convoluted tubulesegment of the kidneys. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that homo-
zygous deletion of Arl15 is lethal at the organismal level.
We hypothesise that the variant found affects the expressionof ARL15, which, in turn modulates magnesium transport
by regulating magnesium transporters. We are performing
further functional studies to elucidate the role ARL15 plays
in magnesium homeostasis both in vitro and in vivo.
C. B. Joseph: None. C. M. Stanton: None. C. Drake:
None. T. S. Boutin: None. J. F. Wilson: None. O. Polasek:
None. O. Devuyst: None. T. Hurd: None. C.
Hayward: None.
C15.08
RNA-seq approach to detect splicing alterations in
primary ciliary dyskinesia and non-CF bronchiectasis
J. Legebeke
1*, G. Wheway1, H. Wai1, W. Walker1,2,J .S .
Lucas1,2, D. Baralle1,2
1University of Southampton, Southampton, United King-
dom,2University Hospital Southampton, Southampton,
United Kingdom82 J. del PicchiaMutations that cause PCD have been reported in >40 genes.
Most cases are recessive, caused by biallelic changes in
these genes. These account for around 70% of cases, sug-
gesting that additional genes, and non-coding or synon-
ymous changes in known genes, remain to be identi ﬁed.
Non-CF bronchiectasis is a heterogeneous group of dis-orders and adults may need to be investigated for PCD.
Here we present an optimised pipeline for RNA analysis
from nasal brushings taken from the inferior turbinate ofpatients with suspected PCD or non-CF bronchiectasis. We
present analysis pipelines to investigate differences in gene
expression, alternative splicing and the identi ﬁcation of
deleterious splicing events. We developed gene-neutral and
gene-speci ﬁc analysis protocols, from both nasal brushings
stored in RNA-later and cells from nasal brushings culturedat the air-liquid interface (ALI). We present this RNA-seq
approach as a particularly useful diagnostic tool to inves-
tigate patients in whom a single pathogenic variant has beenidenti ﬁed in a known PCD gene and where we suspect an
alteration in splicing of the same gene due to a second
intronic or synonymous / non-synonymous exonic variant.This represents a step towards using RNA analysis for
increasing diagnostic yield in rare recessive respiratory
disease. JL, DB and HT are supported by a NIHR ResearchProfessorship to DB (RP- 2016-07-011). JL is further sup-
ported by Southampton NIHR BRC. GW is funded by a
Wellcome Trust Seed Award in Science (Grant No. 204378/Z/16/Z) and a University of Southampton Faculty of Med-
icine Research Management Committee research grant.
G. Wheway: None. H. Wai: None. W. Walker: None. J.
S. Lucas: None. D. Baralle: None.
C15.09
Combined exome/genome sequencing with in-housevariant data repository mining con ﬁrm USP53 as a
causal gene for intrahepatic cholestasis
S. Alawbathani
1*, M. Rocha1, H. Arshad Cheema2,R .
Boustany3, S. Nampoothiri4, A. Alswaid5, N. El Koofy6,V .
Karageorgou1, I. Hövel1, S. Khan1, C. Beetz1, A. Rolfs1,P .
Bauer1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1
1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany,2Children ’s Hospital
and Institute of Child Health, Lahore, Pakistan,3AUBMC
American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut,Lebanon,
4Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala,
India,5King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riadh, Saudi Arabia,
6Abu El Reesh Children ’s Hospital, Cairo, Egypt
Cholestatic liver disease is a signi ﬁcant cause of morbidity
and mortality in the paediatric population, starting in the
early postnatal life. Severity is variable, from benign idio-pathic neonatal hepatitis to intrahepatic cholestasis leadingto liver failure and transplant. There are several genes
described for different genetic diseases that lead to choles-
tasis. USP53 has been recently suggested as a candidate
gene for paediatric intrahepatic cholestasis based on one
family with two affected siblings. Interestingly, USP53
interacts with tight junction protein 2 (TJP2) for whichpathogenic variants are known to cause progressive familial
intrahepatic cholestasis. To date, the USP53 gene has not
been linked to an OMIM phenotype. By combining exome/genome sequencing and mining our in-house variant data-
base we identi ﬁedﬁve patients from unrelated families. All
affected individuals display a similar phenotype, mainlyincluding early onset intrahepatic cholestasis. Moreover,
one family showed hearing loss as an additional phenotype.
All patients were homozygotes for different loss-of-functionvariants in the USP53 gene. USP53 (ubiquitin speci ﬁc
peptidase 53) is a tight junction-associated protein that is
known to involve in the survival of auditory hair cells andhearing. Our results con ﬁrm USP53 as a novel gene for
autosomal recessive intrahepatic cholestasis. Additionally,
we demonstrate that combined exome/genome sequencingand variant database mining is an effective approach to
discover and con ﬁrm novel genes related to human diseases.
This accelerate the process of gene discovery and ultimatelyshortens the diagnostic odyssey in rare genetic disorders.
S. Alawbathani: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. M. Rocha:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene
AG, Rostock, Germany. H. Arshad Cheema: None. R.
Boustany: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. A. Alswaid: None.N. El Koofy: None. V. Karageorgou: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Ger-
many. I. Hövel: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. S. Khan:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene
AG, Rostock, Germany. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany.
A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. P. Bauer: A. Employ-ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG,
Rostock, Germany. A. M. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Centogene AG, Rostock,
Germany.
C15.10
Elucidating the molecular mechanism underlying later-
ality defects
D. Antony
1,2,3*, A. Maver4, M. A. Deardorff5,6, L. Slagter2,
K. Wu2, Z. Bakey1,2, E. Gulec7, A. Gezdirici7, H. Brunner2,3,
M. Schmidts1,2,3Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 831Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University
Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany,2Genome Research
Division, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud UMC,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Radboud Institute of Molecular
Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands,4Centre for Mende-
lian Genomics, Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMCLjubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
5Department of Pediatrics
and Pathology, The Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, UnitedStates,
6Laboratory Medicine, The Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA,
United States,7University of Health Sciences, Kanuni
Sultan Suleyman training and research Hospital, Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey
Introduction: Laterality defects are rare developmental
disorders, occurring isolated or as part of complex syn-
dromes. Underlying cause is frequently dysfunction of
motile cilia causing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) andrarely, non-motile cilia defects or non-ciliary causes. In
addition to randomization of the left right body axis, PCD is
characterized by frequent respiratory infections andinfertility.
Methods: We used Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) to
delineate the underlying molecular cause in 37 mainlyconsanguineous families with laterality defects.
Results: We identi ﬁed causative variants in 32% with
majority of mutations detected in genes previouslyassociated with PCD, including 2 small homozygous
CNVs. Variants in non PCD genes, PKD1l1 and GJA1
were also detected. We further identi ﬁed homozygous
null mutations in two genes not previously associated
with human disease, MNS1 and DNAH9, both in cases
with situs inversus but little or no respiratory symptoms.Gene matcher database revea led two additional families
with biallelic DNAH9 mutation and immuno ﬂuorescence
analysis revealed complete absence of DNAH9 from
respiratory cilia of one affected while DNAH9 localises
to the distal half of cilia in controls. Further, we founddirect interaction of DNAH9 with the ODA docking
complex protein CCDC114 using Y2H screening
also interaction with DNAH5 and DNAI2 using co-Immunoprecipitation.
Conclusion: We could only solve a third of the laterality
cases genetically using WES, pointing towards non codingvariations, genetic mosaicism or epigenetic effects while we
were able to identify two novel human disease causing
genes, MNS1 and DNAH9, both causing laterality defectswith no or little respiratory disease. ERC: TreatCilia
D. Antony: None. A. Maver: None. M. A. Deardorff:
None. L. Slagter: None. K. Wu: None. Z. Bakey: None. E.Gulec: None. A. Gezdirici: None. H. Brunner: None. M.
Schmidts: None.C15.11
Biallelic missense variant in SVBP causes impaired
detyrosination of tubulin leading to complex hereditary
spastic paraplegia without microcephaly
E. Verdura
1,2*, N. Launay1,2, G. Fernandez Garcia de
Eulate3,4,5, J. Ondaro4,5, A. Schlüter1,2, M. Ruiz1,2,S .
Fourcade1,2, A. López de Munain3,4,5, A. Pujol1,2
1Neurometabolic Disease Lab, Institute of Neuropathology,
IDIBELL, L ’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain,
2Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases
(CIBERER U759), Ministry of Science, Innovation and
University, Madrid, Spain,3Department of Neurology,
Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain,
4Department of Neurosciences, Instituto Biodonostia, San
Sebastián, Spain,5Department of Neurosciences, School of
Medicine and Nursery, University of the Basque Country,UPV-EHU, San Sebastián, Spain
Introduction: Reversible C-Terminal detyrosination of
alpha-tubulin is crucial for microtubule organization, and isstrongly linked to neuronal differentiation. VASH1 and
VASH2, in complex with SVBP, have recently been iden-
tiﬁed as responsible for intracellular tubulin detyrosination
activity. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVBP have
much recently been described in patients showing intellec-
tual disability, microcephaly, ataxia and hypotonia.
Methods: All patients underwent accurate clinical
evaluation and provided informed consent. Whole-exome
sequencing (WES) was performed using patients ’DNA
samples, and segregation in relatives was con ﬁrmed by
Sanger sequencing. Primary ﬁbroblasts were generated from
patients ’skin biopsies, and cultured cells were incubated
with paclitaxel to analyze detyrosinated tubulin levels by
immuno ﬂuorescence and western blot. cDNA of VASH1
and wild-type/mutated forms of SVBP were cloned into a
pCMV-Tag4A vector, and then cotransfected into HeLa
cells for Western Blot analysis.
Results: We report two families with multiple patients
harboring an homozygous missense variant in SVBP (p.
Leu49Pro). Affected individuals show spastic paraplegia,peripheral neuropathy, verbal apraxia and intellectual
disability, in absence of microcephaly, broadening the
previously reported phenotype. In vitro experiments inpatients ’ﬁbroblasts demonstrate a signi ﬁcant loss of
VASH1/2 detyrosination activity and decreased SVBP
levels. Cotransfection studies show that SVBP p.Leu49Provariant reduces both VASH1 and SVBP soluble quantities
or their stability.
Conclusions: Our results expand the phenotypic spec-
trum of SVBP mutations to complex spastic paraplegia
without microcephaly, and con ﬁrm for the ﬁrst time that a84 J. del Picchiadetyrosination defect is observed in patients ’cell lines,
enabling functional testing of SVBP variants and extended
pathogenetic studies.
E. Verdura: None. N. Launay: None. G. Fernandez Garcia
de Eulate: None. J. Ondaro: None. A. Schlüter: None. M.
Ruiz: None. S. Fourcade: None. A. López de Munain:None. A. Pujol: None.
C15.13
Understanding the mechanism of RNF216-mediatedneurodegeneration: genetic, proteomic, neuropathologi-
cal and cellular approach
S. Roy
1,2*, P. Ervilha Pereira1,2, N. Schuermans1,2,A .
Sieben3,4, F. Thery5,6, E. Mondragon Rezola7,E .
Debackere1,2, P. LeBlanc1,2, M. Galas8, P. Santens3,4,F .
Impens5,6, E. Bogaert1,2, B. Dermaut1,2
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital,
Gent, Belgium,2Department of Biomolecular Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium,3Department of Neurology, Ghent Uni-
versity Hospital, Gent, Belgium,4Department of Head and
Skin, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium,5Department of Biomolecular
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent
University, Gent, Belgium,6Center for Medical Biotechnol-
ogy, VIB Ghent, Ghent, Belgium,7Department of Neurol-
ogy, University Hospital Donostia, Basque Country
University, Donostia, Spain,8Inserm, UMRS1172, JPARC,
Alzheimer & Tauopathies, Lille, France
Introduction: Neurodegenerative diseases frequently result
from mutations in ubiquitin-signaling genes. Our group wasamong the ﬁrst to report bi-allelic mutations in RNF216, an
E3 ubiquitin ligase, as the genetic cause of Gordon Holmes
syndrome (GHS), an adult-onset rare neurodegenerativedisorder characterized by ataxia, dementia and hypogona-
dotropic hypogonadism or Huntington-like disorder (HDL).
To date, >10 mutations in RNF216 have been reported notonly from the catalytic active site but also from N-terminal
part of the protein.
Objective: We intend to unravel the mechanisms by
w h i c hR N F 2 1 6m u t a t i o n sl e a dt oG H Sa n dH D L .W ea i m
to identify novel RNF216 mutations for genotype-
phenotype correlation studies, identify protein composi-tion of the pathological intranuclear inclusions, and
understand the cellular and biochemical function of the
RNF216 protein.
Methods: Frozen and ﬁxed brain material from patient
were used for generalized proteomics and neuropathological
studies and patient ﬁbroblast and Hela cells were used for
cellular studies.Results: We describe a Spanish patient with HDL having
2 novel compound heterozygous missense mutations in
RNF216. The study of brain material from one of the two
reported Belgian families demonstrated ubiquitin- and p62-
positive intranuclear inclusions, negative for Tau, ?-synu-
clein and TDP-43. Proteomics generated a list of candidategenes whose histopathological examination is currently
ongoing. Hela cells transfected with wildtype and mutant
RNF216 constructs revealed RNF216 and ubiquitin positiveintranuclear speckle-like bodies.
Conclusion: The identity of intranuclear bodies should be
further analyzed hoping to reveal molecular intricacieslinked to this neurodegenerative disease. Odysseus Type-I
(G0H8318N) FWO grant, Starting grant (01N10319) Ghent
University
S. Roy: None. P. Ervilha Pereira: None. N. Schuermans:
None. A. Sieben: None. F. Thery: None. E. Mondragon
Rezola: None. E. Debackere: None. P. LeBlanc: None. M.Galas: None. P. Santens: None. F. Impens: None. E.
Bogaert: None. B. Dermaut: None.
C15.14
The genotype-phenotype correlation of intragenic
RBFOX1 deletions.
M. A. Paczkowska
*, M. Geremek, B. Nowakowska
Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland
The RBFOX1 gene encodes a protein that regulates pre-
mRNA splicing in developmental genes expressed inmuscle, heart and neuronal cells. Intragenic deletions of
RBFOX1 gene have been identi ﬁed as susceptibility loci
and reported in patients with aggressive behavior, conductdisorder, epilepsy and autism spectrum disorder. Despite of
the documented correlation with neurodevelopmental dis-
orders, the deletions of RBFOX1 gene are often inheritedfrom the healthy parents, therefore the clinical interpretation
of CNVs within this gene is still unclear. We applied oli-
gonucleotide microarrays (OGT) in a cohort of 9430patients with neurodevelopment disorders and their healthy
relatives. The analyses of genomes were performed using
genome-wide array to accurate detection of copy numbervariation at the exon level in RBFOX1 gene. Chromosomal
analysis revealed intragenic RBFOX1 deletions in 36
patients. The differential distribution across the genebetween patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and
the control group allowed to distinguished evidently
pathogenic areas within the gene. Deletions of exones 1-2and 13-14 have high penetrance, and are mainly associated
with conduct disorder and autism spectrum disorder. While
the middle part of the gene and all intronic CNVS wereobserved with higher frequency in the control group,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 85suggesting their benign impact on the phenotype. The work
was supported by MINDDS - CA COST Action CA16210 -
Maximising Impact of research in NeuroDevelopmental
DisorderS
M. A. Paczkowska: None. M. Geremek: None. B.
Nowakowska: None.
C15.15
Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress contri-
bute to the phenotype of FOXP1 de ﬁciency
J. Wang*, H. Fröhlich, G. A. Rappold
Institut für Humangenetik, Heidelberg, Germany
Patients with FOXP1 haploinsuf ﬁciency present intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorder, severe speech and lan-
guage impairments as well as motor dysfunction. To unravel
the pathological mechanism underlying FOXP1 syndrome,we analysed Foxp1 +/- mice, which closely re ﬂect FOXP1
haploinsuf ﬁciency. We can show that Foxp1 +/- animals
exhibit behavioural de ﬁcits such as reduced neonatal ultra-
sonic vocalization, hyperactivity, anxiety and alterations in
spatial navigation and memory. Furthermore, they manifest
decreased exercise capacity and endurance. We also foundthat Foxp1 +/- animals display a reduced striatal expression of
proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics
(Pgc-1?, Tfam, Opa1 and Drp1), suggesting that mitochon-drial dysfunction may contribute to the symptoms. To address
this issue in more detail, we investigated mitochondria in WT
and Foxp1 +/- animals. We demonstrate that Foxp1 +/- striatal
neurons display a disrupted mitochondrial membrane poten-
tial. In addition, we detected an increased abundance of
reactive oxygen species, increased cytochrome C release aswell as lipid peroxidation in the Foxp1 +/- striatum. In sum-
mary, our results indicate mitochondrial dysfunction in mur-
ine Foxp1 de ﬁciency, suggesting that mitochondrial
dysfunction and increased oxidative stress may also con-
tribute to the de ﬁcits in FOXP1 Syndrome.
H. Fröhlich: None. G. A. Rappold: None.
C16 The Interplay of Law, Policy and Genomics
C16.1
Regulating Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis: A com-parison of international policy trends and perspectives
R. Isasi
*, M. E. Ginoza
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL,
United StatesPreimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a reproductive
technology which allows prospective parents to select their
future offspring based on genetic characteristics. During the
last decade, its regulation has followed mostly a linear path,
with incremental changes driven by scienti ﬁc advances or
by court driven alterations. But also, shift has beenprompted by greater societal uptake. No longer considered
an experimental practice, stakeholders have challenged the
status quo, recognizing that both technological and policydevelopments do not take place in a moral vacuum. They
have done so under the ﬂag of reproductive freedom,
equitable access and welfare considerations, amongst otherethical concerns. Despite the passage of time, the ubiquitous
presence of eugenics seems to constantly cast a shadow
over technologies that open the door for selecting thegenetic characteristics of a human offspring. For this reason,
we can predict that despite greater societal acceptance,
widening its permissibility criteria will remain contestedand a matter of continue social and policy debate. In this
presentation, we examine variations in policy approaches.
We draw on a representative sample of 19 countries (Aus-tralia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands,
Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, United Kingdom, andthe United States) to provide a global landscape of the
spectrum of policy and legislative approaches. We also
explore central socio-ethical and policy issues and con-tentious applications as for instance, permissibility criteria
(e.g. medical necessity), non-medical sex selection and
reproductive tourism. Finally, we further outline geneticcounseling requirements across policy approaches.
R. Isasi: None. M. E. Ginoza: None.
C16.2
Regulation of international direct-to-participant (DTP)
genomic research: results and recommendations from a
31-country study
M. Zawati
1*, M. Rothstein2, B. Knoppers1
1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,2University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States
International direct-to-participant (DTP) research promises
to greatly increase the number and diversity of participants
for research on genetic disorders. This phenomenon, inwhich participants recruited online supply biosamples or
provide access to electronic health records, may be thwarted
by prohibitions on research without ethics review in eachparticipating country. Though global recruitment is a pro-
mising research strategy, there is an urgent need to under-
stand the international regulatory landscape to foster a moreglobal DTP genomics research ecosystem. In this86 J. del Picchiapresentation, we set out to determine how DTP genomics
research is regulated in 31 countries. We engaged with local
experts in 31 countries, each of whom were asked to pre-
pare a report of 2,000 words in response to a 10-item
questionnaire on the regulation of DTP research. These
reports represent the ﬁrst systematic effort to assess the legal
environment for international DTP genomic research. We
will describe the results of this work, including the state of
regulation of international genomic research practices. Wefound, for example, that 17/31 experts reported it would be
unlawful for an international researcher to conduct DTP
research without local ethics approval. We will conclude byoutlining our team ’s recommendations on international DTP
genomic research, elaborating on themes of ethics equiva-
lence and the importance of incorporating cultural con-siderations in policy development. While there are
signiﬁcant legal barriers to expanding DTP genomics
research internationally, sound policy will maximize itspotential.
Funding information: National Institute of Health (NIH),
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI),Grant No. 5R01HG009914-02.
M. Zawati: None. M. Rothstein: None. B. Knoppers: None.
C16.3
Genomic sequencing capacity, data retention and
personal access to raw data in Europe
S. Narayanasamy
1*, V. Markina1, A. Thorogood2,A .
Blazkova1, M. Shabani3, B. M. Knoppers2, B. Prainsack4,R .
Koesters1
1Megeno S.A., Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg,2Centre of
Genomics and Policy, McGill University, Montreal, QC,Canada,
3Metamedic, Faculty of Law and Criminology,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,4Department of Political
Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Whole genome/exome sequencing (WGS/WES) has
become widely adopted in research and, more recently, inclinical settings. Many hope that the information obtained
from interpretation of this data will have medical bene ﬁts
for patients and - in some cases - also their biologicalrelatives. Because of the manifold possibilities to reuse
genomic data, enabling sequenced individuals to access
their own raw (uninterpreted) genomic data is a highlydebated issue. This paper reports some of the ﬁrst empirical
ﬁndings on personal genome access policies and practices.
We interviewed 39 respondents, working at 33 institutionsin 21 countries across Europe. These sequencing institutions
generate massive amounts of WGS/WES data and represent
varying organisational structures and operational models.Taken together, in total, these institutions have sequenced317,259 genomes and exomes to date. Most of the
sequencing institutions reported that they are able to store
raw genomic data in compliance with various national
regulations, although there was a lack of standardisation of
storage formats. Interviewees from 12 of the 33 institutions
included in our study reported that they had receivedrequests for personal access to raw genomic data from
sequenced individuals. In the absence of policies on how to
process such requests, these were decided on an ad hocbasis; in the end, at least 28 requests were granted, while
there were no reports of requests being rejected. Given the
rights, interests, and liabilities at stake, it is essential thatsequencing institutions adopt clear policies and processes
for raw genomic data retention and personal access.
S. Narayanasamy: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Megeno S. A. V. Markina: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Megeno S. A. A. Thorogood: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Megeno S. A. A.Blazkova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Megeno S.A. M. Shabani: None. B. M. Knoppers: None. B.
Prainsack: None. R. Koesters: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Megeno S.A.
C16.4
The genome as individual property or common good.Conceptualization of the genome within a citizen forum
C. Mayeur
*, W. Van Hoof
Sciensano, Anderlecht, Belgium
In recent years, policymakers and experts showed particular
interest in public engagement in genomics. However, most
projects focus on expressed values, without exploring theconcepts behind them. To understand which uses of genomic
information citizens support, one should ﬁrst examine their
conceptualization of the human genome and then explore thevalues they assign to it. We organized a citizen forum on the
ethical, legal and societal issues surrounding the use of
genomic information in healthcare. During three weekends, apanel of 32 citizens, informed by experts of different back-
grounds, debated and re ﬂected with the ﬁnal aim of producing
political recommendations for the ministry of public health.An inductive thematic analysis of their discussions shows that
citizens view the genome as the most intimate part of indi-
viduals, that warrants protection to avoid breach of privacy.Additionally, citizens claim that humans are more than their
genetic makeup: they are socially, culturally, emotionally, and
psychologically complex, and should be treated and con-sidered accordingly. This is why citizens vehemently oppose
genetic categorization and discrimination. Finally, a funda-
mental tension remains between two conceptions of thegenome - the individual ’s property versus common good -Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 87with consequences on sensitive issues such as commerciali-
zation, access to and sharing of data, individual responsibility
and autonomy. Citizens ’conceptions of the genome inform
such different norms and values that it is important for pol-
icymakers and experts to appreciate them to be able to inform
citizens and engage with them on genomics. InnovativePartnership for Action Against Cancer funded this study.
C. Mayeur: None. W. Van Hoof: None.
C17 New Therapeutic Approaches
C17.1
An innovative dual-reporter cell line to identify protein
level modulators in drug-repositioning for rare genetic
diseases: a proof-of-principle in Autosomal DominantLeukoDystrophy (ADLD)
E. Giorgio
1*, E. Pesce2, E. Pozzi1, E. Sondo2,M .
Lorenzati3, M. Ferrero1, G. Borrelli1, E. Della Sala1,A .
Buffo3, N. Pedemonte2, A. Brusco1,4
1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy,
2IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini-UOC Genetica Medica,
Genova, Italy,3University of Torino-Dep. Neuroscience
Rita Levi Montalcini and Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri
Ottolenghi, Torino, Italy,4Città della Salute e della Scienza
University Hospital-Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy
Rare genetic diseases affect a small number of patients each,
and thus are of limited interest to the biopharmaceutical
industry. Since the vast majority still have no treatmentoptions, a cost-effective strategy is the repurposing of existing
drugs as therapies for new disorders. The success of drug-
repositioning approaches is strongly related to the optimiza-tion of an appropriate reporter cell line suitable for high
throughput screening (HTS). Here, we report the development
and optimization of a stable cell line constitutively expressing
an innovative dual-reporter IRES-containing bicistronic vec-
tor allowing the rapid and ef ﬁcient identi ﬁcation of mod-
ulators acting at protein level. Drugs restoring physiological
protein levels represent a promising therapeutic strategy for
genetic disorders associated with genomic deletions/duplica-tions. An instructive example is Autosomal Dominant Leu-
koDystrophy (ADLD), a rare disease caused by LMNB1
a c c u m u l a t i o nd u et og e n ed u p l i c a t i o no rt oar e g u l a t o r yalteration. We have screened by HTS ~ 400 FDA-approved
drugs and we have identi ﬁed a positive hit. This drug (name
reserved) has been validated in 5 different cell lines con-ﬁrming its ability to speci ﬁcally reduce LMNB1 levels (30%-
80% of reduction). Finally, the treatment of ADLD ﬁbroblasts
showed a decrease of about 50% of cytoplasmic LMNB1,supporting the therapeutic value of our molecule. Our results
pave the way towards a clinical trial for ADLD following the“compassionate use ”practice. Finally, our strategy using a
stable dual-reporter cell line can be exploited for identifying
effective drugs for other genetic and multifactorial disorders
in which the modulation of a protein represents a promising
therapeutic option.
E. Giorgio: None. E. Pesce: None. E. Pozzi: None. E.
Sondo: None. M. Lorenzati: None. M. Ferrero: None. G.
Borrelli: None. E. Della Sala: None. A. Buffo: None. N.
Pedemonte: None. A. Brusco: None.
C17.2
Low-dose in ﬁgratinib, an oral selective ﬁbroblast
growth factor receptor (FGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor(TKI), demonstrates activity in preclinical models of
achondroplasia (ACH)
B. Demuynck
1*, J. Flipo1,G .L i2, C. Dambkowski2,L .
Legeai-Mallet1
1Université de Paris, Institut Imagine, Laboratory of
Molecular and Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondro-
dysplasia, INSERM, Paris, France,2QED Therapeutics
Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States
Background: FGFR3 gain-of-function mutations play a
crucial role in ACH, thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), and
hypochondroplasia. Therapies blocking the MAP kinase
(MAPK) pathway, such as C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP)analogues, are in development; however, FGFR3 can also
promote chondrocyte proliferation via alternate pathways
(e.g. STAT1). We tested the hypothesis that the FGFR1-3selective oral TKI in ﬁgratinib (BGJ398) is more ef ﬁcacious
than a CNP analog due to inhibition of both MAPK and
STAT1 in preclinical models of ACH carrying FGFR3
gain-of-function mutations.
Methods: Human TD chondrocytes were incubated with/
without in ﬁgratinib or vosoritide, and total/phospho-ERK1/
2 levels were measured. A mouse model ( Fgfr3
Y367C/ +)
mimicking ACH received subcutaneous injections of
inﬁgratinib or vehicle control daily (0.2, 0.5 mg/kg/day)
or every 3 days (1 mg/kg) for 15 days.
Results: In vitro ,1 0−10Mi nﬁgratinib led to signi ﬁcant
inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation (p<0.05) in TDchondrocytes, while voso ritide treatment had signi ﬁcant
activity only at concentrations >10
−5M. In vivo ,
signiﬁcant improvement was observed in upper limbs
(humerus +7%, ulna +11%), lower limbs (femur +11%,
tibia+16%), foramen magnum length and organization
of growth plate structure in mice treated with in ﬁgratinib
(daily and intermittent injections). In ﬁgratinib activity
was dose dependent with no apparent toxicities.
Conclusions: Inﬁgratinib has superior activity over
vosoritide in vitro, suggesting that inhibition of multiple88 J. del Picchiapathways downstream of FGFR3 may lead to better
efﬁcacy. Results in vivo indicate that clinically relevant
doses of in ﬁgratinib signi ﬁcantly promote growth. Pre-
clinical data support development of in ﬁgratinib in ACH,
with a clinical study launching this year.
B. Demuynck: None. J. Flipo: None. G. Li: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; QED Therapeutics Inc.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; QED Therapeutics Inc.
C. Dambkowski: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; QED Therapeutics Inc. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; BridgeBio Pharma, Novonate, Origin Bios-
ciences. L. Legeai-Mallet: None.
C17.3
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing approach completely
repaired the causative COL4A5 10bp deletion in a
naturally occurring dog model of Alport Syndrome.
S. Daga
1*, K. Capitani2,3, F. Donati2, G. Beligni1, S. Croci1,
F. Valentino1, C. Fallerini1, R. Tita4, C. Rivera5, S. Clark5,
M. Mencarelli4, M. Baldassarri4, E. Benetti1, S. Furini3,E .
Frullanti1, M. Nabity5, A. Auricchio6,7, S. Conticello2,A .
Renieri1,4, A. Pinto4
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,2Core
Research Laboratory - ISPRO, Florence, Italy,3Depart-
ment of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy,4Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,5Department of Veter-
inary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University College of
Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, College
Station, TX, United States,6Telethon Institute of Genetics
and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy,7Department of
Advanced Biomedicine, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy
Alport Syndrome (AS) is a genetic disorder characterized by
clinicopathologic alterations ranging from GBM abnormal-ities up to ESRD. Extensively reported mutations in the
COL4A3/A4/A5 genes are causative of both the autosomal
and the X-linked forms. Although great pharmacologicaladvances have been achieved in the past years, unfortunately
no de ﬁnitive therapy is currently available. Podocytes,
terminally differentiated cells, produce a unique collagen inthe GBM. We have previously demonstrated that podocyte-
lineage cells can be isolated from AS patients ’urine, and we
have proven the ef ﬁciency of a bi-plasmid (AAV)2-
CRISPR/Cas9 approach to restore the wild-type genotype
in-vitro . Two mutations, namely the COL4A5 p.G624D and
theCOL4A3 p.G526E, mimicking XLAS and ADAS forms
respectively, were effectively corrected with an HDRpercentage greater than 44% and undesired in/dels lower
than 12%. Here we show that, moving to a preclinical
approach, it is possible to correct the causative COL4A5 -
Ex9-10bp-deletion in a naturally occurring dog model, using
a macro-500bp-DNA-Donor. The target region, in 80% of
all treated cells, was corrected without in/dels in the neigh-boring sites. A silent mutation, inserted as a tag on the PAM,
was used to monitor the correction and to protect the DNA
from a new spCas9 cut. Based on AAV2/GFP biodistribu-tion, in-vivo infection with (AAV)2-CRISPR/Cas9 will be
performed at 2-3 months of age using single carotid artery
catheterization to target both renal arteries. This patentedapproach, providing the proof-of-principle for a revolu-
tionary AS gene therapy, can open up the possibility to
novel clinical trials, based on personalized strategy.
Italian patent application n102018000020230
S. Daga: None. K. Capitani: None. F. Donati: None. G.
Beligni: None. S. Croci: None. F. Valentino: None. C.Fallerini: None. R. Tita: None. C. Rivera: None. S. Clark:
None. M. Mencarelli: None. M. Baldassarri: None. E.
Benetti: None. S. Furini: None. E. Frullanti: None. M.Nabity: None. A. Auricchio: None. S. Conticello: None. A.
Renieri: None. A. Pinto: None.
C17.4
Single-intrathecal delivery of a new AAV9-mediated
gene therapy vector provides long-term safe expression
of frataxin and prevents neurological and cardiacdeﬁcits, neurodegeneration and iron deposition in a
Friedreich ’s Ataxia mouse model
E. Balagué
1*, D. Cota-González1, K. Adrián-Campbell1,B .
García-Lareu2, A. Bosch2, J. Coll-Cantí3, M. Chillón4,I .
Sánchez1,5, A. Matilla-Dueñas1,5
1Translational and Functional Neurogenetics Unit, Depart-
ment of Neuroscience, Germans Trias Research Institute
(IGTP), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona-Campus Can
Ruti, Badalona, Spain,2Institut de Neurociències (INc),
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Universitat Autònoma Barcelona 5th level, Edi ﬁci H,
Institut Neurociencies, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain,
3Unitat de Neuromuscular, Hospital Universitari Germans
Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain,4Institució Catalana de
Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Vall d ’Hebron Institut
de Recerca, Hospital Universitari Vall d ’Hebron, Vector
Production Unit (UPV) and Universitat Autònoma Barce-
lona, Barcelona, Spain,5Functional Biology and Experi-
mental Therapeutics lab, Translational and Functional
Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Germans
Trias Research Institute (IGTP), Universitat Autònoma deBarcelona-Campus Can Ruti, Badalona, SpainAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 89Introduction: Friedreich ’s ataxia (FRDA) is a recessively
inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by frataxin
(FXN) de ﬁciency. FRDA is characterised by progressive
ataxia, sensory loss and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Neurodegeneration is identi ﬁed in DRG neurons, peripheral
sensory nerves, the posterior column, and cerebellar dentatenucleus. To date, proof-of-concept approaches have high-
lighted the therapeutic potential of AAV-gene therapy in
FRDA. However, these studies have used synthetic pro-moters initially providing very high-yields of FXN levels
and known to shutdown over time. Recent data point to the
importance of maintaining frataxin levels within a range dueto potential toxicity.
Methods: We generated a new AAV9-gene therapy
vector encoding a DNA sequence for frataxin regulated bythe hPGK1 promoter, which provides constitutive, ubiqui-
tous, and long-term expression of frataxin in YG8R
FRDA mice.
Results: Here we show that a single intrathecal admin-
istration of this vector into 2-month-old FRDA mice results
in effective transduction of the recombinant frataxin geneinto DRG, spinal cord, cerebellar dentate, heart, and liver,
resulting in expression of recombinant frataxin protein at
levels within those in WT mice, for at least 12 months withno apparent vector-induced toxicity. AAV9-FXN treated
FRDA mice show preservation of motor coordination, the
electrophysiological properties in sensory caudal nerve, theclasping re ﬂex, the neuronal structural preservation of the
DRG, spinal cord and dentate nucleus, along with
cardiomyopathy correction, reduction of iron deposits andpreservation of mitochondrial electron transport chain.
Conclusion: These data provide support for the clinical
therapeutic potential of this gene therapy vector for thetreatment of Friedreich ’s ataxia.
E. Balagué: None. D. Cota-González: None. K. Adrián-
Campbell: None. B. García-Lareu: None. A. Bosch: None.J. Coll-Cantí: None. M. Chillón: None. I. Sánchez: None.
A. Matilla-Dueñas: None.
C17.5
HDAC inhibitor CI-994 rescues phenotype in a mouse
model of Birk-Barel intellectual disability syndrome
A. Cooper
1,T. Butto2*, N. Hammer3, S. Jagannath3,D .
Lucia Fend-Guella1, J. Akhtar2, K. Radyushkin4,F .
Lesage5, J. Winter1,6, S. Strand7, J. Roeper3, U. Zechner1,8,
S. Schweiger1,9
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of
the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany,
2Institute for Developmental Biology and Neurobiology,Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany,3Institute
of Neurophysiology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Ger-
many, Frankfurt, Germany,4University Medical Center of
the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany,
Mainz, Germany,5LabEx ICST, Institut de Pharmacologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS and Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France,
6University Medical
Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz,
Germany,7Department of Internal Medicine I, University
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University,
Mainz, Germany,8Senckenberg Center of Human Genetics,
Frankfurt, Germany,9Orphan Diseases of the Central
Nervous System, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany
Epigenetic modulators provide a powerful tool for disease
treatment through alteration of the epigenomic regulative
system. In our study, we focused on the effect of epigenetic
modulators on the maternally imprinted Kcnk9 gene.
Mutations in the Kcnk9 gene were shown to affect the
modulation of the membrane potential and excitability of
neurons, causing Birk-Barel intellectual disability syndrome(BBIDS). Using the BBIDS mouse model, we here present
evidence for a small yet evident non-canonical expression
of the parental Kcnk9 allele in Kcnk9 KO
matanimals, which
was suf ﬁcient to provide an intermediate phenotype in
nocturnal locomotor activity compared to Kcnk9 KOhom.W e
further identi ﬁed the locus coeruleus (LC), a region
involved in regulation of arousal and nocturnal activity in
mice, as the main target region altered in Kcnk9 KOmat
animals. Following screening of numerous epigenetic
modulators, we show that CI-994, a class I HDAC inhibitor,
could increase paternal Kcnk9 expression up to three-fold
and fully rescue the behavioral phenotype in Kcnk9 KOmat
animals. We utilized ChIP-qPCR to further demonstrate that
CI-994 affects histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) at
the promoter and intronic region of Kcnk9 in the LC tissue
samples thereby promoting open accessible chromatin and
increasing expression of Kcnk9 . Interestingly, using allele-
speciﬁc ChIP, we show that the effects on the inactive
paternal allele were signi ﬁcantly higher that on the maternal
allele. Taken all together, our ﬁndings provide further
characterization of the role of Kcnk9 in BBIDS pathology as
well as exciting evidence for a promising therapeutic effect
of CI-994 in mouse model for BBIDS.
A. Cooper: None. T. Butto: None. N. Hammer: None. S.
Jagannath: None. D. Lucia Fend-Guella: None. J. Akhtar:
None. K. Radyushkin: None. F. Lesage: None. J. Winter:None. S. Strand: None. J. Roeper: None. U. Zechner: None.
S. Schweiger: None.90 J. del PicchiaC18 Cancer Genetics II: Clinical Cancer Research
C18.1
Development of a rapid functional assay on peripheral
blood for clinical interpretation of germline TP53 var-
iants and detection of non-coding functional variants
S. Raad1, M. Rolain1, S. Coutant1, C. Derambure1,R .
Lanos1, F. Charbonnier1, J. Bou1, E. Bouvignies1,G .
Lienard1, S. Vasseur1, M. Farrel2, O. Ingster3, S. Baert-
Desurmont1, E. Kasper1, G. Bougeard1, T. Frébourg1,I.
Tournier1*
1Inserm U1245, UNIROUEN, Normandie Univ, and
Genetics Department, Rouen University Hospital, Nor-mandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,
2Mater Private Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,
3Angers University Hospital, Department of Genetics,
Angers, France
Interpretation of germline TP53 variants remains complex
and is critical for an appropriate medical management ofpatients. We developed a functional assay directly per-
formed on blood for the rapid interpretation, within a week,
of unclassi ﬁedTP53 variants. In this assay, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells are cultured and activated for 48h hours,
exposed to doxorubicin and the p53-mediated transcrip-
tional response is quanti ﬁed using RT-MLPA and RT-
QMPSF, including 10 p53 targets and 2 amplicons to
measure p53 mRNA levels. Functional assay and TP53
molecular screening were performed in 71 individuals, inparallel and blind conditions. In 51 wild-type TP53 indi-
viduals, the mean p53 functionality score was 12. 7. Among
8 individuals harboring likely pathogenic or pathogenicvariants, the scores were reduced (mean 4.8) and p53
mRNA levels were reduced in patients harboring truncating
variants allowing to identify them unambiguously. The
assay applied to 11 rare unclassi ﬁed variants [p.(Pro72His),
p.(Gly105Asp), p.(Arg110His), p.(Phe134Leu), p.(Arg158Cys), p.(Pro191Arg), p.(Pro278Arg), p.(Arg283-
Cys), p.(Asp352Tyr), p.(Asn131del), c.-117G>T] led us to
consider them, except the p.(Pro72His), p.(Pro191Arg) andc.-117G>T variants, as pathogenic. Remarkably, the assay
also revealed that the c.*1175A>C polymorphic TP53
variant located within the polyadenylation signal impacts,when present on both alleles, p53 functionality with the
same magnitude as a germline pathogenic TP53 variant and
could act as a modi ﬁer factor in pathogenic variant carriers.
This assay should therefore be a useful tool for the rapid
interpretation of germline TP53 variants of unknown sig-
niﬁcance and the indirect detection of cryptic alterations
within regulatory regions impacting p53 function. SR, MR:
equal contributionS. Raad: None. M. Rolain: None. S. Coutant: None. C.
Derambure: None. R. Lanos: None. F. Charbonnier: None.
J. Bou: None. E. Bouvignies: None. G. Lienard: None. S.
Vasseur: None. M. Farrel: None. O. Ingster: None. S. Baert-
Desurmont: None. E. Kasper: None. G. Bougeard: None. T.
Frébourg: None. I. Tournier: None.
C18.2
Are pathogenic germline variants in metastatic mela-
noma associated with unfavorable survival?
S. Biskup
1*, T. Amaral2, T. Sinnberg2, M. Nieser1,P .
Martus2, C. Garbe2, F. Battke1, A. Forschner2, M. Schulze1
1CeGaT, Tuebingen, Germany,2University clinic, Tuebin-
gen, Germany
Immunotherapy has revolutionized the treatment landscape
of patients with advanced melanoma. Despite the survivalimprovements there are still patients that do not bene ﬁt from
immunotherapy. For those patients early biomarkers that
indicate potential resistance are highly relevant and othertherapeutic alternatives should be considered. We compre-
hensively analyzed tumor and blood samples from 116
patients with advanced melanoma and scheduled for sys-temic therapy between January and June 2018. Descriptive
and survival analysis were performed for all patients and for
those receiving combined immunotherapy (n =59). We
focused on tumor mutational burden, genome instability,
major driver and tumor suppressor genes. Interestingly, a
total of 20 germline variants were identi ﬁed in our cohort.
Nine patients with germline variants received combined
immunotherapy. The 1-year melanoma speci ﬁc survival
(mMSS) for the sub-group with a germline variant was 52.9percent versus 71.9 percent for the sub-group without
germline variant. For patients receiving combined immu-
notherapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab, the 1y-MSSwas 33.3 percent and 67.2 percent respectively for patients
with and without a germline variant ( p=0.019; 95 percent
CI: 2.5-64.1 and 54.1-80.3). The median progression-freesurvival was 2.0 months for patients with a germline variant
and 4.0 months for those without a germline variant
(p=0.021; 95 percent CI: 1.5-2.5 and 0.6-7.4). Conclusion:
For the ﬁrst time, we show in patients with advanced
melanoma that the presence of germline variants might be
associated with worse prognosis and failure in response tocombined immunotherapy. Other therapeutic options should
be considered early as alternative or in combination with
immunotherapy.
S. Biskup: None. T. Amaral: None. T. Sinnberg: None.
M. Nieser: None. P. Martus: None. C. Garbe: None. F.
Battke: None. A. Forschner: None. M. Schulze: None.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 91C18.3
Germline, somatic and clinical associations with
response to Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors and adverse
events in a large patient cohort
S. Groha1*, S. Abou Alaiwi1, K. Taraszka2, E. Lepisto1,M .
Manos1, O. Rahma1, T. Choueiri1, M. L. Freedman1,D .
Schrag1, K. Kehl1, A. Gusev1
1Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States,
2UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors (ICIs) have led to an
unprecedented improvement in durable responses in cancer
therapy but only a fraction of patients derive lasting bene ﬁt,
with many patients developing auto-immune disease-likeadverse events (irAE), motivating research into ICI
response mechanisms and biomarkers.
Using a large cohort of ICI patients at DFCI in a clinical
setting (N =1800 pan-cancer), we probe the in ﬂuence of
genetic and clinical factors on overall survival (OS) and
irAE incidence. We impute common germline features frompanel sequenced tumors and investigate clinical, somatic
and germline in ﬂuences on OS and irAEs using multivariate
and multistage survival analysis.
Weﬁnd signi ﬁcant associations between OS and common
germline HLA alleles (q<0.1), validating one association in
an external cohort. We furthermore ﬁnd somatic copy
number alterations (CNAs) (q<0.1), with alterations of
AKT3, RSPO2 and MYC validating in at least two
independent cohorts. Moreover, we ﬁnd general lab tests
taken at treatment initiation are associated with OS, speci ﬁc
to patients on ICIs. We show that an integrated prognostic
model using somatic, germline and clinical data from EHRrecords signi ﬁcantly outperforms the baseline model of
demographics and tumor mutational burden (a known
putative biomarker), increasing concordance from 0.63 to
0.70. We furthermore ﬁnd signi ﬁcant predictors of future
irAEs from previous auto-immune disease diagnosis (p<1e-5), individual cancer driver mutations, and common HLA
alleles (q<0.01).
Our study identi ﬁes novel mechanisms in ﬂuencing OS
and irAEs in patients on ICIs and shows the bene ﬁto f
prognostic models utilizing clinical patient history.
NCI R01CA227237, Claudia Adams Barr FoundationS. Groha: None. S. Abou Alaiwi: None. K. Taraszka: None.
E. Lepisto: None. M. Manos: None. O. Rahma: None. T.
Choueiri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Modest; AstraZeneca, Alexion, Bayer,
Bristol Myers-Squibb/ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean,Eisai, Foundation Medicine Inc., Exelixis, Ipsen, Tracon,
Genentech, Roche, Roche Products Limited, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Peloton,
Pﬁzer, Prometheus Labs, Corvus, Calithera, Analysis Group,
Sanoﬁ/Aventis, Takeda. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest;
AstraZeneca, Alexion, Sano ﬁ/Aventis, Bayer, Bristol Meyer-
Squibb/ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean, Eisai, Founda-tion Medicine Inc., Exelixis, Genentech, Roche, Roche
Products Limited, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, GlaxoSmithKline,
Merck, Novartis, Peloton, P ﬁzer, EMD Serono, Prometheus
Labs, Corvus, Ipsen, Up-to-Date, NCCN, Analysis Group,
Michael J. Hennessy (MJH) Associates, Inc (Healthcare
Communications Company with several brands such asOnClive, PeerView and PER), Research to Practice, L-path,
Kidney Cancer Journal, Clinical Care Options, Platform Q,
Navinata Healthcare, Harborside Press, American Society ofMedical Oncology, NEJM, Lancet Oncology, Heron Ther-
apeutics, Lilly Oncology. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Pionyr,Tempest. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZe-
neca, Alexion, Sano ﬁ/Aventis, Bayer, Bristol Myers-Squibb/
ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean, Eisai, FoundationMedicine Inc., Exelixis, Genentech, Heron Therapeutics,
Lilly, Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novartis, Peloton,
Pﬁzer, EMD Serono, Prometheus Labs, Corvus, Ipsen, Up-to-
date, NCCN, Analysis Group, Pionyr, Tempest, Lilly
Ventures. M. L. Freedman: None. D. Schrag: None. K. Kehl:
N o n e .A .G u s e v :N o n e .
C18.4
Rare germline variants in the tumor suppressor gene
CDH1 are associated with familial glioma
A. Förster1*, F. Brand1, R. Banan2, R. Hüneburg3,4,C .A .
M. Weber1, N. Elyan1, C. Previti5, J. Kronenberg6,7,U .
Beyer1, H. Martens1, B. Hong8, J. K. Krauss8,J .H .
Bräsen9, A. Zimpfer10, M. Stangel6,7, A. Samii11, S. Wolf5,S .
Aretz3,12, B. Wiese8,13, C. Hartmann2, R. G. Weber1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany,2Division of Neuropathology,
Department of Pathology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany,3National Center for Hereditary
Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,4Department of Internal Medicine I, University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,5Genomics and Proteomics
Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany,6Clinical Neuroimmunology and
Neurochemistry, Department of Neurology, HannoverMedical School, Hannover, Germany,
7Center for Systems
Neuroscience, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover,
Hannover, Germany,8Department of Neurosurgery, Hann-
over Medical School, Hannover, Germany,9Department of
Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany,92 J. del Picchia10Institute of Pathology, University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany,11Department of Neurosurgery, International
Neuroscience Institute, Hannover, Germany,12Institute of
Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Ger-
many,13Department of Neurology, Henriettenstift, Diako-
vere Krankenhaus gGmbH, Hannover, Germany
The genetic basis of familial gliomas, representing about
5% of all gliomas, is poorly understood. In search of rare
germline alterations predisposing to glioma, we appliedwhole-genome, whole-exome and targeted sequencing to
germline-DNA of 21 glioma patients from 15 families with
at least two glioma cases each. Thereby, we identi ﬁed two
families with rare variants in the tumor suppressor gene
CDH1 encoding E-cadherin that co-segregate with the
tumor phenotype, a signi ﬁcant overrepresentation of rare
CDH1 variants in glioma families versus controls. In a
separate cohort of 45 individuals from 25 gastric cancer
families carrying CDH1 germline mutations, brain tumors
were observed in two cases, a signi ﬁcantly higher pre-
valence than in the general population. As most rare CDH1
variant carriers in the two glioma families were affected byoligodendroglioma, we performed mutational analysis in a
separate cohort of 101 oligodendroglioma-DNAs identify-
ing rare CDH1 alterations in about 6% of tumors. CDH1
expression was detected in oligodendroglial precursor cells
and differentiated oligodendrocytes isolated from rat brain.
Functional studies of CDH1 germline variants using
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in or stably transfected cell
models demonstrated their pathogenicity with respect to cell
surface expression, cell migration and aggregation com-pared to control cells. One CDH1 variant showed reduced
binding to beta-catenin and increased nuclear levels of
active beta-catenin that were diminished by treatment withthe MAPK interacting serine/threonine kinase 1 inhibitor
CGP57380. Our data provide evidence for a role of rare
CDH1 variants in the risk and tumorigenesis of gliomas,
particularly of oligodendrogliomas (supported by Wilhelm
Sander-Stiftung grant 2018.097.1).
A. Förster: None. F. Brand: None. R. Banan: None. R.
Hüneburg: None. C. A. M. Weber: None. N. Elyan: None.
C. Previti: None. J. Kronenberg: None. U. Beyer: None. H.Martens: None. B. Hong: None. J. K. Krauss: None. J. H.
Bräsen: None. A. Zimpfer: None. M. Stangel: None. A.
Samii: None. S. Wolf: None. S. Aretz: None. B. Wiese:None. C. Hartmann: None. R. G. Weber: None.
C18.5
Prostate cancer risk and prognosis for carriers ofgermline pathogenic variants in disease implicated genes
N. Camacho Ordonez
*, L. Dong, A. MatakidouAstraZeneca, Melbourn, Royston, Hertfordshire, United
Kingdom
Germline mutations in DNA Damage Response (DDR)
genes such as BRCA2 andATM have been associated with
prostate cancer risk and agressiveness. These associations
are largely based on studies that ascertain for cancer diag-nosis and family history and provide risk estimates with
limited population-level accuracy. Here we evaluate the
clinical signi ﬁcance of germline pathogenic variants in 20
DDR genes and four known susceptibility coding variants
inPOUF51B ,HOXB13 and KLK3 using whole exome
sequences from (1) the UK Biobank (UKBB), a population -
based cohort (200,000 participants) and (2) patients
recruited in AZ clinical trials. Whole exomes from 4,975
prostate cancer patients (3,954 UKBB and 1,021 AZ) and59,438 cancer-free males were analysed. Known and novel
pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed and population risk of
disease, metastasis and overall survival (UKBB only) wereestimated (multiplicity corrected P value <0.005). ATM
(1.15%), BRCA2 (1.11%) and HOXB13 G48E (1.29%) were
the largest contributors to prostate cancer risk, each con-ferring an increase of ~4-fold; followed by CHEK2 with a
moderate contribution (0.4%). BRCA2 carriers were more
likely to metastasise (OR 3.32, 95% CI 1.74-6.45,p=9.94E-05) and had poorer overall survival (Log-Rank
p=1.33E-08), with 85% dying from prostate cancer com-
pared to 53% of non- BRCA2 carriers. This is the largest
study to date providing population-based estimates of
prostate cancer risk, metastasis an survival. Analyses will be
updated with data from the full 500,000 UKBB participants(11,000 prostate cancers).
N. Camacho Ordonez: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. L. Dong: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. A. Mataki-
dou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca.
C18.6
Clinical and molecular characterization of 1253 carriersof a deleterious CHEK2 mutation from the German
Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer
(GC-HBOC)
W. Habhab
1*, U. Faust1, G. Günther1, U. Siebers-Renelt2,
M. Kiechle3, C. Ott4, N. Dikow5, K. Kast6, A. Vesper7,C .
Solbach8, N. Harbeck9, M. Stiller10, A. Gehrig11,C .
Thomssen12, H. Wallaschek13, N. Arnold14, I. Holzhauser15,
S. Kaulfuß16, A. Volk17, W. Janni18, C. Engel19,R .
Schmutzler20, O. Rieß1, C. Schroeder1, K. Bosse1
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany,2InstituteAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 93of Human Genetics, University of Muenster, Muenster,
Germany,3Department of Gynecology, University Hospital,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,4Insti-
tute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité
University medicine of Berlin, Berlin, Germany,5Institute of
Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidel-berg, Germany,
6Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Medical Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Technische University Dresden, Dresden, Germany,
7Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical
Faculty and University Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich-
Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany,
8Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University
Hospital, Frakfurt, Germany,9Department of Obstetrics
& Gynecology, University of Munich (LMU), Munich,Germany,
10Institute of Human Genetics, University of
Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany,11Institute
of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,Germany,
12Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Medical Faculty and University Hospital Halle, Halle,
Germany,13Institute of Human Genetics, University
Hospital of Hannover, Hannover, Germany,14Department
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schles-
wig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Christian Albrechts UniversityKiel Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, University
Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Christian-
Albrechts Universi, Kiel, Germany,
15Institute of Human
Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany,
16Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany,17Institute of Human
Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany,18Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University Clinic Ulm, Ulm, Germany,19Insti-
tute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany,20Center of
Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University ofCologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Published relative risk estimates for breast
cancer for CHEK2 mutation carriers vary between 1.5 and
3. The risk for contralateral breast cancer is elevated. An
association with ovarian cancer is still under debate. Herewe present the clinical and molecular characteristics of 1253
female and male CHEK2 mutation carriers recruited by the
German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and OvarianCancer (GC-HBOC).
Materials and Methods: Deleterious mutations in
BRCA1 andBRCA2 had been excluded in the study group.
The information was gained from the central registry
database of the Consortium.
Results: A total of 1253 patients were tested positive for
a pathogenic germline CHEK2 variant (1176 females, 77
males). More than 60% of the female carriers had developedbreast- and/or ovarian cancer. Approximately 13% of the
females with breast cancer reported a contralateral cancer.
Ovarian cancer was diagnosed in 35 carriers (2.98%; 13 of
them <50yrs). About 6.5% of the males developed breast
cancer. Sixteen mutation carriers developed skin and 14
thyroid cancer, respectively. The most common observedvariant was c.1100delC followed by Del Ex9-10.
Conclusion: CHEK2 -mutations are a substantial cause of
hereditary female breast cancer in the German population.Female carriers face a relevant risk of developing
contralateral cancer. CHEK2 mutation carriers present with
a broad spectrum of additional cancers. Besides ovariancancer, thyroid and skin cancer are the most frequent
entities. A causal association with an increased risk of
ovarian cancer and male breast cancer remains to be provenin larger study cohorts and matched to healthy controls.
W. Habhab: None. U. Faust: None. G. Günther: None. U.
Siebers-Renelt: None. M. Kiechle: None. C. Ott: None. N.Dikow: None. K. Kast: None. A. Vesper: None. C. Solbach:
None. N. Harbeck: None. M. Stiller: None. A. Gehrig:
None. C. Thomssen: None. H. Wallaschek: None. N.Arnold: None. I. Holzhauser: None. S. Kaulfuß: None. A.
Volk: None. W. Janni: None. C. Engel: None. R.
Schmutzler: None. O. Rieß: None. C. Schroeder: None.K. Bosse: None.
C19 Multiple Malformation Syndromes IIC19.1
One test for all: whole genome sequencing in 62 trioswith congenital limb malformation identi ﬁes structural
variants and new disease genes
J. Elsner
1, M. A. Mensah1, M. Holtgrewe2, W. Hülsemann3,
S. Mundlos4,1,M. Spielmann4,1*
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics,
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,
2Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin Institute of Health,
Berlin, Germany,3Handchirurgie, Katholisches Kinderk-
rankenhaus Wilhelmstift, Hamburg, Germany,4Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany
Introduction : The extensive clinical and genetic hetero-
geneity of congenital limb malformation requires compre-hensive analysis of genome-wide genetic variation. Whole
genome sequencing (WGS) has the potential to identify
both coding and non-coding as well as structural variants ina single test. Thus, WGS may increase the diagnostic rate in
cases of congenital limb malformation.
Methods : We collected a cohort of 62 trios featuring
congenital limb malformations that were mutation negative
after standard clinical genetic testing. The cohort was94 J. del Picchiasubjected to whole genome sequencing (Ilumina, 30x
coverage, paired-end, 150bp). Data were analyzed for both
coding and non-coding single nucleotide variants and
structural variants using the SODAR and VarFish pipelines.
Results : Overall we identi ﬁed coding pathogenic single
nucleotide variants in 9 cases (14%). We found mutations in7 known disease genes including one repeat expansion in
HOXD13. In two unrelated cases of ectrodactyly we
identi ﬁed likely pathogenic variants in UBA2 establishing
it as a novel disease gene. In addition we found two
pathogenic structural variants (3%) : one inversion
segregating with the phenotype and one de novo deletion.Furthermore, we identi ﬁed variants in 3 novel high
conﬁdence candidate genes. We also describe and perform
a framework to identify potential non-coding pathogenicvariants.
Conclusions : Whole genome sequencing is a powerful
strategy to identify all types of genomic variants associatedwith congenital limb malformation. It also detects repeat
expansions and copy number neutral inversions that are
missed by most other approaches.
J. Elsner: None. M. A. Mensah: None. M. Holtgrewe:
None. W. Hülsemann: None. S. Mundlos: None. M.
Spielmann: None.
C19.2
Biallelic mutations in TOGARAM1 cause a novel
primary ciliopathy
V. Morbidoni
1,2, E. Agolini3, K. C. Slept4, L. Pannone5,D .
Zuccarello1, E. Grosso6, G. Gai6, L. Salviati1,2,B .
Dallapiccola7, A. Novelli3, S. Martinelli5,E. Trevisson1,2*
1Clinical Genetics Unit, Dept of Women ’s and Children ’s
Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy,2Istituto di
Ricerca Pediatrica IRP, Padova, Italy,3Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, IRCCS-Bambino Gesù Children ’s Hos-
pital, Roma, Italy,4Department of Biology, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States,5Depart-
ment of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Super-
iore di Sanità, Roma, Italy,6Medical Genetics Unit, Città
della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Torino,Italy,
7Scienti ﬁc Directorate, Bambino Gesù Children ’s
Hospital and Research Institute, Roma, Italy
Background : Dysfunction in non-motile cilia is associated
with a broad spectrum of developmental disorders char-
acterized by clinical heterogeneity. Despite over one hun-
dred genes have been associated with primary ciliopathies,with wide phenotypic overlap, some patients still lack a
molecular diagnosis. The aim of this work was to investi-
gate and functionally characterize the molecular causeunderlying a Meckel-Gruber-like phenotype in two sibling
foetuses.
Methods : we used a trio-based whole exome sequencing
(WES) strategy to identify candidate variants in
TOGARAM1 .In silico , in vitro and in vivo ( C. elegans )
studies were carried out to explore the impact of mutationson protein structure and function, and relevant biological
processes.
Results :TOGARAM1 encodes a member of the Cres-
cerin1 family of proteins regulating microtubule dynamics.
Its orthologue in C. elegans ,che-12 , is expressed in the
cilium of a subset of sensory neurons, where it is requiredfor chemosensation. Nematode lines harbouring the mis-
sense variant in TOGARAM1 were generated by CRISPR/
Cas9 technology. Although chemotaxis ability on a NaClgradient and lipophilic dye-uptake were not impaired, che-
12knock-in mutants displayed a shorter cilium in sensory
neurons, and even shorter cilia in hemizygous worms,which recapitulate the genotype observed in the affected
foetuses. Finally, in vitro analysis of microtubule polymer-
ization in the presence of the wild-type or mutant TOG2domain revealed a faster polymerization associated with the
mutant protein, indicating aberrant tubulin binding.
Conclusions : Our data suggest a causative role of
TOGARAM1 variants in the pathogenesis of this novel
disorder, connecting this gene with primary ciliopathy.
V. Morbidoni: None. E. Agolini: None. K. C. Slept: None.
L. Pannone: None. D. Zuccarello: None. E. Grosso: None.
G. Gai: None. L. Salviati: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. A.
Novelli: None. S. Martinelli: None. E. Trevisson: None.
C19.3
Biallelic loss-of-function variations in SMO ,encoding
the key transducer of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway,cause a broad phenotypic spectrum of hedgehogopathies
T. L. LE
1,2*, Y. Sribudiani3,4, X. Dong5,6, C. Huber1,C .
Kois7, G. Baujat1,8, C. T. Gordon1, V. Mayne5,L .
Galmiche8, V. Serre9,2, N. Goudin2, M. Zarhrate1, C. Bole-
Feysot2, C. Masson2, P. Nitschké2, F. W. Verheijen3,L .
Pais10, A. Pelet1, S. Sadedin5, J. A. Pugh7, N. Shur11,S .M .
White5, S. E. Chehadeh12, J. Christodoulou5,6, V. Cormier-
Daire1,8, R. M. W. Hofstra3, S. Lyonnet1,2,8,T .Y .T a n5,6,T .
Attié-Bitach1,2,8, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse13, J. Amiel1,2,8,
S. Thomas1
1Imagine Institute - INSERM U1163, Paris, France,2Uni-
versité de Paris, Paris, France,3Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,4Universitas Padjadjaran, Ban-
dung, Indonesia,5Royal Children ’s Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia,6University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,
7Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY, United States,
8Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,9InstitutAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 95Jacques Monod - CNRS U7592, Paris, France,10Broad
Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States,11Children ’s
National, Washington, WA, United States,12Hôpital de
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France,13University Medical
Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands
The evolutionarily conserved Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is
essential for organogenesis and plays critical roles in postnatal
tissue maintenance and renewal. A unique feature of verte-
brate Hh pathway is that signal transduction requires theprimary cilium (PC) where major pathway components are
dynamically enriched. These factors include Smoothened
(SMO) and Patched, that constitute the core reception systemfor Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) as well as GLI transcription
factors, the key mediators of the pathway. Here, we report
biallelic loss-of-function variations in SMO in seven cases
from ﬁve independent families causing a wide phenotypic
spectrum of hedgehogopathies affecting development of the
brain (hypothalamic hamartoma, microcephaly), heart (atrio-ventricular septal defect), skeleton (postaxial polydactyly,
narrow chest, shortening of long bones) and the enteric ner-
vous system (aganglionosis). Patient-derived cells showednormal ciliogenesis but severely altered Hh signal transduc-
tion due to either altered PC traf ﬁcking or abnormal activation
of the pathway downstream of SMO. In addition, Hh-inde-pendent GLI2 accumulation at the PC tip in patient cells
suggest a potential novel function of SMO in regulating basal
ciliary traf ﬁcking of GLI2 when the pathway is off. Thus, loss
of SMO function in humans results in abnormal PC dynamics
of key components of the Hh signaling pathway and leads to a
large continuum of malformations in humans.
T. L. Le: None. Y. Sribudiani: None. X. Dong: None. C.
Huber: None. C. Kois: None. G. Baujat: None. C. T.
Gordon: None. V. Mayne: None. L. Galmiche: None. V.Serre: None. N. Goudin: None. M. Zarhrate: None. C.
Bole-Feysot: None. C. Masson: None. P. Nitschké: None.
F. W. Verheijen: None. L. Pais: None. A. Pelet: None. S.
Sadedin: None. J. A. Pugh: None. N. Shur: None. S. M.
White: None. S. E. Chehadeh: None. J. Christodoulou:None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. R. M. W. Hofstra: None.
S. Lyonnet: None. T. Y. Tan: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None.
W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. J. Amiel: None. S.Thomas: None.
C19.4
Bi-allelic Variants in RALGAPA1 Cause Profound
Neurodevelopmental Disability, Muscular Hypotonia,
Infantile Spasms, and Feeding Abnormalities
M. Wagner
1,2*, Y. Skorobogatko3, B. Pode-Shakked4,C .M .
Powell5, B. Alhaddad1, A. Seibt6, O. Barel7, G. Heimer7,C .
Hoffmann4, L. A. Demmer8, Y. Perilla-Young5, M. Remke9,
D. Wieczorek10, T. Navaratnarajah6, P. Lichtner11,D .Klee12, H. E. Shamseldin13, F. A. Mutairi14, E. Mayatepek6,
T. M. Strom1, T. Meitinger1, F. S. Alkuraya13, Y. Anikster7,
A. R. Saltiel3, F. Distelmaier6
1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany,2Institute
for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neu,Germany,
3San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA,
United States,4Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel,
5Department of Pediatrics, Chapel Hill, NC, United States,
6University Children´s Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany,
7Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel,8Atrium
Health Levine Children ’s Hospital, Charlotte, NC, United
States,9Department of Pediatric Oncology, Düsseldorf,
Germany,10Institute of Human Genetics, Düsseldorf,
Germany,11Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg,
Germany,12Department of Diagnostic and Interventional
Radiology, Düsseldorf, Germany,13King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
14King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Introduction: Ral (Ras-like) GTPases play an important
role in the control of cell migration and have been impli-cated in Ras-mediated tumorigenicity. Recently, variants in
RALA were described as a cause of intellectual disability
and developmental delay, indicating the relevance of thispathway to neuropediatric diseases.
Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was per-
formed in four affected individuals. Immunoblotting, qRT-PCR, immuno ﬂuorescence, ﬂow cytometry and a drug
screen pipeline using cell viability were used to functionally
characterize patient derived ﬁbroblasts.
Results: Biallelic variants in RALGAPA1 were identi ﬁed
in four unrelated individuals with profound neurodevelop-
mental disability, muscular hypotonia, feeding abnormal-ities, recurrent fever episodes, and infantile spasms.
RalGAPA1 was absent in the ﬁbroblasts derived from two
affected individuals and levels of RalGAPB, a scaffolding
subunit of the RalGAP complex, were reduced. RalA
activity was increased in these cell lines, implying thatRalGAPA1 de ﬁciency causes a dysfunctional RalGAP
complex and a constitutive activation of RalA. Addition-
ally, RalGAPA1 de ﬁciency increased cell-surface levels of
lipid raft components in detached ﬁbroblasts, indicating that
anchorage-dependence of cell growth signaling is disturbed.
The drug screen assay showed altered survival rates of cellsupon treatment with pathway speci ﬁc compounds.
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings indicate that the dysregulation
of the RalA pathway has an important impact on neuronalfunction and brain development. In light of the partially
overlapping phenotype between RALA and RALGAPA1 -
associated diseases, it appears likely that dysregulation ofthe RalA signaling pathway leads to a distinct group of96 J. del Picchiagenetic syndromes that we suggest could be named
RALopathies.
M. Wagner: None. Y. Skorobogatko: None. B. Pode-
Shakked: None. C. M. Powell: None. B. Alhaddad: None.
A. Seibt: None. O. Barel: None. G. Heimer: None. C.
Hoffmann: None. L. A. Demmer: None. Y. Perilla-Young:None. M. Remke: None. D. Wieczorek: None. T.
Navaratnarajah: None. P. Lichtner: None. D. Klee: None.
H. E. Shamseldin: None. F. A. Mutairi: None. E.Mayatepek: None. T. M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None.
F. S. Alkuraya: None. Y. Anikster: None. A. R. Saltiel:
None. F. Distelmaier: None.
C19.5
Functional genomics and extended analyses of unsolved
exome-negative cases through the Undiagnosed DiseasesProject in Victoria (UDP-Vic)
T. Y. Tan
1*, T. Cloney1,N .B .T a n1, L. Gallacher1,J .
Elliott1, G. Helman2, C. Simons2, S. Sadedin1, L. Pais3,A .
O’Donnell-Luria3, J. Christodoulou2, S. M. White1
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Mel-
bourne, Australia,2Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute,
Parkville, Melbourne, Australia,3Broad Center for Mende-
lian Genomics, Cambridge, MA, United States
Clinical exome sequencing (cES) achieves a diagnostic
yield of 40-50% in individuals with a suspected monogenic
disorder. Optimal strategies for solving cES-negative cases
are unclear. Aim: Develop a research program to identifydiagnoses in unsolved cES-negative individuals. Methods:
We established the Undiagnosed Diseases Project in Vic-
toria (UDP-Vic) in collaboration with the Broad Center forMendelian Genomics to undertake family-based sequencing
and multifaceted approaches including genomic re-analysis,
copy number variant identi ﬁcation, RNA-sequencing and
functional studies. Results: We recruited 288 cES-negative
families to UDP-Vic for family-based exome (ES; 263) or
genome sequencing (GS; 25). Probands are paediatric withsyndromic neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Analysis is
complete in 133 families, of which 56 (42.1%) are con-
sidered solved (comprising known, newly emerging, andstrong novel candidate genes). Family-based ES/GS was the
most useful strategy in identifying candidate variants, and
adjunctive analyses such as RNA-sequencing (4/18 casesanalysed; 22.2%), high-resolution microarray (2/32 cases
analysed; 6.3%); re-analysis of original data (2/12 cases
analysed; 16.7%) provided additional diagnoses. GS iden-tiﬁed only one coding variant that was missed in the original
cES. We identi ﬁed strong candidates in 20 novel disease
genes, of which data-sharing and functional analyses led topublication of 6 ( MSL3 ,THOC2 ,FIG4 ,HNRNPU ,SYT1 ,ZNF462 ). Cell-based and animal model functional analyses
are ongoing for other novel candidates. Conclusion: UDP-
Vic has been highly effective in extending the diagnostic
yield beyond that achieved by cES. Our multifaceted
strategy has enabled us to query clinically-driven hypoth-
eses and identify cryptic diagnoses. We plan to incorporateadditional ‘-omics ’approaches to our pipeline.
T. Y. Tan: None. T. Cloney: None. N. B. Tan: None. L.
Gallacher: None. J. Elliott: None. G. Helman: None. C.Simons: None. S. Sadedin: None. L. Pais: None. A.
O’Donnell-Luria: None. J. Christodoulou: None. S. M.
White: None.
C19.6
Identi ﬁcation of DNA methylation episignatures for
PRC2-related overgrowth syndromes
M. A. Levy
1,2*, E. Aref-Eshghi1, T. B. Balci1,2,3, J. Kerkhof1,
G. Merla4, C. Schwartz5, B. Sadikovic1,2
1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada,
2Western University, London, ON, Canada,3Lawson
Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada,4IRCCS-
Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo,
Italy,5Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, CT, United
States
Introduction: An expanding number of genetic syndromes
have been shown to have unique genomic DNA methyla-
tion patterns (episignatures). EZH2 and EED are core
components of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)chromatin remodeling complex which catalyzes methyla-
tion of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27). Mutations in these
genes lead to the overgrowth/intellectual disability syn-dromes Weaver syndrome (EZH2) or Cohen-Gibson
syndrome (EED).
Materials and Methods: We used DNA methylation
microarrays which interrogate 450,000-850,000 individual
CpGs, along with machine learning statistical techniques, to
identify EZH2- and EED-speci ﬁc DNA methylation
signatures present in peripheral blood from affected
individuals.
Results: Using these signatures we differentiated between
individuals with EZH2 or EED mutations, controls, and
those with a wide range of other developmental disability/
intellectual disability (DD/ID) syndromes. In addition, wewere able to distinguish between pathogenic and benign
mutations in either gene, demonstrating the usefulness of
these DNA methylation signatures for classifying variantsof uncertain signi ﬁcance. Weaver and Cohen-Gibson
syndromes exhibit overlapping clinical characteristics and
their methylation signatures re ﬂect this.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 97Conclusions: These results contribute to the growing
catalogue of DNA methylation episignatures useful for the
clinical diagnosis of DD/ID and related syndromes.
M. A. Levy: None. E. Aref-Eshghi: None. T. B. Balci:
None. J. Kerkhof: None. G. Merla: None. C. Schwartz:
None. B. Sadikovic: None.
C20 Neurogenetics
C20.1
An ancestral 10bp repeat expansion in gene encoding
component of ECM causes a novel autosomal-recessiveperipheral neuropathy
A. T. Pagnamenta
1*,Y .Z o u2, S. Donkervoort2,S .B .
Neuhaus2, R. Maroo ﬁan3, N. Dominik3,H .Y .Y i p3,A .H .
Nemeth4,5,M .O ’Driscoll6, F. Norwood7, J. Rankin8,T .
Lavin9, C. Marini-Bettolo10,11, H. Jungbluth12,13,14,L .
Medne15,S .Y .Y u m16, A. R. Foley2, A. Need17, M. Sedghi18,
B. Ansari19, K. Basiri19, A. R. Moslemi20, H. Tajsharghi21,
C. C. Muraresku22, Z. Zolkipli-Cunningham22, S. Lassche23,
C. Marcelis23, Genomics England Research Consortium, J.
C. Taylor1, C. G. Bönnemann2, H. Houlden3
1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Neuromuscular and
Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, NINDS,National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States,
3Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,
4Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,5Oxford Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHSTrust, Oxford, United Kingdom,
6Birmingham Women ’s
NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,
7Department of Neurology, King ’s College Hospital,
London, United Kingdom,8Peninsula Clinical Genetics
Service, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust, Exeter, United
Kingdom,9Department of Neurology, Salford Royal NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom,10The
John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre,
Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, New-castle, United Kingdom,
11Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom,
12Department of Paediatric Neurology –Neuromuscular
Service, Evelina Children ’s Hospital, Guy ’s & St Thomas ’
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,13Ran-
dall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics MuscleSignalling Section, King ’s College London, London, United
Kingdom,
14Department of Basic and Clinical Neu-
roscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neu-roscience, King ’s College London, London, United
Kingdom,
15Divisions of Neurology and Human Geneticsof Genomic Medicine, Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, United States,16Division of Pediatric
Neurology, The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,17William
Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University ofLondon, London, United Kingdom,
18Medical Genetics
Laboratory, Alzahra University Hospital, Isfahan Univer-
sity of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
19Department of neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,20Department of Pathology, University of
Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden,21School of Health Science, Division Biomedicine
and Translational Medicine, University of Skovde, Skovde,Sweden,
22Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program,
Division of Human Genetics, Children ’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,23Radboud
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands
The extracellular matrix (ECM) comprises a network of
macromolecules such as collagens, proteoglycans and gly-coproteins. VWA1 encodes a component of the ECM that
interacts with perlecan/collagen VI, is essential in stabiliz-
ing ECM structures and demonstrates high expressionlevels in tibial nerve. Vwa1-de ﬁcient mice manifest with
abnormal peripheral nerve structure and function, however
VWA1 variants have not yet been associated with disease in
humans. Interrogation of genome sequences of 74,180
individuals from the 100K Genomes Project yielded 10
unrelated patients with rare biallelic variants in VWA1
(NM_022834.5). A single disease-associated allele
(c.62_71dup10; p.G25Rfs*74) was homozygous in 7 indi-
viduals and compound-heterozygous with other likely-deleterious variants in another 3. Given an AF of ~1/1000,
observation of 7 homozygotes constitutes a substantial
enrichment from expectation, consistent with the variant
playing a causative role in the patients ’disease. The wide
age-range of patients (6-70 years) helps us delineate theclinical phenotype over time. Initial assessment suggests a
consistent clinical presentation with common features
including muscle weakness, motor delay, pes cavus and
SMA-like electrophysiology. Additional families with
biallelic variants in VWA1 have been identi ﬁed through
collaborative efforts and partial nonsense mediated decay ofmRNA was observed in ﬁbroblasts. Ongoing work includes
targeted-screening of a large cohort of unsolved CMT
patients. We hypothesise that this disease gene has pre-viously evaded detection using exome sequencing due to
high GC content, consequential low coverage and compu-
tational dif ﬁculties associated with robustly detecting
repeat-expansions. It is anticipated that review of previously98 J. del Picchiaunsolved exomes using lower QC ﬁlters may generate fur-
ther diagnoses.
A. T. Pagnamenta: None. Y. Zou: None. S. Donkervoort:
None. S. B. Neuhaus: None. R. Maroo ﬁan: None. N.
Dominik: None. H. Y. Yip: None. A. H. Nemeth: None. M.
O’Driscoll: None. F. Norwood: None. J. Rankin: None. T.
Lavin: None. C. Marini-Bettolo: None. H. Jungbluth: None.
L. Medne: None. S. Y. Yum: None. A. R. Foley: None. A.
Need: None. M. Sedghi: None. B. Ansari: None. K. Basiri:None. A. R. Moslemi: None. H. Tajsharghi: None. C. C.
Muraresku: None. Z. Zolkipli-Cunningham: None. S.
Lassche: None. C. Marcelis: None. J. C. Taylor: None. C.G. Bönnemann: None. H. Houlden: None.
C20.2
Mutations in the Golgi protein GBF1 as a novel cause ofdistal hereditary motor neuropathy
N. Mendoza Ferreira
1*, M. Karakaya1, N. Cengiz1,D .
Beijer2, N. Fuhrmann1, I. Hölker1, B. Schrank3, K. Brigatti4,
C. Gonzaga-Jauregui5, E. Puffenberger4, G. Wunderlich6,
P. De Jonghe2,7, T. Deconinck2, K. Strauss4, J. Baets2,7,B .
Wirth1
1Institute for Human Genetics, Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Center for Rare Diseases, Cologne, Ger-
many,2Neurogenetics Group, Center for Molecular Neu-
rology (VIB), Laboratory of Neuromuscular Pathology,Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium,
3DKD HELIOS Kliniken, Department of Neurol-
ogy, Wiesbaden, Germany,4Clinic for Special Children,
Strasburg, PA, United States,5Regeneron Genetics Center,
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United
States,6Department of Neurology, University Hospital
Cologne, Cologne, Germany,7Neuromuscular Reference
Centre, Department of Neurology, Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium
Introduction: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN)
are heterogeneous diseases characterized by motor neurondegeneration and atrophy. 50% of the individuals with dHMN
have a mutation in a hitherto undiscovered gene.
Materials and Methods: WES/WGS to identify the
dHMN-causative gene. Assessment of candidate variants
consequences on splicing, protein expression, and sub-
cellular localization, using various cellular systems.
Results: We identi ﬁed de novo or inherited variants
(c.2945G>A, p.C982Y; c.3410C>T, p.A1137V; c.4382G>A,
p.R1461Q and c.3524G>A, p.W1175*) in GBF1 (Golgi
Brefeldin A-Resistant Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor-
1) in four unrelated families with dominant or sporadic
dHMN. Other known dHMN-implicated genes wereexcluded. Affected individuals show dHMN with slowlyprogressive distal muscle weakness and musculoskeletal
deformities (scoliosis, pes cavus, and hammertoes). Electro-
physiological studies con ﬁrmed chronic neurogenic changes
with axonal involvement. Three patients had additionally
distal sensory loss. GBF1 plays a pivotal role in Golgi
maintenance and retrograde traf ﬁcking as well as in
mitochondrial positioning and function. Immunostaining
analyses revealed Golgi fragmentation in all patients ’
ﬁbroblasts, being more severe in W1175*. Subtle mitochon-
drial defects, including reduced mitochondrial content and
fragmentation, were observed in all ﬁbroblast lines; except for
A1137V. These defects are in line with co-immunoprecipita-tion studies in HEK293T cells that demonstrated reduced
GBF1-Miro2 interaction in C982Y and R1461Q. None of the
GBF1 variants affects splicing.
Conclusion: Previous studies have linked Golgi frag-
mentation and mitochondrial fusion- ﬁssion defects with
motor neuron degeneration and atrophy. Our resultsemphasize the role of GBF1 in these contexts and indicate
that GBF1 mutations are a novel dHMN cause.
N. Mendoza Ferreira: None. M. Karakaya: None. N.
Cengiz: None. D. Beijer: None. N. Fuhrmann: None. I.
Hölker: None. B. Schrank: None. K. Brigatti: None. C.
Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. E. Puffenberger: None. G.Wunderlich: None. P. De Jonghe: None. T. Deconinck:
None. K. Strauss: None. J. Baets: None. B. Wirth: None.
C20.3
Biallelic JAM2 variants lead to early-onset recessive
primary familial brain calci ﬁcation
L. V. Schottlaender
1,2,3*, R. Abeti4, Z. Jaunmuktane4,5,C .
Macmillan6, V. Chelban2,B .O ’Callaghan2, J. McKinley7,8,
R. Maroo ﬁan2, S. Efthymiou2, A. Fragkou2, R. Forbes9,M .
Soutar10, J. Livingston11, B. Kalmar2, O. Swayne12,G .
Hotton12, A. Pittman2, J. Mendes de Oliveira13,M .d e
Grandis14, A. Richard-Loendt10, F. Launchbury10,J .
Althonayan4, G. McDonnell8, A. Carr2,12, S. Khan15,C .
Beetz15, A. Bisgin16, S. Tug Bozdogan16, A. Begtrup17,E .
Torti17, L. Greensmith2, P. Giunti4, P. Morrison18,S .
Brandner5, M. Aurrand-Lions14, H. Houlden2,12
1FLENI Neurological Research Institute, Capital federal,
Argentina,2Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, UK,London, United Kingdom,
3Dubowitz Neuromuscular
Centre, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, United Kingdom,4Department of Clinical
and Movement Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute
of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,5Division of
Neuropathology, The National Hospital for Neurologyand Neurosurgery, University College London Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 996Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL, United States,7Department of Neurology, Dublin
Neurological Institute at the Mater Misericordiae Uni-
versity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,8Regional Neurosciences
Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom,
9Neurology Centre, Southern HSC Trust, Craigavon Area
Hospital, Portadown, United Kingdom,10Department of
Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, London, United Kingdom,11Paediatric Neurol-
ogy, The Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds
General In ﬁrmary, Leeds, United Kingdom,12The National
Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square,London, United Kingdom,
13Universidade Federal de
Pernambuco, Departamento de Neuropsiquiatria, Recife,
Brazil,14Aix-Marseille University, Inserm, CNRS, Institut
Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France,15CENTO-
GENE AG, Rostock, Germany,16Medical Genetics Depart-
ment of Medical Faculty & AGENTEM (Adana GeneticDiseases Diagnosis and Treatment Center), Çukurova
University, Adana, Turkey,
17GeneDx, 207 Perry Parkway,
Gaithersburg, MD, United States,18Centre for Cancer
Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast,
Belfast, United Kingdom
Primary familial brain calci ﬁcation (PFBC) is a rare neu-
rodegenerative disorder characterised by a combination of
neurological, psychiatric and cognitive decline associated
with calcium deposition on brain imaging. To date, muta-tions in ﬁve genes have been linked to PFBC. However,
over 50% of individuals affected by PFBC have no mole-
cular diagnosis. We report four unrelated families present-ing with initial learning dif ﬁculties and seizures and later
psychiatric symptoms, cerebellar ataxia, extrapyramidal
signs and extensive calci ﬁcations on brain imaging.
Through a combination of homozygosity mapping and
exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to chromo-
some 21q21.3 and identi ﬁed biallelic variants in JAM2 .
JAM2 encodes for the junctional-adhesion-molecule-2, a
key tight-junction protein in blood-brain-barrier perme-ability. We show that JAM2 variants lead to reduction of
JAM2 mRNA expression and absence of JAM2 protein in
patient ’sﬁbroblasts, consistent with a loss-of-function
mechanism. We show that the human phenotype is repli-
cated in the jam2 complete knockout mouse ( jam2 KO).
Furthermore, neuropathology of jam2 KO mouse showed
prominent vacuolation in the cerebral cortex, thalamus,
cerebellum and particularly widespread vacuolation in the
midbrain with reactive astrogliosis and neuronal densityreduction. The regions of the human brain affected on
neuroimaging are similar to the affected brain areas in the
myorg PFBC null mouse. Along with JAM3 and OCLN ,
JAM2 is the third tight-junction gene in which biallelic
variants are associated with brain calci ﬁcation, suggestingthat defective cell-to-cell adhesion and dysfunction of the
movement of solutes through the paracellular spaces in the
neurovascular unit is a key mechanism in CNS calci ﬁcation.
L. V. Schottlaender: None. R. Abeti: None. Z. Jaunmuk-
tane: None. C. Macmillan: None. V. Chelban: None. B.
O’Callaghan: None. J. McKinley: None. R. Maroo ﬁan:
None. S. Efthymiou: None. A. Fragkou: None. R. Forbes:
None. M. Soutar: None. J. Livingston: None. B. Kalmar:
None. O. Swayne: None. G. Hotton: None. A. Pittman:None. J. Mendes de Oliveira: None. M. de Grandis: None.
A. Richard-Loendt: None. F. Launchbury: None. J.
Althonayan: None. G. McDonnell: None. A. Carr: None.S. Khan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
CENTOGENE. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; CENTOGENE. A. Bisgin: None. S. Tug
Bozdogan: None. A. Begtrup: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Genedx. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genedx. L. Greensmith: None. P.
Giunti: None. P. Morrison: None. S. Brandner: None. M.
Aurrand-Lions: None. H. Houlden: None.
C20.4
Loss of UGP2 in brain leads to a severe epileptic
encephalopathy, emphasizing that bi-allelic isoform
speci ﬁc start-loss mutations of essential genes can cause
genetic diseases
E. Perenthaler1*, A. Nikoncuk1, S. Youse ﬁ1,W .M .
Berdowski1, M. Alsagob2, I. Capo3, H. C. van der Linde1,P .
van den Berg1, E. H. Jacobs1, D. Putar1, M. Ghazvini1,E .
Aronica4, W. F. J. van IJcken1, W. G. de Valk1,E .
Medici –van den Herik1, M. van Slegtenhorst1, L. Brick5,M .
Kozenko5, J. N. Kohler6, J. A. Bernstein6, K. G. Monaghan7,
A. Begtrup7, R. Torene7, A. Al Futaisi8, F. Al Murshedi9,F .
Al Azri9, E. Kamsteeg10, M. Mojarrad11, A. Eslahi11,E .
Ghayoor Karimiani12, J. Vandrovcova13, F. Zafar14,N .
Rana14, K. K. Kandaswamy15, J. Hertecant16, P. Bauer15,
D. Colak2, S. Efthymiou13, H. Houlden13, A. M. Bertoli-
Avella15, R. Maroo ﬁan13, K. Retterer7, A. C. Brooks1,N .
Kaya2, T. J. van Ham1, T. Barakat1
1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,3Faculty of Medicine Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia,
4Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,5McMaster
Children ’s Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada,6Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States,
7GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,8Sultan
Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman,9Sultan Qaboos Uni-
versity Hospital, Muscat, Oman,10Radboud University,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,11Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of,12St.
George ’s University, London, United Kingdom,13UCL100 J. del PicchiaQueen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United
Kingdom,14Children ’s hospital and institute of Child
health, Multan, Pakistan,15CENTOGENE AG, Rostock,
Germany,16UAE University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates
Developmental and/or epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs)
are a group of devastating genetic disorders, resulting inearly onset, therapy resistant seizures and developmental
delay. Here we report on 19 individuals from 12 families
presenting with a severe form of intractable epilepsy, severedevelopmental delay, progressive microcephaly and visual
disturbance. Whole exome sequencing identi ﬁed a recur-
rent, homozygous variant (chr2:64083454A>G) in theessential UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP2 ) gene in
all probands. This rare variant results in a tolerable
Met12Val missense change of the longer UGP2 proteinisoform but causes a disruption of the start codon of the
shorter isoform. We show that the absence of the shorter
isoform leads to a reduction of functional UGP2 enzyme inbrain cell types, leading to altered glycogen metabolism,
upregulated unfolded protein response and premature neu-
ronal differentiation, as modelled during pluripotent stemcell differentiation in vitro. In contrast, the complete lack of
all UGP2 isoforms leads to differentiation defects in mul-
tiple lineages in human cells. Reduced expression of Ugp2a/Ugp2b in vivo in zebra ﬁsh mimics visual disturbance and
mutant animals show a behavioral phenotype. Our study
identi ﬁes a recurrent start codon mutation in UGP2 as a
cause of a novel autosomal recessive DEE. Importantly, it
also shows that isoform speci ﬁc start-loss mutations causing
expression loss of a tissue relevant isoform of an essentialprotein can cause a genetic disease, even when an organism-
wide protein absence is incompatible with life. We provide
additional examples where a similar disease mechanismapplies.
E. Perenthaler: None. A. Nikoncuk: None. S. Youse ﬁ:
None. W. M. Berdowski: None. M. Alsagob: None. I.
Capo: None. H. C. van der Linde: None. P. van den Berg:
None. E. H. Jacobs: None. D. Putar: None. M. Ghazvini:None. E. Aronica: None. W. F. J. van IJcken: None. W. G.
de Valk: None. E. Medici –van den Herik: None. M. van
Slegtenhorst: None. L. Brick: None. M. Kozenko: None. J.N. Kohler: None. J. A. Bernstein: None. K. G. Monaghan:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDX. A.
Begtrup: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDX. R. Torene: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; GeneDX. A. Al Futaisi: None. F. Al Murshedi:
None. F. Al Azri: None. E. Kamsteeg: None. M. Mojarrad:None. A. Eslahi: None. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. J.
Vandrovcova: None. F. Zafar: None. N. Rana: None. K. K.
Kandaswamy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; CENTOGENE AG. J. Hertecant: None. P. Bauer: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; CENTOGENEAG. D. Colak: None. S. Efthymiou: None. H. Houlden:
None. A. M. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. R. Maroo ﬁan: None.
K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
GeneDX. A. C. Brooks: None. N. Kaya: None. T. J. van
Ham: None. T. Barakat: None.
C20.5
Human-lineage-speci ﬁc genomic elements are enriched
within genes implicated in neurodegenerative diseases
Z. Chen
1*, D. Zhang1, R. H. Reynolds1, J. Hardy1, J. Botía2,
S. A. Gagliano Taliun3, M. Ryten1
1Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,
2Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las
Comunicaciones. Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain,
3Center for Statistical Genetics and Department of
Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
United States
Introduction: While encephalization has had advantages
for humans, this process may predispose us to neurode-
generative disorders including Alzheimer ’s and Parkinson ’s
diseases, which do not occur naturally in aged non-human
primates. This suggests that genomic features speci ﬁc to the
human lineage may provide insights into brain-relateddiseases.
Methods: In this study, we leverage high-depth whole
genome sequencing data from ~8,000 individuals andimproved conservation metrics to generate a combined
annotation identifying regions simultaneously depleted for
genetic variation (constrained regions) and have lowconservation at ten base pair resolution. We test our
proposal that these constrained, non-conserved regions
(CNCRs) result from human-speci ﬁc purifying selection
and are enriched for neurological disease risk loci.
Results: Weﬁnd that CNCRs are signi ﬁcantly depleted
from protein-coding genes but enriched within lncRNAs.We use strati ﬁed-linkage disequilibrium score regression to
demonstrate that CNCRs are enriched for per-SNP herit-
ability of complex human-speci ﬁc phenotypes, namely
intelligence (coef ﬁcient p =1.4e-3). We ﬁnd that high
CNCR density is a feature of genes already implicated in
neurological diseases, including MAPT andAPOE . Focus-
ing on APOE , we identify high CNCR density within an
unannotated intron-3 retaining non-coding transcript
reported to regulate neuronal APOE . Using human frontal
cortex RNA-sequencing data, we ﬁnd the proportion of the
intron-3-retaining transcript is higher in Alzheimer ’s disease
than control participants (p < 2.2e-16) and associated withAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 101more severe Braak pathology (adjusted r^2 =0.6778, p <
2.2e-16).
Conclusions: We generate a highly-granular annotation
that supports the importance of human-lineage-speci ﬁc
sequences in neurodegenerative disorders with implications
for disease modelling and interpretation of non-codingvariants.
ZC: LWENC Doctoral-Funding
Z. Chen: None. D. Zhang: None. R. H. Reynolds: None.
J. Hardy: None. J. Botía: None. S. A. Gagliano Taliun:
None. M. Ryten: None.
C20.6
Full-length RNA sequencing of Alzheimer brain sample
using long reads reveals complex alternative splicing
patterns
J. Ekholm
*, E. Tseng, T. Hon, J. Underwood
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States
Long-read mRNA sequencing such as PacBio ’s Iso-Seq
method offer high-throughput transcriptome pro ﬁling that
circumvents the transcript assembly problem by sequencing
full-length cDNA. The Iso-Seq method has emerged as themost reliable technology for fully characterizing isoforms
and, in turn, help shed light on underlying disease
mechanisms. Here, we have utilized the Iso-Seq method tosequence an Alzheimer ’s disease whole brain sample. This
is a devastating neurodegenerative disease that affects ~44
million people worldwide, making it the most commonform of dementia. Studies looking into disease mechanism
have shown that changes in gene expression due to alter-
native splicing likely contribute to the initiation and pro-gression of Alzheimer ’s disease. Hence, efforts have been
made to better understand the gene expression changes in
the Alzheimer brain by sequencing the transcriptome ofaffected brain regions. In this study, complex alternative
splicing patterns emerged, with 162,290 unique transcripts
up to 14 kb in length from 17,670 genes being detected.More than 60% of these transcripts were novel isoforms, the
vast majority of which have supporting cage peak data and
polyadenylation signals. To further investigate the sample,we also applied the Iso-Seq solution to single cell RNA
samples. In this experiment we obtained between 150,000-
180,000 unique isoforms from 15,000-17,000 genes. Over50% of the isoforms categorized as novel isoforms, sug-
gesting a high degree of undiscovered transcripts in the
human samples, demonstrating the utility of long-read RNAsequencing for human disease research.
J. Ekholm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E.Tseng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. T. Hon:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. J. Underwood:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; PacBio.
C21 Methods and Applications of Association Studies in
Large Cohorts
C21.1
A genome-wide association study of sex at birth in 3million individuals reveals widespread sex-differential
participation bias with potential implications for GWAS
interpretation
N. Piratsu
1, M. Cordioli2, G. Mignogna3, A. Abdellaoui4,P .
Nandakumar5, B. Hollis6, M. Kanai7, V. Manikandan8,P .
Della Briotta Parolo2, N. Baya7, C. Carey7, J. Karjalainen2,
T. D. Als8, M. D. Van der Zee4, F. R. Day6, K. K. Ong6,T .
Morisaki9, E. de Geus4, R. Bellocco3, Y. Okada9,A .
Børglum8, P. Joshi1, A. Auton5, D. Hinds5, B. Neale7,R .
Walters7, Finngen Study, 23andMe Research Team,
iPSYCH Consortium, M. G. Nivard4, J. R. B. Perry6,a.
ganna2*
1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Fin-
land,3University of Milano Bicocca, Milan, Italy,4VU
amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,523andMe Inc, Sun-
nyvale, CA, United States,6University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,7Broad Institute, Cambridge,
MA, United States,8Aarhus university, Aarhus, Denmark,
9University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Genetic association results are often interpreted with the
assumption that factors in ﬂuencing voluntary participation
do not affect downstream analyses. Understanding the
genetic basis of this participation bias is challenging as itinvolves the genotypes of unseen individuals. As a proof of
concept, we demonstrate that sex at birth becomes a heri-
table trait in the presence of sex-differential participationbias. By performing a GWAS of sex in ~3.3M men and
women, we identify over 150 genome-wide signi ﬁcant loci
which highlight complex traits underpinning differences instudy participation between sexes. For example, body mass
index (BMI) raising alleles were observed at higher fre-
quency in men compared to women, suggesting thatgenetically higher-weight women are less likely to partici-
pate in population studies than men. We demonstrate how102 J. del Picchiathese biases can lead to incorrect inferences in Mendelian
Randomization analyses and propose a conceptual frame-
work for addressing these biases. Our ﬁndings highlight a
new dimension of challenges genetic studies may begin to
face as sample sizes continue to grow.
N. Piratsu: None. M. Cordioli: None. G. Mignogna:
None. A. Abdellaoui: None. P. Nandakumar: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; 23andMe Inc. B.
Hollis: None. M. Kanai: None. V. Manikandan: None. P.Della Briotta Parolo: None. N. Baya: None. C. Carey:
None. J. Karjalainen: None. T. D. Als: None. M. D. Van der
Zee: None. F. R. Day: None. K. K. Ong: None. T. Morisaki:None. E. de Geus: None. R. Bellocco: None. Y. Okada:
None. A. Børglum: None. P. Joshi: None. A. Auton: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; 23andMe Inc.
D. Hinds: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
23andMe Inc. B. Neale: None. R. Walters: None. M. G.
Nivard: None. J. R. B. Perry: None. A. ganna: None.
C21.2
A phenome-wide gene-based collapsing analysis of rare
loss-of-function and missense variation in 268,451 UK
Biobank exomes
Q. Wang, K. Carss, K. Smith, S. Petrovski
*
Centre for Genomics Research (CGR), Discovery Sciences,
BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, Uni-
ted Kingdom
Historically, the genetic basis of complex disease has been
investigated by genome-wide association studies using
genotyping arrays. This approach is cost ef ﬁcient but lim-
ited to known and common variants. Via advanced access to
300K UK Biobank participant exomes, we studied the rare
protein-coding variation contribution to thousands of phe-notypic endpoints. Containing clinical, biomarker, and other
phenotypic information, this resource is unique in breadth
and depth.
We performed collapsing analyses considering a range of
genetic architectures. In total, 12 classes of qualifying
variants were studied according to predicted protein effect,allele frequency, and zygosity. We expanded our scope
beyond loss-of-function (LoF) variation with models
targeting missense variation predicted to be deleterious orlocated in regions of missense tolerance ratio (MTR)
constraint. A synonymous genetic model was used to
deﬁne our empirical null p-value distribution.
Using exomes from 268,451 individuals, we performed a
PheWAS studying the relationships between ~19K genes
and ~15K phenotypes. Our cloud-based platform delivered>2.5 billion analyses within 24 hours. Among study-wide
signiﬁcant ﬁndings 68% are previously known, 17% areknown disease genes but novel phenotype associations, and
15% are novel disease genes. We uncovered associations
driven by missense variants clustered in genic regions that
were missed when missense constraint was not considered.
Some of these were not captured by a LoF model,
suggesting possible gain-of-function signals.
We will illustrate AstraZeneca ’s use of these data to
rapidly validate and inform safety pro ﬁles of potential drug
targets, identify novel targets, predict drug repositioningopportunities, and study prevalence of molecular diagnoses.
Q. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
AstraZeneca. K. Carss: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. K. Smith: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
C21.3
FinnGen - study at its midway: already identifying
dozens of novel variants for tens of diseases and traits
M. Perola
1,2,3*
1Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki,
Finland,2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,3On
behalf of the FinnGen Study, Helsinki, Finland
The FinnGen project is a public-private partnership study in
Finland designed to bene ﬁt from the genetic isolation of
Finnish population to identify variants contributing to
common and rare diseases. All Finnish biobanks across the
country participate in the study. The ﬁnal aim is to collect
more than 10% of the adult population of Finland, e.g. about
500.000 participants, and utilize the well validated high-
quality, lifelong health registry data for a GWAS-PheWassetting. To date, after two and a half years of recruitment, we
have GWAS genotyped 224 578 individuals and analysed
this data against 3882 endpoints and 84 million health careevents. The current number of biobanked participants for the
project is already >340 000. Previously, we have shown that
the average Finn has more low-frequency loss-of-functionvariants and complete gene knockouts as non-Finn Eur-
opeans. Following this, now in FinnGen we have so far
identi ﬁed more than 400 genome-wide signi ﬁcant loci
(about 350 novel), which have a Finnish enriched, low fre-
quency (MAF<0.1, enrichment > 1.5) variant. More than 60
of these loci have a missense or protein truncating variant.The longitudinal setting and inclusion of the parental cause-
of-death are producing novel insights into aetiology and
progression of hundreds of diseases. FinnGen ﬁrst year
summary results of 96,499 individuals from November 2018
are now publicly released at http://r2. ﬁnngen. ﬁ/.
M. Perola: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 103grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Abbvie, Astra Zeneca,
Biogen, Celgene, Genentech, GSK, Janssen Biotech, Maze
Therapeutics, MSD, P ﬁzer, Sano ﬁ.
C21.4
Discovery, estimation and prediction analysis using a
Bayesian survival model for complex traits
S. E. Ojavee1*, D. Trejo-Banos1, M. Patxot1, K. Fischer2,A .
Kousathanas1, M. R. Robinson3
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,2Univer-
sity of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Institute of Science and
Technology, Vienna, Austria
Time-to-event analysis using genotypic data may enable a
better understanding of the mechanisms and underlying
genetic architecture behind the onset and development of
common complex disease. Typically, time-to-event data arenot normally distributed, are right censored and in genomic
studies, the number of covariates strongly exceeds the
number of observations. Previous work has not adequatelyaddressed these issues, potentially leading to underpowered
models and biased effect size estimates.
Here, we propose a hierarchical Bayesian model which
assumes that time-to-event has a Weibull distribution,
handles sparsity with spike and slab variable selection and
variance partitioning, considers right censoring, and yieldsestimates of the proportion of genetic variance explained
(SNP heritability). The model can handle datasets of
hundreds of thousands of people and millions of geneticmarkers by combining synchronous parallel Gibbs sampling
and adaptive rejection sampling.
In simulations, our approach outperformed previous
approaches and provided better genetic effect estimation.
We then applied our model to UK Biobank data for a wide-
range of traits, including time-to-death, time to cardiovas-cular disease and time-to-menopause. We achieved 68%
higher SNP heritability estimates compared to previous
results for both time-to-menopause and time-to-menarche(SNP heritabilities of 0.26 and 0.42 respectively).
Our general framework enables more accurate discovery
and estimation of the survival-related genomic markereffects providing novel insight into the genetic architecture
of any very large-scale time-to-event data, and unprece-
dented statistical power to predict risk for medicallyimportant traits.
This work was funded by an SNSF Eccellenza Grant
(PCEGP3_181181) to M.R.R.
S. E. Ojavee: None. D. Trejo-Banos: None. M. Patxot:
None. K. Fischer: None. A. Kousathanas: None. M. R.
Robinson: None.C21.5
Simultaneous estimation of bi-directional causal effects
and heritable confounding from GWAS summary
statistics
L. Darrous
1,2*, N. Mounier1,2, Z. Kutalik1,2,3
1University Center for Primary Care and Public Health,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland,3Genetics of Complex Traits,
University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom
Introduction: Mendelian Randomisation (MR), an
increasingly popular method that estimates the causal
effects of risk factors on complex human traits, has seenseveral extensions that relax its basic assumptions. How-
ever, most of these extensions suffer from two major lim-
itations; under-exploitation of genome-wide markers, andsensitivity to the presence of a heritable confounder of the
exposure-outcome relationship. To overcome these limita-
tions, we propose a Latent Heritable Confounder MR(LHC-MR) method applicable to association summary sta-
tistics, which simultaneously estimates bi-directional causal
effects, direct heritability, and confounder effects whileaccounting for sample overlap.
Results: We demonstrate that LHC-MR outperforms
several existing MR methods in terms of bias andvariance for a wide range of simulation settings and apply
it to summary statistics of 13 complex traits. Besides
several concordant results, LHC-MR unravelled newmechanisms (how being diagnosed for certain
diseases might lead to improved lifestyle) and revealed
potential false positive ﬁndings of standard MR
methods (apparent causal effect of body mass index on
educational attainment may be driven by a strong ignored
confounder). Phenome-wide search to identify LHC-
implied heritable confounders showed remarkable agree-
ment between the LHC-estimated causal effects of the latentconfounder and those for the potentially identi ﬁed ones.
Finally, LHC-MR naturally decomposes genetic correlation
to causal effect-driven and confounder-driven contributions,demonstrating that the genetic correlation between systolic
blood pressure and diabetes is predominantly confounder-
driven.
Conclusion: LHC-MR, a structural equation mixed effect
model, is a novel method that tackles both causal inference
with increased precision and the genetic architecture ofcomplex disease.
L. Darrous: None. N. Mounier: None. Z. Kutalik: None.104 J. del PicchiaC21.6
Multi-trait genome-wide association analysis of blood
pressure identi ﬁes 45 additional loci
C. P. Cabrera1,2*, R. Pazoki3,4,5, A. Giri6, J. N. Hellwege7,
E. Evangelou3,8, J. Ramírez1, L. V. Wain9,10, I. Tzoulaki3,8,
T. L. Edwards11, P. Elliott3,12,13, P. B. Munroe1,2,M .R .
Barnes1,2, M. J. Caul ﬁeld1,2, H. R. Warren1,2, on behalf of
the VA Million Veteran Program and the ICBP workinggroup
1William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary Univeristy
of London, London, United Kingdom,2National Institute for
Health Research, Barts Cardiovascular BiomedicalResearch Center, Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom,
3Department of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, London, UnitedKingdom,
4Department of Life Sciences,College of Health
and Life Sciences, Brunel University, London, United
Kingdom,5Centre for In ﬂammation Research and Transla-
tional Medicine, Brunel University, London, United King-
dom,6Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,Vanderbilt
Epidemiology Center, Department of Obstetrics andGynecology,Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nash-
ville, TN, United States,
7Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,
Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Insti-tute for Medicine and Public Health,Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States,
8Department
of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of IoanninaMedical School, Ioannina, Greece,
9Department of Health
Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United King-
dom,10NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre,
Glen ﬁeld Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom,11Vander-
bilt Genetics Institute, Division of Epidemiology, Depart-
ment of Medicine, Institute for Medicine and Public Health,Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
United States,
12National Institute for Health Research
Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Imperial CollegeHealthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom,
13UK Dementia Research
Institute, Imperial College London, London, UnitedKingdom
Introduction: Single-trait genome wide association studies
(GWAS) have revealed over 1,000 blood pressure (BP) loci.
However, these loci only account for less than one third of
the BP genetic variation. Multi-trait GWAS is reported toincrease discovery power by jointly analysing highly cor-
related traits. By performing the ﬁrst large-scale multi-trait
BP GWAS, we aimed 1) to compare multi-trait vs single-trait results and 2) identify additional loci.Methods: We apply Multi-Trait Analysis of GWAS
(MTAG) software to jointly analyse systolic BP, diastolic
BP and pulse pressure traits using our recent GWAS
discovery results from ~750k individuals of European
ancestry from UK Biobank and the International Con-
sortium of Blood Pressure. To detect additional loci wetested ~7 million imputed genetic variants applying the
same combined 1-stage and 2-stage design criteria as in the
original GWAS, with replication using MTAG results fromthe US Million Veteran Program (n~220k).
Results: Single-trait GWAS yielded a higher number of
signiﬁcant independent signals genome-wide. Nevertheless,
our multi-trait analysis identi ﬁed 45 new BP loci that were
not detected in the equivalent GWAS, of which nine remain
novel (based on further BP loci discoveries since 2018).
Conclusions: Our multi-trait GWAS discovered addi-
tional BP loci. However, our results illustrate that the
beneﬁts of MTAG are trait-speci ﬁc, requiring high pairwise
correlation between all pairs of traits, and that more power
is gained when MTAG is also used for meta-analysis of
traits from different samples. This suggests that future BPgenetics discovery projects should focus efforts on larger
meta-analyses including new cohorts.
C. P. Cabrera: None. R. Pazoki: None. A. Giri: None. J.
N. Hellwege: None. E. Evangelou: None. J. Ramírez: None.
L. V. Wain: None. I. Tzoulaki: None. T. L. Edwards: None.
P. Elliott: None. P. B. Munroe: None. M. R. Barnes: None.M. J. Caul ﬁeld: None. H. R. Warren: None.
C22 Immunology and HematologyC22.1
Newborn screening for severe combined immunode ﬁ-
ciency (SCID) using combined T cell reception excision
circles (TREC)/kappa-deleting element recombination
element (KREC) assays and next generation sequencing:diagnostic yield from the new established Swiss
programme
M. Elgizouli
1*, J. Pascal1, A. Bahr1, S. Prader2,D .
Drozdof2, J. Pachlopnik Schmid2, K. Steindl1, A. Rauch1,J .
Reichenbach2
1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Zurich, Schlieren,
Switzerland,2Department of Immunology, University Chil-
dren’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Introduction: Infants with severe combined immunode ﬁ-
ciency (SCID), a fatal form of primary immunode ﬁciency in
the absence of early de ﬁnitive therapy, show an improved
outcome if diagnosed and treated within the ﬁrst few
months of life, making the condition a suitable target for
newborn screening. Country-wide newborn screening forAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 105SCID was initiated in Switzerland in January 2019 with
about 80.000 live births per year.
Methods: DNA samples from dried blood spots of from
all neonates born in Switzerland in 2019 were assayed for
T-cell receptor excision circles (TREC) and kappa-deleting
element recombination excision circles (KREC). Cases withlow TREC and/or low KREC counts subsequently under-
went clinical genetic assessment and whole exome sequen-
cing (WES)-based mutation screening and/or high-resolution chromosomal microarray testing. Children with
dysmorphic features suspicious of DiGeorge syndrome
were initially tested for the common 22q11.2 microdeletion.In cases with suspected syndromes not detectable with
WES, targeted Sanger sequencing was performed.
Results: Out of 15 neonates with low TREC/KREC
counts identi ﬁed through the screening procedure, we
diagnosed 5 neonates with SCID and 6 with syndromic
conditions in which a severe immunode ﬁciency constitutes
a component of the clinical picture. Notably, 2 of the
6 syndromic immunode ﬁciencies were caused by RNA-
genes and thus are not included in standard exome captureprocedures.
Conclusion: Ourﬁndings support the utility of WES as
an ef ﬁcient and rapid mutation screening method in
newborns with low TREC/KREC counts and suggest a
Swiss incidence of SCID above the US incidence of 1 in
58,000 live births.
M. Elgizouli: None. J. Pascal: None. A. Bahr: None. S.
Prader: None. D. Drozdof: None. J. Pachlopnik Schmid: None.
K. Steindl: None. A. Rauch: None. J. Reichenbach: None.
C22.2
Strategies for increasing diagnostic rate in patients with
primary immunological disorders within the GenomicsEngland 100,000 Genomes Project
C. Camps
1,2*, H. Grif ﬁn3, K. Engelhardt3, Genomics
England Research Consortium, S. Y. Patel2,4,S .
Hambleton3,5, J. C. Taylor1,2
1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,2Oxford NIHR Biomedi-
cal Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom,3Institute of
Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom,4Department of Clinical Immunol-
ogy, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom,5Great North Children ’s Hospi-
tal, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
The UK ’s 100,000 Genomes Project has completed its
sequencing and includes 74,180 rare disease genomes ofwhich 2,005 are from patients or family members with aprimary immunological diagno sis. Whilst the referring
clinical centres review variants in known genes for a
given patient ’s presenting condition, the Genomics Eng-
land Clinical Interpretation partnerships (GECIPs) can
investigate the pathogenesis of ’unsolved ’cases, poten-
tially leading to the identi ﬁcation of novel disease genes,
phenotypes or mutation mechanisms. In the Immune
GECIP we have taken a gene-focused approach to screen
groups of subjects for whom no pathogenic mutation hasyet been con ﬁrmed, which is more ef ﬁcient than analysing
results on a case-by-case basis. We started by screening
known-disease genes (n =482) for the presence of variants
with high/moderate impact and frequency ≤1% in popu-
lation databases across all probands. For each variant, we
counted the number of homozygotes and heterozygotesamong probands of the Immunology domain compared
with the remaining probands, and further compared the
groups at various levels to identify any enrichment.Results from this approach include i) identi ﬁcation of
digenic cases among patients with complex phenotypes,
ii) detection of immune disease-causing variants inpatients outwith the Immunology domain, iii) detection of
compound heterozygotes involving structural variants.
This has paved the way for discovery of novel genes in theremaining patients while assi sting in the timely delivery
of clinically actionable ﬁndings, providing an exemplar of
how the 100K genomes dataset can be used to identifynovel disease genes and mechanisms as well as re ﬁning
disease entities.
C. Camps: None. H. Grif ﬁn: None. K. Engelhardt: None.
S. Y. Patel: None. S. Hambleton: None. J. C. Taylor: None.
C22.3
Dysregulated expression of the long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) ,LINC01871 ,implicated in
Sjögren ’s Syndrome pathogenesis
M. L. Joachims
1, B. Khatri1, K. L. Tessneer1,A .M .
Stolarczyk1, G. B. Wiley1, A. Rasmussen1,J .M .
Guthridge1,2, J. A. James1,2, R. H. Sco ﬁeld1,2, K. L. Sivils1,I .
Adrianto3,C. J. Lessard1,2*
1OKLAHOMA MEDICAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION,
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, United States,2University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,United States,
3Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI,
United States
Introduction: Sjögren ’s syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune
disease characterized by in ﬂammatory destruction of exo-
crine glands. Here, we aimed to identify and characterize
candidate lncRNAs with potential relevance to SSpathology.106 J. del PicchiaResults: RNA-seq was used on whole blood from SS
patients (n =30 autoantibody negative (SSRo-); n=27
autoantibody positive (SSRo+)) and healthy controls (HC, n
=27) to identify differentially expressed (DE) lncRNAs (log2
fold change (FC) ≥2o r ≤0.5; p adj<0.05). We identi ﬁed 1054
unique DE ncRNAs between Ro+,R o−, and a combined
analysis relative to HC. Of these, 45 (1 lincRNA, 1 antisense,
43 pseudogenes) were overexpressed in all 3 SS subsets. To
investigate the function of the novel lincRNA, LINC01871 ,
we performed correlation analysis of the SSRo-transcriptome
yielding several co-expressed protein coding RNAs involved
in immune regulation ( THEMIS ,TBX21 ,IL10RA ,IL2RB ,
etc.). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of the SS and publicly
available RNA expression data identi ﬁed shared immune-
related pathways including cytotoxic T cell, NK cell, andT cell regulation. We used CRISPR editing to generate a
single cell LINC01871
-/-clone of HSB2 cells. RNA-seq of
LINC01871-/-compared to unmodi ﬁed HSB2 cells identi ﬁed
1166 DE transcripts. Pathway analyses clustered DE
transcripts into similar immune regulatory, cytotoxic and T
cell pathways. Further, several T cell regulatory transcriptscorrelated with LINC01871 in SS
Ro-were downregulation
after LINC01871 deletion: CD109 (FC=−9.7; p adj=
5.3 × 10−16),IL22 (FC=−8.1; p adj=7.6 × 10−11),PDCD1
(FC=−6.2; p adj=1.1 × 10−6),THEMIS (FC=−3.8; p adj=
2.7 × 10−165),TBX21 (FC=−2.1; p adj=3.3 × 10−25).
Conclusion: LINC01871 is a potential mediator of
dysregulated T cell in ﬂammatory pathways implicated in
SS pathogenesis. Funding: NIGMS P30GM110766; Pres-
byterian Health Foundation
M. L. Joachims: None. B. Khatri: None. K. L. Tessneer:
None. A. M. Stolarczyk: None. G. B. Wiley: None. A.
Rasmussen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakersbureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis,
ThermoFisher. J. M. Guthridge: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Dxterity. J. A. James: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; Progentec
Biosciences. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Abb-
vie, Novartis, Jannsen. R. H. Sco ﬁeld: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
Pﬁzer. K. L. Sivils: None. I. Adrianto: None. C. J.
Lessard: None.
C22.4
Clonal myelopoiesis in the UK biobank cohort: somatic
ASXL1 mutations are strongly associated with smoking
history
A. A. Z. Dawoud
*, W. J. Tapper, N. C. P. CrossFaculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom
Age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is associated with
the development of hematological malignancies and non-hematological disorders. We sought to determine the
signiﬁcance of myeloid CH in the UK Biobank cohort
(n=502,524, median age =58 years, median follow
up=10.6 years). Utilizing data from single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays (n =486,941) and whole exome
sequencing (n =49,956), we identi ﬁed 1166 (0.24%)
participants with myeloid CH, de ﬁned by myeloid-asso-
ciated mosaic chromosome abnormalities (mCA) and/or
likely somatic dr iver mutations in DNMT3A, TET2,
ASXL1, JAK2, SRSF2 orPPM1D . The frequency of
myeloid CH increased with age by approximately 10% per
year (OR =1.10; P ≤2×1 0
−16). Genome-wide associa-
tion analysis identi ﬁed two distinct signals within TERT
that predisposed to CH, plus a weaker signal corre-
sponding to the JAK2 46/1 haplotype. CH and speci ﬁc
mutation types were associated with several blood fea-
tures and clinical phenotype s, including an association
between TET2 mutations and chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Smoking history was signi ﬁcantly asso-
ciated with CH: 53% (n =622) of CH cases were past or
current smokers compared to 44% (n =13,651) of con-
trols ( P=3.38 × 10−6), a difference principally due to
current ( P=6.14 × 10−6,O R=1.09) rather than past
smoking ( P=0.085). Strikingly, breakdown of CH by spe-
ciﬁcm u t a t i o nt y p er e v e a l e dt h a t ASXL1 loss of function
mutations were most strongly associated with current
smoking status ( P=1.92 × 10−5,O R=1.07), and the only
abnormality associated with past smoking ( P=2.60 × 10−3,
OR=1.04). Indeed, 69% of participants with ASXL1 muta-
tions (n =69) were past or current smokers. We suggest that
the in ﬂammatory environment induced by smoking promotes
the outgrowth of ASXL1 -mutant clones.
A. A. Z. Dawoud: None. W. J. Tapper: None. N. C. P.
Cross: None.
C22.5
A genome-wide meta-analysis yields 46 new loci
associating with biomarkers of iron homeostasis
E. Ferkingstad1*, M. K. Magnusson1,2, S. Bell3,A .S .
Rigas4, E. Allara3, G. Bjornsdottir1, A. Ramond3,E .
Sørensen4,5, G. H. Halldorsson1, D. S. Paul3,K .S .
Burgdorf4, H. P. Eggertsson1, S. Kristmundsdottir1,W .J .
Astle3, C. Erikstrup5, J. K. Sigurdsson1, D. Vuckovic3,V .
Tragante1, P. Surendran3, B. Vidarsson6, I. Jonsdottir1,2,T .
Hansen7, O. Sigurdardottir8, H. Stefansson1, D. Rye9,
DBDS Genomic Consortium, J. E. Peters3,D .
Westergaard7, H. Holm1, N. Soranzo10,3, K. Banasik7,G .
Thorleifsson1, W. H. Ouwehand3, U. Thorsteinsdottir1,P .Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 107Sulem1, A. S. Butterworth3, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,2,J .
Danesh3, S. Brunak11, E. Di Angelantonio3, H. Ullum4,K .
Stefansson1,2
1deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland,2Uni-
versity of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland,3University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,4Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,5Aarhus Uni-
versity Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,6The Laboratory in
Mjodd, Reykjavik, Iceland,7University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark,8Akureyri Hospital, Akureyri, Ice-
land,9Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States,
10Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
11Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research,
Copenhagen, Denmark
Iron de ﬁciency is a major public health problem affecting
maternal and child mortality, and iron overload has
important health implications due to end-organ irontoxicity. In order to better understand the genetic regula-
tion of iron homeostasis we carried out three genome-
wide association studies in Iceland, the UK and Denmark
of blood levels of ferritin (N =246,139), total iron
binding capacity (N =135,430), iron (N =163,511) and
transferrin saturation (N =131,471), which are the bio-
markers routinely measured for clinical assessment of
iron status. In a meta-analy sis we found associations
with iron homeostasis biomarkers represented by62 sequence variants at 56 loci. Fourteen of the variants
associate with more than one biomarker, bringing the total
number of observed associations to 87. Of the identi ﬁed
loci, 46 are novel and 10 are known. We assessed the
association of these varian ts with proteomics data and
various clinical endpoints. Five variants show sexualdimorphism: four have stronger effects in women while
one has a stronger effect in men. The four variants with
larger effects in women also have stronger effects in pre-
menopausal than post-menopausal women, and their
effect is likely working through blood loss and primarilymenstrual bleeding. The associations implicate novel iron
regulating proteins contri buting to physiological pro-
cesses involved in iron home ostasis: iron sensing and
storage, in ﬂammation, gut iron absorption, iron recycling,
erythropoiesis and bleeding /menstruation. We further-
more identify both common and rare sequence variantscontributing to risk of iron de ﬁciency anemia, a major
clinical entity that hitherto has not been studied thor-
oughly from a genetic point of view.
E. Ferkingstad: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. M. K. Magnus-
son: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. S. Bell: None. A. S. Rigas:
None. E. Allara: None. G. Bjornsdottir: A. Employment(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen,
Inc. A. Ramond: None. E. Sørensen: None. G. H.
Halldorsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. D. S. Paul: None. K. S.
Burgdorf: None. H. P. Eggertsson: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. S.
Kristmundsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. W. J. Astle:
None. C. Erikstrup: None. J. K. Sigurdsson: A. Employ-ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/
Amgen, Inc. D. Vuckovic: None. V. Tragante: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/
Amgen, Inc. P. Surendran: None. B. Vidarsson: None. I.
Jonsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. T. Hansen: None. O.Sigurdardottir: None. H. Stefansson: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. D.
Rye: None. J. E. Peters: None. D. Westergaard: None. H.Holm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. N. Soranzo: None. K.
Banasik: None. G. Thorleifsson: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. W.
H. Ouwehand: None. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi
ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen,
Inc. P. Sulem: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. A. S. Butter-
worth: None. D. F. Gudbjartsson: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. J.
Danesh: None. S. Brunak: None. E. Di Angelantonio: None.
H. Ullum: None. K. Stefansson: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.
C22.6
Identi ﬁcation of regulators of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells in vivo in humans using population
genetics
A. Lopez de Lapuente Portilla
1*, L. Ekhdal1, C. Cafaro1,Z .
Ali1, G. Thorleifsson2, K. Zemaitis1, N. Ugidos
Damboriena1, E. Johnsson1, G. Norddahl2,U .
Thorsteinsdottir2, J. Larsson1, K. Stefansson2, B. Nilsson1
1Lund University, Lund, Sweden,2deCODE Genetics,
Reykjavik, Iceland
Introduction: Understanding how hematopoietic stem- and
progenitor cells (HSPCs) are regulated is of central impor-
tance for the development of new therapies for blood dis-
orders and for regenerative medicine. Traditionally,however, HSPC regulation has been studied in model sys-
tems, and little is known about the situation in vivo in
humans.108 J. del PicchiaMethods: To learn how HSPCs are regulated under
native conditions in humans, we carried out a ﬁrst large-
scale genome-wide asso ciation study on CD34+cells,
representing HSPCs in blood. We used circulating CD34+
levels as a proxy trait to expose regulators of key
phenomena like HSPC pool size, migration, and earlydifferentiation. We created a unique phenotyping platform
based on high-throughput, high-resolution ﬂow-cytometry
and machine learning-based algorithms for automated
ﬂow data analysis, and quanti ﬁed CD34
+cells in 9,936
adults.
Results: We identi ﬁed 8 genome-wide ( P<5×1 0−8) and
20 suggestive loci ( P<5×1 0−6) associated with CD34 +
levels. The two strongest were the HSPC migration receptor
CXCR4 and a novel protein phosphatase never previously
implicated in stem cell biology. Using eQTL, ATAC-seq,
and promoter capture Hi-C analysis in isolated HSPCs, we
pinpoint likely causal variants, including variants in distantregulatory elements selectively active in speci ﬁc HSPC
subpopulations. Furthermore, shRNA knockdown in pri-
mary CD34
+cells supports that some of the identi ﬁed genes
affect CD34+proliferation and differentiation.
Conclusions: We report the ﬁrst large-scale analysis of
the genetic architecture of HSPC regulation, with potentialimplications for stem cell transplantation and the treatment
of hematologic malignancies.
Grant information: European Research Council, Swed-
ish Research Council, Swedish Cancer Society.
A. Lopez de Lapuente Portilla: None. L. Ekhdal: None. C.
Cafaro: None. Z. Ali: None. G. Thorleifsson: A. Employ-ment (full or part-time); Modest; deCODE Genetics. K.
Zemaitis: None. N. Ugidos Damboriena: None. E. Johns-
son: None. G. Norddahl: A. Employment (full or part-time);Modest; deCODE Genetics. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Modest; deCODE Genetics.
J. Larsson: None. K. Stefansson: E. Ownership Interest(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Modest; deCODE Genetics. B. Nilsson: None.
C23 Counselling, Communication and Deliberation
C23.1
Helping very young children understand inherited can-
cer predisposition syndromes using bibliotherapy
G. Schlub
1*, A. Crook2, J. Fleming1, K. Barlow-Stewart1,J .
Kirk3, K. Tucker4, S. Greening5
1University of Sydney, Faculty of Health and Medicine,
Sydney, Australia,2Cancer Services, Royal North Shore
Hospital, Sydney, Australia,3Crown Princess Mary Cancer
Centre, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia,4Hereditary
Cancer Clinic, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia,5Illawara Cancer Care Centre, Wollongong, Sydney,
Australia
Introduction: Communication with children about her-
editary conditions is dif ﬁcult for parents. Yet, good com-
munication strategies are leading determinants of
adaptation and resilience. With inherited cancer predis-position syndromes that can affect very young children e.g.
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) and Hereditary Phaeochro-
mocytoma and Paraganglioma Syndrome (HPPS), genetictesting and subsequent surveillance in at-risk children is the
optimal intervention. Given this often commences early,
providing these children and their parents appropriategenetic counselling and communication strategies is
important. By adopting a bibliotherapeutic framework-
where stories are delivered prescriptively (i.e. ‘bib-
liotherapy ’), we developed and evaluated the ﬁrst psycho-
educational resource in Australia for children at risk of LFS
and HPPS.
Materials and Methods: Illustrated storybooks for
children aged 5-10 years old at risk of either LFS or HPPS
were created based on models of developmental compre-hension. Parents were invited to participate in the study and
read the relevant storybook to their child/ren. Semi-
structured qualitative interviews were conducted andanalysed thematically using a general inductive approach
to ascertain parents ’experience reading this storybook with
their children.
Results and Conclusion: Twelve parents were inter-
viewed (total 29 children). Unanimously, parents reported
this resource would have been a useful communication toolhad it been available when their children were ﬁrst tested
and/or diagnosed. Parents reported that the resource
supported them with communication without raisingemotional distress. We anticipate that by incorporating
parental views, this cost-effective and easily deployable
resource will have psycho-educational bene ﬁt and will
improve the process of communication between parents and
children about paediatric inherited cancer syndromes.
G. Schlub: None. A. Crook: None. J. Fleming: None. K.
Barlow-Stewart: None. J. Kirk: None. K. Tucker: None. S.
Greening: None.
C23.2
Towards personalized genetic counselling: exploring
subgroups among counselees based on different facetsof empowerment before the ﬁrst visit
J. Voorwinden
1*, E. Birnie1, M. Plantinga1, M. Ausems2,N .
Knoers1, M. Velthuizen2, A. Lucassen3, I. van Langen1,A .
Ranchor1Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 1091UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands,2UMCU, Utrecht, Neth-
erlands,3University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom
Introduction: The main goal of genetic counselling is
improving empowerment (cognitive/affective outcomes).
The aim of this study is to explore subgroups amongcounselees based on different facets of empowerment.
Subsequently, to examine if these subgroups are associated
with socio-demographic and clinical variables. Recognizingthe speci ﬁc needs regarding genetic counselling for each
subgroup, could facilitate personalized genetic counselling.
Materials and Methods: Data from 2446 unselected
counselees from two Dutch academic centres was collected
with a validated questionnaire: the GCOS-18, which
measures six facets of empowerment (hope, knowledgeabout the condition, knowledge about genetic services,
negative emotions, uncertainty about heredity, uncertainty
about the treatment). Subgroups were analysed with latentproﬁle analysis.
Results: Six subgroups could be distinguished. Pro ﬁle 1
(n=727) scored best on all facets of empowerment, and
consisted of more higher educated and pre-symptomatic
counselees. Pro ﬁle 2 (n=724) scored average on all facets
of empowerment. Pro ﬁle 3 (n=225) experienced less hope,
and consisted of more index patients. Pro ﬁle 4 (n =130)
experienced less hope and knowledge; parents of referred
children were overrepresented. Pro ﬁle 5 (n =491) had
strong uncertainty about heredity, these counselees were
older and more often at risk of hereditary cancer. Pro ﬁle 6
(n=149) had strong negative emotions, uncertainty about
heredity and uncertainty about the treatment. These
counselees were older and lower educated.
Conclusion: This study reveals subgroups among
counselees. The scoring on different facets of empowerment
allows to distinguish speci ﬁc subgroups, each having their
own speci ﬁc needs, which could be used for personalization
of the genetic counselling process.
J. Voorwinden: None. E. Birnie: None. M. Plantinga:
None. M. Ausems: None. N. Knoers: None. M. Velthuizen:
None. A. Lucassen: None. I. van Langen: None. A.
Ranchor: None.
C23.3
Exploring patient deliberation prior to predictive
genetic testing in the absence of immediate clinical utility
L. M. Ballard
1*, S. Doheny2, A. M. Lucassen1, A. J. Clarke2
1University of Southampton, Southampton, United King-
dom,2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United KingdomIntroduction: Some patients appear to ‘know ’whether they
wish to have a genetic test or not, whilst others deliberate
extensively before deciding. Little is understood about how
patients deliberate such decisions. Previous research has
focused on the result of the deliberation process, but little
attention has been paid to the process of arriving at adecision itself and the role medical and lifeworld frames
play in this deliberation. Our research explored both the
deliberation and eventual decision made by patients at riskof Huntington ’s disease.
Methods: We recruited 15 patients who were considering
predictive testing for Huntington ’s disease from four UK
regional genetics services. We gathered qualitative data
from patients ’clinical consultations and re ﬂective diaries to
explore deliberation and patient interviews to exploredecisions. We took an ethnographic approach to consulta-
tions, applied discourse analysis to clinic consultations and
reﬂective diaries, and account analysis to the ﬁnal interview
with participants.
Results: Ourﬁndings show how consultations, discus-
sions with others, misconceptions, and information seekinginﬂuence four key areas: 1. Patient knowledge of the
options available; 2. Forecasting of emotions regarding
different options; 3. Imagined futures and 4. Hypotheticalscenarios (if/then). We compared clinical consultations with
reﬂective diaries to further explore deliberation inside and
outside the clinical appointment.
Conclusion: Ourﬁndings illustrate how medical frames
sit alongside patient lifeworld frames and how this
inﬂuences deliberation and shared decision making. We
make recommendations regarding the development of
decision support tools for use in clinical practice. ESRC
Grant ES/R003092/1
L. M. Ballard: None. S. Doheny: None. A. M. Lucassen:
None. A. J. Clarke: None.
C23.4
Negotiating autonomy and interdependence with family:
how young people and health professionals navigategenetic testing for Li-Fraumeni syndrome
R. Forbes Shepherd
1,2*, L. A. Keogh3, A. V. Werner-Lin4,
M. B. Delatycki5,6, L. E. Forrest1,2
1Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia,2Sir Peter MacCal-
lum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia,3Melbourne School of Population
and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Mel-
bourne, Australia,4School of Social Policy and Practice,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, UnitedStates,
5Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne,110 J. del PicchiaAustralia,6Department of Paediatrics, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
Background/Purpose: The intersection of adolescence
and young adulthood (AYA: aged 15-39 years) with high
multi-organ cancer risk caused by Li-Fraumeni syndrome
(LFS), complicates the process and implications ofgenetic testing. This research aims to investigate how
AYAs experience, and health professionals negotiate, this
process.
Methods: A multi-method approach using qualitative
interviews with AYAs together with a survey of Australa-
sian genetic and oncology health professionals examinedexperiences and practice of LFS genetic testing.
Findings: Thirty AYAs (mean age 25.5; 26 TP53+ve; 4
at 50% risk) participated. Reliance on family at this lifestage complicated AYAs ’autonomous decision-making
capacity for genetic testing, with parent-driven testing being
common among adolescents. Adolescents who underwentdiagnostic testing had limited involvement in genetic testing
decisions due to a power differential between parents and
providers. Forty-three respondents completed the survey(56% genetic counsellors), 65% had facilitated predictive
TP53 testing for AYAs, 33% had facilitated testing for
minors (<18 years). Using vignettes, respondents were moresupportive of testing for emotionally mature compared to
immature minors (p =0.009), and more supportive of
adolescent wishes compared to parental wishes for testing(p=0.020) when families held discordant views on testing.
Conclusion: Despite health professionals supporting
AYA autonomy in vignettes, the reality of genetic testingfor LFS described by AYAs was more complex and subtle,
involving both developmental and familial considerations,
which require developmentally appropriate geneticcounselling.
R. Forbes Shepherd: None. L. A. Keogh: None. A. V.
Werner-Lin: None. M. B. Delatycki: None. L. E.
Forrest: None.
C23.5
Exploring outcomes from the Deciphering Developmen-
tal Disorders study
H. Copeland
1,2*, E. Kivuva1, G. Hall2, T. DDD Study3,C .
Wright4
1Department of Clinical Genetics, RD&E, Exeter, United
Kingdom,2School of Biological Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom,4Institute of Biomedical and
Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School,Exeter, United KingdomThe Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) Study is
investigating the genetic aetiology of abnormal develop-
ment in >13,500 children with severe developmental dis-
orders from across the UK and Ireland. Diagnoses have
been identi ﬁed in around 35% of individuals, and over 50
genes have been newly implicated in developmental dis-orders. We sought to investigate the clinical and psycho-
social outcomes of receiving a genetic diagnosis in a subset
of DDD participants. Individuals recruited through theRoyal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust who received a con-
ﬁrmed genetic diagnosis from the DDD study before
August 2019 were selected for inclusion (n =112). Genetics
notes were reviewed to assess pre-de ﬁned clinical out-
comes. Disease-speci ﬁc treatment was indicated for seven
individuals, including Carbamazepine for seizure control inindividuals with pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 , and
antenatal L-serine treatment for pregnancies at risk of
pathogenic variants in PHGDH . Additionally, 69 indivi-
duals were referred to other specialties for investigations or
ongoing screening, 25 individuals were recruited to further
genetic research studies, three families were able to accessprenatal testing techniques, and 87 families were given or
signposted to disease-speci ﬁc information and/or gene-
speciﬁc patient support groups. Individuals (n =16) who had
no recorded clinical outcomes were invited to interview to
assess the psychosocial impact of the diagnosis for the
individual and wider family. Preliminary results highlightthe broad impact of a diagnosis, including clinical outcomes
for both the patient and family, as well as wider social and
psychological bene ﬁts. This presentation will discuss the
clinical and psychosocial impact of receiving a genetic
diagnosis through DDD.
H. Copeland: None. E. Kivuva: None. G. Hall: None. T.
DDD Study: None. C. Wright: None.
C23.6
Improving the communication of genomics results to
patients and families with rare diseases using Experi-
ence-Based Co-Design (EBCD)
A. Costa
1,2,V. Frankova3,4*, E. Alexander5,A .
Arellanesová6, V. Bros-Facer7, J. Clayton-Smith5,8,G .
Gumus9, M. Havlovicova4, A. Hunter10, M. Macek4,A .
Metcalfe11, C. Patch12,2, R. Pourová-Kremlíková4,M .
Pritchard13, G. Robert1, L. Roberts13
1Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery &
Palliative Care King ’s College, London, United Kingdom,
2Society and Ethics Research, Connecting Science, Well-
come Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,3Insti-
tute for Medical Humanities, Charles University, FirstFaculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic,
4Department
of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, 2ndAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 111Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol,
Prague, Czech Republic,5Manchester Centre For Genomic
Medicine, University of Manchester, St Mary ’s Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom,6CAVO, Prague, Czech
Republic,7EURORDIS, Paris, France,8Division of Evolu-
tion and Genomic Sciences School of Biological SciencesUniversity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
9EURORDIS, Barcelona, Spain,10Genetic Alliance UK,
London, United Kingdom,11Shefﬁeld Hallam University,
Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom,12Genomics England, Queen
Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom,
13SWAN UK, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: We present the methods and ﬁndings of a
research study aimed to improve the communication of
genomic results to families with rare diseases. The pre-sentation will include a short video produced with family
participants.
Materials and methods: The study was set in two
genetic services, one in the United Kingdom and one in the
Czech Republic. Using EBCD, we carried out observations
of clinical appointments and interviews with families(n=18) and health professionals (n =22). Over a series of
workshops, we worked with participants to identify
priorities for improvement and develop more appropriateways of communicating genomic results.
Results: Priorities for improvement identi ﬁed included: i)
communication at the point testing (UK); ii) counselling onfeeling of guilt (CZ) and iii) follow up care (both sites). To
address these, participants co-designed two types of
interventions: i) educational interventions for workforceand ii) service model improvements.
Conclusions: The results provide important evidence
on key competencies for the workforce in the newgenomic era, and practical recommendations to achieve
effective family-centred communication. They also
indicate the need for new models of service delivery
and greater attention to follow up care after results have
been shared. Finally, the st udy offers practical lessons
on how to enable patient and family involvement to
co-designing genomic services that can best meet
their needs.
The study is part of the larger Solve-RD project. The
Solve RD has received funding from the European Union ’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme undergrant agreement No 779257.
A. Costa: None. V. Frankova: None. E. Alexander: None.
A. Arellanesová: None. V. Bros-Facer: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. G. Gumus: None. M. Havlovicova: None. A.
Hunter: None. M. Macek: None. A. Metcalfe: None. C.
Patch: None. R. Pourová-Kremlíková: None. M. Pritchard:None. G. Robert: None. L. Roberts: None.C24 Best Posters 2
C24.02
A novel disorder involving dyshematopoiesis, in ﬂam-
mation and HLH due to aberrant CDC42 function
S. Coppola
1*,M .T .L a m2,3,4, O. H. Krumbach5,G .
Prencipe6, I. Insalaco6, C. Cifaldi7,8, I. Brigida9, E. Zara1,
S. Scala9, S. Martinelli10, M. Di Rocco10,11, A. Pascarella6,
M. Niceta12, F. Pantaleoni12,A .C i o l ﬁ12, F. Carisey2,4,M .
Akbarzadeh5, L. Farina1,6, L. Pannone10,12,H .C .
Erichsen13, A. C. Horne14,15, Y. Bryceson16,17, L. Torralba-
Raga16, K. Ramme18,8, A. Finocchi19,8, F. Locatelli20,C .
Cancrini19,8, A. Aiuti9, M. R. Ahmadian5, J. S. Orange2,F .
De Benedetti6, M. Tartaglia12
1National center for rare diseases, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, Rome, Italy,2Department of Pediatrics, Columbia
University, Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United
States,3Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine
Graduate Program and Medical ScientistTraining Pro-gram, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States,
4Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,5Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Medical Faculty
of the Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany,
6Division of Rheumatology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,7Department of Pediatrics,
Ospedale Pediatricon Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,
8Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy,9San Raffaele Telethon Institute for
Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San Raffaele Scienti ﬁc
Institute, Milan, Italy,10Department of Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy,11Department of Cellular Biotechnology and Haema-
tology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy,12Genet-
ics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,13Depart-
ment of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo UniversityHospital, Oslo, Norway,
14Pediatric Rheumatology, Astrid
Lindgren Childrens Hospital, Karolinska University Hos-
pital, Stockholm, Sweden,15Department of Women ’s and
Children ’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska Uni-
versity Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden,16Department
of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska UniversityHospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden,
17Broegelmann
Research Laboratory, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Uni-
versity of Bergen, Bergen, Norway,18Pediatric Hematol-
ogy, Immunology and HCT Section, Astrid Lindgren
Children ’s Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, Stock-
holm, Sweden,19Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale
PediatricoBambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,112 J. del Picchia20Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy
Introduction: The diagnosis and delineation of novel
genetic syndromes is often dif ﬁcult given the limited
availability of patients, genetic heterogeneity, and clinical
variability. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) ischaracterized by hyper-in ﬂammation driven by excessive
activation and expansion of macrophages and defective
Natural Killer (NK) cytotoxicity; it can be fatal if untreated.Here, we identify a previously unrecognized hematological
and autoin ﬂammatory condition in four unrelated patients
with superimposable features, including neonatal-onset tri-linear cytopenia with dyshematopoiesis, autoin ﬂammation,
rash, and HLH.
Methods: To delineate this new syndrome, we performed
phenotype and whole-genome/exome analyses. In silico,
in vitro and in vivo (C. elegans) assays allowed to
characterize the impact of mutation on localization andfunction.
Results: All patients shared the same de novo CDC42
mutation (Chr1:22417990C>T, p.R186C) and alteredhematopoietic compartment, immune dysregulation, and
inﬂammation. We documented unique effects of the p.
R186C on CDC42 localization and function. Indeed,CDC42^R186C showed impaired interaction with known
CDC42 regulators and effectors, including RHOGDI,
IQGAP1 and WASP, leading to aberrant Golgi accumula-tion, cytoskeleton rearrangement and reduced growth and
migration, which likely HB1underlie the distinctiveness of
the trait of this syndrome. Aberrant CDC42 function causeddefective NK cytotoxicity, which likely contributes to the
HLH phenotype. Timely therapeutic neutralization of IL-1?
and IFN? was critical to the survival of one patient, whounderwent successful bone marrow transplantation.
Conclusions: The presented data emphasize the crucial
role played by CDC42 in hematopoiesis and in ﬂammation.
Early recognition of the disorder and establishment of
treatment followed by bone marrow transplant are importantto survival.
S. Coppola: None. M. T. Lam: None. O. H. Krumbach:
None. G. Prencipe: None. I. Insalaco: None. C. Cifaldi:None. I. Brigida: None. E. Zara: None. S. Scala: None. S.
Martinelli: None. M. Di Rocco: None. A. Pascarella:
N o n e .M .N i c e t a :N o n e .F .P a n t a l e o n i :N o n e .A .C i o l ﬁ:
None. F. Carisey: None. M. Akbarzadeh: None. L. Farina:
None. L. Pannone: None. H. C. Erichsen: None. A. C.
Horne: None. Y. Bryceson: None. L. Torralba-Raga:None. K. Ramme: None. A. Finocchi: None. F. Locatelli:
None. C. Cancrini: None. A. Aiuti: None. M. R.
Ahmadian: None. J. S. Orange: None. F. De Benedetti:None. M. Tartaglia: None.C24.04
Loss of costameric supervillin causes myopathy with
myoﬁbrillar disorganization and autophagic vacuoles
C. Hedberg-Oldfors
1, R. Meyer2, K. Nolte3, Y. A. Rahim1,C .
Lindberg4, K. Karason5, I. J. Thuestad6, K. Visuttijai1,M .
Geijer7,8, M. Begemann2, F. Kraft2, E. Lausberg2,L .
Hitpaß9, R. Götzl10,E .J .L u n a11, H. Lochmüller12,13,S .
Koschmieder14, M. Gramlich15, B. Gess16, M. Elbracht2,J .
Weis3, I. Kurth2, A. Oldfors1,C. Knopp2*
1Department of Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,
2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,3Institute of Neuro-
pathology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany,4Department of Neurology, Neuromus-
cular Centre, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothen-burg, Sweden,
5Department of Cardiology and Transplant
Institute, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg,
Sweden,6Department of Pediatrics, Skane University
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden,7Department of Radiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothen-
burg, Sweden,8Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden,9Institute of Human Genetics,
MeDepartment of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology,
Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen Universitydical Faculty,RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
10Department
of Plastic Surgery, Hand and Burn Surgery, Medical
Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
11Division of Cell Biology and Imaging, Department of
Radiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, United States,12Children ’s Hospital of
Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Division of Neurology,
Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa,
ON, Canada,13Brain and Mind Research Institute, Ottawa,
ON, Canada,14Department of Hematology, Onkology,
Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Medical
Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
15Department of Invasive Electrophysiology, Medical
Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany,
16Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
Introduction: Archvillin, the muscle speci ﬁc isoform of
supervillin encoded by the SVIL gene, is a large sarco-
lemmal protein. Despite an important role of supervillin in
muscle cell physiology has been suggested, no musculardisease associated with SVIL mutations has been described.
We here report a new structural myopathy in four indivi-
duals of two unrelated, consanguineous families caused bybiallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVIL.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 113Material and Methods: Patients were comprehensively
investigated clinically, and whole exome sequencing on
genomic DNA was performed in all affected individuals.
Skeletal muscle biopsies were morphological analyzed by
enzyme and immunohistochemical techniques and electron
microscopy.
Results: Affected patients share a distinctive phenotype
that includes a wide neck, anteverted shoulders, and a
prominent trapezius muscle together with variable contrac-tures besides further skeletal and mild heart muscle
involvement. Muscle biopsies of both families demon-
strated complete loss of supervillin in muscle tissue bywestern blot and immunohistochemical analyses. Compre-
hensive light and electron microscopical investigations of
muscle biopsies showed striking similarities betweenpatients and revealed a structural myopathy with prominent
lobulated type 1 ﬁbers, myo ﬁbrillar disintegration and signs
of altered proteostasis and impaired autophagy.
Conclusions: The results underline the importance of
supervillin for the structural integrity of muscle ﬁbers in
humans and show that recessive loss-of-function mutationsin SVIL cause a novel myopathy with distinct histological,
ultrastructural and clinical ﬁndings.
Funding: This study was supported by the Swedish
Research Council to AO (grant number 2018-02821) and by
the German Research Foundation (DFG) to IK (KU1587/4-1).
C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. R. Meyer: None. K. Nolte:
None. Y. A. Rahim: None. C. Lindberg: None. K. Karason:
None. I. J. Thuestad: None. K. Visuttijai: None. M. Geijer:
None. M. Begemann: None. F. Kraft: None. E. Lausberg:None. L. Hitpaß: None. R. Götzl: None. E. J. Luna: None.
H. Lochmüller: None. S. Koschmieder: None. M. Gramlich:
None. B. Gess: None. M. Elbracht: None. J. Weis: None. I.Kurth: None. A. Oldfors: None. C. Knopp: None.
C24.06
Genome wide methylation pro ﬁling, EpiSign, as a
diagnostic test
M. Alders
1*, P. Henneman1, E. Aref-Eshghi2, A. Venema1,
J. Kerkhof2, B. Sadikovic2,3, M. Mannens1
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2London
Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada,3Western
University, London, ON, Canada
A growing number of neurodevelopmental syndromes are
shown to have unique genomic DNA methylation pro ﬁles.
These episignatures can be used to diagnose patients withsuch syndromes. We have recently implemented genome
wide methylation pro ﬁling as a diagnostic test in our
laboratory. This test, named EpiSign(v1), is able to recog-nize 22 syndromes, 14 of which are syndromes with speci ﬁcepisignatures, (for example for Kabuki syndrome, BAFo-
pathies and Cornelia de Lange syndrome), 6 are imprinting
disorders and 2 are repeat expansion disorders. Validation
of the test was based on 38 positive samples (with known
pathogenic variant) and 24 negative controls. All samples
were called correctly provided that the DNA was extractedfrom peripheral blood and there was no low mosaicism for
the pathogenic variant. Reasons for requesting an EpiSign
clinical test were: the presence of a variant of unknownclinical signi ﬁcance, clinical diagnosis without molecular
conﬁrmation, or as a test complementary to WES/WGS,
without a prior (suspected) diagnosis. In approximately40% of cases with a suspected (VUS present) or clinical
diagnosis, EpiSign was able to con ﬁrm this diagnosis. This
shows that EpiSign is a powerful new diagnostic tool, inparticular for patients for whom conventional genetic test-
ing was inconclusive. In March 2020 an updated version of
EpiSign will be available (EpiSignv2), allowing diagnosisof an additional 23 syndromes (45 in total). For a current list
of syndromes detected by EpiSign see https://genomedia
gnostics.amsterdamumc.nl/
M. Alders: None. P. Henneman: None. E. Aref-Eshghi:
None. A. Venema: None. J. Kerkhof: None. B. Sadikovic:
None. M. Mannens: None.
C24.08
The landscape of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants from
300,000 individuals in the UK Biobank populationsampling
Z. Ghazoui
*
AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Prior prevalence estimates of BRCA1 and BRCA2 protein-
truncating variants (PTVs) have been generally limited to
studies that have ascertained for cancer patients or indivi-duals with a family history of cancer. The aim of this study
is to utilise one of the largest sequenced Biobank popula-
tions to investigate the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2PTVs and ClinVar pathogenic/likely pathogenic classi ﬁed
missense variants. We analysed whole-exome sequence
data from 300,000 UK Biobank participants ( https://www.
ukbiobank.ac.uk/ ), which is a prospective cohort study
linked to deep phenotypic data. Among the 300,000
exomes, we identi ﬁed 1332 carriers of high con ﬁdence rare
PTVs in BRCA1/2 and another set of 62 carriers of rare
ClinVar pathogenic/likely pathogenic classi ﬁed missense
variants in BRCA1/2. Of the 1394 BRCA1/2 putativelypathogenic variant carriers, 529 (38.0%) have been diagnosed
with cancer, 455 (32.6%) have a reported family history of
cancer but are not diagnosed with cancer and 410 (29.4%)have no reported history (or family history) of cancer. For the114 J. del Picchia529 individuals with a cancer diagnosis we further evaluated
the contribution that they have to 100 distinct ICD10 primary
cancer phenotypes and identi ﬁed that ovarian (5.3% of
reported), breast (2% of reported), prostate (1% of reported),
pancreas (1.5% of reported) and lung (1.1% of reported)
cancers are amongst the cancers that are signi ﬁcantly enriched
for these BRCA1/2 putatively pathogenic variants. This study
provides an unbiased summary of germline BRCA1/2 con-
tribution to various primary cancers and highlights the valueof careful variant interpretation.
Z. Ghazoui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; AstraZeneca.
C24.09
Nanopore-sequencing-based high-resolution karyotyp-
ing of AML patients
F. Kraft
1*, P. Krüger1, S. Koschmieder2, E. Jost2,M .
Crysandt2, I. Kurth1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital RWTH
Aachen, Aachen, Germany,2Department of Medicine
(Hematology Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation), University Hospital RWTH Aachen,
Aachen, Germany
Introduction: The current diagnostic scheme for classi ﬁ-
cation of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients is usuallybased on cytogenetic and molecular biology methods. The
turnaround time for karyotype analysis is up to two weeks,
due to the indispensable cultivation of hematopoietic cells.Although initial PCR or FISH-based testing for recurrent
structural variations (SV) can be carried out within few
hours, the AML classi ﬁcation is demanding and requires
accurate karyotyping.
Methods: We utilized nanopore-sequencing to overcome
the time-consuming karyotyping and further increaseresolution and accelerate SV analysis for AML classi ﬁca-
tion. In detail, low-coverage whole genome sequencing
(LC-WGS) was carried out in combination with a modi ﬁed
SMURFseq protocol on AML bone marrow or blood
samples (?20% blasts). LC-WGS data was used to identify
classi ﬁcation-relevant SV in AML. Genome-wide CNV
analysis was done from SMURFSeq data.
Results: For all 16 samples the results from nanopore-
sequencing con ﬁrmed the SV identi ﬁed by conventional
cytogenetic and FISH analyses. Translocations, inversions,
tandem duplications and CNVs were identi ﬁed at single
base resolution. We could detect additional small CNVs ingrowth regulating genes which may modify the aggressive-
ness of the leukemia. Moreover, the procedure from DNA
isolation to obtaining results requires less than 48h and isnot operator dependent. The method can also generatekaryotype data from samples for which the cell cultivation
failed.
Conclusion: We show that nanopore-sequencing can
speed-up and potentially improve the comprehensive
analysis of SV in AML. Rapid classi ﬁcation according to
ELN risk strati ﬁcation will immediately impact on targeted
and risk adapted treatment of AML patients.
F. Kraft: None. P. Krüger: None. S. Koschmieder: None.
E. Jost: None. M. Crysandt: None. I. Kurth: None.
C24.10
Classi ﬁcation of ATM variants identi ﬁed in Spanish
patients with suspicion of hereditary cancer
L. Feliubadaló
1,2,3*, M. Santamariña Peña4,5,6,L .M .
Porras7,8, A. Moles-Fernández9, A. T. Sánchez10,11,A .
Blanco12,13,5, O. Diez9,14, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez9,M .d el a
Hoya15,16, A. Lopez-Novo17, A. Osorio18,5, M. Pineda1,2,3,D .
Rueda19,20, C. Ruiz-Ponte21,5, A. Vega12,13,5, I. J. Molina22,
X. de la Cruz7,8,23, C. Lázaro1,2,3
1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol-
ogy, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain,2Program in
Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Therapy in
Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat,Spain,
3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain,4Grupo de Medicina
Xenómica. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiagode Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
5CIBERER, Madrid, Spain,6Universidad de Santiago de
Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,7Research
Unit in Clinical and Translational Bioinformatics, Vall
d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain,
8Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain,
9Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d ’Hebron
Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain,10Heredi-
tary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
Barcelona, Spain,11Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth,
United Kingdom,12Fundación Pública Galega Medicina
Xenómica-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain,
13Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de
Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain,14Area
of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of
Vall d ’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain,15CIBER-ONC, Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain,16Molecular Oncology
Laboratory, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, IdISSC (Instituto
de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San
Carlos), Madrid, Spain,17Fundacion Publica Galega de
Medicina Xenómica, Grupo de Medicina Xenomica-Uni-
versidade de Santiago de Compostela, Instituto de Inves-
tigacion Santiago de Compostela (E035), Santiago deCompostela, Spain,
18Human Genetics Group, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain,Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 11519Digestive Cancer Research Group, 12 de Octubre
Research Institute, Madrid, Spain,20Molecular Biology
Laboratory, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain,21Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica,
Grupo de Medicina Xenomica-Universidade de Santiago de
Compostela, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de San-tiago de Compostela (E035), Santiago de Compostela,
Spain,
22Institute of Biopathology and Regenerative Med-
icine, University of Granada, Granada, Spain,23Institució
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barce-
lona, Spain
The use of NGS gene panels for clinical testing has
increased the diagnostic yield, but also the frequency of
variants of unknown signi ﬁcance (VUS) per patient. With
the aim of improving and standardizing variant classi ﬁca-
tion, we ’ll create a national registry of genetic variants in
cancer predisposing-genes. To that end, seven Spanish
molecular laboratory groups currently using NGS panels forhereditary cancer diagnostics created a variant database.
Our current database gathers all variants with less than 1%
allele frequency in all GnomAD outbred populations,starting with the ATM gene, study because of its moderate
increase in breast cancer risk and its remarkable number of
VUSes. The methodology consisted of: 1) selection andcuration of 50 representative variants from our cohort; 2)
evaluation of each by three members; and 3) discussion of
evidences for classi ﬁcation in monthly teleconferences. As
ATM-speci ﬁc guidelines have not been published, we have
previously carried out our own ACMG/AMP criterion
adjustment. So far, 842 variants belonging to 730 testedpatients with different hereditary cancer conditions. Among
the 265 unique variants, 97 appeared more than once, and
35 had differences in classi ﬁcation among groups. Our new
ATM-speci ﬁc criteria have allowed us to improve and
standardize the classi ﬁcation of the 50 pilot variants. We ’ll
next submit our classi ﬁcations to international databases
and extend our database to other Spanish participants and
hereditary cancer genes. Grant support: Carlos III NationalHealth Institute - FEDER funds [PI19/00553; PI16/00563;
PI16/01898; SAF2015-68016-R and CIBERONC]; the
Government of Catalonia [PERIS_MedPerCan and URD-Cat projects, 2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496].
L. Feliubadaló: None. M. Santamariña Peña: None. L. M.
Porras: None. A. Moles-Fernández: None. A. T. Sánchez:None. A. Blanco: None. O. Diez: None. S. Gutiérrez-
Enríquez: None. M. de la Hoya: None. A. Lopez-Novo:
None. A. Osorio: None. M. Pineda: None. D. Rueda: None.C. Ruiz-Ponte: None. A. Vega: None. I. J. Molina: None. X.
de la Cruz: None.C24.12
Reduced male reproductive success drives selective
constraint on human genes
E. J. Gardner
1*, M. D. C. Neville1, K. E. Samocha1,M .E .
K. Niemi1, K. J. Barclay2, M. Kolk3, G. Kirov4,H .C .
Martin1, M. E. Hurles1
1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom,
2Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock,
Germany,3Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden,
4School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United
Kingdom
Sequencing of human populations has revealed highly
variable patterns of natural selection acting on humangenes, with a minority of genes appearing to be under
strong selection against heterozygous variants that abolish
the function of the encoded protein. Although these selec-tively constrained genes are strongly enriched for dominant
single gene disorders, for most of these genes the nature of
the selective constraint is unknown. We called large dele-tions from SNP genotyping data on 500K UK Biobank
participants and analysed protein truncating variants from
exome data on 50K UK Biobank participants. We deter-mined the cumulative burden of likely loss-of-function
variants in each UK Biobank participant, weighted
according to the degree of selective constraint of theimpacted gene(s), which we term their Shet burden. We
found that increasing Shet burden results in substantially
reduced male reproductive success, driven by an increasedrisk of childlessness (p =4x10-15). This reduction in
reproductive success is much weaker in females (p =
0.0026). Shet burden is also associated with reduced ﬂuid
intelligence, educational attainment and household income,
but without strong sex-bias. We present evidence that this
reduced male reproductive success is most likely mediated
by cognitive and behavioural traits, which, due to female
preferences for mating partners likely to invest resources intheir offspring, renders male carriers of such variants less
able to ﬁnd mating partners. Our ﬁndings support a sub-
stantial role for sexual selection due to mate choice pre-ferences shaping the recent evolution of human genes.
E .J .G a r d n e r :N o n e .M .D .C .N e v i l l e :N o n e .K .E .
S a m o c h a :N o n e .M .E .K .N i e m i :N o n e .K .J .B a r c l a y :N o n e .M. Kolk: None. G. Kirov: None. H. C. Martin: None. M. E.
Hurles: E. Ownership Interest (s tock, stock options, patent or
other intellectual property); Modest; Congenica.116 J. del PicchiaC24.13
Widespread sexual differences in genetic architecture in
UK Biobank
E. Bernabeu1*, O. Canela-Xandri2, K. Rawlik1, A. Talenti1,
J. Prendergast1, A. Tenesa1,2
1The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom,2MRC Human Genetics Unit, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Despite males and females sharing nearly identical gen-
omes, there are differences between the sexes in complextraits and in the risk, incidence, and prevalence of a wide
array of diseases. Gene by sex interactions (GxS) are
thought to underlie some of this sexual dimorphism.However, the extent and basis of these interactions are
poorly understood. Here we provide insights into both the
scope and mechanism of GxS across the genome of circa450,000 individuals of European ancestry and 530 complex
traits in UK Biobank. We report sex differences in herit-
ability for 71 traits, through genetic correlations for 69traits, and in associations of genetic variants located in the
autosome and X-chromosome for 103 traits. We also show
that sex speci ﬁc polygenic risk scores may lead to a modest
improvement of phenotypic prediction and highlight how
sex agnostic analyses could be missing loci of interest.
Finally, we studied the potential functional role of thisdimorphism through sex-biased eQTL and gene-level ana-
lyses. This study marks the largest examination of the
genetics of sexual dimorphism to date. Our ﬁndings parallel
previous reports, proving the widespread presence of sexual
genetic heterogeneity across complex traits, though be it of
generally modest magnitude. This warrants the need forfuture studies to consider sex-stratifying analyses, in order
to both shed light into possible sex-speci ﬁc molecular
mechanisms as well as improve prediction of high-level
phenotypes.
E. Bernabeu: None. O. Canela-Xandri: None. K. Rawlik:
None. A. Talenti: None. J. Prendergast: None. A.
Tenesa: None.
C24.14
Proﬁling the chromatin landscape of early neurodeve-
lopment using scATAC-seq
C. C. Mannens
*, L. Hu, E. P. Braun, P. Lönnerberg, S.
Linnarsson
Karolinska institutet, Solna, Sweden
Understanding the molecular processes underlying healthy
development of the human brain is crucial in the modellingand investigation of neurodevelopmental disorders. While
many evolutionarily conserved developmental processes are
well studied in mouse models, our understanding of human-
speciﬁc neurodevelopmental processes is limited. Our lab
aims to provide transcriptomic and epigenomic reference
atlases with single-cell resolution. In this ongoing project,we are characterizing chromatin accessibility of cell types in
the human brain during early development (5 - 13 p.c.w.)
using single-cell ATAC-sequencing. So far, we havesequenced a few tens of thousands of cells and will pro ﬁle
up to one million individual human cells, identifying both
region- and cell lineage-speci ﬁc enhancers as well as enri-
ched motifs and gene accessibility. We use a two-step
approach to feature identi ﬁcation, ﬁrst performing super-
ﬁcial decomposition and clustering on binned genomic
ranges to stratify peak calling and then performing Hier-
archical Poisson Factorization on more detailed PeakxCell
data to identify lineages and cell types. We have identi ﬁed
29 clusters and 325.484 unique peaks. 115.048 of these
peaks are intergenic and 28.622 of these peaks (25%) don ’t
align to any known element in the GENCODE GRCh38reference, indicating the presence of unannotated cell line-
age speci ﬁc enhancers. To validate the cluster identities and
lineages, our scATAC-seq data will be integrated with thescRNA-seq data that has been acquired as part of the
Human Developmental Cell Atlas initiative. This combined
resource may serve as a reference for future studies relatingto development of the human nervous system. European
Union - H2020-SC1-BHC-2018-2020 - BRAINTIME
C. C. Mannens: None. L. Hu: None. E. P. Braun: None.
P. Lönnerberg: None. S. Linnarsson: None.
C25 Late Breaking SessionC25.1
Deciphering genomic inversions
C. M. Grochowski
1*, M. Pettersson2, J. Eisfeldt2,M .
Gandhi1,3, D. Pehlivan1, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui4,M .
Withers1, P. Stankiewicz1,5, A. C. V. Krepischi6,J .R .
Lupski1, A. Lindstrand2, C. M. B. Carvalho1
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,3University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, UnitedStates,
4Regeneron, Tarrytown, NY, United States,5Baylor
Genetics, Houston, TX, United States,6University of S ão
Paulo, SP, Brazil
Genomic inversions are a class of structural variation (SV)
relevant in evolution, speciation and disease but challengingto detect/resolve. Copy number neutral inversions contain
two breakpoints in cis , often located within repetitiveAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 117regions. Contrastingly, inversions accompanied by copy
number variation (CNV, deletions/duplications/triplica-
tions) may have more than two breakpoints. Those features
contribute to the high error rates that characterize inversion
detection resulting in many events being overlooked.
We hypothesize that proper detection/investigation of
inversions require a strategy utilizing multiple methodolo-
gies including cytogenetics and next-generation sequencing.
We applied karyotyping, short-read WGS, linked-readWGS, droplet digital PCR, array CGH, long-read WGS
(ONT) or optical mapping (OM) in two cohorts of inversion
carriers: 1. paracentric or pericentric inversions (N =18) and
2. inversions accompanied with complex rearrangements
(N=3) and one individual with multiple de novo inversions.
For cohort 1, we achieved nucleotide-resolution of inver-sion for 13/18 (72%) samples studied by WGS providing
mechanistic insights and challenging the dogma of how
most inversions are formed. Remarkably, we observed that~17% of apparently neutral inversions are accompanied by
CNVs. For cohort 2, we observed that ONT/OM resolved
the complex inversion structure through the use of singlemolecules preserving the architecture, enabling identi ﬁca-
tion of multiple junctions within repetitive segments missed
by WGS.
No single technology solves all SVs. While short-read
WGS can resolve a proportion of neutral inversions, those
mediated by repeats or accompanied by CNVs remainchallenging. Utilization of multiple technologies and
visualization of unbroken DNA through OM/ONT sequen-
cing facilitates detection/resolution of structures containingmultiple breakpoint junctions.
C. M. Grochowski: None. M. Pettersson: None. J.
Eisfeldt: None. M. Gandhi: None. D. Pehlivan: None. C.Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Genomics Center. M. Withers:
None. P. Stankiewicz: None. A. C. V. Krepischi: None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; 23 and Me. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Regeneron Pharma-ceuticals, Novartis. A. Lindstrand: None. C. M. B.
Carvalho: None.
C25.2
Polymorphic inversions underlie the shared genetic
susceptibility of obesity-related diseases
J. R. Gonzalez
1*, C. Ruiz1, A. Caceres1, I. Moran2,M .
Lopez1, L. Alonso2, I. Tolosana1, M. Guindo-Martinez3,J .
M. Mercader3, T. Esko4, D. Torrents2, J. Gonzalez5,L .A .
Perez-Jurado5
1Barcelona Institute for Global Health, BARCELONA,
Spain,2Barcelona Supercomputing Center, BARCELONA,Spain,3Broad Institute, BOSTON, MA, United States,
4University of Tartu, BARCELONA, Estonia,5Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, BARCELONA, Spain
Background: The burden of several common diseases
including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, asthma, and
depression is increasing in most world populations. Themechanisms underlying the numerous epidemiological and
genetic correlations among these disorders remain largely
unknown. Genomic inversions can alter the function ofgenes by multiple mechanisms affecting several diseases. Its
impact remained largely unknown because they were dif-
ﬁcult to genotype in large cohorts.
Methods: We performed an inversion association
analysis including 21 inversions and 25 obesity-related
traits, on a total of 408,898 Europeans, and validated theresults in 67,299 independent individuals. Inversion calling
was performed using our scoreInvHap tool that uses exiting
GWAS data.
Results: Seven inversions were associated with multiple
diseases while inversions and inversions 8p23.1, 16p11.2
and 11q13.2 were strongly associated with the co-occurrence of obesity with other common diseases.
Transcriptome analysis across numerous tissues revealed
strong candidate genes of obesity-related traits. Analyses inhuman pancreatic islets indicated the potential mechanism
of inversions in the susceptibility of diabetes by disrupting
the cis-regulatory effect of SNPs from their target genes.
Conclusions: We report the largest association study of
genomic inversions and human traits that represents a
breakthrough for genomic association of comorbid dis-orders. Inversions have major genetic contribution into the
joint susceptibility to common diseases. The results in
obesity and diabetes reveal a mechanism in which cis-regulatory SNPs are separated from their target genes by
inversion breakpoints. Future studies in other diseases are
now accessible to the research community thanks to our
inversion genotyping tool.
J. R. Gonzalez: None. C. Ruiz: None. A. Caceres: None.
I. Moran: None. M. Lopez: None. L. Alonso: None. I.
Tolosana: None. M. Guindo-Martinez: None. J. M.
Mercader: None. T. Esko: None. D. Torrents: None. J.Gonzalez: None. L. A. Perez-Jurado: None.
C25.3
Discovery of rare variants associated with bloodpressure regulation through meta-analysis of 1.3 million
individuals
E. V. Feofanova
*, the Blood Pressure-International
Consortiumof Exome chip Studies (BP ‐ICE), CHARGE
consortium, CHD Exome +, Exome BP, GoT2D:T2Dgenes,
deCODE, the Million Veteran Program (MVP)118 J. del PicchiaHuman Genetics Center, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States
Elevated blood pressure (BP) is a major risk-factor for
cardiovascular disease worldwide. Most prior genetic stu-
dies of BP explored Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs)
with minor allele frequency [MAF]>0.01. The majority ofidenti ﬁed BP-SNVs are non-coding and the corresponding
causal genes remain unknown. We explored the role of rare
variants (MAF< =0.01) on BP and elucidated candidate
causal BP genes, to further our understanding of BP
regulation.
The Exome array facilitates analyses of rare coding
variants with potential functional consequences. Over 80%
of SNVs on the array are rare and ~80% are missense,
implicating a candidate causal gene. We performed anExome Array-Wide Association Study (EAWAS) of
~247,000 SNVs in ~1.32 million participants (95 studies)
to identify SNVs associated with SBP, DBP, pulse pressureand hypertension. We additionally performed a rare-variant
Genome-Wide Association Study (RV-GWAS) of ~29
million imputed and genotyped SNVs in ~670,000participants (UKBiobank, MVP).
We discovered 105 new BP-associated genomic regions,
containing nine rare SNV-BP associations in the EAWASand 23 –in the RV-GWAS ( P<5x10
−8); 55 additional rare
variants were distinct novel SNVs within known BP-
associated loci. Many BP-associated rare variants highlightpotential candidate causal genes ( e.g. GATA5 ,PLCB3 ),
with 17% located in or near potentially druggable genes
(e.g. NR3C2 ,NPPA ).
Our study is the largest analysis of rare variants to date,
revealing candidate genes at new and previously reported
BP loci, highlighting potential therapeutic targets. We alsoreport new observations from both rare and common loci
enriching our understanding of genetic BP regulation in
health and disease.
E. V. Feofanova: None.
C25.4
Multi-Omics integration for molecular diagnostics of
mendelian disorders
R. Kopajtich
1,2*, D. Smirnov1,2, S. Loip ﬁnger3, C. Meng4,
D. Ghezzi5, K. Murayama6, J. A. Mayr7, P. Freisinger8,M .
D. Metodiev9, A. Rötig9, T. Klopstock10, G. F. Hoffmann11,
R. Santer12, F. Distelmaier13, R. Olsen14, D. Piekutowska-
Abramczuk15, P. Verloo16, C. Lamperti5, J. Gagneur3,C .
Ludwig4, H. Prokisch1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University Munich,
München, Germany,2Institute of Neurogenomics, Helm-
holtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany,3Department ofInformatics, Technical University Munich, Garching, Ger-
many,4Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectro-
metry, BayBioMS, Technical University Munich, Freising,
Germany,5Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Istituto
Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy,6Department of
Metabolism, Chiba Children ’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan,
7Department of Paediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria,8Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum
Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany,9INSERM U1163, Uni-
versité Paris, Institut Imagine, Paris, France,10Department
of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig-Maximi-
lians-University, Munich, Germany,11Department of Gen-
eral Pediatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany,12University Medical Center Eppen-
dorf, Hamburg, Germany,1313Department of General
Pediatrics, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düssel-
dorf, Germany,1414Research Unit for Molecular Medicine,
Aarhus University and University Hospital, Aarhus N,Denmark,
15Department of Medical Genetics, The Chil-
dren’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,
16Department of Internal Medicine and Paediatrics, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
With genomic advancement, came the shift from variant
discovery to interpretation, which must be rigorous to avoidmisinterpretation. Here, we analyzed 150 ﬁbroblast cell lines
from undiagnosed patients with suspected mitochondrial
disorders. Transcriptome analysis facilitates genome-wideDNA variant interpretation on the RNA level, for both coding
and non-coding variants. Proteomics allows quanti ﬁcation of
proteins in one assay, removing the need for individualWestern blot analyses. Missense variants accounting for over
50% of all mutations reported in HGMD. They may have no
functional consequence or may exercise their pathogenicityby disrupting interactions or destabilizing the protein structure
which can be detected by proteomics as aberrantly low
expression. We established a protocol for quantitative deep
proteome analysis allowing us to quantify a median of 7,500
proteins per sample. Discarding lowly expressed genes,around 13,000 transcripts are detectable. For the diagnosis of
Mendelian disease, we analyzed three aberrant events: 1)
aberrant splicing, 2) low expression, 3) monoallelic expres-sion, and variants often present as a combination of these
events. Combining DNA and RNA sequencing we increase
the diagnostic yield by 15%. Proteomics allowed us to vali-date 12/27 missense VUS (44%). In additional 12 cases, we
were able to reach a diagnosis by detecting low protein levels
of known disease genes which have not been prioritized byWES. In 14 of those cases, we were able to validate the
pathogenic character by the impact on additional proteins
functionally associated. In summary, we established a multi-omics integration pipeline and propose its application to
advanced molecular diagnostics.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 119R. Kopajtich: None. D. Smirnov: None. S. Loip ﬁnger:
None. C. Meng: None. D. Ghezzi: None. K. Murayama:
None. J. A. Mayr: None. P. Freisinger: None. M. D.
Metodiev: None. A. Rötig: None. T. Klopstock: None. G. F.
Hoffmann: None. R. Santer: None. F. Distelmaier: None. R.
Olsen: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. P.Verloo: None. C. Lamperti: None. J. Gagneur: None. C.
Ludwig: None. H. Prokisch: None.
C25.5
Impaired complex I repair causes recessive Leber ’s
hereditary optic neuropathy
S. L. Stenton
1,2*, N. Sheremet3, C. Catarino4, N. Andreeva3,
Z. Assouline5, P. Barboni6, O. Barel7, I. Bychkov8,L .
Caporali9, P. Charbel Issa10, P. Freisinger11, S. Gerber12,
D. Ghezzi13, J. Heidler14, M. Hempel15, E. Heon16,Y .
Itkis17, E. Javasky7, J. Kaplan12, R. Kopajtich1,2,C .
Kornblum18, R. Kovacs-Nagy19,1, T. Krylova8, W. Kunz20,
C. La Morgia9, C. Lamperti13, C. Ludwig21,P .
Malacarne22, J. Mayr23, J. Meisterknecht14, T. Nevinitsyna3,
F. Palombo9, B. Pode-Shakked24, M. Shmelkova3,M .
Tzadok24, A. van der Ven15, C. Vignal-Clermont25,M .
Wagner1, E. Zakharova8, N. Zhorzholadze3, J. Rozet12,V .
Carelli9, P. Tsygankova8, T. Klopstock4, I. Wittig14,H .
Prokisch1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany,2Institute of Neurogenomics,
Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany,3Fed-
eral State Budgetary Institution of Science “Research
Institute of Eye Diseases ”, Moscow, Russian Federation,
4Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Uni-
versity Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-UniversitätMünchen, München, Germany,
5Fédération de Génétique
et Institut Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France,6Scienti ﬁc Institute
San Raffaele, Milan, Italy,7Genomics Unit, Sheba Cancer
Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer,Israel,
8Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow,
Russian Federation,9IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neuro-
logiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy,10Oxford Eye Hospital,
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Oxford, United Kingdom,11Department of Pediatrics,
Klinikum am Steinenberg, Reutlingen, Germany,12Labora-
tory genetics in ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163
- Institute of genetic diseases, Imagine, Paris, France,
13Unit of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy,
14Functional Proteomics, SFB815 Core Unit, Medical
School, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
15Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,16The Hospitalfor Sick Children, Department of Ophthalmology and
Vision Sciences, The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada,17Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow,
Moscow, Russian Federation,18Department of Neurology,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany,19Department of
Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochem-istry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary,
20Department of Experimental Epileptology and Cognition
Research, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,21Bavarian
Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS),
Technische Universität München, München, Germany,
22Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Goethe-Univer-
sity, Frankfurt am Main, Germany,23Department of
Pediatrics, Salzburger Landeskliniken and Paracelsus
Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria,24Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel,
25Ophthalmology Department, Centre National d ’Ophtal-
mologie des Qinze-Vingts, Paris, France
Leber ’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is one of the
most frequent and ﬁrst genetically de ﬁned mitochondrial
diseases. The majority of LHON cases are caused bymutations in mitochondrial DNA-encoded complex I (CI)
genes and are characterized by a mild CI defect. However, a
signiﬁcant number still remain genetically unde ﬁned. Uti-
lizing human genetics and tracking of protein turnover in
mitochondrial supercomplexes, we delineate the role of an
orphan chaperone protein in a novel mechanism of CIfunction and describe a recessive form of LHON resulting
from defects in this protein. Biallelic recessive DNAJC30
mutations were discovered in LHON cases from 29 famil-ies, breaking the longstanding dogma of exclusive maternal
inheritance. In 27 of the families, the variant is ascribed to
an Eastern European founder event. Moreover, incompletepenetrance and male predominance hallmarking maternally
inherited LHON are recapitulated, indicating that these
features originate downstream of the genetic defect. Given
the combination of variable penetrance and higher than
expected allele frequency of the founder variant, the dis-covery proved challenging to current diagnostic approaches.
Our experimental data from patient-derived ﬁbroblast cell
lines indicate that the pathology underpinning the disease, amild but consistent CI defect, is due to reduced exchange of
subunits of the CI N-module, responsible for the ﬁrst part of
electron transport and exposed to higher risk of damage.The identi ﬁcation of this repair system is of general biolo-
gical importance, and may open promising avenues for
future therapeutic interventions for defective CI. Grantreferences: 01GM1906D, 01GM1906A, 01GM1603, SFB
815/Z1, GR-2016-02361449, EXC2026.
S. L. Stenton: None. N. Sheremet: None. C. Catarino:
None. N. Andreeva: None. Z. Assouline: None. P. Barboni:
None. O. Barel: None. I. Bychkov: None. L. Caporali:120 J. del PicchiaNone. P. Charbel Issa: None. P. Freisinger: None. S.
Gerber: None. D. Ghezzi: None. J. Heidler: None. M.
Hempel: None. E. Heon: None. Y. Itkis: None. E. Javasky:
None. J. Kaplan: None. R. Kopajtich: None. C. Kornblum:
D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia,
and expert witness); Modest; Santhera Pharmaceuticals. R.Kovacs-Nagy: None. T. Krylova: None. W. Kunz: None. C.
La Morgia: None. C. Lamperti: None. C. Ludwig: None. P.
Malacarne: None. J. Mayr: None. J. Meisterknecht: None.T. Nevinitsyna: None. F. Palombo: None. B. Pode-
Shakked: None. M. Shmelkova: None. M. Tzadok: None.
A. van der Ven: None. C. Vignal-Clermont: None. M.Wagner: None. E. Zakharova: None. N. Zhorzholadze:
None. J. Rozet: None. V. Carelli: None. P. Tsygankova:
None. T. Klopstock: B. Research Grant (principal investi-gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Modest; Santhera Pharmaceu-
ticals and GenSight Biologics. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Santhera Pharmaceuticals and GenSight Biologics.
I. Wittig: None. H. Prokisch: None.
C25.6
WES pro ﬁling of COVID-19
A. Renieri
1,2*, E. Benetti3, F. Montagnani3,4, R. Tita2,C .
Fallerini1, S. Amitrano2, M. Bruttini2, G. Doddato1,A .
Giliberti1, F. Valentino1, S. Croci1, L. Di Sarno1, F. Fava1,2,
M. Baldassarri1, A. Tommasi1,2, M. Palmieri1,A .
Emiliozzi3,4, M. Fabbiani4, B. Rossetti4, G. Zanelli3,4,L .
Bergantini5,M .D ’Alessandro5, P. Cameli5, D. Bennet5,F .
Anedda6, S. Marcantonio6, S. Scolletta6, F. Franchi6,M .
Mazzei7, E. Conticini8, L. Cantarini9, B. Frediani10,D .
Tacconi11, M. Feri12, R. Scala13, A. Ognibene14,G .
Spargi15, C. Nencioni16, G. Caldarelli17, M. Spagnesi18,A .
Canaccini19, E. Frullanti1, I. Meloni1, M. Mencarelli2,C .
Lo Rizzo2, A. Pinto2, E. Bargagli5, M. Mandalà20,S .
Furini3, F. Mari1,2
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,
2Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Senese, Siena, Italy,3Dept of Medical Biotechnologies,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy,4Dept of Specialized and
Internal Medicine, Tropical and Infectious Diseases Unit,
Siena, Italy,5Unit of Respiratory Diseases and Lung
Transplantation, Department of Internal and Specialist
Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy,6Dept of
Emergency and Urgency, Medicine, Surgery and Neuros-ciences, Unit of Intensive Care Medicine, Siena University
Hospital, Siena, Italy,
7Dept of Medical, Surgical and
Neuro Sciences, Diagnostic Imaging, University of Siena,Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy,
8Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery andNeurosciences, University of Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte,
Siena, Italy,9Dept of Medical Sciences, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy,10Research Center of Systemic Autoin ﬂamma-
tory Diseases and Behçet ’s Disease and Rheumatology-
Ophthalmology Collaborative Uveitis Center, Department
of Medical Sciences, Surgery and Neurosciences, Univer-sity of Siena, Siena, Italy,
11Dept of Specialized and Internal
Medicine, Infectious Diseases Unit, San Donato Hospital
Arezzo, Arezzo, Italy,12Dept of Emergency, Anesthesia
Unit, San Donato Hospital, Arezzo, Italy,13Dept of
Specialized and Internal Medicine, Pneumology Unit and
UTIP, San Donato Hospital, Arezzo, Italy,14Clinical
Chemical Analysis Laboratory, San Donato Hospital,
Arezzo, Italy,15Dept of Emergency, Anesthesia Unit,
Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy,16Dept of Specia-
lized and Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases Unit,
Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy,17Clinical Chemical
Analysis Laboratory, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto,Italy,
18Dept of Prevention, ASL South-East Tuscany, ASL
South-East Tuscany, Italy,19Territorial Scienti ﬁc Techni-
cian Department, ASL South-East Tuscany, ASL South-EastTuscany, Italy,
20Otolaryngology Unit, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy
Introduction : Italy has been the ﬁrst European Country
experiencing the epidemic wave of SARS-CoV-2 infection
reaching 200,000 cases. On March 16, we started the GEN-
COVID project ( https://sites.google.com/dbm.unisi.it/gen-
covid ) aiming to collect 2,000 COVID-19 patients all over
Italy, the ﬁrst 500 being already collected.
Material and Methods: Aﬁrst cohort of 130 Tuscanian
COVID-19 patients (100 of which hospitalised) was
subjected to clinical and molecular characterisation by
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES).
Results : Searching for common genes by Collapsing
Methods against 300 WES controls of Italian population
failed to give straightforward statistically signi ﬁcant results
with the exception of a pair of genes, one belonging to the
Olfactory Receptor families with many paralogs in thegenome. This result is not unexpected since we are facing
the most challenging common disorder triggered by
environmental factor with a strong underlying heritability(50%). Learning the lesson of Autism Spectrum Disorder,
we started to re-analyse the cohort treating each patient as an
independent case, following a Mendelian-like model. Weidenti ﬁed for each patient an average of 3 pathogenic
mutations involved in virus infection susceptibility and
pinpoint to one or more rare disorder(s); the number beinghigher in the most severely affected cases. To our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst report on WES and COVID-19. Our
results pinpoint to a combined model for COVID-19susceptibility with a number of, yet unknown, common
susceptibility genes which represent the favorite backgroundAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 121in which additional rare mutations confer to the host the best
environment for virus growth and organ damage.
A. Renieri: None. E. Benetti: None. F. Montagnani:
None. R. Tita: None. C. Fallerini: None. S. Amitrano:
None. M. Bruttini: None. G. Doddato: None. A. Giliberti:
None. F. Valentino: None. S. Croci: None. L. Di Sarno:None. F. Fava: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A. Tommasi:
None. M. Palmieri: None. A. Emiliozzi: None. M. Fabbiani:
None. B. Rossetti: None. G. Zanelli: None. L. Bergantini:None. M. D ’Alessandro: None. P. Cameli: None. D.
Bennet: None. F. Anedda: None. S. Marcantonio: None.
S. Scolletta: None. F. Franchi: None. M. Mazzei: None. E.Conticini: None. L. Cantarini: None. B. Frediani: None. D.
Tacconi: None. M. Feri: None. R. Scala: None. A.
Ognibene: None. G. Spargi: None. C. Nencioni: None. G.Caldarelli: None. M. Spagnesi: None. A. Canaccini: None.
E. Frullanti: None. I. Meloni: None. M. Mencarelli: None.
C. Lo Rizzo: None. A. Pinto: None. E. Bargagli: None. M.Mandalà: None. S. Furini: None. F. Mari: None.
C26 New Technologies and ApproachesC26.1
Electrical impedance detection based GenapSyssequencer enables diverse genomic applications
S. Paliwal
*, A. Nabi, M. Fallahi, M. R. Barmi, M. Jouzi, S.
Stern, X. Gomes, H. Nezamfar, E. LoPrete, B. Dong, P.
Kenney, K. B. Parizi, H. Rategh, S. Sankar, H.
Esfandyarpour
Genapsys Inc, Redwood City, CA, United States
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies have
made rapid strides in the throughput and accuracy of DNA
sequencing in recent years. These advances have revolu-
tionized biomedical and clinical research. Here, Genapsys
presents a novel, scalable, low cost, and high accuracy NGS
platform, which enables wide-ranging genomicapplications.
The GenapSys NGS platform is based on accurate
detection of electrical impedance changes resulting fromsingle base incorporations during sequencing-by-synthesis.
We show that impedance changes measure a steady state
dNTP incorporation signal, leading to higher accuracy. Thecore of the technology is a CMOS-based electronic chip that
enables scalability and low instrument and consumable
costs. Chips with 1M, 16M and 144M sensors can be run onthe same GenapSys instrument, giving a lab ﬂexibility in
NGS assay design and sample multiplexing. We demon-
strate that a single run with a 16M sensor chip generates upto 2 Gb of high accuracy data, with greater than 99% raw
accuracy and average read lengths of 150 bp.We demonstrate wide-ranging genomic applications of
the GenapSys platform, which include whole genome
sequencing of small genomes such as bacteria and viruses,
whole exome sequencing of human samples, and transcrip-
tomic applications. We also demonstrate that the high
accuracy of the GenapSys platform makes it ideal forgermline and somatic variant calling for inherited diseases
and cancer. Thus, the GenapSys NGS platform is an
accurate, scalable, and low cost solution for genomicsresearch and clinical applications.
S. Paliwal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Genapsys Inc. A. Nabi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. M. Fallahi: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. M. R.
Barmi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genapsys Inc. M. Jouzi: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. S. Stern: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. X. Gomes: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc.
H. Nezamfar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁ-
cant; Genapsys Inc. E. LoPrete: A. Employment (full orpart-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. B. Dong: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. P.
Kenney: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genapsys Inc. K. B. Parizi: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. H. Rategh: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc. S.
Sankar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Genapsys Inc. H. Esfandyarpour: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Genapsys Inc.
C26.2
A bespoke gene-to-patient approach uplifts novel gene
discovery for rare disease diagnostics
E. G. Seaby
1,2*, D. Smedley3, R. Scott3, M. Caul ﬁeld3,D .
Baralle1, H. L. Rehm2,A .O ’Donnell-Luria2, S. Ennis1
1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom,
2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
United States,3Genomics England, London, United Kingdom
Next generation sequencing has revolutionised rare disease
diagnostics. Concomitant with advancing technologies has
been a rise in novel disease-gene discoveries. However,
diagnostic rates remain suboptimal at ~30%. Novel genediscovery is still hindered by vast quantities of variants of
uncertain signi ﬁcance found in genes of undetermined
biological function. This necessitates intensive functionalexperiments on genes of equally-predicted causality that is
proving a major bottleneck. Herein we propose a bespoke
method that reverses the traditional approach of novel genediscovery. We apply the LOEUF metric of intolerance to122 J. del Picchiagene inactivation to curate a list of predicted haploinsuf ﬁ-
cient disease genes. By leveraging genomic and phenotypic
data from the 100,000 Genomes Project, we adopt a gene-
to-patient approach that matches de novo loss-of-function
variants in constrained genes to rare disease patients, thus
reducing most of the analytical noise that currently pre-cludes novel discoveries. Preliminary data reveal the most
constrained LOEUF genes (n =1044) are highly correlated
with OMIM disease genes. Yet, 70% have no diseaseassociation, leaving many probable disease genes yet to be
discovered. Pilot data from the 100,000 Genomes Project
(n=28,000) reveal 655 rare (MAF <0.001), de novo loss-of-
function events in 1044 LOEUF-constrained genes. 476 are
in known OMIM genes and 179 are in novel genes (174
cases involving 138 genes). Of these, 27 genes have morethan one kindred affected and 17 have the same/similar
phenotypes. Therefore, rethinking current practices by uti-
lising large cohorts and adopting gene-based approachescan accelerate novel gene discovery and target the most
appropriate genes for functional validation.
E. G. Seaby: None. D. Smedley: None. R. Scott: None.
M. Caul ﬁeld: None. D. Baralle: None. H. L. Rehm: None.
A. O ’Donnell-Luria: None. S. Ennis: None.
C26.3
Analysis of Mendelian phenotypes through mouseembryo viability screening
P. Cacheiro
1*, S. A. Murray2, V. Muñoz-Fuentes3,H .
Westerberg4, M. E. Dickinson5, A. Mallon4, T. F. Meehan3,
D. Smedley1, the International Mouse Phenotyping
Consortium
1William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University
of London, London, United Kingdom,2The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States,3European
Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics
Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom,4Medical Research
Council Harwell, Mammalian Genetics Unit and Mary
Lyon Centre, Harwell, United Kingdom,5Department of
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College ofMedicine, Houston, TX, United States
We have recently described a gene classi ﬁcation across the
Full Spectrum of Intolerance to Loss-of-function (LoF)(FUSIL) by combining mouse viability screens and human
cell proliferation assays, and showing speci ﬁc enrichment
of disease genes in discrete categories. Here, we furtherdissect this spectrum by assessing the embryonic stage at
which homozygous LoF results in lethality in mice, and
explore the correlation with human phenotypes.
Four hundred mouse lethal genes identi ﬁed by the
International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium wereadditionally classi ﬁed into one of three windows of
embryonic lethality: early, mid or late gestation. Early
lethal genes showed a lower percentage of genes with
abnormal phenotypes reported in the human orthologues
when compared to late lethal genes (40% vs 51%,
P=0.048), while the percentage of disease genes associated
with autosomal recessive inheritance was signi ﬁcantly
higher (74 % vs 46%, P =0.0005). Consistent with this
observation, we found higher pRec scores among the earlylethals (median pRec for early, mid and late windows: 0.80,
0.50 and 0.36; median pLI: 0.004, 0.07 and 0.32).
Neurological and neurodevelopmental were the mostfrequent type of diseases across windows (19%, 24% and
27%). Skeletal disorders were the second most frequent
class among those genes lethal at mid-gestation, whichcorrelates with the organogenesis phase of embryonic
development. Conversely, early lethal disease genes were
highly enriched for metabolic disorders (OR 4.27,P=0.0003).
The mouse embryonic development stage where LoF
leads to lethality allows us to establish associations withhuman disease features. This knowledge may assist the
prioritisation of candidate genes.
P. Cacheiro: None. S. A. Murray: None. V. Muñoz-
Fuentes: None. H. Westerberg: None. M. E. Dickinson:
None. A. Mallon: None. T. F. Meehan: None. D.
Smedley: None.
C26.4
Patient-derived retinal organoids to model retinitis
pigmentosa 1 (RP1)
P. Berber
*, A. Milenkovic, C. Brandl, B. H. F. Weber
University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
Introduction: Human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSC) are an excellent starting point for generating 3D
retinal organoids, which contain many cell types native to
the retina. Still, retinal organoids lack critical physiologicalcontact between photoreceptors and retinal pigment epi-
thelium (RPE) cells. Nevertheless, retinal organoids offer
exciting new pathways of scienti ﬁc discovery, including
modeling retinal dystrophies such as Retinitis Pigmentosa 1
(RP1, OMIM #180100), where vision loss is caused by the
degeneration of photoreceptors. Here, we have differ-entiated retinal organoids from healthy controls and RP1
patients harboring autosomal dominant mutations in the
RP1 gene (OMIM # 603937).
Materials and Methods: Human dermal ﬁbroblasts were
obtained from skin biopsies of six RP1 patients and healthy
controls, and reprogrammed into hiPSCs. An organoiddifferentiation protocol was adapted from publishedAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 123protocols. A novel method to harvest and expand RPE cells
as byproducts from the organoid differentiation protocol,
was also established.
Results: Successful retinal organoid differentiation was
conﬁrmed, via immunocytochemistry staining for ganglion
and photoreceptor markers. Photoreceptor differentiationwas improved by culturing the organoids on an orbital
shaker, facilitating the redistribution of fresh media and
waste. Organoids differentiated from RP1 patient hiPSCshowed a dramatic reduction in cells expressing recoverin, a
developing photoreceptor marker (13 ± 4.35 vs 80.3 ± 4.51,
p-value =4.92*10
−05). RPE cells were used to establish a
co-culture with the organoids, to induce physiological
contact between photoreceptors and RPE.
Conclusions: Retinal organoids can be differentiated from
hiPSC, and provide an exciting new avenue of research to
model inherited retinal dystrophies, including RP1.
P. Berber: None. A. Milenkovic: None. C. Brandl: None.
B. H. F. Weber: None.
C26.6
Next generation cytogenetics: genome-imaging improvesstructural variant detection for constitutional chromo-
somal aberrations
K. Neveling
*, T. Mantere, E. Kater-Baats, R. van Beek, M.
Oorsprong, S. Vermeulen, M. Pauper, D. Olde Weghuis, M.
Stevens-Kroef, G. van der Zande, D. Smeets, A. Hoischen
Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Recently, we raised the question whether the Bionano genome-
imaging technology would have potential to replace all, FISH,
karyotyping and CNV-microarr ay studies, in the analysis of
somatic aberrations for different kind of leukemia samples.1
Here we aimed to test the clinical utility of this technology forthe analysis of constitutional aberrations in DNA derived fromvarious tissues. We analyzed samples with known aberrations
of patients with infertility, recurrent abortions or intellectual
disability, as well as prenata l samples by genome imaging.
For 30 samples, ultra-high molecular weight gDNA was
isolated either from blood (EDTA/Heparin) or cell lines
(ﬁbroblasts/amniotic ﬂuid/chorionic villi). DNA was pro-
cessed and imaged on the Saphyr instrument (Bionano
Genomics).
1For each sample at least 100x genome
coverage was obtained. Using Bionano Access software,de novo genome assembly, SV and CNV variant calling and
annotation was performed.
Sample preparation for all different materials was successful.
Data analysis on average resulted in ~50 rare SVs and ~20 high
conﬁdence CNVs per sample. In the analyzed cases, all
previously clinically reported structural aberrations weredetected except for Robertsonian translocations, as expectedfor the current technology. Correctly detected aberrations
included 8 microdeletions and 8 dup lications, 11 translocations,
1 inversion and 4 aneuploidies.
Bionano genome-imaging is a promising technology with
potential to become a generic cytogenetic test for all types of
(molecular-)cytogenetic aberrations. The 10.000-time higherresolution as compared to standard karyotyping thereby
enables precise breakpoint mapping and strikingly, even
balanced translocations and inversions are picked up easily.
1. Neveling et al. (2020). bioRxiv- https://doi.org/10.
1101/2020.02.06.935742
K. Neveling: None. T. Mantere: None. E. Kater-Baats:
None. R. van Beek: None. M. Oorsprong: None. S.
Vermeulen: None. M. Pauper: None. D. Olde Weghuis:
None. M. Stevens-Kroef: None. G. van der Zande: None. D.Smeets: None. A. Hoischen: None.
C27 Genome Variation and ArchitectureC27.1
NCBI ALFA: Providing Sequence Variation Resourcefrom 1 Million dbGaP Subjects
L. Phan
*, NCBI dbSNP, NCBI dbGaP
NCBI, Bethesda, MD, United States
The aim of the NCBI Allele Frequency Aggregator (ALFA)
project ( https://go.usa.gov/xdNvF ) is to make frequency data
from over 1M subjects in the database of Genotype and Phe-
notype (dbGaP), previously under authorized access, availablefor open-access to facilitate disc overies and interpretations of
variants with biological imp acts or causing diseases. The
ALFA project will compute allele frequency for variants acrossapproved un-restricted dbGaP s tudies. This involved harmo-
nizing and normalizing Heterogeneous data and ﬁle formats
from GWAS chip array genotyping, exomes, and whole gen-
omes. were QC and transformed into standard VCF format as
input into an automated pipeline using the new SPDI notation(Holmes et al., 2019) to aggregate, remap and cluster to
existing dbSNP rs, and computed allele frequency. Allele fre-
quencies are computed for 12 major populations includingEuropean, Hispanic, African, Asian, and other diverse popu-
lation ancestries that were determined using GRAF-pop soft-
ware developed by dbGaP (Jin et al., 2019). The data isintegrated with dbSNP 680 million Reference SNP (rs) and
existing allele frequency reported for over 500 million rs from
various projects including 1000Genomes, ExAc, GnomAD,TopMed, and many other population studies. The initial ALFA
aggregate data release is from 110 thousand dbGaP subjects,
~10% of available data. Aggregated from 677 billion geno-types, the results included alle le counts and frequency for 531
million known dbSNP rs site and 18 million novel ones.124 J. del PicchiaSubsequent quarterly releases will include additional new
dbGaP studies and combined can reach over a billion variants
from millions of subjects.
L. Phan: None.
C27.2
Predicting the effects of structural variants in thehuman genome
P. Kleinert
*, M. Kircher
Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
In recent years, we saw rapid technological advances in the
identi ﬁcation of structural variants (SVs). However, the
interpretation of these variants remains challenging. Several
methods were developed that utilize individual mechanistic
principles like the deletion of coding sequence or 3D gen-
ome architecture disruptions. However, a comprehensivetool that uses the broad spectrum of available annotations
for estimating the effect of SVs and prioritize functional
variants in health and disease is missing. Here we describeCADD-SV, a method to retrieve and integrate a wide set of
annotations across the range and in the vicinity of SVs for
functional scoring. So far, supervised learning approacheswere of very limited power for this kind of application, due
to a very small number of functionally annotated (e.g.
pathogenic/benign) SV sets. We overcome this problem byusing a surrogate training-objective, the combined annota-
tion dependent depletion (CADD) of functional variants in
evolutionary derived variant sets. Our tool computes sum-mary statistics and uses a trained linear model to differ-
entiate deleterious from neutral structural variants. We use
human and chimpanzee derived alleles as proxy-neutral andcontrast them with matched simulated variants as proxy-
pathogenic, an approach that has proven powerful in the
interpretation of SNVs and short InDels (Kircher & Wittenet al, 2014). In a proof-of-principle study, we show that
CADD-SV scores correlate with known pathogenic variants
in individual genomes as well as allelic diversity observedacross the population. The ability of the current model to
prioritize functionally relevant and pathogenic variants is
unmatched by existing methods.
P. Kleinert: None. M. Kircher: None.
C27.3
RNA secondary structure mediated by Aluinsertion as a
novel disease-causing mechanism
E. Masson
1,2, S. Maestri1,2, D. N. Cooper3, C. Férec1,2,J.
M. Chen1*1Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078, GGB, Brest, France,
2CHRU Brest, Service de Génétique Médicale et de Biologie
de la Reproduction, Brest, France,3Institute of Medical
Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
United Kingdom
We have recently reported a homozygous Aluinsertion var-
iant (termed Alu_Ins) within the 3 ′-untranslated region (3 ′-
UTR) of the SPINK1 gene as the cause of a new pediatric
disease entity. Although Alu_Ins had been shown, by means
of a cell culture-based full-length gene expression assay
(FLGEA; expression vector contained SPINK1 ’s~ 7 - k be n t i r e
coding and intronic sequences), to result in the complete lossofSPINK1 mRNA expression, the precise underlying
mechanism(s) has remained elusive. Herein, we ﬁlled this
knowledge gap by adopting a hypothesis-driven approach.Employing RepeatMasker, we identi ﬁed two Aluelements
(termed Alu1a n d Alu2) within the SPINK1 locus; both are
located deep within intron 3 and, most importantly, reside inthe opposite orientation to Alu-Ins. We then performed the
cell culture-based FLGEA on a total of 7 full-length SPINK1
expression vectors (i.e., wild-type (WT), mutant (Mut),WT_del Alu1, Mut_del Alu1, WT_del Alu2, Mut_del Alu2a n d
inversion of Alu_Ins) in the presence of a nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay inhibitor, cycloheximide. The results clearlydemonstrated that Alu_Ins disrupts splicing by forming RNA
secondary structures with Alu1i nt h ep r e - m R N As e q u e n c e
rather than by its primary sequence. This is the ﬁrst time that
anAluinsertion variant has been shown to exert its effect via
such a mechanism causing human genetic disease. Given the
abundance of pre-existing Aluelements within the human
genome and the potential insertion of new Aluelements into
virtually any site, our ﬁndings have important implications for
the detection and interpretation of Aluelements in human
disease genes. (This work was supported by INSERM).
E. Masson: None. S. Maestri: None. D. N. Cooper: None.
C. Férec: None. J. M. Chen: None.
C27.4
Increased mutation rates and genome variation at activespermatogonial regulatory sites
V. B. Kaiser
*, L. Talmane, Y. Kumar, F. Semple, M.
MacLennan, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study,
D. R. FitzPatrick, M. S. Taylor, C. A. Semple
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Introduction: The germline is the ultimate source of
genetic variation, but we know little about the in ﬂuence of
germline chromatin structure on the processes that give rise
to mutations. Here, we use germline epigenomic data tostudy the in ﬂuence of transcription factor binding sitesAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 125(TFBSs) in the germline on the patterns of different classes
of mutation across the human genome.
Materials and Methods: We use novel spermatogonial
ATAC-seq data to infer the locations of TFBSs and meiotic
recombination initiation sites (PRDM9 binding sites). We
then relate these sites to structural variants in the DDD(Deciphering Developmental Disorders) cohort, very rare
(gnomAD database) variants from extant human popula-
tions, and de novo mutations.
Results: Germline TFBSs are impacted by signi ﬁcantly
increased rates of structural variant breakpoints: 32% of
singleton DDD breakpoints are within 1KB of an ATAC-Seq peak, and particular testis-active factors are enriched.
Both de novo and rare gnomAD short insertions are
enriched at the same TFBSs, suggesting these sites areparticularly susceptible to mutation and that they employ an
unusual DNA repair mechanism. The increased mutation
rates associated with germline TF binding disproportio-nately affect a class of enhancers active in human
neurodevelopment, since these enhancers overlap TFBSs
active in spermatogonia (odds ratio of mutation =6.82,
95% CI =[5.34,8.71] for deletion breakpoints).
Conclusion: Spermatogonial TFBSs drive genome
increased mutation rates and regulatory redundancy maylead to neurodevelopmental disease.
V. B. Kaiser: None. L. Talmane: None. Y. Kumar: None.
F. Semple: None. M. MacLennan: None. D. R. FitzPatrick:None. M. S. Taylor: None. C. A. Semple: None.
C27.5
Resolving complex structural variants in recurrentbrain tumors
K. Okonechnikov
1,2, J. Hübner1,2, O. Chapman3,A .
Chakraborty4, M. Pagadal3, R. Bumb5, S. Chandran5,K .
Kraft6, R. Hidalgo7, S. Mundlos7, R. Wechsler-Reya8,N .
Coufal9, M. Levy10, J. Crawford11, K. Pajtler1,2,12,D .
Reid13, A. Schmitt13, H. Carter3,F .A y4, J. Dixon5,J .
Mesirov3,14,S .M .P ﬁster1,2,12, M. Kool1,2,L. Chavez3,14*
1Hopp Children ’s Cancer Center at the NCT Heidelberg
(KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany,2Division of Pediatric
Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany,3Department of Medicine, University
of California San Diego (UCSD), San Diego, CA, UnitedStates,
4Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for
Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA, United States,5Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States,
6Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford, Stanford, CA, United States,7Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,8Tumor
Initiation and Maintenance Program, NCI-Designated
Cancer Center, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical ResearchDiscovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States,9Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, San
Diego, CA, United States,10Department of Neurosurgery,
University of California San Diego –Rady Children ’s
Hospital, Sam Diego, CA, United States,11Department of
Neurosciences, University of California San Diego –Rady
Children ’s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States,
12Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,Germany,
13Arima Genomics, Inc, San Diego, CA, United
States,14Moores Cancer Center, University of California
San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, United States
Introduction: Brain and other tumors of the CNS are the
most common cancers in children aged 0-14 years in the
USA. Ependymoma is the third most common pediatricbrain tumor and a leading cause of death in childhood
cancer patients. The most common and aggressive sub-
group, posterior fossa ependymoma group A (PFA), occursin young children and frequently leads to recurrences.
Despite extensive DNA sequencing studies, the only
molecular marker associated with particularly poor survivalis gain of chromosome 1q.
Materials and Methods: Through pro ﬁling enhancers in
ependymoma tumors, we have recently identi ﬁed putative
oncogenes, molecular targets, and functional pathways
(Mack et al, Nature 2018). Complementary to the analysis
of enhancers, we have now mapped the 3D organization oftumor chromatin in primary and relapse ependymoma
tumors using HiC.
Results: By an integrative analysis of enhancer and gene
expression in the context of the newly derived HiC data, we
identify new tumor-dependency genes activated by tumor-
speciﬁc chromatin clusters of regulatory elements. We have
also leveraged the HiC data for resolving structural variants
(SVs) underlying copy number alterations. As a result, we
identify complex inter-chromosomal SVs that result in the
formation of new topologically associated domains ( ‘neo-
TADs ’) leading to transcriptional activation of putative
oncogenes.
Conclusions: We propose a new molecular mechanism
by which chromosome 1q gains lead to complex inter-chromosomal SVs. By forming neo-TADs, these SVs lead
to the transcriptional activation of oncogenes and thus
potentially contribute to resistance in a subgroup of veryaggressive pediatric brain tumors.
K. Okonechnikov: None. J. Hübner: None. O. Chapman:
None. A. Chakraborty: None. M. Pagadal: None. R. Bumb:None. S. Chandran: None. K. Kraft: None. R. Hidalgo:
None. S. Mundlos: None. R. Wechsler-Reya: None. N.
Coufal: None. M. Levy: None. J. Crawford: None. K.Pajtler: None. D. Reid: None. A. Schmitt: None. H. Carter:126 J. del PicchiaNone. F. Ay: None. J. Dixon: None. J. Mesirov: None. S.
M. Pﬁster: None. M. Kool: None. L. Chavez: None.
C28 NeurodevelopmentC28.1
Pathogenic variants in RLIM/RNF12 lead to syndromic
X-linked intellectual disability and congenital, neurolo-
gic and behavior disorders
S. G. M. Frints
1,2*, A. Ozanturk3, G. Rodriguez Criado4,U .
Grasshoff5, M. Field6, S. Manouvrier-Hanu7,8, S. Hickey9,10,
K. Gripp11, C. Bauer5, C. Schroeder5, A. Toutain12,13,T .
Mihalic Mosher9,14, B. J. Kelly14, P. White9,14, A. Dufke5,S .
Moon3, D. C. Koboldt9,14, E. Gerkes15, A. van Haeringen16,
C. Ruivenkamp16, C. Mignot17, B. Keren18, A. Müller5,S .
Waldmüller5, M. Blandfort19, U. Kordaß20, K. Gardner21,A .
Trimouille22, K. E. P. van Roozendaal1,2, S. A. Haas23,L .
Murray6, E. Haan24,25, R. Carroll24, J. Liebelt25,L .
Hobson26, M. De Rademaeker27, H. Brunner1,2,28,J .
Glatz1,2, K. Devriendt29, J. Vermeesch29, M. Raynaud12,13,30,
O. Riess5, J. Gribnau31, N. Katsanis3, P. Bauer5,J .
Gecz25,32, C. Golzio33, C. Gontan34, V. Kalscheuer35
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University
Medical Center +, MUMC +, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands,
2Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, FHML,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands,3Center
for Human Disease Modeling and Departments of Pedia-
trics and Psychiatry, Duke University, Durham, NC, UnitedStates,
4Unidad de Genética Clínica, Hospital Virgen del
Rocío, Sevilla, Spain,5Institute of Medical Genetics and
Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,Germany,
6GOLD (Genetics of Learning and Disability)
Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia,7Clinique de
Génétique médicale Guy Fontaine, Centre de référencemaladies rares Anomalies du développement Hôpital
Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France,
8Département Universi-
taire de Génétique, EA RADEME Maladies Rares duDéveloppement et du Métabolisme, Faculté de Médecine,
Université Lille 2, Lille, France,
9Division of Molecular &
Human Genetics, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Colum-
bus, OH, United States,10Department of Pediatrics, The
Ohio State University College of Medicine, Ohio, OH,
United States,11Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children
Nemours, Wilmington, DE, United States,12Service de
Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU de Tours, Tours,
France,13UMR INSERM U930, Faculté de Médecine,
Université François Rabelais, Tours, France,14The Insti-
tute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children ’s Hospi-
tal, Columbus, OH, United States,15Department of Clinical
Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, UMCG,
Groningen, Netherlands,16Department of ClinicalGenetics, Leiden University Medical Center, LUMC,
Leiden, Netherlands,17Unité Génétique Clinique, Hôpital
Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France,18Genetic Department,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP. Sorbonne Université,
Paris, France,19Praxis für Neuropädiatrie und humangen-
etische Beratung, Landau, Germany,20MVZ für Human-
genetik und Molekularpathologie GmbH, Greifswald,
Germany,21RareREACH Research Patient Liaison, Rare
Genomics Institute, 4859 West Slauson Avenue #573, LosAngeles, CA 90056, USA, Los Angeles, CA, United States,
22Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux, Labor-
atoire MRGM, INSERM U1211, Univ., Bordeaux, France,
23Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
24Adelaide Medical School and Robinson Research Insti-
tute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,
25South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA Pathology
(at Royal Adelaide Hospital), Adelaide, Australia,26Genet-
ics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide,
Australia,27Centre for Medical Genetics, Reproduction and
Genetics, Reproduction Genetics and Regenerative Medi-cine, Free University Brussel (VUB), UZ Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium,
28Radboud University Medical Center, Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands,29Center
for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium,30Inserm U930 "Imaging and Brain", Tours,
France,31Department of Developmental Biology, Oncode
Institute, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands,32South Australian Health and Medical
Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia,33U964; Université
de33Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scienti ﬁque,
Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,
34Department of Developmental Biology, Oncode Institute,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,35Research Group Development
and Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany
Introduction: RLIM/RNF12 is an X-linked E3 ubiquitin
ligase acting as a negative regulator of LIM-domain con-
taining transcription factors and participates in X-chromo-some inactivation (XCI) in mice.
Material and Methods: We performed exome sequencing,
in vitro and in vivo studies. Clinical genetic (re)evaluation wasperformed using a Human Phenotype Ontology scoring list.
Methylation-based assays were used for determining X-
chromosome inactivation in carrier females.
Results: We will provide a review on affected males and
carrier females from 9 families which we published recently
and on 10 novel families who have unique missensevariants in RLIM . All surviving affected males presented
with X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) disorders. TenAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 127percent of the heterozygous carrier females showed mild
physical features. X-chromosome inactivation was skewed
in >91% of the carrier females. Most of the RLIM variants
identi ﬁed are predicted to affect protein function. Nine
altered amino acids are conserved and lie within a domain
essential for binding interacting proteins or in the C-terminal RING- ﬁnger catalytic domain. In vitro experiments
revealed that the amino acid changes investigated impaired
RLIM ubiquitin ligase activity. In vivo experiments in rlim
mutant zebra ﬁsh showed that wild-type RLIM rescued the
zebra ﬁshrlim microcephaly phenotype, whereas the so far
9/9 patient-speci ﬁc missense variants tested failed to rescue
the phenotype and thus represent likely severe loss of
function mutations.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁed spectrum of functionally
investigated pathogenic RLIM missense variants (9/9) cause
related XLID disorders and impaired ubiquitin ligase
activity, suggesting that proper function of RLIM isrequired for normal development, cognition and behavior.
S. G. M. Frints: None. A. Ozanturk: None. G. Rodriguez
Criado: None. U. Grasshoff: None. M. Field: None. S.Manouvrier-Hanu: None. S. Hickey: None. K. Gripp: None.
C. Bauer: None. C. Schroeder: None. A. Toutain: None. T.
Mihalic Mosher: None. B. J. Kelly: None. P. White: None.A. Dufke: None. S. Moon: None. D. C. Koboldt: None. E.
Gerkes: None. A. van Haeringen: None. C. Ruivenkamp:
None. C. Mignot: None. B. Keren: None. A. Müller: None.S. Waldmüller: None. M. Blandfort: None. U. Kordaß:
None. K. Gardner: None. A. Trimouille: None. K. E. P. van
Roozendaal: None. S. A. Haas: None. L. Murray: None. E.Haan: None. R. Carroll: None. J. Liebelt: None. L. Hobson:
None. M. De Rademaeker: None. H. Brunner: None. J.
Glatz: None. K. Devriendt: None. J. Vermeesch: None. M.Raynaud: None. O. Riess: None. J. Gribnau: None. N.
Katsanis: None. P. Bauer: None. J. Gecz: None. C. Golzio:
None. C. Gontan: None. V. Kalscheuer: None.
C28.2
De-novo and Biallelic pathogenic variants in NARS1
cause neurodevelopmental delay due to dominant
negative and partial loss of function effect
E. O’Connor
1, A. Manole1,S. Efthymiou1*, M. Mendes2,M .
Jennings3, D. Jenkins4, M. Lopez5, R. Maroo ﬁan1,V .
Salpietro1, S. Antonarakis6, J. Vincent7, T. B. Haack8,F .
Distelmaier9, R. Horvath3, J. Gleeson10, H. Becker11,J .
Mandel12, D. Koolen13, H. Houlden1
1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,
2Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,3University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,4Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom,5Institute of Healthy Aging, London, UnitedKingdom,6University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,
7Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, ON,
Canada,8University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany,
9Heinrich-Heine-University, Dusseldorf, Germany,
10Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California, CA, United
States,11University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,
12IGBMC, Strasbourg, France,13Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetases (ARSs) are ubiquitous, ancient
enzymes that charge amino-acids to cognate tRNA molecules,
the essential ﬁrst-step of protein translation. Here, we describe
20 families consisting of 31 individuals with de-novo hetero-zygous and biallelic mutations in the asparaginyl-tRNA-syn-
thetase gene ( NARS1 ), with a phenotype characterised by
microcephaly, neurodevelopmental delay, seizures, peripheralneuropathy and ataxia. NARS1 mRNA and protein expression
from both patient ﬁbroblasts and induced neural progenitor
cells (iNPCs) were reduced; NARS1 enzyme levels in thesetissues were also signi ﬁcantly reduced. Yeast complementation
assay on the recessive p.Arg545Cys mutation was not detri-
mental, but molecular modelling of this mutation showedweaker spatial positioning a nd tRNA selectivity. Zebra ﬁsh
modelling of the prevalent p.Arg534* de-novo mutation gave a
severely abnormal locomotor phenotype. Here, we show thatde-novo and biallelic mutations in NARS1 are a prevalent cause
of abnormal neurodevelopment, where the mechanism for de-
novo mutations is dominant neg ative and for recessive muta-
tions partial loss-of-functio n. MRC Centre grant (G0601943)
E. O ’Connor: None. A. Manole: None. S. Efthymiou:
None. M. Mendes: None. M. Jennings: None. D. Jenkins:None. M. Lopez: None. R. Maroo ﬁan: None. V. Salpietro:
None. S. Antonarakis: None. J. Vincent: None. T. B. Haack:
None. F. Distelmaier: None. R. Horvath: None. J. Gleeson:None. H. Becker: None. J. Mandel: None. D. Koolen:
None. H. Houlden: None.
C28.3
Biallelic loss-of-function variants in TBC1D2B cause a
neurodevelopmental disorder with seizures and gingivalovergrowth
F. L. Harms
1*, P. Parthasarathy2, D. Zorndt1, M. Alawi3,S .
Fuchs1, B. J. Halliday2, C. McKeown4, H. Sampaio5,6,N .
Radhakrishnan7, S. K. Radhakrishnan8, R. Sachdev4,S .P .
Robertson2, S. Nampoothiri9, K. Kutsche1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,2Department of
Women ’s and Children ’s Health, Dunedin School of
Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand,
3Bioinformatics Core, University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,4Centre for Clinical128 J. del PicchiaGenetics, Sydney Children ’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia,
5Department of Women and Children ’s Health, Randwick
Campus, University of New South Wales, Randwick,
Australia,6Sydney Children ’s Hospital, Randwick, Austra-
lia,7Department of Ophthalmology, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Cochin, India,
8Department of Neurology, Amrita Institute of Medical
Sciences & Research Centre, Cochin, India,9Department of
Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences &Research Centre, Cochin, India
The family of Tre2-Bub2-Cdc16 (TBC)-domain con-
taining GTPase activating p roteins (RABGAPs) is not
only known as key regulators of RAB GTPase activity,
but also has GAP-independent functions. RAB GTPases
are implicated in membrane traf ﬁcking pathways, such
as vesicular traf ﬁcking. We report biallelic loss-of-
function variants in TBC1D2B , encoding a member of
the TBC/RABGAP family with yet unknown function, as
the underlying cause of cogn itive impairment, seizures,
and gingival overgrowth in two individuals from unre-
lated families. TBC1D2B mRNA amount was drastically
reduced and the protein was absent in ﬁbroblasts of one
patient. In immuno ﬂuorescence analysis, ectopically
expressed TBC1D2B co-localized with vesicles positivefor RAB5, a small GTPase orch estrating early endocytic
vesicle traf ﬁcking. In two independent TBC1D2B
CRISPR/Cas9 knockout HeLa cell lines that serve ascellular model of TBC1D2B deﬁciency, epidermal
growth factor intern alization was signi ﬁcantly reduced
compared with the parental H eLa cell line suggesting a
role of TBC1D2B in early endocytosis. Serum depriva-
tion of TBC1D2B -deﬁcient HeLa cell lines caused a
decrease in cell viability an d an increase in apoptosis.
Our data reveal that loss of TBC1D2B causes a neuro-
developmental disorder with gingival overgrowth, pos-
s i b l yb yd e ﬁcits in vesicle traf ﬁcking and/or cell
survival.
F. L. H. was supported by the Research Promotion Fund
of the Faculty of Medicine (FFM) of the University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf. This work was
supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsge-meinschaft (KU 1240/10-1) to K. K. and from Curekids
New Zealand to S.P.R.
F. L. Harms: None. P. Parthasarathy: None. D. Zorndt:
None. M. Alawi: None. S. Fuchs: None. B. J. Halliday:
None. C. McKeown: None. H. Sampaio: None. N.
Radhakrishnan: None. S. K. Radhakrishnan: None. R.Sachdev: None. S. P. Robertson: None. S. Nampoothiri:
None. K. Kutsche: None.C28.4
De novo pathogenic variants in CSNK2B cause a new
intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome distin-
guished from Poirier-Bienvenu neurodevelopmental
syndrome
M. Asif
1,2,3*, E. Kaygusuz1,2,4, M. Shinawi5, A. Nickelsen6,
J. Hochscherf7, D. Lindenblatt7, A. A. Noegel1,3,S .
Tinschert8, K. Nie ﬁnd7, P. Fortugno9, J. Jose6,F .
Brancati9,10, P. Nürnberg1,3, M. S. Hussain1,2,3
1Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,2Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical
Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,3Center
for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University ofCologne, Cologne, Germany,
4Institute of Human Genetics,
University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany,
5Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department
of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO, United States,6Institute of Pharmaceutical
and Medicinal Chemistry, Westphalian Wilhelms-Univer-sity, Münster, Germany,
7Department of Chemistry, Insti-
tute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,8Zentrum Medizinische Genetik, Medizinische
Universität, Innsbruck, Austria,9Istituto Dermopatico
dell’Immacolata (IDI) IRCCS, Rome, Italy,10Medical
Genetics, Department of Life, Health and EnvironmentalScience, University of L ’Aquila, L ’Aquila, Italy
Introduction : In a cohort of patients with intellectual dis-
ability, microcephaly, growth failure, facial and digitalanomalies, we recently identi ﬁed mutations in CKAP2L as a
cause of Filippi syndrome (FS). One of these patients was
tested negative for CKAP2L and had a slightly different
phenotype.
Materials and Methods : To identify the causal variants,
trio whole-exome sequencing was performed. To further
explore the consequences of identi ﬁed variants, pulldown
assays, microscale thermophoresis, immuno ﬂuorescence
and whole transcriptome and whole phosphoproteome
(WPP) pro ﬁling were conducted.
Results : A pathogenic de novo CSNK2B variant was
identi ﬁed in the proband, while a second patient recruited
through GeneMatcher showing similar phenotype harbored
a de novo CSNK2B variant on same codon. Both variants, p.
(Asp32Asn) and p.(Asp32His), caused an up-regulation of
CSNK2B expression at transcript and protein level, which
resulted in impaired cross talk between αandβsubunits of
casein kinase 2 (CK2). The effect of p.(Asp32His) was
observed in the canonical Wnt signaling (CWS) and DNA
damage response (DDR) pathways. In CWS, an impairedAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 129interaction of DVL3 with mutant CK2 βand up-regulation
as well as mislocalization of β-catenin in mutant LCLs was
found. In DDR, γH2AX, 53BP1 and CHK1 was substan-
tially increased in mutant LCLs. Additionally, RNA-seq
data con ﬁrmed differential expression of genes involved in
the aforementioned pathways. Finally, WPP showedhypophosphorylation of 344 substrates of CK2.
Conclusions : Our ﬁndings suggest that CSNK2B is a
novel candidate gene for a rare distinguished craniodigitalsyndrome. The underlying pathogenic variants exert their
pleiotropic effects through a dysregulation of CWS
and DDR.
M. Asif: None. E. Kaygusuz: None. M. Shinawi: None.
A. Nickelsen: None. J. Hochscherf: None. D. Lindenblatt:
None. A. A. Noegel: None. S. Tinschert: None. K. Nie ﬁnd:
None. P. Fortugno: None. J. Jose: None. F. Brancati: None.
P. Nürnberg: None. M. S. Hussain: None.
C28.5
Biallelic and monoallelic variants in PLXNA1 cause a
syndromic disorder with neurodevelopmental and
oculo-cerebral anomalies
G. C. Dworschak
1,2,3*, J. Punetha4, J. C. Kalanithy1,E .
Mingardo1, H. B. Erdem5, Z. C. Akdemir4, E. Karaca6,T .
Mitani4, D. Mara ﬁ4, J. M. Fatih4, S. N. Jhangiani7,J .V .
Hunter8, T. Dakal9, B. Dhabhai9, O. Dabbagh10,H .S .
Alsaif11, F. S. Alkuraya11, R. Maroo ﬁan12, H. Houlden12,S .
Efthymiou12, N. Dominik12, V. Salpietro12, T. Sultan13,S .
Haider14, F. Bibi15, H. Thiele16, J. Hoefele17,K .M .
Riedhammer17, M. Wagner17, I. Guella18, M. Demos19,B .
Keren20, J. Buratti20, P. Charles20, C. Nava20,E .
Valkanas21, L. B. Waddell22, K. J. Jones22, E. C. Oates22,S .
T. Cooper22, D. MacArthur23, R. E. Schnur24,G .E .
Hoganson25, J. E. Burton25, M. McEntagart26, D. Pehlivan4,
J. E. Posey4, J. R. Lupski4,7, H. Reutter1,27
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany,3Department of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany,4Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College ofMedicine, Houston, TX, United States,
5Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Diskapi
Yildirim Beyazit Training and Research Hospital, Ankara,Turkey,
6Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States,7Human
Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine,Houston, TX, United States,
8Department of Radiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
9Genome and Computational Biology Lab, Department of
Biotechnology, Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur,
India,10Department of Neuroscience, King FaisalSpecialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia,11Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
12Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom,13Department of Pediatric
Neurology, Institute of Child Health, The Children ’s
Hospital Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan,14Department of
Paediatric Medicine, Wah Medical College, Wah, Pakistan,
15University Institute of Biochemistry & Biotechnology,
PMAS –Arid Agriculture University, Rawalpindi, Pakistan,
16Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,17Institute of Human Genetics, Klini-
kum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany,18Department of
Medical Genetics, Centre for Applied Neurogenetics,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
19Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Uni-
versity of British Columbia and BC Children ’s Hospital,
Vancouver, BC, Canada,20AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpê-
trière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France,21Center
for Mendelian Genomics, The Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States,22Kids Neu-
roscience Centre, Kids Research, The Children ’s Hospital
at Westmead, Sydney, Australia,23Broad Institute of
Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
bridge, MA, United States,24GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD,
United States,25Department of Pediatrics, University of
Illinois, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States,
26South West Thames Regional Genetics Centre, St.
George ’s Healthcare NHS Trust, St. George ’s, University
of London, London, United Kingdom,27Department of
Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, UniversityHospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
PLXNA1 encodes plexin-A1, a neuronal transmembrane
receptor for semaphorin signaling in the central nervous
system that is suggested to play a key role in axon guidance.
Here, we describe rare and novel potentially deleteriousvariants in PLXNA1 identi ﬁed by exome sequencing in ﬁve
families with biallelic variants and four families with
monoallelic variants. Shared phenotypic features amongaffected individuals include global developmental delay
(11/12), congenital brain anomalies (7/12), craniofacial
dysmorphisms (7/12), and ocular anomalies (7/12). Nota-bly, seizures were almost exclusively reported in indivi-
duals with monoallelic variants. Structural modeling of all
missense variants in PLXNA1 suggests distortion in the
native protein. Knockdown of the zebra ﬁsh homolog
plxna1a in zebra ﬁsh larvae caused anomalies of the central
nervous system and the eye supporting our observations inaffected individuals. Our human genetic and functional
studies in zebra ﬁsh indicate that PLXNA1 plays an130 J. del Picchiaindispensable role in neurodevelopment and implicate it in a
syndromic disorder with neurodevelopmental and oculo-
cerebral anomalies. Grant: BONFOR grant O-120.0001 and
Herbert-Reeck foundation (2019) to GCD
G. C. Dworschak: None. J. Punetha: None. J. C.
Kalanithy: None. E. Mingardo: None. H. B. Erdem: None.Z. C. Akdemir: None. E. Karaca: None. T. Mitani: None. D.
Mara ﬁ: None. J. M. Fatih: None. S. N. Jhangiani: None. J.
V. Hunter: None. T. Dakal: None. B. Dhabhai: None. O.Dabbagh: None. H. S. Alsaif: None. F. S. Alkuraya: None.
R. Maroo ﬁan: None. H. Houlden: None. S. Efthymiou:
None. N. Dominik: None. V. Salpietro: None. T. Sultan:None. S. Haider: None. F. Bibi: None. H. Thiele: None. J.
Hoefele: None. K. M. Riedhammer: None. M. Wagner:
None. I. Guella: None. M. Demos: None. B. Keren: None.J. Buratti: None. P. Charles: None. C. Nava: None. E.
Valkanas: None. L. B. Waddell: None. K. J. Jones: None. E.
C. Oates: None. S. T. Cooper: None. D. MacArthur: None.R. E. Schnur: None. G. E. Hoganson: None. J. E. Burton:
None. M. McEntagart: None. D. Pehlivan: None. J. E.
Posey: None. J. R. Lupski: None. H. Reutter: None.
C28.6
Mutations in Gemin5 cause developmental delay, motor
dysfunction and cerebellar atrophy
U. Pandey
*
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States
GEMIN5, an RNA-binding protein is essential for assembly
of the SMN complex. It facilitates the formation of small
nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), the building blocks ofspliceosomes. GEMIN5 is involved in regulating the spli-
cing of pre-mRNAs and has been shown to bind snRNA-
binding protein of the SMN complex. Here we showidenti ﬁcation of novel autosomal recessive variants in the
GEMIN5 gene in 5 unrelated patient families with total 7
affected individuals. These variants have not been reportedin any publicly available databases. The probands present
with developmental delay, central hypotonia, ataxia and
cerebellar hypoplasia. In addition to this, we found novelcompound heterozygote variants including deletions and
frameshift mutations in 14 additional unrelated families
with 17 affected individuals sharing overlapping clinicalsymptoms. We observed that patient iPSC-derived neurons
expressing GEMIN5 variants drastically reduced the
expression of snRNP components (SMN, Gemin2, Gemin4and Gemin6) as compared to controls suggesting a potential
disruption in snRNP complex. Pathogenic mutations in
GEMIN5 as well as shRNA mediated knockdown ofendogenous GEMIN5 perturbed snRNP complex assembly.Importantly, knocking down rigor mortis ,ﬂy homologue of
human GEMIN5, showed a reduced lifespan and motor
dysfunction similar to human patients. Furthermore, we
identi ﬁed transcriptomic changes that are caused by
pathogenic mutations in GEMIN5 in patients. Here, we
provide the ﬁrst evidence that, patients carrying autosomal
recessive mutations in GEMIN5 display neurological
symptoms. Our data suggests that pathogenic mutations in
GEMIN5 perturb the physiological functions by potential
loss-of-function of GEMIN5 protein.
U. Pandey: None.
C29 Skin & Bones
C29.1
Homozygous loss-of-function mutations in CCDC134 are
responsible for a severe form of osteogenesis imperfecta
J. Dubail
1*, P. Brunelle1, G. Baujat1, C. Huber1,M .
Doyard1, C. Michot1, P. Chavassieux2, A. Khairouni3,V .
Topouchian4, S. Monnot1, E. Koumakis1,5, V. Cormier-
Daire1
1Institut Imagine INSERM U1163, Paris, France,2Univer-
sité de Lyon, INSERM UMR 1033, Lyon, France,3Pediatric
Orthopedics, Casablanca, Morocco,4Necker-Enfants
Malades Hospital, Paris, France,5Cochin Hospital,
Rheumatology department, Paris, France
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a primary bone fragility
disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1/15 000 births.The majority of OI cases are inherited in an autosomal-
dominant manner, while ﬁve to ten percent have recessive
or X-linked inheritance. Up to now, approximately 10% ofOI cases remain without mutation demonstrated, supporting
the involvement of other genes in the disease spectrum. By
whole exome sequencing, we identi ﬁed a homozygous
variant (c.2T>C) in CCDC134 gene in three patients from
two unrelated families, with bisphosphonate-resistant severebone fragility, short stature, gracile long bones with pseu-
darthroses, but no dentinogenesis imperfecta. CCDC134
encodes a secreted protein widely expressed, implicated inthe regulation of some mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK) signaling pathway. Western blot and immuno-
ﬂuorescence analyses con ﬁrmed the absence of CCDC134
protein in patient cells, compared to controls. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that CCDC134 mutations are associated
with increased Erk1/2 phosphorylation and decreasedCOL1A1 andOPN mRNA expression in patient osteoblasts
compared to controls. These data support that CCDC134 is
a new gene involved in severe progressive deformingrecessive osteogenesis imperfecta (type III).Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 131J. Dubail: None. P. Brunelle: None. G. Baujat: None. C.
Huber: None. M. Doyard: None. C. Michot: None. P.
Chavassieux: None. A. Khairouni: None. V. Topouchian:
None. S. Monnot: None. E. Koumakis: None. V. Cormier-
Daire: None.
C29.2
Hypomorphic variants in the replication complex
member GINS3 result in a Meier Gorlin phenotype
P. Kannu1*, E. Campos1, H. Wurtele2, K. Ahmed1,R .
Shaheen3, M. McQuaid2, K. Kernohan4, K. Boycott5,Z .
Alhassnan3, F. Alkuraya3
1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,
2Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada,3King
Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Chil-
dren’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada,
5Children ’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON,
Canada
Introduction: Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGORS) is a rare
genetic disorder characterized by primordial dwar ﬁsm,
microtia, and patellar aplasia//hypoplasia, which is caused
by impaired DNA replication. Here we report the identi ﬁ-
cation of four individuals from two unrelated families pre-
senting a MGORS like phenotype, characterized by
unreported recessive hypomorphic variants in the GINS3gene, which encodes a subunit of the CMG helicase. The
evolutionarily conserved CDC45/MCM2-7/GINS1-4
(CMG) protein complex is an essential helicase thatunwinds DNA during DNA replication.
Results: We found that variants in GINS3 limit origin of
replication ﬁring, hence slowing cellular proliferation,
providing a potential mechanism for the dwar ﬁsm
phenotype. Furthermore, the v ariants destabilize the GINS
subcomplex, thereby affecting the entire DNA replicationfork altogether. Cells with th e GINS3 variants accumulate
in the S and G2-phases of the cell cycle. Infection of
patient cells with a lentivirus expressing wt GINS3rescues the origin of ﬁring of replication forks and
proliferation rates. We also s how that the GINS3 variants
alter protein-protein interact ions within components of the
replication machinery and are hypersensitive to DNA
damage.
Conclusions: In summary, we have identi ﬁed variants in
GINS3 as a new cause of MGORS and established GINS3
as a critical component required for ef ﬁcient DNA
replication and genome stability.
P. Kannu: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Alexion,
Ipsen. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Ipsen. E.Campos: None. H. Wurtele: None. K. Ahmed: None. R.Shaheen: None. M. McQuaid: None. K. Kernohan:
None. K. Boycott: None. Z. Alhassnan: None. F.
Alkuraya: None.
C29.3
Homozygous EMILIN1 loss-of-function variants impair
both elastin and collagen ﬁber formation and cause a
novel entity with arterial tortuosity and osteopenia
A. Beyens
1,2*, C. Adamo3,4, E. Yilmaz Gulec5, A. Gezdirici5,
P. Bonaldo6, H. Bornaun7, E. Brauchle8, J. Brinckmann9,
W. P. Devine10, B. Gangaram11, T. Sasaki12, K. Schenke-
Layland8,13, S. Symoens1, A. Tam11, G. Sengle3,4,14,B .
Callewaert1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent and Department of
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium,2Department of Dermatology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,3Center for Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany,4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital ofCologne, Cologne, Germany,
5Department of Medical
Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research
Hospital, Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey,
6Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy,7Department of Pediatric Cardiology,
Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital,Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey,
8Research
Centre for Women ’s Health, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany,9Institute of Virology and Cell
Biology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,10Pathol-
ogy Department, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, United States,11Department of
Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, United States,12Department of Biochem-
istry II, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, Oita, Japan,
13NMI Tübingen, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany,14Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: EMILIN1 belongs to the Elastin Micro ﬁbril
Interface-Located Proteins (EMILINs), a family of structu-rally related extracellular glycoproteins. It is found in var-
ious tissues characterized by pronounced resilience and
elastic recoil, such as skin and arteries, where it associateswith elastic ﬁbers and preferentially targets ﬁbrillin micro-
ﬁbrils. EMILIN1 has been reported to bind and co-localize
with ﬁbulin-4 in the extracellular matrix. Fibulin-4 is a
known carrier of lysyl oxidase (LOX), an enzyme involved
in elastin and collagen crosslinking. Arterial tortuosity can
be found in several connective tissue disorders, such as132 J. del PicchiaFBLN4 -related cutis laxa and arterial tortuosity syndrome
(ATS), caused by SLC2A10 mutations.
Results: Exome sequencing in two unrelated families
with arterial tortuosity revealed homozygous loss-of-func-
tion mutations in EMILIN1 . Patients exhibit widespread
arterial tortuosity and fractures of ribs and long bones.Immuno ﬂuorescence of patient ﬁbroblasts reveals a direct
dependence of ﬁbulin-4 ﬁber assembly on EMILIN1
deposition. Western blotting and mass spectrometry analy-sis show altered levels of LOX and collagen 1. Raman
microspectroscopy analysis carried out in in Emilin1
-/-mice
shows structural changes in the collagen and elastic ﬁber
networks. Biochemical analysis of human ﬁbroblast cul-
tures and Emilin1-/-mice skin demonstrates a disturbed
collagen crosslinking pattern. Transmission electron micro-scopy of patient skin displays a frayed and moth-eaten
aspect of the elastin with disorganization of micro ﬁbrillar
structures. Collagen ﬁbrils show increased and more
variable diameters.
Conclusion: This study describes a novel syndrome
associated with arterial tortuosity and suggests a mechanismthrough which altered elastic ﬁber homeostasis affects
collagen ﬁber formation. (Grant Reference BOF01N04516)
A. Beyens: None. C. Adamo: None. E. Yilmaz Gulec:
None. A. Gezdirici: None. P. Bonaldo: None. H. Bornaun:
None. E. Brauchle: None. J. Brinckmann: None. W. P.
Devine: None. B. Gangaram: None. T. Sasaki: None. K.Schenke-Layland: None. S. Symoens: None. A. Tam: None.
G. Sengle: None. B. Callewaert: None.
C29.4
Transcriptional single-cell atlas of human limb mal-
formation candidate genes
C. A. Prada-Medina
1*, G. Cova1, J. Glaser1, C. Dietrich1,
J. Henck1, S. Mundlos1,2, M. A. Mensah2, M. Spielmann1,2
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2Institute for Medical Genetics and Human
Genetics Charité, Berlin, Germany
The extensive clinical and genetic heterogeneity of con-
genital limb malformation requires a comprehensive ana-lysis of genome-wide genetic variation. Large exome and
genome sequencing studies have led to the identi ﬁcation of
hundreds of candidate genes. However, few variants havebeen functionally characterized. The sheer number of these
candidate genes makes traditional functional analyses e.g.,
in animal models almost impossible. Therefore, for the vastmajority of patients, the molecular mechanism is still
unknown. In our study, we used high throughput single-cell
transcriptomics to create a reference atlas of candidate genesduring embryonic limb development. We characterizedgene expression of over ﬁfty thousand cells from four cri-
tical days of mouse early limb development (E9.5, E10.5,
E11.5, and E12.5) by performing a single-cell RNA
sequencing. We implemented an unsupervised approach to
identify the general transcriptional patterns of disease-
causing genes during mouse embryonic limb development.We curated a gene-set of over 1400 genes that are asso-
ciated with limb malformation in mice. 25% of these genes
ranked among the topmost informative gene expressionvariances during early limb development. Over sixty of
these genes present cell-type-speci ﬁc gene expression pat-
terns, mainly in the ectoderm and the apical ectodermalridge. We show that mutations in genes expressed during
early limb development are particularly prone to give rise to
limb malformation. Our study provides an atlas of candidategenes that are co-expressed with known limb disease genes
and represents a resource to study cell-types and molecular
mechanisms involved in limb malformation.
C. A. Prada-Medina: None. G. Cova: None. J. Glaser:
None. C. Dietrich: None. J. Henck: None. S. Mundlos:
None. M. A. Mensah: None. M. Spielmann: None.
C29.5
Tendon-to-bone attachment cells are bi-fated <and> are
regulated by shared enhancers <and> KLF transcrip-tion factors
S. Kult
1,T. Olender1*, M. Osterwalder2, S. Krief1,R .
Blecher-Gonen1, S. Ben-Moshe1, L. Farack1, H. Keren-
Shaul1, D. Leshkowitz1, T. M. Salame1, T. D. Capellini3,S .
Itzkovitz1, I. Amit1, A. Visel2, E. Zelzer1
1The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel,2Lawr-
ence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, UnitedStates,
3Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States
The mechanical challenge of attaching elastic tendons to
stiff bones is solved by the formation of a unique transi-
tional tissue, the enthesis. A comprehensive molecular
signature of the developing enthesis cells has yet beenuncovered. Here, we show that tendon-to-bone attachment
cells are bi-fated, activating a mixture of chondrocyte and
tenocyte transcriptomes, under regulation of shared reg-ulatory elements and Krüppel-like factors transcription
factors (KLFs). RNA and ATAC sequencing of embryonic
attachment cells, chondrocytes and tenocytes revealedexpression of both chondrogenic and tenogenic genes by
attachment cells. Indeed, in situ hybridization and single-
molecule ISH showed that attachment cells co-expresstenocyte and chondrocyte markers. ATAC-Seq analyses
combined with ENCODE histone mark data, conservation,
and other datasets revealed that attachment cells are regu-lated by putative enhancers that are shared with eitherAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 133tenocytes or chondrocytes. Transgenic mouse enhancer
reporter assay veri ﬁed the shared activity of three enhan-
cers, supporting the notion that the mixed transcriptome of
attachment cells is regulated by sharing enhancers with
tenocytes or chondrocytes. Combining over-represented
transcription factor analysis with transcriptome resultssuggested a regulatory role for KLFs in attachment cells.
Indeed, blocking expression of Klf2 andKlf4 in the devel-
oping limb mesenchyme impaired attachment cell differ-entiation, establishing that KLFs are key regulators of the
fate of these cells. Overall, we provide the ﬁrst molecular
overview of the developing transitional tissue, connectingtendon to bone, showing that activation of a combination of
cartilage and tendon transcriptomes by the bi-fated attach-
ment cells leads to the formation of a new, intermediatecell fate.
S. Kult: None. T. Olender: None. M. Osterwalder: None.
S. Krief: None. R. Blecher-Gonen: None. S. Ben-Moshe:None. L. Farack: None. H. Keren-Shaul: None. D.
Leshkowitz: None. T. M. Salame: None. T. D. Capellini:
None. S. Itzkovitz: None. I. Amit: None. A. Visel: None. E.Zelzer: None.
C29.6
Identifying targets for osteoporosis via whole exomesequencing and CRISPR-Cas9
S. Zhou
1*, L. Laurent1, J. P. Kemp2, V. Forgetta1,J .
Morris3, A. Pramatarova4, P. I. Croucher5, J. Bassett6,D .
Goltzman7, D. M. Evans2, J. Richards1
1McGill University, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal,
QC, Canada,2University of Queensland Diamantina
Institute, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Aus-tralia,
3New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United
States,4McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada,5Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney, Australia,6Molecular Endocri-
nology Laboratory, Department of Medicine, ImperialCollege London, London, United Kingdom,
7Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
QC, Canada
New drug targets are needed for osteoporosis. It is not
known whether whole exome sequencing (WES) or GWAS
followed by target gene mapping can better identify causalgenes for this disease. To compare these approaches, we
ﬁrst identi ﬁed a set of 54 positive control genes whose
perturbation causes a Mendelian form of osteoporosis, orwhich act as drug targets for approved therapies. We
undertook sequence kernel association tests (SKATO) to
associate 18,350 autosomal protein-coding genes withestimated bone mineral density (eBMD), using WES dataof 42,404 white British participants from UK Biobank
and performed a GWAS in the same sample. We
found that WES identi ﬁed genes were more strongly enri-
ched for positive control genes (odds ratio [OR] =119,
P=5.2 × 10
−6), and this enrichment was 5-fold higher
compared to enrichment of GWAS-identi ﬁed genes (OR =
22.5, P =5×1 0−5). From WES data, we identi ﬁed 38 genes
with exonic variants with functional impact that collectively
associated with eBMD, one of the most prominent geneswasCADM1 (SKATO, P =1.8 × 10
−9). We used CRISPR-
Cas9 to knockout (KO) CADM1 in SaOS-2 osteoblast cell
lines, suppressing protein abundance at the cell surface,which resulted in increased expression of early bone mar-
kers: RUNX2 ,COL1A1/ 2 and ALPL . We previously
demonstrated that Cadm1 KO mice had reduced bone
mineral content (-3.2 standard deviations [SD]) and strength
(-2.0 SD) compared to wildtype. These ﬁndings demon-
strate that WES is a powerful approach to identify genesinﬂuencing bone density, such as CADM1 , which could
serve as targets for osteoporosis therapies.
S. Zhou: None. L. Laurent: None. J. P. Kemp: None. V.
Forgetta: None. J. Morris: None. A. Pramatarova: None. P.
I. Croucher: None. J. Bassett: None. D. Goltzman: None. D.
M. Evans: None. J. Richards: None.
C30 Polygenic Risk Scores: From Tool to Practice
C30.1
Using reference- ﬁxed principal components to improve
polygenic risk score prediction
O. Naret
*, J. Fellay
École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed
multiple genetic variants associated with traits or diseases.
They con ﬁrmed that most common diseases have a strong
genetic component coming from many genetic variants,
each having a small effect size on disease risk. Using the
summary statistics from highly powered GWAS, it is nowpossible to build polygenic risk scores (PRS) that can help
predict the individual risk of common diseases. We here
propose to improve PRS prediction by leveraging popula-tion strati ﬁcation due to demographic history, which is a
typical confounding factor removed during GWAS. We
provide a tool that 1) map a discovery cohort to the prin-cipal component (PC) space of the 1000 Genomes Project
cohort and train a model to associate the phenotype dis-
tribution to this PC space; 2) map a target patient to thesame PC space and use the previously trained model to
compute its PC score. We compared two disease risk134 J. del Picchiamodels, one using PRS only and one using PRS and PC
score jointly. Applying this method to UK Biobank data, we
demonstrate improvement for all tested phenotypes: <10%
for menarche age, blood pressure, BMI, baldness, and
height), 14% for menopause age, 50% for diabetes, 59% for
bone mineral density and 455% for skin color. Thisapproach has the potential to allow ethnically diverse
populations to bene ﬁt from genomic medicine.(Grant:
SNF:175603)
O. Naret: None. J. Fellay: None.
C30.2
The Polygenic Score (PGS) Catalog: an open database toenable reproducibility and systematic evaluation
S. A. Lambert
1,2,3*,L .G I l2,4, S. Jupp3, M. Chapman2,1,4,H .
Parkinson3,2, J. Danesh1,2,5,4, J. A. L. MacArthur3,M .
Inouye1,2,5,6,7
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Health Data Research UK-Cambridge, Wellcome Genome
Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,3European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom,
4Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus,
Hinxton, United Kingdom,5National Institute for Health
Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre at the
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Cambridge, United Kingdom,
6Baker Heart and Diabetes
Institute, Melbourne, Australia,7The Alan Turing Institute,
London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Polygenic [risk] scores (PGS), which
aggregate hundreds-to-millions of genomic variant ’s effects
into a single score, can enhance prediction and under-
standing of common diseases and traits. Rapidly-evolving
research into PGS and their potential clinical utility has,however, been limited by inadequate and/or incomplete
reporting, heterogeneity in evaluation techniques, and
variable performance in populations of non-Europeanancestry.
Objective: An accurate understanding of each PGS and
its predictive value is necessary for its application.Collaborating with the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, we
have developed the PGS Catalog to provide an open
resource of consistently annotated PGS, to increase theirreproducibility and availability.
Methods: We developed a framework to summarise and
represent PGS. For each PGS we extract metadatadescribing the score (rsID, effect allele & weight), its
development and application details, links to GWAS
Catalog summary statistics employed, characteristics oftraining/validation cohorts (phenotyping, sample size,
ancestry), and reported performance metrics.
Results: The current PGS Catalog contains over 100
consistently annotated PGS for 43 different traits, distrib-
uted in an open database ( www.PGSCatalog.org ), initially
focusing on purpose-built PGS developed after 2010 forcardiometabolic diseases and cancers. The Catalog is
regularly updated to broaden its coverage, and we invite
researchers to submit their PGS to maximize their utility.We aim to provide a comprehensive resource of available
PGS along with a complete picture of their predictive
accuracy - to this end we outline our upcoming efforts tosystematically evaluate the cataloged PGS in diverse
external cohorts, in order to distribute directly comparable
measures of PGS performance.
S. A. Lambert: None. L. GIl: None. S. Jupp: None. M.
Chapman: None. H. Parkinson: None. J. Danesh: F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sano ﬁ,
Astra Zeneca. J. A. L. MacArthur: None. M. Inouye: None.
C30.3
Polygenic risk, breast cancer susceptibility genes, andbreast cancer over the life course
N. Mars
1*, E. Widén1, T. Meretoja2,3, S. Kerminen1,M .
Pirinen1,4,5, P. Palta1,6, A. Palotie1,7,8, J. Kaprio1,5,H .
Joensuu9,3, M. Daly1,8, S. Ripatti1,5,8
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM),
HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2Breast
Surgery Unit, Comprehensive Cancer Center, HelsinkiUniversity Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,
3University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,4Helsinki Institute for Informa-
tion Technology HIIT and Department of Mathematics andStatistics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,
5Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland,6Estonian Genome Center, Institute of
Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,7Psychiatric
& Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department ofPsychiatry, Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Department of Medicine, and the Department of Neurology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, UnitedStates,
8Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
United States,9Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with
both monogenic and polygenic germline inheritance.Among 99,969 women in FinnGen, we set out to evaluate
how breast cancer polygenic risk score (PRS) and high-
impact frameshift variants jointly impact the risk of breastcancer. Secondly, we evaluated whether PRS impacts breastAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 135cancer mortality in the population, and the risk of recur-
rence and mortality among breast cancer patients.
The lifetime risk of breast cancer (by age 80) for carriers
of two Finnish-enriched frameshift variants, c.1592delT in
PALB2 (242-fold enrichment in Finland, 270 carriers) and
c.1100delC in CHEK2 (3.7-fold enrichment, 1,543 carriers)
was 57% and 32%, respectively. The PRS modi ﬁes the
breast cancer risk conferred by the two variants. Women
with PALB2 and average PRS (20-80th percentile) had a
lifetime risk of 56%, which increased to 85% with high PRS
(>90th percentile), and decreased to 27% with low PRS
(<20th percentile). For CHEK2 , these lifetime risks were
27%, 59%, and 18%.
We move beyond the simple binary de ﬁnition of breast
cancer: the PRS was associated with a more severe disease,both in the population (HR 2.25, 95%CI 1.72-2.95 for
breast cancer-related mortality with a PRS >90
thpercentile),
and in breast cancer cases (HR 1.21, 95%CI 1.09-1.34 forrisk of breast cancer recurrence; similar results adjusting for
surgery type, age, and stage at diagnosis).
We demonstrate opportunities to improve genetic risk
assessment in breast cancer, both using PRS alone and for
facilitating better management of women carrying muta-
tions in breast cancer susceptibility genes.
N. Mars: None. E. Widén: None. T. Meretoja: None. S.
Kerminen: None. M. Pirinen: None. P. Palta: None. A.
Palotie: None. J. Kaprio: None. H. Joensuu: None. M. Daly:None. S. Ripatti: None.
C30.4
Genetic assessment of age-associated fracture risk
C. Medina-Gomez
1*, K. Trajanoska1, C. Fan2,O .A .
Andreassen3, M. Zillikens1, A. M. Dale2,A .G .
Uitterlinden1, T. M. Seibert2, F. Rivadeneira1
1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,2University of
California, San Diego, CA, United States,3University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Aim: Identifying individuals at risk of early-onset osteo-
porosis is of outmost importance. The largest GWAS to
date, identi ﬁed 1,103 genetic variants associated with
ultrasound-derived Bone Mineral density (eBMD). We
investigated whether a genetic risk score (GRS) from these
variants would associate with fracture incidence and predicttime to fracture.
Methods : We included in this study 11,351 participants
of the Rotterdam Study with up to 20 years of follow-up.Incident non-vertebral fractures were reported in 2,153
(19%) individuals. GRS was constructed as a weighted sum
of the number of putative eBMD-decreaser alleles at 1,031genetic variants. Cox regression and Weibull survival
analysis were implemented adjusting for sex.
Results : An increment of one standard deviation (SD) in
the GRS represented an increase of 1.20 (pv< 2 × 10
−16)i n
the hazard ratio of fracture. When analyzed in quintiles,
individuals in the highest quintile had 1.52 HR of fracture(95%CI 1.09-2.11) as compared to these individuals in the
middle quintile, despite their similitude in anthropometric
characteristics ( Table 1 ). In addition, fracture occurred
signiﬁcantly earlier in the former group (event time ratio =
0.95, 95%CI 0.91-0.99).
Conclusion : Our results suggest that GRS can be used for
personalized genetic risk estimates that can predict for age
at fracture. We show how a suboptimal epidemiological
predictive tool, as ultrasound measurements for fractureprediction, is leveraged within the genetic framework.
Table 1
Quintiles GRS 1 N =54 2N =1758 3N =6497 4N =2892 5N =150 P
Fracture % 9.2% 14.1% 18.7% 22.4% 24.7% 1.8E-11
HR 0.6 0.7 Ref 1.2 1.5 <2E-16ETR 1.07 1.04 Ref 0.97 0.95 <2E-16
FN-BMD (g/cm2) 1.00 0.94 0.91 0.87 0.83 <2E-16
Female% 64.0% 58.0% 57.0% 59.0% 58.0% 0.47Age (yrs) 63.0 65.5 65.2 65.4 65.2 0.86
Weight (kg) 76.5 75.8 76.1 76.5 77.0 0.23
Height (m) 1.67 1.68 1.68 1.68 1.69 0.51
C. Medina-Gomez: None. K. Trajanoska: None. C. Fan:
None. O. A. Andreassen: None. M. Zillikens: None. A. M.
Dale: None. A. G. Uitterlinden: None. T. M. Seibert: None.
F. Rivadeneira: None.
C30.5
Integrative analysis of the plasma proteome and
polygenic risk of cardiometabolic disease
S. C. Ritchie1*, Y. Liu2, S. A. Lambert1, B. G. Drew2,A .C .
Calkin2, A. S. Butterworth1, J. Danesh1, M. Inouye1,2
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia
Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) capture the
genetic architecture of common diseases by aggregatinggenome-wide genetic variation into a single score that
reﬂects an individual ’s disease risk. These present new
opportunities to identify molecular pathways involved indisease pathogenesis.
Materials and Methods: We performed association
analysis between PRSs and 3,442 plasma proteins usinglinear regression models in 3,175 healthy individuals to
identify proteins whose levels associated with PRSs for136 J. del Picchiaatrial ﬁbrillation, coronary artery disease, chronic kidney
disease, stroke, or type 2 diabetes. Mendelian Randomisa-
tion analysis was used to test whether levels of PRS-
associated proteins were causal of disease risk. Tissue-
speciﬁc gene expression levels of PRS-associated proteins
were tested for correlations with cardiometabolic pheno-types in mouse models. We investigated potential drug
repurposing opportunities by overlaying PRS to protein
associations with drug target information.
Results: We identi ﬁed 48 proteins whose levels asso-
ciated with PRSs for coronary artery disease, chronic
kidney disease, or type 2 diabetes, including well-knowndisease-associated proteins along with novel associations.
Mendelian Randomisation supported a causal effect for
changes in levels of three PRS-associated proteins ondisease. Mouse models revealed strong correlations with
relevant cardiometabolic traits for tissue-speci ﬁc expression
of seven PRS associated proteins with no previous knownlink to cardiometabolic disease. Finally, we identi ﬁed three
promising potential drug repurposing opportunities where
the effect of on-market drugs on protein levels wereconsistent with PRS to protein associations.
Conclusions: Overall, our study provides a framework
for polygenic association studies, demonstrating the powerof PRSs to identify and prioritise novel disease biology.
S. C. Ritchie: None. Y. Liu: None. S. A. Lambert: None.
B. G. Drew: None. A. C. Calkin: None. A. S. Butterworth:None. J. Danesh: None. M. Inouye: None.
C30.6
Genotyping On ALL patients (GOALL); clinical imple-mentation of high-throughput genotyping arrays
J. van Rooij
*, A. Verkerk, B. Sedaghati-khayat, L. Broer, J.
de Vries, G. van Dijk, J. van Meurs, A. Uitterlinden
Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Introduction: Genetic testing is increasingly used in stan-
dard clinical practice. Dense genotyping arrays cover a largeportion of known clinically relevant genetic variation and
provide a cost-effective, high-throughput and highly stan-
dardized alternative. In the GOALL project, we are deter-mining the clinical utility and applications of genotyping
arrays.
Methods: We investigate the clinical utility of the
GSAMD_v2 and PMDA arrays by: 1) technical validation
of common and rare variants 2) offering polygenic risk
scores (PRS) as primary utility in clinical practice, 3)prospectively counseling and testing eligibility of feeding
back secondary ﬁndings (pharmacogenomics, ACMG
mutations) using array based genotyping. We are pilotingthese applications in collaboration with multiple depart-
ments at the Erasmus MC.
Results: Our preliminary results suggest that >90% of the
mutations routinely determined in our hospital are covered
by the array design. We have selected 240 known breast
cancer mutation carriers for array genotyping to checkconcordance. Comparison of array vs. WES of 197
population samples shows an overall non-reference con-
cordance of 98%, and 95% for singletons. Population pilotresults demonstrate signi ﬁcant primary case strati ﬁcation by
PRS for breast cancer, coronary artery disease, myocardial
infarction, osteoarthritis and age-related maculardegeneration.
Discussion: Our preliminary results suggest that a portion
of hospital-wide clinical genetic testing can cost-effectivelybe replaced by array-based genotyping. In addition to
reporting highly concordant results, array-based genotyping
allows additional reporting of several PRS, HLA- andancestry-typing and pharmacogenomics. This data can
easily be stored and re-analyzed, or unblinded when a
patient requires further (secondary) genetic testing.
J. van Rooij: None. A. Verkerk: None. B. Sedaghati-
khayat: None. L. Broer: None. J. de Vries: None. G. van
Dijk: None. J. van Meurs: None. A. Uitterlinden: None.
C31 Shaping the Genomic Medicine Era
C31.1
"It ’s probably nothing, but ⋯" Couples ’experiences of
pregnancy following a uncertain prenatal genetic result
S. Lou
1,2*, K. Lomborg3, C. Lewis4, S. Riedijk5,O .
Petersen6, I. Vogel1,7
1Center for Prenatal Diagnostics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark,2Defactum - Public Health &
Health Services Research, Aarhus, Denmark,3Steno
Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
4London North Genomic Laboratory Hub, Great Ormond
Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom,5Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands,6Fetal Medicine
Unit, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Rigshospi-talet Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Den-
mark,
7Department of Clinicial Genetics, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark
Introduction: The introduction of Chromosomal Micro-
Array in prenatal testing includes the potential identi ﬁcation
of uncertain copy number variants (CNV) where sig-
niﬁcance and implications for the unborn child can be dif-
ﬁcult or impossible to predict. The aim of this study was to
explore how prospective parents manage uncertainty and
experience pregnancy in light of an uncertain CNV result.Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 137Material and methods: Qualitative interviews with 16
women and 10 partners who had received a prenatally
diagnosed, uncertain CNV. Participants were interviewed 1-
14 weeks after birth. Data were analyzed using thematic
analysis.
Results: Following the CNV diagnosis, some couples
focused on the severe syndromes ruled out by the result,
while others were more concerned with the new potential
risks, e.g. learning disabilities. During pregnancy, thecouples used various strategies to reduce worry such as
limiting information seeking, reducing talk of the CNV and
deferring thoughts of potential consequences. Furthermore,additional ultrasound was appreciated by all. Inherited
CNVs caused relief, but also feelings of responsibility for
the child ’s potential challenges. After birth, worry
decreased considerably. However, all couples paid extra
attention to the child ’s development, while also being alert
to the risk wrongfully interpreting the child ’s development
in terms of the CNV. Eleven couples appreciated knowing
about the child ’s CNV. Five couples would rather not
have known.
Conclusions: Health professionals should be mindful of
terminology, remember to point out what has been ruled out
by the CNV result, and discuss potential coping strategieswith the couple. Funding: Novo Nordisk Foundation (Grant
NNF16OC0018722)
S. Lou: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk Founda-
tion. K. Lomborg: None. C. Lewis: None. S. Riedijk: None.O. Petersen: None. I. Vogel: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Modest; Novo NordiskFoundation.
C31.2
Additional Genomic Findings: towards a feasible,
effective model of care
E. Lynch
1,2,M. Martyn1,3,4*,L .L e e1,3,4, A. Kanga-Parabia2,
R. Weerasuriya1,3,4, R. Tytherleigh1,3, C. L. Gaff1,3,4
1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Austra-
lia,2Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville,
Australia,3Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Park-
ville, Australia,4Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
Genomic sequencing for diagnosis makes possible deliber-
ate analysis for variants predictive of future health risk
(‘additional ﬁndings ’). Challenges to provision of AF in
public health systems exist but evidence to guide develop-ment of a feasible, effective model of care is lacking. Whenavailable, AF are offered concurrently with diagnostic
testing. To examine decisions about AF and investigate
other models of care, we offered AF to 200 adults at a
separate genetic counselling appointment after completion
of diagnostic testing (i.e. after results)Patients completed
surveys after AF genetic counselling, after AF result returnand 6 months following last contact with the service.
Consultations were recorded and analysed. Participating
genetic counsellors were interviewed. Eighty three (83/200,42%) patients attended pre-test counselling with 81 (98%)
accepting AF. Patients felt supported in decision making:
79/83 (95%) agreed the level of information they receivedwas‘about right ’and 73/78 (94%) reported counselling was
helpful. Participants and counsellors identi ﬁed valuable
elements of counselling, including establishing a relation-ship. Genetic counsellors also reported addressing concerns
and misconceptions yet, despite relatively intensive coun-
selling, 34% (28/83) of participants mistakenly believed thetest was for all known genetic conditions or would provide
information about their primary condition. All respondents
to the post-result survey correctly recalled their AF result(49/49) but confusion about its implications was evident.
Research is needed to identify communication strategies
that effectively address common AF misconceptions and areachievable in public health systems in order to realise the
ideal of a feasible, effective service for AF.
E. Lynch: None. M. Martyn: None. L. Lee: None. A.
Kanga-Parabia: None. R. Weerasuriya: None. R. Tyther-
leigh: None. C. L. Gaff: None.
C31.3
Analysis of laboratory exome sequencing reporting
practices using a ‘virtual patient ’
D. F. Vears
1,2,3,4*, M. G. Elferink5, M. Kriek6, P. Borry1,4,
K. L. van Gassen7
1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care,KU Leuven, Leuven,Belgium,
2University of Melbourne, Carlton, Australia,
3Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Parkville, Austra-
lia,4Leuven Institute for Human Genomics and Society,
Leuven, Belgium,5University of Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,6Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Nether-
lands,7University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands
Studies have suggested that laboratories performing exome
sequencing return different types of results to clinicians.While some report variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance,
unsolicited ﬁndings, and/or secondary ﬁndings, others do
not. To investigate the degree of variation in reporting, wecreated a ‘virtual patient-parent trio ’byin silico merging138 J. del Picchiaeight disease-causing variants from patients into “normal ”
background exomes. We sent the sequence data and details
of the patient ’s phenotype (developmental delay, dys-
morphic features, cardiac hypertrophy), to laboratories
worldwide and asked them to issue a diagnostic report.
Participating laboratories completed a questionnaire toexplain their rationale for (not) reporting each of the var-
iants integrated. Of the 39 participating laboratories, 30
reported the X-linked dominant inherited variant in theHDAC8 gene, which was the partial cause of the patient ’s
phenotype, and 26 reported the de novo BICD2 variant,
which explained another component of the phenotype.Laboratories who did not report these variants explained
they used either a ﬁlter or a targeted gene panel that
excluded the variant, or they did not consider the variant tobe responsible for the phenotype. There was also variation
in reporting associated with the cardiac phenotype; 30
reported MYBPC3 and only 16 reported PLN, often due totheﬁltering strategies used. Reporting of unsolicited/sec-
ondary ﬁndings also varied widely. We identi ﬁed con-
siderable variability in reporting of disease-causing variants,primarily due to different analysis strategies. This sig-
niﬁcantly impacts whether causative variants are identi ﬁed,
with important implications for patients. Analysis strategybest-practice guidelines may help reduce variability and
improve patient care.
D. F. Vears: None. M. G. Elferink: None. M. Kriek:
None. P. Borry: None. K. L. van Gassen: None.
C31.4
Knowledge, attitudes and preparedness for polygenicrisk testing in clinical practice: a cross-sectional survey
of health professionals
A. K. Smit
1*, A. E. Cust1, K. Dunlop1, M. Young2,B .
Meiser3, J. Tiller4, T. Yanes5,3
1The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,2Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia,3Univer-
sity of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia,4Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia,5University of Queens-
land, Woolloongabba, Australia
Introduction : Strategies to prepare and support health
professionals for the potentialimplementation of polygenic
risk scores (PRS) into clinical practice are required.
Materials and Methods : An anonymous questionnaire
was distributed online byprofessional organisations in
Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US. Eligibleparti-cipants were health professionals who provide cancer risk
assessments. Knowledge,perceived self-ef ﬁcacy, concerns,
beneﬁts and expectations for the future clinicalapplicationof PRS were described. Content analysis was
undertaken of free-text responses.
Results : A total of 128 health professionals took part in
the questionnaire (geneticcounsellors n =86%; oncologists
n=5%; clinical geneticists n =4%; other n =5%). Many
haddiscussed PRS with a patient (61%), but only 20%reported having ordered a test. Over half(69%) reported that
the use of PRS in future clinical practice was certain or
likely. Many(49%) reported that general practitioners wouldhave a primary role in the provision of PRS,supported by
genetics health professionals. Overall, con ﬁdence in
explaining PRS to patientswas low, and participantsreported concern about insuf ﬁcient health professional
resources,uncertainty about individual risk and barriers to
obtaining life insurance. Perceived bene ﬁtsof PRS included
greater incentive for patients to engage in preventive
behaviours and accessto increased or tailored surveillance
and screening.
Conclusions : Our ﬁndings demonstrate that health
professionals are already providingpolygenic risk informa-
tion, although fewer are ordering testing, and there is a needforeducational and point-of-contact resources to support this
process. These ﬁndings will informthe development of
implementation strategies for incorporating PRS intoclinical practice.
A. K. Smit: None. A. E. Cust: None. K. Dunlop: None.
M. Young: None. B. Meiser: None. J. Tiller: None. T.Yanes: None.
C31.5
Impact of the discussion of uncertainty on formercounselees ’outcomes. An experimental vignettes study
N. Medendorp
1*, M. Hillen1, C. Aalfs2, A. Stiggelbout3,E .
Smets1
1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,3Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Introduction: Uncertainty increasingly needs to be dis-
cussed during cancer genetic counseling due to technolo-
gical developments. How discussions about uncertaintyaffect counselees may depend on communication style.
Ideally, counselees are enabled to deal with uncertainty and
make well-informed decisions. We tested the impact ofdifferent ways of conveying uncertainty and addressing
counselees ’uncertainty on counselees ’outcomes, and
explored moderating effects of counselees ’characteristics.
Materials and methods: Former counselees viewed one
(out of six) randomly assigned video depicting a consultation
involving the discussion of a multigene panel test. In a 2x3design geneticists ’communication of uncertaintyAbstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations 139(comprehensive vs. gist) and responses to counselees ’
uncertainty expressions (providing information vs. providing
space vs. balancing uncertainty) were systematically manipu-
lated. Before and after watching, participants completed
questionnaires. Primary outcome was feelings of uncertainty.
Results: Preliminary analyses were performed on 91%
(n=178) of the required sample. Communication of
uncertainty was successfully manipulated: the comprehen-
sive version was perceived as more detailed ( p=. 099).
However, differences in how responses to counselees ’
uncertainty expressions were not perceived ( p=.303). No
effects on feelings of uncertainty were found for geneticists ’
communication about uncertainty ( p=.323), or response
style ( p=.630). Statistical analysis on the complete dataset,
including effects on secondary outcomes and moderatingeffects of counselees ’characteristics will be performed and
discussed.
Conclusions: Preliminary analysis showed that different
manners of communicating uncertainty and addressing
counselees ’uncertainty expressions did not lead to
differences in feelings of uncertainty. Findings will informa training intervention to support geneticists in discussing
uncertainty.
Funding: Dutch Cancer Society (KWF Kankerbestrijding;
UvA 2015-7607)
N. Medendorp: None. M. Hillen: None. C. Aalfs: None.
A. Stiggelbout: None. E. Smets: None.
C31.6
Primary Care Genomics: A roadmap for curriculum
change and educational resource development
J. Hayward
1,2,3,I .R a ﬁ1, S. Simpson2, E. Miller2, A. Seller2,
M. Bishop2*
1Royal College of General Practitioners, London, United
Kingdom,2Genomics Education Programme, Birmingham,United Kingdom,3Yorkshire and Humber Genomics
Medicine Centre, Leeds, United Kingdom
Health Education England ’s Genomics Education Pro-
gramme (GEP) has developed a roadmap for de ﬁning
General Practitioners ’(GPs) learning needs and identifying
priorities for resource development, suitable for adoption byother specialties. With the implementation of England ’s
National Health Service ’s (NHS) Genomic Medicine Ser-
vice, genomic information will be used within routineclinical care by an increasing number of specialties. The
GEP exists to ensure NHS staff are prepared for the inte-
gration of genomics into clinical practice. With the RoyalCollege of General Practitioners (RCGP), the GEP devised
a three-stage process - plan; develop; deliver - to identify
GPs’learning requirements and appropriate interventions.
Using the Delphi method, an expert working group (n =30),
comprising GPs, genetic specialists, patients and educa-
tionalists, identi ﬁed 22 themes around the knowledge, skills
and behaviours GPs require to manage clinical activities
involving genomics (stage 1). Alongside this, a desktop
exercise (stage 2) mapped genetic/genomic educationresources relevant to GPs through targeted searches of
organisational websites, supplemented by web searches.
From these, resources from 21 organisations were identi-ﬁed. Next, a gap analysis (stage 3) mapped resources from
stage 2 against the knowledge, skills and behaviours from
stage 1, establishing a list of resources requiring develop-ment. These resources, with those identi ﬁed in stage 2,
formed the foundation of an education toolkit, hosted on the
RCGP website. Findings from stage 1 also informed therevised RCGP training curriculum for GPs. The toolkit has
become a go-to destination for GPs learning about geno-
mics, and its development roadmap can be adopted by otherspecialties.
J. Hayward: None. I. Ra ﬁ: None. S. Simpson: None. E.
Miller: None. A. Seller: None. M. Bishop: None.140 J. del Picchia