European Journal of Human Genetics (2019) 26:3 –112
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0249-5
ABSTRACT
Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics
Conference: Oral Presentations
Copenhagen, Denmark, May 27 –30, 2017
Published online: 1 October 2018
© European Society of Human Genetics 2018
The ESHG 2017 marks the 50th Anniversary of the ﬁrst ESHG Conference which took place in Copenhagen in 1967.
Additional information about the event may be found on the conference website: https://2017.eshg.org/
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement is sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All authors were
asked to address any potential bias in their presentation and to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. These disclosures
are listed at the end of each presentation. Contributions of up to EUR 10 000 (ten thousand euros, or equivalent value in
kind) per year per company are considered "modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000 per year are considered "signi ﬁcant".
Plenary Sessions
PL1
50 years of ESHG
PL1.1
A brief history of how we got here
A. Read
Manchester ,United Kingdom
This year the European Society of Human Genetics
celebrates the 50thanniversary of its ﬁrst meeting, held here
in Copenhagen in 1967. I have been asked, on behalf of theBoard and Executive of the Society, to start off this year ’s
conference with a brief look back at how we came to be
here. In doing this I have drawn heavily on the historicalmaterial assembled by Professor Peter Harper, whose arti-
cles should be consulted for more detail.
The story of the ESHG is a story of two halves. The ﬁrst
24 years, up to 1991, were dominated by one man, Professor
Jan Mohr of Copenhagen. When he agreed with a small
group of colleagues to start a European Society of HumanGenetics his vision was of a stripped-down organisation with
minimal administrative tasks. There were no elected of ﬁcers,
just a permanent secretary (himself for all those years) andan unchanging 20-member Board. Virtually their only
function was to nominate somebody each year to organise a
symposium on some aspect of human genetics. The societygave no ﬁnancial support for this - it hardly could, with only
around 200 members whose subscription was $7.By 1988 it had become clear that something more was
needed if the ESHG was to become a signi ﬁcant force in
developing a European human genetics community. Revo-
lutionary moves culminated at the meeting in Leuven in1991 where a rotating president and of ﬁcers were elected,
and statutes adopted formally incorporating the society
under Belgian law. The society ’s journal, the European
Journal of Human Genetics, was established shortly after-
wards and the modern ESHG was born. We now have an
annual turnover of over 2 million euros, professionaladministration through Jerome del Picchia and his team at
the Vienna Medical Academy, and an important voice in
European and international developments in human genet-ics. Jan Mohr (who died in 2009) might have mixed feelings
about some of these developments but surely he would
agree that this 2017 meeting is the best human geneticsconference ever.
A. Read: None.
PL1.2
How will the present time in genetics beremembered?
H. Brunner1,2
1Department of Human Genetics Radboud UMC ,Nijmegen,
Netherlands ,2Dept of Clinical Genetics ,Maastricht UMC ,
Maastricht ,Netherlands
At 50 years, the Society of Human Genetics has con-
ﬁdently assumed its current position as a pillar of modern
medicine. Is ours a special time? Have we reached the1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:high-point of Human Genetics? I don ’t think that the
history of human genetics ends here at all. Rather, it
seems that fundamental change is still very much in the
air. First, let ’s celebrate that after more than 100 years, the
battle between the Mendelia ns and Biometricians has
ﬁnally ended. And it is a draw. Mendelian rare conditions
mainly re ﬂect gene disruptions subject to strong selective
forces, whereas common complex disease largely re ﬂects
common polygenic regulatory v ariation of gene activity.
Sometimes these mix, as for the major neurodevelop-
mental disorders: Intellectual disability, Autism, and
Schizophrenia are mostly due to a mix of polygenic andde novo single gene variants. The Mendelian forms being
associated with lower IQ. As Galton predicted in the 19
th
century, height is generally polygenic and Peter Vis-
scher ’s work has used this data to show that most of the
heritability is not missing but undetected, because the
effects of individual loci are too small to pass stringentsigniﬁcance tests. Work from Sardinia shows that some of
the alleles that confer short s tature affect known Mende-
lian genes, which have drifted up to appreciable fre-quencies in this population to create the well-known
island effect on height. After a period of frenzied activity
following the invention of nex t generation sequencing, the
era of monogenic disease gene discovery has passed its
peak. At the same time, our ability to see pathogenic
variation rather than infer it, is fundamentally changingmedicine and our societies. Rare diseases have become a
recognized part of medicine, not just curiosities. One such
area where gene-based disco veries are changing medicine
fast is cancer therapy. The understanding of the gene
composition of the Philadelphia chromosome led to the
ﬁrst targeted cancer drug, Imatinib. Other examples fol-
lowed such as EGFR mutations in lung cancer. Soon, all
w o m e nw i t hb r e a s ta n do v a r i a nc a n c e rw i l lb et e s t e df o r
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, to guide their therapy.Similar testing could happen for male patients with
prostate cancer. All this will lead to an enormous increase
in the detection of people with genetic predisposition forcancers, which constitutes a n interesting example of how
Molecular Pathology and Mendelian predisposition
genetics come together. Work by Ségolene Ayme andothers has led to the recent launch of the European
Reference Networks whose purpose is to improve diag-
n o s i sa n dc a r ef o rr a r ed i s e a s e sp a t i e n t sa c r o s sE u r o p e .NIPT represents another major triumph for the power of
next generation sequencing technology. It is almost
incomprehensible how NIPT seemed such a distant goalfor so many years. The diagnostic rate of exome
sequencing and microarrays is between 20 and 60% for
most diagnostic situations where Mendelian disease issought. This experience underlines that the genome is not
entirely readable yet. Progress requires single celltechniques for mosaic situations, long read sequencing for
repetitive elements and other genomic dark matter, and
whole genome sequencing to capture smaller genomic
rearrangements. All of these will come. Still, reading the
genome does not equal understanding it. Fortunately,
Functional Genomics is about to come of age, now thatthe groundwork has been done with the Hapmap,
ENCODE and Blueprint projects. The future of Human
Genomics will be radically different as we start to studyTraits rather than States, and this at the single cell level
and in real time. Multi-omics approaches will arrive soon,
as will innovative gene therapy approaches. The futuremay turn out much more surprising and informative than
any of us can now predict.
H. Brunner: None.
PL1.3
The Future: Solved Problems and Persisting
Challenges
A. Visel1,2,3
1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ,Berkeley, CA ,
United States ,2DOE Joint Genome Institute ,Walnut Creek ,
CA, United States ,3University of California ,Merced ,CA,
United States
Groundbreaking discoveries by individual researchers,
disruptive technological advancements, and massive-scaledata collection efforts by large research consortia have
fundamentally transformed the ﬁeld of human genetics. The
introduction of powerful data generation and analysistechniques fueled the emergence and rapid growth of the
ﬁeld of genomics as a data-driven science. Researchers now
routinely apply genomic approaches to resolve the geneticbasis of human diseases in ways that were unimaginable
just a few decades ago. Extrapolating from the mind-
boggling pace of progress to date, I will attempt to speculateabout the future of human genetics and genomics in the
decades ahead. Speci ﬁcally, I will discuss ways in which
many current challenges will likely become resolvedthrough foreseeable technological improvements. More
importantly, I will describe problems that are expected to
present persistent conceptual challenges. In particular, I willdiscuss the continued conquest to decipher the vast non-
coding portion of the human genome, our current dif ﬁcul-
ties in understanding its function, and barriers to identifyingconnections between non-coding sequence changes and
human disease.
A. Visel: None.4PL2
What ’s New? Highlights Session
PL2.1
Enhancer composition and dosage control
developmental gene expression
A. J. Will1,2, G. Cova1,2, M. Osterwalder3, W. Chan1,2, N. Brieske1,
A. Visel3, E. Klopocki4, D. G. Lupiáñez1,2, S. Mundlos1,2
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics ,RG Devel-
opment and Disease ,Berlin ,Germany ,2Institute for Med-
ical and Human Genetics ,Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin ,Berlin ,Germany ,3Genomics Division, MS 84 –171,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ,Berkeley ,CA,
United States ,4Institute of Human Genetics ,Julius Max-
imilian University Würzburg ,Würzburg ,Germany
Gene expression is controlled by enhancers, cis-
regulatory elements that are often located in clusters dis-
playing redundancy in reporter assays and similarities intranscription factor occupancy. Copy number variations
(CNVs) of such elements can be associated with disease,
induced by yet unclear pathomechanisms. At the Indian
Hedgehog (Ihh) locus, for example, duplications result in
craniosynostosis, syndactyly, and polydactyly, phenotypes
not previously associated with Ihh function. Here, we dis-sect the regulation of Ihhin vivo and show that a cluster of
at least 8 enhancers with individual tissue-speci ﬁcity reg-
ulates Ihhexpression in the digit anlagen, growth plates,
skull sutures and digit tips. To investigate how gene
expression responds to systematic variations in the number
of regulatory elements, we generated mutants usingCRISPR/Cas9 and investigated their phenotypes. Con-
secutive deletions of enhancer elements show that they
function in an additive manner resulting in growth defectsof the skull and long bones. Duplications, in contrast, cause
tissue-speci ﬁc upregulation of Ihhleading to fusion of
sutures in the skull and misexpression in the distal inter-digital space causing syndactyly, polydactyly and abnor-
mally shaped phalanges. Chromosome conformation
capture (4C) of the region shows that the duplications resultin speci ﬁc regulatory con ﬁgurations that explain the
appearance of the pathogenic phenotypes.
In summary, this study shows that CNVs of non-coding
regulatory elements can result in speci ﬁc regulatory
abnormalities including gene over- and misexpression. The
composition of individual enhancer elements and theirrelative dosage within a cluster confer precision of spatio-
temporal gene expression.
A.J. Will: None. G. Cova: None. M. Osterwalder:
None. W. Chan: None. N. Brieske: None. A. Visel: None.E. Klopocki: None. D.G. Lupiáñez: None. S. Mundlos:
None.
PL2.2
Quantifying the impact of rare coding variation
across the phenotypic spectrum
A. Ganna1, F. K. Satterstrom1, S. Zekavat1, I. Das2, J. Alfoldi1,M .I .
Kurki1, W. K. Thompson3, A. Byrnes1, K. J. Karczewski1, M. A. Rivas4,
C. Churchhouse1, J. Flannick1, D. MacArthur1, M. J. Daly1,P .F .
Sullivan5, J. C. Florez1, A. Palotie6, A. E. Locke7, A. Børglum8,
S. Kathiresan1, B. M. Neale1
1Broad institute, Cambrdige ,MA,United States ,2The
McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University ,St.
Louis ,MO,United States ,3The Institute of Biological
Psychiatry and the University of California ,San Diego ,CA,
United States ,4Stanford University ,Palo Alto ,CA,United
States ,5Karolinska Institutet ,Stockholm ,Sweden ,6FIMM ,
university of Helsinki ,Helsinki ,Finland ,7The McDonnell
Genome Institute at Washington University ,St. Louise ,MO,
United States ,8Aarhus University ,Aarhus ,Denmark
Whole exome sequencing (WES) studies enable us to
determine the impact of rare coding variation on complex
traits. Here we assemble WES data on 100,289 individuals
from a combination of cohort studies with electronic healthrecords (EHR) and case/control disease studies to evaluate
the role that a burden of rare ( <0.1% allele frequency) loss
of function (LoF) variants in 3,172 highly evolutionarilyconstrained genes (HC) plays in conferring risk for 13
quantitative traits and 10 diseases. Carriers of at least one
HC-LoF variant had increased risk of autism, schizophrenia,bipolar disorder, intellectual disability and ADHD (P-values
(p) range: 8 × 10
−4–1×1 0−14). The effect was stronger for
individuals diagnosed with > 1 disorder, but also signi ﬁcant
in those without comorbidities. In controls without any
aforementioned disorder, we observed a signi ﬁcant asso-
ciation with the broader ICD-10 category of mental/beha-vioral disorders. Furthermore, carriers of HC-LoF variants
tended to be shorter (p =2×1 0
−4), have fewer years of
education (p =3×1 0−4) and tended to be younger (p =5×
10−7); the latter observation possibly re ﬂecting reduced
survival or study participation. Other gene-sets (ClinVar
genes, mice or cell lethal genes) did not show any LoF-burden associations, however GWAS-derived gene-sets
implicated in lipids and myocardial infraction showed a
signiﬁcant LoF-burden with the corresponding traits.
Finally, using EHRs of 14,709 individuals, we performed a
phenome-wide scan and identi ﬁed a signi ﬁcant association
between HC-LoF and chronic kidney failure (p =2×1 0
−6)
and with number of hospital visits (p =0.0014). InAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 5conclusion, we describe the signature of rare deleterious
coding variants on multiple complex traits.
A. Ganna: None. F.K. Satterstrom: None. S. Zekavat:
None. I. Das: None. J. Alfoldi: None. M.I. Kurki: None.
W.K. Thompson: None. A. Byrnes: None. K.J.
Karczewski: None. M.A. Rivas: None. C. Churchhouse:
None. J. Flannick: None. D. MacArthur: None. M.J.
Daly: None. P.F. Sullivan: None. J.C. Florez: None.
A. Palotie: None. A.E. Locke: None. A. Børglum: None.
S. Kathiresan: None. B.M. Neale: None.
PL2.3
De novo gain-of-function mutations in the
epigenetic regulator SMCHD1 cause Bosma arhinia
microphthalmia syndrome
C. T. Gordon1, S. Xue2, G. Yigit3, H. Filali1, K. Chen4, N. Rosin3,
K. Yoshiura5, M. Oufadem1, T. Beck4, C. Dion6,A .S e ﬁani7, H. Kayserili8,
J. Murphy4, C. Chatdokmaiprai9, A. Hillmer10, D. Wattanasirichaigoon9,
S. Lyonnet1, F. Magdinier6, A. Javed10, M. Blewitt4, J. Amiel1,
B. Wollnik3, B. Reversade2
1Institut Imagine ,INSERM U1163 ,Paris ,France ,2Institute
of Medical Biology ,A*STAR ,Singapore ,Singapore ,
3Institute of Human Genetics ,Göttingen ,Germany ,4The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research ,
Melbourne ,Australia ,5Nagasaki University ,Nagasaki ,
Japan ,6Aix Marseille Université ,INSERM UMRS 910 ,
Marseille ,France ,7Institut National d ’Hygiène ,Rabat ,
Morocco ,8Koç University School of Medicine ,Istanbul ,
Turkey ,9Faculty of Medicine ,Ramathibodi Hospital ,
Mahidol University ,Bangkok ,Thailand ,10Genome Institute
of Singapore ,A*STAR ,Singapore ,Singapore
Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) is an
extremely rare and striking condition characterized bycomplete absence of the nose (arhinia) with or without
ocular defects. Arhinia is presumed to result from a speci ﬁc
defect of the nasal placodes or surrounding neural crest-derived tissues during embryonic development. By exome
sequencing we identi ﬁed missense mutations in the exten-
ded ATPase domain of the epigenetic regulator StructuralMaintenance of Chromosomes Flexible Hinge Domain
Containing 1 (SMCHD1) as the cause of BAMS in all 14
cases studied. All mutations were de novo where parentalDNA was available. ATPase assays using wildtype or
mutant versions of puri ﬁed SMCHD1 protein indicated that
the BAMS mutations increase the catalytic activity of theprotein. In overexpression assays in Xenopus embryos we
observed that injection of SMCHD1 RNA harboring BAMS
mutations resulted in more severe frontonasal and eyehypoplasia than injection of wildtype SMCHD1. These
functional assays suggest that the BAMS mutations behaveas gain-of-function alleles. This is in contrast to loss-of-
function mutations in SMCHD1 that have been associated
with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) type
2, a disorder with no phenotypic overlap with BAMS. In
FSHD type 2, loss of the epigenetic silencing activity of
SMCHD1 results in pathogenic misexpression of the tran-scription factor DUX4 in skeletal muscles. Our results
establish SMCHD1 as a key player in nasal development
and provide biochemical insight into its enzymatic functionthat may be exploited for development of therapeutics for
FSHD.
C.T. Gordon: None. S. Xue: None. G. Yigit: None.
H. Filali: None. K. Chen: None. N. Rosin: None.
K. Yoshiura: None. M. Oufadem: None. T. Beck:
None. C. Dion: None. A. Se ﬁani: None. H. Kayserili:
None. J. Murphy: None. C. Chatdokmaiprai: None.
A. Hillmer: None. D. Wattanasirichaigoon: None.
S. Lyonnet: None. F. Magdinier: None. A. Javed:
None. M. Blewitt: None. J. Amiel: None. B. Wollnik:
None. B. Reversade: None.
PL2.4
Genetic variation in the Estonian population: a
pharmacogenomic study of adverse drug reactionsusing electronic health records
K. Krebs1, T. Tasa1,2, M. Kals1, R. Mägi1, T. Esko1, A. Metspalu1, J. Vilo2,
L. Milani1
1Estonian Genome Center ,Tartu ,Estonia ,2Institute of
Computer Science ,Tartu ,Estonia
Introduction: Advances in next generation sequencing
(NGS) technologies coupled with electronic health records
(EHR) have provided new opportunities for the interpreta-
tion of the role of genetic variation in different diseases andtraits. Pharmacogenomics applies NGS methods to docu-
ment genetic variants important in drug response with the
ultimate goal of reducing the negative effects of variabilityin drug response including adverse drug reactions (ADR).
Here we performed a large scale study of genes important in
drug response of Estonian biobank participants by usingcomprehensive information from Estonian e-health
databases.
Materials and Methods: We sequenced the whole gen-
omes of 2,240 participants of the Estonian biobank using
PCR-free sample preparation and 30x coverage at the Broad
Institute, and further included all variants imputed for14,219 genotyped subjects in the Estonian biobank. We
identi ﬁed ADR diagnoses using ICD10 codes, and pre-
scribed drugs by searching the participants ’records from
the Estonian Health Insurance Fund.6Results: When focusing on 64 genes important in drug
response we observed 622 variants in the coding regions
and 388 variants in the regulatory regions of these genes.
By linking with the EHRs we were able to validate several
previously documented genetic variants associated drug
induced ADRs. By genome wide analysis we identi ﬁed a
novel gene, CTNNA3, to associate with ADRs among
individuals treated with oxicams. The ﬁnding replicated in
an extended cohort from the biobank.
Conclusion: EHRs together with genotype information and
additional thorough validation of ADRs are a way to ﬁnd
individuals potentially at risk for unexpected drug response.
K. Krebs: None. T. Tasa: None. M. Kals: None.
R. Mägi: None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None.
J. Vilo: None. L. Milani: None.
PL2.5
From pathogenic mechanism to a therapeuticapproach in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 38 (SCA38)
E. Di Gregorio1, M. Ferrero2, M. Manes3, E. Hoxha4, L. Boccone5,
L. Orsi6, N. Mitro7, D. Caruso7, A. Alberici3, A. Padovani3, S. Cavalieri2,
E. Giorgio2, C. Mancini2, E. Pozzi2, E. Riberi8, R. Gabriele4, I. Balbo4,
L. Masante4, V. Zambelli7, M. Maldini7, M. Sallese9, F. Tempia4,
B. Borroni3, A. Brusco2
1Azienda Ospedaliera Università Città della Salute e della
Scienza ,Torino ,Italy,2Department of Medical Sciences ,
Torino ,Italy,3Department of Clinical and Experimental
Sciences ,Brescia ,Italy,4Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri
Ottolenghi ,Orbassano ,Italy,5Ospedale Regionale Micro-
citemie ,Cagliari ,Italy,6Department of Neuroscience and
Mental Health ,Torino ,Italy,7Department of Pharmaco-
logical and Biomolecular Sciences ,Milano ,Italy,
8Department of Public Health and Pediatrics ,Torino ,Italy,
9Department of Medical ,Oral and Biotechnological Sci-
ences ,Chieti ,Italy
ELOVL5 gene is associated with autosomal dominant
Spinocerebellar Ataxia 38 (SCA38, MIM# 611805), a rare
adult-onset cerebellar neurodegeneration. ELOVL5 encodes
for an elongase, an enzyme with a critical role in regulatingthe amount of a subset of polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs). We explored pathogenic mechanism of SCA38,
studying aberrant ELOVL5-p.Gly230Val protein. In COS7cells, expressing ELOVL5-p.Gly230Val, we demonstrated
mutant protein alters Golgi-ER transport, and accumulates
into Golgi apparatus. We also showed unfolded proteinresponse (UPR) activation by a signi ﬁcant increase of
CHOP, ATF-4 and XBP1 markers.
Nevertheless, in Elovl5- ko mice, we showed a signi ﬁcant
motor impairment at 3 months using the balance beam test
(P < 0.001), and at 6 months using the rotarod test (P <0.05). At 12 months, we identi ﬁed a reduction in the
thickness of the third cerebellar lobule molecular layer (P <
0.05). Overall, a dual gain-/loss-of-function mechanism is
likely in this disorder.
Based on this assumption and considering that fatty acids
produced by ELOVL5 have a feedback negative loop,reducing ELOVL5 gene expression, we designed double-
blind placebo-controlled study involving 10 SCA38 patients
using PUFAs. We conducted an initial 16-week trial (600mg/day DHA vs. placebo, 1:1), followed by 24-week sin-
gle-blind open-label study. We observed a signi ﬁcant clin-
ical improvement of neurological symptoms in treatedsubjects as compared to patients under placebo (P =0.02).
The effect of DHA treatment was enhanced in the open-
label phase, where a signi ﬁcant improvement of both clin-
ical symptoms and cerebellar metabolism was observed.
These ﬁndings suggest DHA supplementation is an
effective treatment for SCA38.
E. Di Gregorio: None. M. Ferrero: None. M. Manes:
None. E. Hoxha: None. L. Boccone: None. L. Orsi: None.
N. Mitro: None. D. Caruso: None. A. Alberici: None.
A. Padovani: None. S. Cavalieri: None. E. Giorgio:
None. C. Mancini: None. E. Pozzi: None. E. Riberi:
None. R. Gabriele: None. I. Balbo: None. L. Masante:
None. V. Zambelli: None. M. Maldini: None. M. Sallese:
None. F. Tempia: None. B. Borroni: None. A. Brusco:
None.
PL2.6
Analysis of de novo mutation clustering identi ﬁes
candidate disease genes in neurodevelopmental
disorders due to likely gain-of-function and
dominant-negative mechanisms
S. H. Lelieveld1, L. Wiel1, H. Venselaar1, R. Pfundt1, G. Vriend1,J .A .
Veltman1,2, H. G. Brunner1,3, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, C. Gilissen1
1Radboudumc ,Nijmegen ,Netherlands ,2International Cen-
tre for Life ,Newcastle upon Tyne ,United Kingdom ,
3Maastricht University Medical Centre ,Maastricht ,
Netherlands
Haploinsuf ﬁciency (HI) is the most common mechanism
through which mutations exert their effect and cause dis-
ease. Typically, these pathogenic mutations are spreadthroughout the gene, and result in absence of protein pro-
duct. In contrast, non-haploinsuf ﬁciency (NHI) mechan-
isms, caused by gain-of-function/dominant-negativemissense mutations, are often characterized by the spatial
clustering of mutations within a gene. Here we exploited
this property and developed a method to speci ﬁcally iden-
tify genes with signi ﬁcant spatial clustering patterns for
de novo mutations. We applied our method to a dataset ofAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 74,043 de novo missense mutations from published exome
studies of patient-parent trios with (neuro)developmental
disorders (NDDs). Among the 15 genes that we identi ﬁed
there was a strong enrichment for known NDD genes (12
out of 15, p =1.65e-04) thereby validating our approach.
Strikingly, 11 out of these 12 genes are known to actthrough a disease mechanisms other than HI. Interestingly,
identi ﬁed genes are signi ﬁcantly less tolerant to population
variation than known HI genes (p =8.59e-03). The 3 genes
that were not previously linked to NDDs are involved
processes that are known to be disrupted in NDDs. Finally,
we performed 3D-modeling of protein structures to showthat, unlike known HI genes, clustering mutations are
unlikely to affect protein folding and more likely to disturb
protein interactions/complex formation. In summary, weshow that our method successfully identi ﬁes known NDD
disease genes and that these are strongly enriched for dis-
ease mechanisms other than HI. We identify further 3 geneswith similar patterns and propose these as novel NDD
candidate genes.
S.H. Lelieveld: None. L. Wiel: None. H. Venselaar:
None. R. Pfundt: None. G. Vriend: None. J.A. Veltman:
None. H.G. Brunner: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None.
C. Gilissen: None.
PL3
ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges Debate: Ethical
and Legal Discussions - Past, Present &
Future
PL3.1
Reﬂecting on ethics in genetics: The past, present
and future
R. Chadwick
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
What is sometimes called ‘gen-ethics ’has gradually
expanded its scope as it has moved out of the genetics clinic
to have application in health care in general and in multipleother aspects of life. As the focus of debate has moved from
genetic counselling and eugenics to the promises of thera-
pies and enhancements; genomic research and data sharing;prediction and personalisation; the ethical frameworks have
also been tested. Traditional thinking on informed consent
and privacy has been challenged. A more ‘personalised ’
future may require new thinking about the concept of
‘person ’itself.
R. Chadwick: None.PL3.2
Going from perceptions of genetic risk to the
balancing of bene ﬁts and risks
M. Hansson
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Perceptions of genetic risk information and how
this kind of information may affect the individual as
well as relatives to the index patient have been
s t u d i e dt h o r o u g h l ys i n c em a n yy e a r si nm a n yp a t i e n tpopulations. Examples of issues that have been exten-
sively researched are: i) ho w at risk individuals and
patients understand their risk of disease after testing andgenetic counselling; ii) their emotional responses to the
information; iii) the effects of the information on aspects
related to quality of life; iv) the in ﬂuence of testing on
family dynamics and, v) their uptake of recommended
risk-reducing strategies. Apart from the last item con-
cerning the relationship between genetic risk informationand changes of behaviour, this research ﬁeld is mature.
New technological tools challenges, however, established
genetic risk information strategies. WGS will revealinformation that is not related to the main condition being
investigated, leading to questions on how to best inform
about incidental/unsolicited ﬁndings. Complex diseases
come with both genetic risk and risks related to environ-
mental and life style factors where the individual may
play a signi ﬁcant role in modifying the total risk. From a
historical perspective we see now a methodological
development in genetic risk information where the
focus is not only on what matters to the patient or howmuch it matters but how he/she prefers the trade off
between bene ﬁts and risk. Methods l i k eD i s c r e t eC h o i c e
Experiments and Best Worst Scaling may help us to getour hands on not only perceptions of risk but how the
patient wants to balance these risks against expected
beneﬁts. I will in this presentation brie ﬂy describe this
development.
M. Hansson: None.
PL3.3
The Evolution of Genetic Counseling: Effectively
Meeting Our Clients ’Needs
B. B. Biesecker
National Human Genome Resaerch Institute/National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
Over the past forty years the clinical practice of genetic
counseling has expanded from prenatal and pediatric8patients to include adults at risk for common disease
(oncology, cardiology, neurology, psychiatry) and healthy
adults pursuing predictive testing. Across all settings we
have responsibilities to help clients make informed choi-
ces about use of genetic testing and cope effectively with
increased risk or genetic cond itions in their families. Our
psycho-educational practice comprises teaching genetic
concepts alongside providing psychological counseling to
enhance decision making and adaptation to genetic riskand conditions. A systematic review of 25 years of ran-
domized controlled trials i nvolving genetic counseling
outcomes reveals that telephone counseling is as effectiveas in-person counseling for patients at increased risk of
inherited cancer. An intervention study prompting genetic
counselors to attend to topics of interest to their clientsled to more targeted and valued sessions within a similar
timeframe. These outcomes illustrate ways to streamline
services and improve its effectiveness. Yet studies ofcommunication in genetic counseling demonstrate domi-
nant speech by genetic counselors and use of technical
language at a high literacy level. This pattern limits cli-ents’understanding in failing to engage them in a pro-
ductive dialogue. The use of therapeutic counseling
interventions is minimal compared to information
provision, suggesting a lack of opportunity for shared
decision making and enhanced psychological wellbeing —
the predominant outcome of randomized trials in geneticcounseling. With the onslaught of additional information
and uncertainties emanatin g from genome sequencing
we face a challenge that genetic counseling maybecome further dominated by technical information with
less time spent on processing the potential value of
the information for the client. New evidence-basedpractice models are greatly needed to maximize the
opportunities of genetic counseling to meet our clients ’
needs.
B.B. Biesecker: None.
PL3.4
From Medical Genetics to Applied Genomics:
Implications for Human Geneticists ’Core Goals and
Values
E. Juengst
Chapel Hill, NC, United States
As a biomedical ﬁeld, human genetics since c. 1960
has subscribed to a very dist inctive ethos when dealing
with genetic health problems. Long before “patient self-
determination ”and “shared decision-making ”became
everyday words in other health care ﬁelds, clinical
geneticists have made a point of respecting their clients ’beliefs, values, and goals, even if their choices
carried risks for themselves, their families or the wider
society. When translational genomic research began to
make genetic risk assessmen t relevant across multiple
medical specialties, geneticis ts took their client-centered
ethos along, through the vision of a “personalized geno-
mic medicine ”that would both tailor care to patient ’s
molecular pro ﬁles and also empower them to take a more
active role in their health care. The theoretical goal of“precision medicine ”is to take the next step, by inte-
grating genetic risk data with information about patients ’
speci ﬁc social histories and environmental exposures, to
reveal actionable “epigenetic ”factors that in ﬂuence their
risks. Along this route, however, evidence from the
human genetics literature s uggests that odd things are
happening. The genomic variation studies that are
necessary to achieve human genetics ’molecular goals are
reorienting the ﬁeld from individuals to populations, by
suggesting public health applications that depend for their
success on individual decisional conformity, not auton-
omy. As genomic sequencing tools becomes integratedinto mainstream medicine, more traditional forms of
medical paternalism seem to be in ﬂuencing genetics,
limiting rather than expanding, the patient ’sr o l ei n
decision-making about medical information. And as
genomic applications move further into anthropology,
forensics, national security, international sports, andthe marketplace, the ﬁeld moves further from a health
focus, making “Applied Genomics ”an apt label for
even its human uses. For precision medicine to movefrom being a scienti ﬁc dream to a clinical reality,
geneticists will have to decide whether these trends
reﬂect healthy ethical evolution or moral compromise.
PL4
Mendel Lecture
PL4.1
Mendel Lecture: Reading and Writing Genomes
G. Church
Boston, MA, United States
By 1863 Gregor Mendel could “read”the state of seven
sites in the pea genome by their impact on visible traits
and could “write ”genomes by mating randomly muta-
genized plants. Today, we can routinely read 95% of the 6
billion basepairs of the human genome using and ﬂuor-
escent or nanopore sequencing and many other “omes ”
and traits at sub-cellular res olution using in situ sequen-
cing (FISSEQ). Today, we can “write ”billions ofAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 9basepairs of genomic DNA on chips and change 320 sites
in a cell at once to radically change the fundamental triplet
genetic code that connects genotypes to phenotypes. We
can engineer multi-virus resistant cells, humanized pigs
for transplantable organs, and wild animal populations to
eliminate Malaria, Lyme dis ease and invasive species. We
already have many genetically modi ﬁed humans. These
technologies are changing exponentially, increasing the
need for thoughtful and thorough discussion of the desiredtrajectories without prematu rely dismissing alternative
p a t h sa si m p r a c t i c a l .
PL5
ESHG Award Lecture
PL5.1
ESHG Award Lecture: X-chromosome structure andepigenetic dynamics during X inactivation
E. Heard
Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique et Biologie du Devél-
oppement, Paris, France
X-chromosome inactiva tion during early female
development is an essential epigenetic process that isrequired to achieve appropriate dosage for X-linked gene
products. We are interested in understanding how the
differential treatment of the two X chromosomes in thesame nucleus is set up during development and how this
differential expression is then maintained, or reversed in
certain circumstances such as the inner cell mass of themouse embryo or in the germ line. The establishment of X
inactivation involves the non-coding Xist RNA that
triggers chromosome-wide c hromatin re-organisation
and gene silencing. Recent insights have been made
into the nature of these chromosome-wide changes and
the factors that mediate them. The inactive X is foldedinto a unique bipartite, heterochromatic structure that
tends to lack topologically associated domains (TADs),
except at regions of escape. However little is knownabout the molecular mechanis ms underlying X inactiva-
tion and in particular, the degree to which 3D X-
chromosome structure is a cause or a consequence ofgene expression. Our recent studies have focused on the
degree to which organization into TADs (i) in ﬂuences
monoallelic Xist regulation and (ii) participates in
regional escape from X inactivation on the inactive
X chromosome.
E. Heard: None.Concurrent Symposia
S01
Single cell studies: From technology to biology
S01.1
Single cell RNAseq-based characterisation of adult
stem cells
B. Deplancke
Lausanne, Switzerland
This presentation will cons ist of three mostly unpub-
lished parts. First, I will desc ribe our recent efforts char-
acterizing the heterogeneity of adipose stem cells. Using
single cell transcriptomics, w e were able to identify three
distinct and novel subpopulations. One population is
thereby of particular interest since these cells are refrac-
tory to fat cell differentiation despite their stem cell-likecharacteristics and also app ear to have repressive capa-
city. This raises the hypothesis whether a dysbalance in
this population may lead to fat cell accumulation and thusobesity. More generally, it rev eals the power of single cell
genomics in uncovering new, biomedically relevant cell
populations. In a second part, I will brie ﬂy describe our
efforts to generate a novel web tool supporting the auto-
mated analysis of single-ce ll RNA-seq data. This Auto-
mated Single-ce ll Analysis Pipeline (ASAP) can be
accessed at https://asap.ep ﬂ.ch/and should greatly facil-
itate the implementation of single cell genomics in non-
expert labs. I will end by presenting our recently devel-oped single cell-based classi ﬁer to identify somatic stem
and progenitor cells in heterogeneous populations. I will
show how this classi ﬁer enables the identi ﬁcation of stem-
like cells in still ambiguous systems such as the pancreas
and the epidermis. In addition, it aids in the exploration of
lineage commitment hierarchies, thus facilitating thestudy of biological processes such as cellular differentia-
tion, tissue regeneration, and cancer.
S01.2
Towards single-cell proteomics: Unraveling cell
populations in health and disease by single-cellmass cytometry
S. Chevrier
Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland
No abstract received.
S. Chevrier: None.10S01.3
Singlecell RNA-seq unveils the molecular diversity of
midbrain development in human,mouse and stem
cells
G. La Manno
Karolinska Institutet, Unit of Molecular Neurobiology,
Stockholm, Sweden
Understanding the embryonic development of human
ventral midbrain is of major interest for Parkinson ’s disease.
However, the heterogeneity of cell types developing in this
area and the level of similarity between human embryo and
rodent models remains unclear. We transcriptomicallyproﬁled ventral midbrain development in human, mouse
and stem cell cultures, at the single cell level. By the means
of unbiased cell type discovery, species comparison andtime course analysis we gained quantitative insights into
progenitors heterogeneity, cell type conservation and
dopaminergic neuron speci ﬁcation. Finally, we used the
single-cell data to train a machine-learning algorithm to
assess the composition and quality of stem-cell-derived
preparations for cell replacement therapy.
G. La Manno: None.
S02
One gene, many phenotypes
S02.1
Filaminopathies
S. P. Robertson
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Mutations affecting any one of the three ﬁlamin genes
(FLNA, FLNB and FLNC ) give rise to a heterogeneous
group of no less that 16 different clinical disorders. Since
their ﬁrst description beginning in 2003, a deeper under-
standing of their clinical presentation has emerged, linkingphenotypes with the location of causative mutations and/or
their effect on gene function. These linkages assist in plan-
ning the clinical evaluation of individuals with potentialﬁlaminopathy phenotypes and assigning a likelihood of
pathogenicity for some variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in
these genes. Assisting an understanding of the pathogenesisof these disorders has been the discovery of mutations in
additional loci resulting in close phenocopies of these con-
ditions, leading to a deepening understanding of how theseactin binding cytoskeletal proteins regulate morphogenesis.
S.P. Robertson: None.S02.2
Laminopathies
N. Levy
Marseille, France
No abstract received.
S02.3
Disruption of Na+binding in alpha-3 Na+,K+-
ATPaseby neurological disease mutations andrescue by second-site mutation
B. Vilsen1, R. Holm2,C .P .R ø n n2, M. S. Toustrup-Jensen2,A .P .
Einholm2, V. R. Schack2
1Aarhus, Denmark,2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
The Na+,K+-ATPase is an ion pump that uses energy
liberated by hydrolysis of ATP to exchange intracellularNa
+for extracellular K+, thus creating essential gradients
for Na+and K+across the cell membrane. High resolution
crystal structures of Na+- and K+-bound states have shown
where in the protein structure the ions bind. Of the three
Na+sites (I, II, and III), site III is most speci ﬁc for Na+.
Missense mutations in the genes encoding the α2- and α3-
isoforms of the Na+,K+-ATPase, expressed in glia and
neurons, respectively, cause neurologic disorders. A high
proportion of the α3 disease mutations occur in the trans-
membrane sector and several seem to affect Na+binding at
site III. Hence, we have shown that rapid-onset dystonia
parkinsonism (RDP) and alternating hemiplegia of child-hood (AHC) mutations F780L, D923N, and Y1013dup
disturb Na
+binding selectively without effect on K+
binding. The CAPOS (Cerebellar ataxia, are ﬂexia, pes
cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss)
mutation E818K is likely to disturb Na+site III by pertur-
bation of a crucial hydrogen bonding network apparent inthe crystal structure. Recently, we found that a secondary
mutation rescues the defective Na
+binding at site III caused
by RDP/AHC mutation D923N. Here I also present datashowing rescue of the compromised function of additional
neurological disease mutants. A perspective is that it may be
feasible to develop an ef ﬁcient pharmaceutical mimicking
the rescuing effect, which optimally would rescue the
compromised function of a variety of α3-disease mutants
with reduced af ﬁnity of Na
+site III.
R. Holm: None. C.P. Rønn: None. M.S. Toustrup-
Jensen: None. A.P. Einholm: None. V.R. Schack: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 11S03
Novel Treatment Options
S03.1
Emerging targeted drug therapies in skeletal
dysplasias
R. Savarirayan
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne,
Australia
Quantum advances have occurred in the ﬁeld of human
genetics in the six decades since Watson and Crick ful ﬁlled
their “wish to suggest a structure for the salt of deoxyribose
nucleic acid. ”These culminated with the human genome
project, and the ability to deliver medical advice, manage-
ment, and therapy tailored to a speci ﬁc genetic blueprint
(individualised medicine). Advances in molecular diag-
nostic capabilities have been rapid, to the point where the
genome can be sequenced for several thousand dollarswithin a week. Crucially, this genomic revolution has
facilitated the identi ﬁcation of targets for “precision ”treat-
ments to combat genetic diseases at their source. Disruptive,pathogenesis-based therapies are now revolutionising the
management of inherited disorders of cartilage and bone
(skeletal dysplasias), changing their natural history, andgiving patients and families new options and outcomes.
These include the use of C-natriuretic peptide in achon-
droplasia and recombinant tissue non-speci ﬁc alkaline
phosphatase in hypophosphatasia. This presentation will
review the current status of these emerging therapies in
clinical trials and practice, and future potential targetedtherapeutic options for skeletal dysplasias.
R. Savarirayan: None.
S03.2
Gene therapy of myotubular myopathy
A. Buj Bello
Genethon / INSERM UMR 951, Evry, France
Mutations in the myotubularin gene ( MTM1 ) result in X-
linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), a pediatric diseaseof skeletal muscle characterized by small centrally nucle-
ated myo ﬁbers containing abnormal mitochondrial accu-
mulations. Patients typically present with severe hypotoniaand respiratory failure, and most of them die during early
infancy. We have developed a gene therapy approach to
treat this disease and shown the ef ﬁcacy of intravenous
injection of a unique dose of a recombinant adeno-
associated viral vector expressing myotubularin in mouseand dog models of the disease, leading to long-term cor-
rection of the muscle phenotype. Results from a dose
escalation study aiming at de ﬁning the therapeutic dose in
XLMTM dogs will also be presented. These preclinical
results support the development of a gene therapy clinical
trial in patients with myotubular myopathy.
A. Buj Bello: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant;
Audentes Therapeutics.
S03.3
Pronuclear transfer to prevent mitochondrial DNA
disease (Mito therapy)
M. Herbert
Newcastle, United Kingdom
No abstract received.
S04
From Association to Causality in complex
diseases
S04.2
Efﬁcient ﬁne-mapping of genome-wide association
study results
M. Pirinen, C. Benner
Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Uni-
versity of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Typically genomic regions pinpointed by GWAS contain
hundreds of correlated variants and a key step in trans-
forming GWAS information into biological insights is ﬁne-
mapping, narrowing down the set of all variants to a much
smaller set of most probable causal variants. This talk
outlines recent ideas that have made computational ﬁne-
mapping practical in human genomics and demonstrates
them through our experience with the FINEMAP algorithm.
Key components include: (1) Compressing data to light-weight summaries to avoid logistics and privacy concerns
related to complete data sharing and to minimize the com-
putational overhead, (2) Ef ﬁcient implementation of spar-
sity assumptions and (3) Ef ﬁcient search algorithms. An
important practical question is to what degree we can rely
on linkage disequilibrium estimates from external referencedata when ﬁne-mapping large GWAS meta-analyses of
traits and diseases using summary statistics.
M. Pirinen: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant;
Genomics plc. C. Benner: None.12S04.3
Integration of eqtl and gwas to ﬁnd susceptibility
genes for complex traits
B. Pasaniuc
Los Angeles, CA, United States
No abstract received.
S05
3D genome architecture: non-coding
variants and human disease
S05.1
A 3D Code in the Human Genome
E. Lieberman Aiden
Houston, TX, United States
Stretched out from end-to-end, the human genome - a
sequence of 3 billion chemical letters inscribed in a mole-cule called DNA - is over 2 meters long. Famously, short
stretches of DNA fold into a double helix, which wind
around histone proteins to form the 10nm ﬁber. But what
about longer pieces? Does the genome ’s fold in ﬂuence
function? How does the information contained in such an
ultra-dense packing even remain accessible? In this talk, Idescribe our work developing ‘Hi-C ’(Lieberman-Aiden
et al., Science, 2009; Aiden, Science , 2011) and more
recently ‘in-situ Hi-C ’(Rao & Huntley et al., Cell, 2014),
which use proximity ligation to transform pairs of physi-
cally adjacent DNA loci into chimeric DNA sequences.
Sequencing a library of such chimeras makes it possible tocreate genome-wide maps of physical contacts between
pairs of loci, revealing features of genome folding in 3D.
Next, I will describe recent work using in situ Hi-C toconstruct haploid and diploid maps of nine cell types. The
densest, in human lymphoblastoid cells, contains 4.9 billion
contacts, achieving 1 kb resolution. We ﬁnd that genomes
are partitioned into contact domains (median length, 185
kb), which are associated with distinct patterns of histone
marks and segregate into six subcompartments. We identify∼10,000 loops. These loops frequently link promoters and
enhancers, correlate with gene activation, and show con-
servation across cell types and species. Loop anchorstypically occur at domain boundaries and bind the protein
CTCF. The CTCF motifs at loop anchors occur pre-
dominantly ( >90%) in a convergent orientation, with theasymmetric motifs “facing ”one another. Next, I willdiscuss the biophysical mechanism that underlies chromatin
looping. Speci ﬁcally, our data is consistent with the for-
mation of loops by extrusion (Sanborn & Rao et al., PNAS ,
2015). In fact, in many cases, the local structure of Hi-C
maps may be predicted in silico based on patterns of CTCF
binding and an extrusion-based model. Finally, I will showthat by modifying CTCF motifs using CRISPR, we can
reliably add, move, and delete loops and domains. Thus, it
possible not only to “read”the genome ’s 3D architecture,
but also to write it.
S05.2
Long Range regulation of mammalian gene
expression
D. Higgs
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United
Kingdom
Our laboratory studies how transcriptional and epigenetic
programmes are played out in chromatin spanning the
human and mouse globin loci as haematopoietic cells
undergo lineage fate decisions and differentiation. Our aimis to understand the principles by which all mammalian
genes are switched on and off during cell fate decisions.
Globin gene expression is controlled by a group of con-served regulatory elements some of which lie within the
introns of an adjacent widely expressed gene (Nprl3) and
another lies in intergenic DNA. All of these elements havethe chromatin signature of enhancer elements. Using
Chromosome Conformation Capture, we have shown that
they physically interact with each other and with the globingene promoters, and together are essential for normal globin
gene expression. From genome-wide studies, this con ﬁg-
uration appears to be a common feature of highly expressed,lineage-speci ﬁc genes and such groups of regulatory ele-
ments have more recently been called “super-enhancers ”.
Using homologous recombination we have deleted indivi-dual elements and combinations of elements to investigate
how they may work in concert to regulate gene expression.
Weﬁnd that no element on its own is indispensible for
globin gene expression and despite their super ﬁcially
common features they have radically different effects on
nascent transcription. However, removal of two criticalelements virtually abolishes globin expression raising the
question of what is the role of the other elements in and
around the superenhancer? One possibility is that the con-ﬁguration of the ﬁve enhancer-like elements provides some
polarity to the enhancer complex. We have tested this by
inverting the entire enhancer structure within its naturallocus and observing the effect of this on globin expressionAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 13in vivo with dramatic effects. In the proposed project we
plan to investigate in further detail how these cis-acting
elements work together within the broader context of the
chromosomal environment. We have recently performed
Hi-C experiments and have de ﬁned the Topologically
Associated Domain (TAD) containing the globin genecluster in erythroid and non-erythroid cells. We will next
investigate how activation, deletion and re-orientation of the
globin regulatory elements affect expression of other geneswithin the same TAD and in neighbouring TADs. Impor-
tantly, using globin as our model, we will address the
general question of the relationship between higher order,long-range chromosomal structure and function.
D. Higgs: None.
S05.3
Structural variants cause 3D con ﬁrmational changes
S. Mundlos
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Charité,
Berlin, Germany
S. Mundlos: None.
S06
Treatment-Focused Genetic Testing in
Cancer
S06.1
Circulating tumor DNA in cancer monitoring
E. Heitzer, P. Ulz, J. B. Geigl, M. R. Speicher
Medical University of Graz, Institute of Human Genetics,
Graz, Austria
Due to the continuous development of targeted cancer
therapies a comprehensive and longitudinal characterization
of cancer genomes becomes increasingly important. How-
ever, repeated tumor sampling is challenging and therefore,the dynamics of tumor evolution, especially in metastatic
cancers, remains incompletely characterized. One possibi-
lity to overcome this issue is the analysis of circulatingtumor DNA (ctDNA), which is shed into the circulation
from primary tumors and metastases. In addition to circu-
lating tumor cells (CTCs), and tumor-derived exosomes,ctDNA enables a serial, non-invasive assessment of the
genetic architecture of tumors. We have analyzed several
hundred plasma DNA samples from patients with breast,prostate, colon, and lung cancer. Using a variety of targeted(hybridization based capturing and amplicon-based enrich-
ment) and untargeted approaches (plasma-Seq, mFAST-
SeqS) we have shown that changing levels of ctDNA cor-
relate with the response to certain treatments. Furthermore,
ctDNA analyses can be used to identify resistance
mechanisms, e.g. in men with prostate cancer underandrogen-deprivation therapy or in individuals with color-
ectal cancer under anti-EGFR therapy, or to detect novel
emerging actionable targets such as ERBB2 . Moreover, we
were able to characterize the dynamics of clonal evolution
of tumor genomes derived from plasma DNA. To facilitate
the biological and clinical interpretability, we have devel-oped innovative bioinformatics tools for pathway analyses
and tumor genome strati ﬁcation. In this presentation selec-
ted cases will demonstrate the potential clinical utility ofctDNA analyses. In addition, this presentation will focus on
latest developments in ctDNA analyses. We have recently
shown that also functional information can be retrievedfrom whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. As plasma
DNA is nucleosome protected DNA, the genomic sequen-
cing coverage around transcription start sites (TSSs) showsdistinct coverage patterns for expressed genes compared to
unexpressed genes. Here examples how expressed onco-
genes can be directly inferred from whole-genomesequencing of plasma DNA from breast cancer patients
will be presented.
E. Heitzer: None. P. Ulz: None. J.B. Geigl: None. M.R.
Speicher: None.
S06.2
CANCELLED - Next-generation sequencing: a change
of paradigm in molecular diagnostics of cancer
D. González de Castro
Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, QUB,
Belfast, United Kingdom
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is playing an ever-
increasing role in the diagnosis and patient strati ﬁcation for
precision medicine. Implementation of NGS strategies for
the characterisation of cancer specimens in clinical practicerequires particular approaches to overcome some of the
inherent limitations of the process, including DNA degra-
dation, pathological review of tumour content, tumourheterogeneity, reliable detection of different types of
sequence variants and a robust bioinformatics pipeline to
identify low level somatic mutations. Different technologiesprovide bene ﬁts and limitations, without a clear single
approach that can be applied to all instances. Structural
variation and copy number alterations are key genomicaberrations in oncology and pose signi ﬁcant challenges for14some NGS technologies, normally requiring alternative
preparations to single nucleotide variation and small indels.
Alternative sampling strategies using body ﬂuids can par-
tially overcome some of the limitations, and provide addi-
tional information for patient management. Finally,
integration of NGS with other methodological approaches isrequired for accurate patient diagnosis and strati ﬁcation and,
therefore, a multidisciplinary approach with complementary
technologies is the key to provide a viable precision med-icine solution to cancer.
D. González de Castro: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; AstraZeneca,
Roche Molecular Systems. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest;AstraZeneca, Roche Molecular Systems, GSK/Novartis. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZeneca, Philips.
S06.3
Precision cancer medicine: translating laboratory
studies into improvements in patient care
G. Capella
Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain
There are a number of prospective and predictive bio-
markers routinely used in clinical practice for solid tumors
that have an impact on patient care. Predictive biomarkers
currently validated include: (i) levels of expression of hor-mone receptors for the prediction of response to hormone
blockade in breast cancer; (ii) HER2 expression levels for
trastuzumab; (iii) C-KIT mutation in the prediction of
response to imatinib in Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors;
(iv)EGFR mutations in the response to TKI inhibitors in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); (v) EML4/ALK
translocation in the response to crizotinib in NSCLC; (vi)
KRAS andNRAS mutations as negative markers of response
to EGFR blockade by cetuximab or panitumumab; (vii)BRAF mutations in the response to vemurafenib in
advanced melanoma; (vii) BRCA germline mutation as
predictor to response to PARP inhibitors in breast cancer.Critical issues in the translation of the preclinical ﬁndings to
the clinical setting include the use of robust methodologies
valid in suboptimal samples with clearly de ﬁned cut-off
values. Regarding the design of the clinical studies a
number of characteristics must be hIghlighted: (i) the use of
response rate as a preferred endpoint; (ii) the focus inadvanced diseases; (iii) preferably based in single-agent
studies; (iv) an adequate power (v) a well-de ﬁned timing of
sample acquisition; and (vi) an independent validationpreferably in randomized trials. So far validation of gene
signatures or other complex markers such as immuneinﬁltrates has been lagging behind precluding a more
widespread use of these technologies in the routine setting.
Among the challenges to face in this implementation in the
years to come include to accelerate the transition, to modify
study design based on the lessons learnt and to promote
structural changes favoring a biomarker-based drug devel-opment and a reimbursement of cost of biomarker analysis
once its usefulness is shown.
G. Capella: None.
S07
Still the golden age of chromosomes
S07.1
The molecular pathogenesis of trisomy 21
S. E. Antonarakis
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Trisomy 21 is the model human phenotype for all
genomic gain dosage imbalances including microduplica-
tions. The functional genomic exploration of the post-sequencing years of chromosome 21 and the generation of
numerous cellular and mouse models have provided an
unprecedented opportunity to decipher the molecular con-sequences of the genome dosage imbalance. Transcriptome
analyses of cellular models has revealed that the gene
expression dysregulation caused by the trisomy 21 affectsthe entire genome, it is organized in large domains, and may
be mediated by chromatin modi ﬁcations. HiC experiments
reveal altered long-range trans chromatin interactions thatmay be related to the dysregultion of gene expression.
Single-cell ﬁbroblast analyses has contributed to the
dynamics of allelic expression of chromosome 21 genes,and provided new insights into the gene dosage mechan-
isms. The understanding of the molecular pathophysiology
of Down syndrome may provide innovative treatmentopportunities.
S.E. Antonarakis: None.
S07.2
Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) - not that
normal benign phenomenon after all
L. A. Forsberg1,2,3
1Dept. Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden,2Beijer Laboratory of
Genome Research, Uppsala, Sweden,3Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala, SwedenAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 15The life expectancy of men in developed countries is
about 6 years shorter compared with women, but the
underlying mechanism(s) are not well understood. Men
with LOY in the peripheral blood harbor a mixture of cells
with and without chromosome Y, as a consequence of post-
zygotic mutations. Our ﬁndings indicate that LOY might be
a key for understanding the sex difference in longevity.
We have investigated LOY in blood cells and its
pathological consequences in several prospective as well ascase-control studies, through collaborations and data shar-
ing. Associations between LOY in blood cells and various
outcomes were evaluated using a set of statistical techni-ques. Methods to estimate the degree of LOY mosaicism in
a sample are based on quantifying a lower than expected
abundance of DNA derived from the Y chromosome, inrelation to reference loci from other parts of the genome.
For example, data-tracks measuring DNA copy number in
SNP-array experiments, read-depth in NGS-data and qPCRcan be used.
Frequent LOY in hematopoietic cells was ﬁrst described
more than 50 years ago and was long considered neutral. Incontrast, our results show that LOY in blood cells is asso-
ciated with increased risk for all-cause mortality, as well as
risk for various non-hematological diseases. For example, ina cohort called ULSAM, encompassing men between 70
and 93 years of age at blood sampling, we found that men
with LOY in more than 1/3 of the nucleated blood cells hadabout two-fold risk for all-cause mortality during 20 years
follow-up time. Furthermore, LOY in blood cells was
associated with increased risk for mortality in non-hematological cancers as well as risk for diagnosis of Alz-
heimer ’s disease in this cohort. Analyses performed by us
and others in independent cohorts have successfully repro-duced these ﬁndings.
The causality behind associations between LOY in blood
cells and increased risk for various diseases in other organsremains an open question. One hypothesis is that disrupted
immune system function(s) in blood cells with LOY could
play a role, leading to reduced protection from diseaseprocesses in different tissues of the body. Regardless of
underlying mechanism(s), however, we envision that LOY
in blood could become a predictive biomarker in futuremedicine.
LOY is the most common post-zygotic mutation and it
accumulates with age. At least 20% of men older than 80years are affected. Smoking mediates a four-fold increased
risk in a dose-dependent and transient manner. Genome-
wide analyses identi ﬁed 19 DNA regions associated with
acquired LOY in blood cells, including genes implicated in
aneuploidy, genome instability and cancer susceptibility. As
a male-speci ﬁc genetic risk factor, an increased risk for
pathology and mortality associated with LOY in blood cells,could help explain why men on average live shorter lives
compared to women.
L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
CRAY Innovation AB.
S07.3
Introducing the emerging era of “Cytogenomics ”
M. Talkowski
Boston, MA, United States
A new era of ‘cytogenomics ’is emerging in which
technological advancements are being leveraged for newinsights into chromosomal abnormalities at the level of the
individual nucleotide. Dr. Talkowski ’s lab has integrated
various molecular and computational genomics methods toevaluate the genomic landscape of balanced chromosomal
abnormalities (BCAs). These analyses have revealed the
remarkable complexity that can underlie their formation,often mediated by small inversions at the breakpoints, and
the extreme examples of chromosome shattering, now
recognized as ‘chromoanagenesis ’and ‘chromothripsis ’,
that can occur in the viable human germline and often
resolve to a massive yet balanced reorganization of the
chromosomes. These studies have also surveyed the con-tribution of de novo BCAs (translocations, inversions,
insertions, and balanced chromoanagenesis) to human
congenital anomalies and the remarkable reservoir of novelgene discovery possible from the delineation of BCAs in
such individuals, as well as their diagnostics yields. These
analyses also observed apparent ‘hotspots ’of BCA forma-
tion and the consequences of apparent alterations of higher
order nuclear organization of the chromosomes, such as
disruption of a topologically associating domains (TAD)harboring known driver loci of microdeletion syndromes,
suggesting alternative regulatory mechanisms of genomic
disorders. Ongoing studies have also begun to characterizethe diversity of structural variation, including recurrent yet
complex forms of inversion variation in the human germ-
line, as well as the contribution of all classes of structuralvariation to the genetic architecture of autism and other
neurodevelopmental disorders in the coding and noncoding
regulatory genome. These studies collectively suggest thatstructural variation represents a major component of the
genetic etiology of human developmental anomalies, and
that emerging genomics technologies and large scalereference maps will be critical to de ﬁne, interpret, and
accurately quantify the role of this unique class of genomic
variation to human disease, both in basic research andclinical interpretation.16S08
New technologies in Neurogenetics
S08.1
3D analysis of commissural systems with light sheet
microscopy
A. Chédotal
Institut de la Vision, Paris, France
In most animal species including humans, commissural
axons connect neurons on the left and right side of the
nervous system. This communication between the two
sides of the brain and spinal cord is necessary for a seriesof complex function, includin g binocular vision, coordi-
nated locomotor movements, and sound direction locali-
zation. In humans, the balance of commissural and non-commissural axons is essential to CNS physiology and to
the integration of sensory sti muli/inputs. Abnormal axon
midline crossing during development causes a wholerange of neurological disorders ranging from congenital
mirror movements, horizontal gaze palsy, scoliosis or
binocular vision de ﬁcits. Partial or complete corpus cal-
losum agenesis are some of the most common brain
malformations in children w ith variable neurological
outcomes. I will discuss some of the genetic mechanismsunderlying anomalies of midline crossing and present
some of our most recent work that challenges the existing
dogmas and suggest that commissural axon guidancemechanisms are more diverse across species than pre-
viously appreciated. To facilitate the analysis of the
organization and evolution of commissural systems invertebrates, we have developed a new imaging method
which combines whole-mount immunostaining or com-
missural axon tracing, tissu e clearing with organic sol-
vents and 3D light-sheet micr oscopy. I will present new
applications of this method in the ﬁeld of human embry-
ology and our ongoing effort to generate a database andcell atlas of the developing human embryo, normal or
pathologic.
A. Chédotal: None.
S08.2
Brain imaging genetics in neurodevelopmentaldisorders
B. Franke
Radboud University Medical Center and Donders Institute
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, NetherlandsWith more and more common genetic variants for
neurodevelopmental disorde rs like ADHD, schizophrenia,
and autism being identi ﬁed, we ﬁnd ourselves facing a
new bottleneck in understanding the etiology of those
disorders: the functions of a variant/gene/locus identi ﬁed
and the way by which it increases disease risk, are oftenunknown. Brain imaging genetics - or neuroimaging
genetics - offers an attractive human in vivo model to
investigate the effects of (common genetic) risk factors onthe brain. However, after an initial hype, the ﬁeld of
imaging genetics research has gone through a phase of
disillusionment in recent years. Too many underpoweredcandidate gene studies without replication investigating
single regions of interest have undermined the trust in this
model. I will show that neuroimaging genetics is currentlymaking a convincing come-back. Within the worldwide
ENIGMA Consortium, we have performed GWAS to
identify the genetic factors that contribute to the regional/global structures of our brain using well-powered sam-
ples. Based on those data, co mbined with the knowledge
of the brain regions affected by neurodevelopmental dis-orders, we investigated the genetic overlap between the
variants determining brain structure from the ENIGMA
studies and those in ﬂuencing disease risk from the studies
of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium and iPSYCH.
Such studies are performed at the level of the global
genetic architecture as well as at the level of single geneticvariants. I will show data on both approaches for schi-
zophrenia and attention-de ﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Based on those recent studies we can conclude that neu-roimaging genetics offers a promising model system to
understand the effects leadin g from a genetic variant to an
increased risk for the neurodevelopmental disorder.Having gone through a rough start, more recent studies in
thisﬁeld in well-powered samples and employing brain
wide/genome-wide approaches offer a glimpse of theactual power of this human in vivo model.
B. Franke: None.
S09
Explaining phenotypic variability
S09.1
Oligogenic inheritance and mutational load
N. Katsanis
Durham, NC, United States
No abstract received.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 17S09.2
Genetic and epigenetic regulation of repetitive DNA
in relation to disease
S. M. van der Maarel
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
A major constituent of the human genome is repetitive
DNA, including tandem and interspersed repeats. Of the
tandem repeats, macrosatellite repeats (MSRs) belong to the
largest repeat structures in the human genome typicallyspanning hundreds of kilobases of genomic DNA. Because
of their polymorphic nature, MSRs represent an extreme
example of copy number variation. Their structure andfunction however, is poorly understood, but their associa-
tion with human disease suggests that tandem repeats such
as MSRs are under strict genetic and epigenetic constraint.
Two disorders of epigenetic dysregulation of tandem
repeats are Immunode ﬁciency, Centromere instability and
Facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome and FacioScapulo-Humeral Dystrophy (FSHD). ICF syndrome is a primary
immunode ﬁciency caused by mutations in at least four
genes, some of them encoding known chromatin modi ﬁers
such as DNMT3B and HELLS, while for the remaining
genes their role in the epigenetic regulation of the genome is
less established. ICF patients show genome wide changes inthe epigenetic regulation of pericentromeric and sub-
telomeric tandem repeats. How this epigenetic dysregula-
tion relates to the clinical symptoms is, however, largelyunknown. Conversely, how loss of control over the epige-
netic regulation of the subtelomeric D4Z4 MSR causes the
muscular dystrophy FSHD is much better de ﬁned with
documentation of incomplete repression of the germline and
early stem cell transcription factor DUX4 in skeletal mus-
cle. Interestingly, there is considerable genetic and epige-netic overlap between these clinically discordant disorders,
and with the recently genetically elucidated Bosma ahrinia
microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS).
Identifying the commonalities and differences between
these chromatin disorders of repetitive DNA will provide us
a better understanding of the function and regulation ofrepetitive DNA.
S.M. van der Maarel: None.S09.3
Multiple molecular diagnoses underlie some cases
of apparent phenotypic expansion
J. E. Posey1, E. Karaca1, Z. H. Coban Akdemir1, X. Song1, T. Harel2,
S. Jhangiani1, Y. Bayram1, V. Bahrambeigi1, D. Muzny1, R. A. Gibbs1,
J. R. Lupski1,3
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
2Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel,3Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States
Multiple molecular diagnoses, characterized by the
observation of two (dual) or more unique disease conditions
each resulting from variation at a separate locus, represent aparticular challenge to ascertain clinically and molecularly.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) and the development of
bioinformatic tools to identify de novo single nucleotideand small indel variants, as well as copy number variants,
has made WES a truly comprehensive genomics assay that
does not require pre-supposition of the correct gene-basedmolecular diagnoses. As such, WES has enabled the iden-
tiﬁcation of multi-locus molecular diagnoses in ~5% of
WES-informative cases, resulting in blended phenotypes.We hypothesized that multiple molecular diagnoses might
underlie some cases of apparent ‘phenotypic expansion ’.
From a WES-studied cohort of 128 Turkish families withneurodevelopmental phenotypes, we performed a re-
analysis of 19 cases with molecular diagnoses initially
characterized as having a phenotype that extended beyondthat previously described for the reported etiologic disease
gene. Of these 19 cases, 12 additional potentially patho-
genic variants were newly identi ﬁed in 9 (47.4%) cases,
resulting in 6 dual and 3 multiple molecular diagnoses. Two
novel candidate disease genes ( SRR, MAGI3 ) and one
intragenic deletion ( MPDZ , exons 3 –27) were identi ﬁed.
Two families each with two affected siblings demonstrated
intrafamilial phenotypic variability explained by the iden-
tiﬁcation of 3 molecular diagnoses in the more severely
affected proband, and one molecular diagnosis in the less
severely affected sibling. Absence of heterozygosity (AOH)
contributed to molecular diagnoses in 6 cases, including oneproband for whom 3 independent molecular diagnoses
resulted from 3 homozygous potentially pathogenic variants
in the same region of AOH. These ﬁndings highlight the18roles of clinical phenotyping and AOH-mediated reduction
to homozygosity in enumerating mutational burden. Eluci-
dation of additional highly penetrant alleles in cases with
apparent phenotypic expansion may provide a general
explanation for a large class of phenotypic variation.
J.E. Posey: Other; Modest; Baylor College of Medicine
and Miraca Holdings, Inc. have formed a joint venture with
shared ownership of the Baylor Genetics (BG) laboratory.
JEP is an employee of BCM. E. Karaca: None. Z.H.
Coban Akdemir: None. X. Song: None. T. Harel: None.
S. Jhangiani: None. Y. Bayram: None. V. Bahrambeigi:
None. D. Muzny: None. R.A. Gibbs: Other; Modest;
Baylor College of Medicine and Miraca Holdings, Inc. have
formed a joint venture with shared ownership of the Baylor
Genetics (BG) laboratory. RAG is an employee of BCM.J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options,
patent or other intellectual property); Modest; JRL has stock
ownership in 23andMe, and stock options in Lasergen, Inc.,JRL is a co-inventor of US and European patents related to
molecular diagnostics for inherited neuropathies, eye dis-
eases, and bacterial genomic ﬁngerprinting. F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; JRL is a paid consultant for
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Other; Modest; Baylor College
of Medicine and Miraca Holdings, Inc. have formed a jointventure with shared ownership of the Baylor Genetics (BG)
laboratory. JRL is an employee of BCM.
S10
Population and evolutionary genetics
S10.1
Genetic time travel
J. Krause1,2
1Jena, Germany,2Max Planck Institute for the Science of
Human History, Jena, Germany
Genomic History of Ice Age Europe
Little is currently known about the genetic history of
ancient Europeans before the advent of agriculture ~8,500years ago. We have analysed genome-wide data from 51
modern humans remains that span around 40,000 years of
Eurasian prehistory. Over this time, the proportion ofNeanderthal DNA decreased from 3 –6% to around 2%,
consistent with natural selection against Neanderthal var-
iants in modern humans. Whereas the earliest modernhumans in Europe did not contribute substantially to
present-day Europeans, all individuals between ~37,000
and ~14,000 years ago descended from a single founderpopulation which forms part of the ancestry of present-day
Europeans. A ~35,000-year-old individual from northwest
Europe represents an early branch of this founder popula-
tion which was then displaced across a broad region, before
reappearing in southwest Europe during the last ice age
~19,000 years ago. During the major warming period after~14,000 years ago, a new genetic component related to
present-day Near Easterners appears in Europe. These
results document how population turnover and migrationhave been recurring themes of European prehistory.
S10.2
Peopling of the world
E. Willerslev
Copenhagen, Denmark
No abstract received.
S10.3
The origins of Farming
M. Thomas
University College London, London, United Kingdom
Farming and sedentism ﬁrst become established in
southwest Asia during the early Holocene and later spread
to neighbouring regions, including Europe and southernAsia, along multiple dispersal routes. The extent to which
its spread was mediated by demic expansion of farmers, or
by the transmission of farming technologies and lifeways toindigenous hunter-gatherers without a major concomitant
migration of people, has been the subject of considerable
debate for more than 100. Recent ancient DNA studiesindicate a dominant role of migration in the transition to
farming in central and northern Europe, with evidence of
only limited hunter-gatherer admixture into early Neolithicpopulations. By analysing DNA from early Aegean farmers
we extend the European Neolithic migratory chain all the
way back to southwestern Asia. However, Early Neolithicgenomes from the Zagros region of Iran reveal a previously
uncharacterised population that is neither ancestral to the
ﬁrst European farmers nor has contributed signi ﬁcantly to
the ancestry of modern Europeans. They are genetically
distinct from all other available prehistoric genomes, but
show strong af ﬁnities to modern day Iranian, Pakistani and
Afghan peoples. These data suggest that multiple hunter-
gatherer populations adopted farming in SW-Asia, that
early farming technologies and domesticates wereAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 19exchanged in a ‘federal ’Neolithic core zone, and that
components of pre-Neolithic population structure were
preserved as farming spread into neighbouring regions.
M. Thomas: None.
S11
Cancer immunogenetics
S11.1
Next-generation immunotherapies for colorectal
cancer
N. de Miranda
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Following the encouraging clinical responses observed in
cancer patients treated with immune checkpoint blockers,
immunotherapy shows great promise for the treatment of
cancer. The blockade of co-inhibitory pathways in T-cellspromotes their activation and triggers anti-tumour immu-
nity. The latter was shown to be driven against tumour-
mutated antigens (neo-antigens) and to be dependent on theexistence of neo-antigen-speci ﬁc, activated T-cells, prior to
therapeutic intervention. This observation suggests the
complementary enhancement of T-cell responses by meansof neo-antigen vaccination and/or adoptive transfer of neo-
antigen-speci ﬁc T-cell clones. The accumulated evidence on
an association between the occurrence of natural anti-tumour immune responses in colorectal cancers (CRCs) and
improved clinical prognosis makes CRC patients excellent
candidates to bene ﬁt from immunotherapy. We are screen-
ing the coding genomes of CRCs by whole-exome and
RNA next-generation sequencing (NGS). Somatic mutation
proﬁles (mutanomes) are annotated and neo-antigens cor-
responding to the transcribed mutations are tested for their
ability to induce activation of autologous T-cells derived
from tumour in ﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and peripheral
blood. The discovery of neo-antigen-speci ﬁc T-cell clones
in CRC patients would support the development of anti-
cancer therapies consisting of neo-antigen-based vaccinesand/or adoptive transfer of neo-antigen-speci ﬁc T-cell
clones.
Recently, we have also reported on an elusive immune
cell population that was speci ﬁcally associated with CRCs
that had escaped T-cell recognition through loss of Human
Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) class I. Strikingly, the presenceof these cells also implied a good clinical prognosis as they
were found in patients without metastatic disease. Never-
theless, these cells have not yet been fully characterized andare only recognized for being CD45/granzyme B +while
lacking typical T- and NK-cell markers. We arephenotyping this immune cell population so that their
functional characterization is possible. They could con-
stitute a novel immunotherapeutic agent for the treatment of
cancers that have escaped T-cell recognition through loss of
HLA class I expression.
N. de Miranda: None.
S11.2
Dissecting tumor-immune cell interactions usinggenomics tools
Z. Trajanoski
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
Recent breakthroughs in cancer immunotherapy and
decreasing costs of high-throughput technologies sparked
intensive research into tumour-immune cell interactionsusing genomic tools. The wealth of the generated data and
the added complexity pose considerable challenges and
require computational tools to process, analyse and visua-lise the data. Recently, a number of tools have been
developed and used to effectively mine tumour immuno-
logic and genomic data and provide novel mechanisticinsights.
It this presentation I will show results generated using
state-of-the-art computational tools addressing several pre-vailing questions in cancer immunology including: quanti-
ﬁcation of tumor-in ﬁltrating immune cells from RNA-
sequencing data, identi ﬁcation of determinants of tumor
immunogenicity, and immunoediting that tumors undergo
during progression or as a consequence of targeting the PD-
1/PD-L1 axis.
Z. Trajanoski: None.
S11.3
Adoptive T cell therapy
T. Blankenstein1,2
1Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany,2Charité Centrum für Tumormedizin, Institut für
Immunologie, Berlin, Germany
Adoptively transferred T cells have been shown to reject
large established tumors. In such models, T cells recognize
the tumor antigen as foreign. The task is to generate human
T cell receptors (TCR) that recognize human tumor-associated (self) antigens as foreign and use these TCRs
for gene therapy. We use mice with a humanized TCR
repertoire to isolate therapeutic TCRs.
T. Blankenstein: None.20S12
Genetics and Microbiome
S12.1
Microbiome host-pathogen interactions
R. Xavier
Boston, MA, United States
No abstract received.
S12.2
Host-microbe interaction
J. Raes
Leuven, Belgium
No abstract received.
S12.3
Genetics of the microbiome
A. Zhernakova, A. Kurilshikov, M. Bonder, C. Wijmenga, J. Fu
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands
Gut microbiome plays an important role in human
metabolism, immunity, and health. Various factors includ-
ing diet, medication, and environment have been shown to
inﬂuence the gut microbiome composition. Recently the
role of host genetics in shaping the gut ecosystem has been
described in human studies and animal models. In this
presentation I will summarize the current state of micro-biome research with an emphasis on the effect of host
genetics on the gut microbiome composition. In particular, I
will focus on results of recent genome-wide associationstudies of microbiome composition and function, and on the
genetic determinants of the host immune system that help
shape the gut microbiome.
A. Zhernakova: None. A. Kurilshikov: None.
M. Bonder: None. C. Wijmenga: None. J. Fu: None.S13
Next generation clinical genetics
S13.1
Integrating the Phenomic and Genomic
Architectures of Developmental Disorders
D. R. FitzPatrick
MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Clinically-de ﬁned syndrome diagnoses have an excellent
record in predicting de ﬁned sets of causative genotypes.
The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) projectis a UK- and Ireland-wide study that aims to develop and
use new genetic technology and statistical analyses to make
ad eﬁnitive diagnosis in individuals with severe or extreme
developmental disorders. DNA samples are available from
~13,500 affected individuals have been recruited with
10,000 of these also having samples available from bothparents.We have recently reported a signi ﬁcant excess of
damaging de novo variants in 94 different genes in a cohort
of 4294 probands with previously undiagnosed develop-mental disorders. Genome wide signi ﬁcance in this study
was based on human genetic data alone. The overall diag-
nostic rate for all modes of inheritance within DDD is~41%. This diagnostic rate involved some element of
individual clinicians assessing whether the phenotype mat-
ches the genotype. It would be useful to develop compu-tational approaches to this matching as it should allow more
rational variant ﬁltering options when dealing with genome-
wide sequence data. However, the extent to which cluster-ing in phenotypic space can be used to predict speci ﬁc
diagnostic genotypes is not clear. Here I will explore the use
of facial imaging, growth z scores, developmental mile-stones and HPO terms for diagnostic ﬁltering. The pheno-
type is likely to become an important component of the
computational approach to the analysis of genome widesequencing data1 and a consistent approach to the collection
and utilitation of such information is a vital part of study
design References: PMID: 28358133; PMID: 28135719;
PMID: 25533962; PMID: 24963138
D.R. FitzPatrick: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 21S13.2
The clinical geneticists ’perspective on exome
sequencing
A. Rauch
Zurich, Switzerland
Finding an etiological diagnosis is a major challenge in
most rare and/ or genetically heterogeneous conditions.
Exome sequencing is capable of signi ﬁcantly increasing the
diagnostic yield, but still leaves many patients undiagnosedand may impose concerns about variants of unknown sig-
niﬁcance. Data analysis guided by clinical considerations
can well improve the interpretation of exome sequencingresults and should stimulate the development of better
algorithms.
S13.3
Fast-WES for neonates, how useful is it really?
G. W. E. Santen
Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medi-
cal Center, Leiden, Netherlands
Whole exome and genome sequencing (WES/WGS) are
currently reshaping clinical genetic practice. Current turn-
around times are too slow for widespread implementation,
but shorter turnaround times will no doubt stimulateapplication of WES beyond classical clinical genetics.
There have been several studies showing high diagnostic
yields (40 –60%) of fast WES/WGS in neonatal intensive
care unit (NICU) patients. However, many of the syn-
dromes detected in these papers are considered recognizable
syndromes (such as CHARGE, Noonan and Kabuki syn-dromes). In our hospital, as in all larger hospitals in the
Netherlands and many in Europe, clinical geneticists rou-
tinely perform consultations before genetic investigations
are requested. In the case of a high con ﬁdence clinical
diagnosis management is already in ﬂuenced and fast WES/
WGS has only limited added value. As the costs of fastWES/WGS are currently signi ﬁcantly higher (up to 50%)
than for standard protocols, the question of whether fast
WES/WGS should be the standard tool in the evaluation ofneonates in the NICU/PICU becomes relevant.
Therefore, we evaluated the potential usefulness of fast-
WES (a 1 –2 week full WES protocol) in our clinical
practice. We retrospectively evaluated two years of NICU
consultations in children <4 months old. In part of this
period fast-WES was available and considered in theabsence of a clinical diagnosis, when signi ﬁcant procedureswere considered, or when the patient ’s condition was
deteriorating unexpectedly.
To our great surprise, we found that fast-WES was only
requested four times in the course of this study. Surpris-
ingly, the diagnostic yield of WES (23 regular WES and the
4 fast-WES, mostly trio) was very low ( <5%). Part of theexplanation of this low yield lies in a high rate of early
clinical diagnoses by SNP-array and clinical consultations,
thusﬁltering out many known diagnoses before requesting
(fast-)WES.
In our experience fast-WES can be a very useful tool but
it is not often indicated in our NICU/PICU population,where pre-screening by a genetic consultation and SNP-
array has a high diagnostic yield. We have found fast-WES
extremely useful in other cases outside the scope of thisstudy, such as in slightly older children and during preg-
nancy. As costs will continue to decrease we hope to be able
to be less restrictive in offering fast-WES to patients, furtherreducing the time to diagnosis for a subset of patients.
G.W.E. Santen: None.
S14
Organoid models: The Maxi Impact Of MiniOrgans
S14.1
Dissecting human and chimpanzee cerebral
organoids using single-cell RNA-seq
J. Camp1, S. Kanton1, F. Badsha2, F. Mora-Bermudez2, S. Pääbo1,
W. Huttner2, B. Treutlein1,2,3,3
1Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
Leipzig, Germany,2Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell
Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany,3Technical
University Munich, Munich, Germany
Cerebral organoids have emerged as powerful models of
human brain development, and offer the potential to study
uniquely human brain evolution. However, the extent to
which cerebral organoid systems recapitulate fetal geneexpression networks remains unclear. Here we use single-
cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to dissect and compare
cell composition and progenitor-to-neuron lineage rela-tionships in human and chimpanzee cerebral organoids and
fetal human neocortex. We ﬁnd that human and chimpanzee
organoid cortical cells use gene expression programsremarkably similar to those of the fetal tissue in order to
organize into cerebral cortex-like regions. We identify
genes that are differentially expressed in human progenitorsand neurons relative to chimpanzee, and highlight modern
human genetic changes that can be studied in organoid22cultures. More broadly, this strategy can be extended to
other organoid systems modeling human and chimpanzee
development and disease.
J. Camp: None. S. Kanton: None. F. Badsha: None.
F. Mora-Bermudez: None. S. Pääbo: None. W. Huttner:
None. B. Treutlein: None.
S14.2
Common mechanisms between Zika virus-inducedand inherited microcephaly in human brain
organoids
J. Gopalakrishnan
Cologne, Germany
No abstract received.
S14.3
Liver organoids for the study of liver biology and
disease
M. Huch
Gurdon Institute-Wellcome Trust, Cambridge, United
Kingdom
Despite the enormous replication potential of the liver,
there are currently no culture systems available that sustain
hepatocyte replication in vitro. Hepatocytes can be main-tained in culture for a few days. However, they lose their
hepatocyte phenotype and function almost immediately,
thus precluding its application for cell therapy treatments.Liver stem cells have the potential to selfrenew and dif-
ferentiate into functional hepatic lineages. Mouse liver stem
cells can be inde ﬁnitely expanded in vitro (for >1 year),
into“liver organoids ”, in our liver stem cell culture system,
in the absence of a mesenchymal niche. The cultured cells
express ductal markers and differentiate into functionalhepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. We have now further
developed our culture system to study human liver stem
cells and human liver disease. We describe a culture systemthat allows the long-term expansion of adult human liver
stem cells ( > 3 months) from donor biopsies while main-
taining their differentiation potential towards functionalhepatocytes in vitro. The expanded cells are highly stable at
the chromosome and structural level, while single base
changes occur at very low rates. The cells can readily beconverted into functional hepatocytes in vitro and upon
transplantation in vivo. Organoids from α1-antitrypsin
deﬁciency and Alagille Syndrome patients mirror the
in vivo pathology. Clonal long-term expansion of primary
adult liver stem cells opens up experimental avenues fordisease modeling, toxicology studies, regenerative medicine
and gene therapy.
M. Huch: None.
S15
ESHG / ESC JOINT Symposium: Polygenic
Cardiovascular traits
S15.1
Implications of understanding the genetic basis of
coronary artery disease
N. J. Samani
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom
Over the last decade, large-scale GWAS meta-analyses
have identi ﬁed several dozens of genetic loci associated
with risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). This presenta-
tion will describe the current state of the discovery process,discuss what we have learnt and how the ﬁndings are being
clinically translated.
N.J. Samani: None.
S15.2
Genetics of arterial blood pressure: from common torare variants in the general population
P. Munroe
London, United Kingdom
Over the past 10 years ’substantial progress has been
made mapping blood pressure loci using genome-wide
association studies and deploying bespoke microarrays(most recently the Cardio-Metabochip and Exome chip
arrays) in very large sample sizes. There are now over 400
blood pressure loci, providing hundreds of candidate genes,and new insights into pathways that are key in blood
pressure regulation. My presentation will discuss some of
the results of the most recent analyses and highlighting thekeyﬁndings.
S15.3
The genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes
P. Froguel
Lille, France
No abstract received.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 23S16
Autophagy in health and disease
S16.1
Autophagy gets to the bone
C. Settembre1,2
1Naples, Italy,2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine
(TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy
Autophagy is a lysosomal pathway deputed to the recy-
cling of cellular components. The regulation of autophagy is
essential for tissue homeostasis and is controlled by the
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)kinase in response to nutrients. My lab has recently
demonstrated that autophagy, by regulating collagen levels
in cartilages, is necessary during bone growth. However,whether an impairment of autophagy plays a role in the
pathogenesis of genetic disorders affecting the skeleton is
still unknown. During my talk I will present new datashowing that autophagy dysfunction accounts for bone
growth retardation in lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) by
inhibiting collagen secretion by growth plate chondrocytes,the main regulators of longitudinal bone growth. Genetic
inhibition of mTORC1 activity or pharmacological stimu-
lation of the pro-autophagy protein Beclin1 rescued chon-drocyte autophagy, collagen levels in cartilages and bone
growth retardation in two different LSD mouse models.
Taken together, these data unveil a role for mTORC1 andautophagy in the pathogenesis of skeletal disorders and
suggest their modulation as new therapy for the treatment of
LSDs.
S16.2
Autophagy in metabolic processes
R. Ricci
IGBMC, Illkirch, France
Proper nutrient sensing is crucial in multicellular
organisms. In mammals upon feeding, the pancreatic ß cell
mainly senses increasing glucose levels and secretes insulin
that acts to induce anabolic pathways in different organs.Inversely, the ß cell decreases insulin secretion to suppress
these anabolic reactions upon low glucose levels during
fasting. As known for many eukaryotic cells, nutrientdeprivation is also expected to induce macroautophagy
(hereafter referred to as “autophagy ”). During autophagy,
cellular components are sequestered into double-membraneautophagosomes, which subsequently fuse with lysosomes
(autolysosomes), where degradation occurs. Resultingcatabolites maintain cells metabolically active ensuring cell
survival. We recently were able to demonstrate that, in
contrast to other mammalian cells, autophagy in ß cells was
not a predominant response upon nutrient deprivation.
Instead of autophagy, starved ß cells induced lysosomal
degradation of newly generated (nascent) secretory insulingranules in the vicinity of the Golgi, a process we termed
starvation-induced insulin granule degradation (SINGD).
Keeping autophagy high during starvation and as a con-sequence generation of intracellular nutrients led to
uncontrolled insulin release. As the nascent insulin granules
were shown to be preferentially secreted, suppresion ofautophagy through SINGD is thus an optimal strategy to
counteract insulin secretion, at the same time providing
sufﬁcient nutrients for ß cells to survive. The observed
positive correlation between autophagy and insulin secre-
tion may suggest an involvement of autophagy in post-
prandial insulin release probably going beyond the widelyestablished housekeeping role of autophagy. Importantly,
we have now evidence that degradation of insulin granules
in lysosomes is dramatically enhanced in ß cells of murineand human diabetic islets. We also have preliminary data
supporting that lysosomal degradation of insulin contributes
to loss of insulin and chronic suppression of autophagy.Autophagy is indeed important to maintain ß cell function,
in particular in a situation of high insulin demands such as
in type 2 diabetes (T2D). Overall, our mechanism thusrepresents an important evolutionary adaption for nutrient-
deprived ß cells. However, its deregulation may actually
contribute to ß cell failure in T2D. Our ﬁndings may thus
change the current paradigm in which decreased ß cell
survival and/or dedifferentiation mainly accounted for
insulin loss in T2D.
R. Ricci: None.
S16.3
Autophagy in neurodegeneration and ageing
N. Tavernarakis
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Crete,
Greece
Mitochondria, the main energy hub of the cell, are highly
dynamic organelles, playing essential roles in fundamentalcellular processes. Mitochondrial function impinges on
several signalling pathways modulating cellular metabo-
lism, cell survival and healthspan. Maintenance of mito-chondrial function and energy homeostasis requires both
generation of newly synthesized and elimination of dys-
functional mitochondria. Impaired mitochondrial functionand excessive mitochondrial content are major character-
istics of ageing and several human pathophysiological24conditions, highlighting the pivotal role of the coordination
between mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy. How-
ever, the cellular and molecular underpinnings of mito-
chondrial mass homeostasis remain obscure. We found that
DCT-1, the Caenorhabditis elegans homolog of mammalian
BNIP3 and BNIP3L/NIX, is a key mediator of mitophagypromoting longevity under stress. DCT-1 acts downstream
of the PINK-1-PDR-1/Parkin pathway and is ubiquitinated
upon mitophagy-inducing conditions to mediate theremoval of damaged mitochondria. Accumulation of
damaged mitochondria triggers SKN-1 activation, which
initiates a bipartite retrograde signaling pathway stimulatingthe coordinated induction of both mitochondrial biogenesis
and mitophagy genes. Taken together, our results unravel a
homeostatic feedback loop that allows cells to adjust theirmitochondrial population in response to environmental and
intracellular cues. Age-dependent decline of mitophagy
both inhibits removal of dysfunctional or super ﬂuous
mitochondria and impairs mitochondrial biogenesis result-
ing in progressive mitochondrial accretion and conse-
quently, deterioration of cell function.
N. Tavernarakis: None.
Educational Session
E01
Sequencing, Sponsored by Illumina
E01.1
The Future of Genomic Medicine
E. Mardis
Nationwide Children ’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United
States
Large-scale biomedical discovery has been tremendously
facilitated by the application of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) and advanced computational analyses over the past
ten years. As a result of these studies, a greatly enhancedunderstanding of the genomic underpinnings of human
disease has been obtained. There is increasing evidence that
applying this new knowledge to aid in diagnosis of patientswith genetic diseases and cancers can provide additional
precision through NGS-based diagnostic assays. My talk
will highlight these translational efforts in cancers andconstitutional disorders, focusing on case studies to illustrate
the precision obtained, and on the remaining challenges that
must be overcome to achieve routine use of genomics inclinical diagnosis, prognosis and treatment decision-making.
E. Mardis: None.E01.2
Deep Sequencing of 10,000 Human Genomes
A. Telenti
Human Longevity, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States
The ability to sequence human genomes at high scale
allows the investigation of the landscape of human diver-sity: the rates of discovery, the characteristics of the non-
protein-coding genome, and the hallmarks of conservation
and essentiality. Analysis of 10,000 deep sequenced gen-omes (30X coverage) identi ﬁes variation in 1 every 13
nucleotides in the genome. Most of the variations are sin-
gletons, and each additional sequenced genome adds over8000 additional new variants to the database. This density
of variation allows the creation of a map of human genetic
constraint in the non-coding genome that differs from theconservation map de ﬁned by interspecies alignment. There
is a strong pattern of coordination of genetic constraint
between genes and their regulatory regions up to 2MB.Essential genes, as de ﬁned by a number of metrics (Phi,
pLI, RVIS, Missense z-score, EvoTol, LoFtool), use con-
served regulatory elements. It is estimated that, withsequencing of 1 million genomes, one every third nucleo-
tide will be observed variant if tolerated.
A. Telenti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Human Longevity, Inc. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Human Longevity, Inc.
E01.3
Increasing the diagnostic yield of genome-widesequencing for rare diseases
K. M. Boycott
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
An accurate diagnosis is an integral component of clin-
ical care for patients with rare genetic diseases. Recent
advances in sequencing, in particular whole-exomesequencing (WES), are identifying the genetic basis of
disease for 25 –40% of patients. There are a variety of rea-
sons why up to 75% of patients might be unsolved afterWES, including incomplete coverage of the exome and
genetic mutations elusive to the technology itself; some of
these challenges can be addressed by pursuing additionalgenomic technologies. However, there are a proportion of
these unsolved cases in which the disease-causing variant is
in fact within the WES data but for a variety of reasonsthere is insuf ﬁcient evidence to support a de ﬁnitive diag-
nosis. This is not surprising given that approximately half ofAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 25the genes for the estimated 7000 rare diseases remain to be
discovered. The wealth of genome sequence data being
generated in diagnostic laboratories should accelerate pro-
gress in biomedicine - making it possible to integrate
genomic and clinical information to reveal the genetic basis
of inherited diseases, amongst many other applications.However, we are not organized to seize this extraordinary
opportunity —nor are we on a path to do so, highlighting
the need for critical large-scale data sharing. Two interna-tional consortia, the International Rare Diseases Research
Consortium (IRDiRC) and the Global Alliance for Geno-
mics and Health (GA4GH), have recognized rare diseasesas a remarkable opportunity for advancement in this realm
on a world-wide scale and support initiatives such as the
Matchmaker Exchange ( www.matchmakerexchange.org )t o
facilitate case-based matching for discovery. As we come
closer to understanding the genetic etiology of all rare
diseases, it is likely that we will increasingly rediscoverknown genes and that the approach to completion of the
disease compendium will be asymptotic and much more
challenging than predicted.
K.M. Boycott: None.
E01.4
Medical genome sequencing in the 100,000
Genomes Project Rare Disease Programme
R. H. Scott
Genomics England, London, United Kingdom
To bring the predicted bene ﬁts of genomics to NHS
patients is why the Prime Minister launched the 100,000Genomes Project in late 2012. The project will sequence
100,000 genomes from around 70,000 people. Participants
are NHS patients with a rare disease, plus their families, andpatients with cancer.
The Rare Disease Programme has recruited over 20,000
participants and returned interpreted genome results in3,000 (from 1,500 families) to the recruiting centres. To
deliver the programme a novel framework has been estab-
lished to enable large-scale recruitment, clinical data col-lection and the development of a semi-automated
interpretation pipeline that bene ﬁts from the centralisation
of sequencing and bioinformatic infrastructure whileenabling recruiting clinical and laboratory control over
validation and reporting of results and forming a platform
for research and innovation. This talk will describe thedevelopment of this infrastructure and share insights from
our analyses to date.
R.H. Scott: None.E02
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to model
disease
E02.1
Functionally assaying thousands of BRCA1 variants
with saturation genome editing
G. M. Findlay, R. Daza, B. K. Martin, A. Leith, M. D. Zhang, L. M.
Starita, J. Shendure
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
CRISPR technologies are transforming the way
researchers study genome function. The ability to engineerDNA sequence variants in their endogenous genomic con-
text offers great potential for accurately characterizing the
effects of variants on both basic biological processes andhuman disease. However, given the extensive genetic var-
iation observed in clinical sequencing, methods for deter-
mining functional consequences of variants should behighly scalable. To address this challenge, we recently
developed a genome editing method to interrogate hundreds
to thousands of variants at a single locus in a singleexperiment. This approach, called saturation genome edit-
ing, leverages multiplex homology-directed repair of
CRISPR/Cas9-derived DNA breaks to introduce a highlydiverse set of variants across approximately 100 bp of
genomic sequence. With next-generation sequencing, we
can measure each allele ’s effect on phenotypes such as cell
growth and transcript abundance. Currently, we are apply-
ing saturation genome editing to systematically characterize
approximately 4,000 single nucleotide variants within theBRCA1 gene in human cells. We read out BRCA1 function
in a cell line in which the homologous recombination
pathway is essential for viability. Our preliminary resultsconstitute a catalog of functional scores for nearly all single
nucleotide variants spanning thirteen high-priority exonic
regions that code for the protein ’s RING and BRCT
domains. We show that in addition to nearly all nonsense
and canonical splicing variants, a substantial fraction of
missense and intronic variants near splice junctions alsocompromise BRCA1 function. Furthermore, a small but
appreciable fraction of synonymous variants abrogate
BRCA1 function, presumably through effects on splicing
efﬁciency or transcript stability. Ongoing efforts to re ﬁne
our functional scores and substantiate their clinical utility
may be useful for overcoming the challenge of BRCA1
variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in genetic testing for
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer disease risk. More
broadly, by expanding this experimental paradigm forCRISPR/Cas9-mediated variant testing to other clinically26actionable genes we aim to substantially improve the
interpretability of genetic testing.
G.M. Findlay: None. R. Daza: None. B.K. Martin:
None. A. Leith: None. M.D. Zhang: None. L.M. Starita:
None. J. Shendure: None.
E02.2
The CRISPR revolution: engineering structural
variants to study disease
D. Lupiáñez1,2,3, G. Andrey1
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Devel-
opment and Disease, Berlin, Germany,2Institute for Med-
ical and Human Genetics, Charité –Universitätsmedizin,
Berlin, Germany,3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for
Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité –
Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
Structural variations contribute extensively to the varia-
bility of the human genome and are often associated withdisease. Their study in murine model systems, however, has
been classically burdened by laborious genetic targeting
procedures and time-consuming mouse crossing steps.Recently, the CRISPR/Cas technology emerged as a pow-
erful tool to edit genomes in a fast, cost-effective and pre-
cise manner. Using this system, chromosomalrearrangements such as deletions, duplication, inversions or
translocations can be easily generated, thus facilitating the
creation of models of human disease. In this talk, I willdiscuss the fundaments of this technology, providing
exemplary cases that highlight how CRISPR/Cas has
revolutionized our current lab methodology and allowed theidenti ﬁcation of novel pathomechanisms.
D. Lupiáñez: None. G. Andrey: None.
E03 50
Shades of Cancer Genetics
E03.1
Genetic susceptibility to common cancers: whathave we learned from large cancer genetic consortia
A. C. Antoniou
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Advances in genomic technologies have enabled more
rapid, less expensive genetic sequencing than was possible afew years ago. These technologies allow for the compre-
hensive genetic pro ﬁling for assessing risks to commoncancers and include multiplex sequencing panels of several
genes and panels of common single nucleotide poly-
morphisms (SNPs). However, the clinical utility of such
multiplex gene and SNP panels depends on having accurate
estimates of cancer risks for mutations in the genes included
in such panels as well as cancer risk prediction models thatconsider the multifactorial aetiology to cancer suscept-
ibility. Over the past two decades international consortia,
such as the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium, the Breastand Ovarian Cancer Association Consortia, the Consortium
of Investigators of Modi ﬁers of BRCA1/2 and the Interna-
tional BRCA1/2 Carrier Cohort Study have enabled us to
accurately characterise the cancer risks for rare and common
cancer susceptibility genetic variants; to understand how the
genetic variants interact with each other on cancer risks; andhow genetic variants interact with other lifestyle/hormonal
risk factors for the disease. Using breast, ovarian and
prostate cancers as examples the presentation will reviewthe key research achievements by the international consortia
and how these are helping us to realise a more personalised
risk-based cancer prevention and cancer control.
A.C. Antoniou: None.
E03.2
Two decades after BRCA: setting paradigms in
personalized cancer care and prevention
K. Ofﬁt
New York, NY, United States
No abstract received.
E04
Channelopathies
E04.1
Brain channelopathies
R. Guerrini
Children ’s Hospital Anna Meyer, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy
In the human genome there are more than 400 genes
encoding ion channels, i.e. transmembrane proteins reg-
ulating ion ﬂuxes across membranes. Dysfunction in ion
channels leads to altered membrane excitability most often
manifested by paroxysmal disorders. The resulting diseases,
cumulatively de ﬁned as channelopathies, are manifested as
phenotypes ranging from common to very rare disorders,
whose severity can be mild, disabling, or life-threatening.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 27Genetic neurological channelopathies are typically inherited
in an autosomal dominant fashion. The resulting parox-
ysmal disturbances of neurological function can either be
the only clinical manifestation or be associated with
developmental and intellectual disabilities, with consequent
pronounced reproductive disadvantage. Mutations affectingcentral nervous system expressed sodium and potassium
channels most often result in severe epileptic encephalo-
pathies, but may also cause self-limiting benign epilepsies.In spite of the high number of patients and mutations
described for some of these conditions, genotype/phenotype
correlations are only marginally understood. The study ofthese disorders has improved our understanding of patho-
physiology of several neurological disorders, particularly
epilepsy, but also episodic ataxia and hemiplegic migraine.Neuronal channelopathies are individually rare but cumu-
latively represent a considerable proportion of the practice
of pediatric neurology and pose serious challenges fortreatment and genetic counselling. Even after a speci ﬁc ion
channel disorder has been diagnosed the therapy remains
empirical and symptomatic, often with limited ef ﬁcacy in
most patients. Developing new and more speci ﬁc ther-
apeutic approaches is a high priority and is proving more
difﬁcult that initial discoveries had led to hope for.
R. Guerrini: None.
E04.2
Muscle channelopathies
H. Houlden
UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, United
Kingdom
Muscle and Neuromuscular Channelopathies
The number of pathogenic mutations causing non-
dystrophic myotonias (NDMs) and periodic paralyses in
known genes continues to expand. Mutations have also
been identi ﬁed CLCN1, SCN4A, in the ryanodine receptor
gene manifesting as an atypical periodic paralysis pheno-
type and thyrotoxic hypokalaemic periodic paralysis in a
novel gene encoding an inwardly rectifying potassiumchannel, Kir2.6. Work studying molecular mechanisms
indicates that 90% of the known mutations causing hypo-
kalaemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) result in loss ofpositively charged arginine residues in the S4 segments of
either SCN4A or CACNA1S, possibly creating a gating-
pore current that may be important in the pathogenesis ofHypoPP. Recent studies evaluating clinical features and
health status in NDM patients have provided more detailed
insights into the signi ﬁcant morbidity associated with these
diseases. Ultrasound has been successfully used to
demonstrate muscle abnormalities in NDM patients andmagnetic resonance spectroscopy studies applied to
HypoPP patients suggest that this technique can demon-
strate both disease-related and treatment-related changes.
Here the clinical syndromes and genetic causes are dis-
cussed as well as some of the more recently identi ﬁed
neuromuscular channelopathies.
H. Houlden: None.
E05 Imprinting-related disorders
E05.1
Overview on imprinting related disease
D. J. G. Mackay
University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, South-
ampton, United Kingdom
Genomic imprints in humans are written upon our gen-
omes from the earliest stages of our development, as apermanent memory of our parental origin. The human
genome contains approximately 150 imprinted genes, and
their expression is distinctively mono-allelic - i.e., fromeither the paternal or the maternal DNA. Many imprinted
gene products regulate growth, from the cellular to the
organismal level, and disturbing their exquisite balance ofmono-allelic expression leads to imprinting disorders (IDs),
with distinctive effects on growth, development, metabo-
lism and behaviour. In this educational session, I willsummarise known IDs, their range of genetic and epigenetic
causes, and the insights they give us into normal imprinting
control. I will explore the challenges of ID diagnosis onboth the clinical and epigenetic level, highlighting both the
clinical heterogeneity of individual IDs, and the clinical
overlap between them. I will describe the recent advances indiagnosis and management of IDs that have been driven by
the EU COST network on imprinting disorders, EUCID.net.
As examples of this work, both this talk and its companionlecture will describe recent International Clinical Consensus
activities in three IDs: Silver-Russell syndrome, Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome, and Pseudohypoparathyroidism.
D.J.G. Mackay: None.
E05.2
Clinical and molecular overview of Beckwith-
Wiedemann and Silver-Russel syndromes
F. Brioude, E. Giabicani, W. Abi Habib, I. Netchine
Universite Pierre et Marie Curie, Assistance Publique
Hopitaux de Paris (Hopital Trousseau) and Inserm
UMR_S938, Paris, France, Paris, France28Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and Silver-
Russell syndrome (SRS) are two imprinting disorders (ID)
with foetal growth disturbance. Epigenetic (abnormal
methylation at imprinting center regions) or genetic
(mutations, duplications, uniparental disomy (UPD))
defects of imprinted genes on chromosome 11 (BWS andSRS), 7 (SRS) and more recently 14 (SRS) have been
identi ﬁed in these two syndromes. In humans, the 11p15
region contains genes which are important for regulation offoetal and postnatal growth. This region includes two
imprinted domains: the IGF2 /H19 domain regulated by
imprinting center region 1 (ICR1, or H19/IGF2 :IG-DMR)
and the CDKN1C /KCNQ1OT1 domain regulated by ICR2
(orKCNQ1OT1 :TSS DMR).
BWS has been described in the 1970s. BWS is an
overgrowth syndrome with additional features as macro-
glossia, abdominal wall defects, hemihyperplasia, organo-
megaly, neonatal transient neonatal hypoglycemia/hyperinsulinism. Furthermore, BWS is associated with an
increased risk of embryonic tumour during early childhood,
especially nephroblastomas or hepatoblastomas. ICR1 gainof methylation (GOM), ICR2 loss of methylation (LOM),
11p15 paternal UPD or CDKN1C loss-of-function muta-
tions represent the most frequent molecular mechanisms inBWS. A strong correlation between the risk of embryonic
tumor and the molecular mechanism has been described,
with the most important risk for patients with ICR1 GOM or11p15 paternal UPD. Tumour screening is mostly based on
abdominal ultrasound for children with BWS. However,
many tumour screening programs have been proposed, withsome of them suggesting different schemes based on the
molecular mechanism. Furthermore, some of them add
screening of hepatoblastoma with serum alpha fetoprotein.
SRS is a clinical mirror of BWS, and has been described
in the 1950s. In 2016, a ﬁrst international consensus
regarding diagnosis and management of SRS has beenestablished. SRS is a clinical diagnosis, for which a clinical
scoring system (Netchine-Harbison, NH-CSS) has been
validated. NH-CSS includes being short for gestational age,postnatal growth retardation, relative macrocephaly at birth,
feeding dif ﬁculties/low BMI, protruding forehead and body
asymmetry/hemihypoplasia. Later in life, SRS patients aremore likely to develop early puberty, overweight and/or
metabolic disturbances. About 50% of SRS patients present
an ICR1 LOM, and 5 –10% present a maternal UPD at
chromosome 7. More recently, molecular defects of chro-
mosome 14 (usually linked to Temple syndrome, another
ID with growth retardation) have been identi ﬁed in cohorts
of SRS patients (including maternal UPD, deletions or
abnormal methylation). Finally mutations of CDKN1C
(gain-of-function) or IGF2 (loss-of-function) have been
described in rare familial cases of SRS. Management of
SRS patients includes (among others) early nutritionalsupport, growth hormone treatment and surveillance of
puberty/adrenarche.
F. Brioude: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; IPSEN,
SANDOZ. E. Giabicani: None. W. Abi Habib: None.
I. Netchine: None.
E06 Bioethics for ‘dummies ’
E06.1
Gene editing, NIPT
M. C. Cornel
VU University Medical Center, dept Clinical Genetics and
Amsterdam Public Health research Institute, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Bioethics for ‘dummies ’: Gene editing, NIPT
Ethics has many de ﬁnitions. (1) Research ethics. Scientist
may think of ethical committees or institutional review
boards - long and bothersome procedures needed before the
start of a research project. Does the experiment followresearch ethics principles as speci ﬁed in the Declaration of
Helsinki?(2) Clarifying the debate. Bioethicist help to
understand relationships among life sciences, biotechnol-ogy, medicine, politics, law and philosophy. Why do we
argue the way we argue. What values are behind con-
troversial issues. For a decision to be made, what are thearguments in favor and against. (3) Ethical practice in
profession-led health care. For physicians ethics is an ele-
ment of professionalism. The CANMEDS competency“professionalism ”encompasses ethical practice. For the
questions at the beginning of life, gene editing and non-
invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), I will focus on the con-tributions of the Public and Professional Policy Committee
(PPPC) of ESHG, to illustrate how recommendations for
responsible health care practice were developed, and howthe ethical debate was clari ﬁed as in the second and third
deﬁnition of ethics. Ethics for beginners could start with
principles of ethics. Knoppers and Chadwick in 2005
described emerging trends in ethics, especially in human
genetic research, starting from the principles of autonomy,
privacy, justice, quality and equity and moving to recipro-city, mutuality, solidarity, citizenry and universality.
Autonomy has been a very important element in genetics
health care. Especially if reproductive choices are to bemade, the women or the couple involved have to decide.
Coercion is to be avoided. The PPPC recommendations on
NIPT state that it has the potential of helping the practicebetter achieve its aim of facilitating autonomous reproduc-
tive choices. To evaluate this aim, it is not suf ﬁcient toAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 29report on the number of participants, the uptake or the
prevalence of aneuploidies. Crucial elements for the health
care system include information and counseling, education
of professionals, accountability to all stakeholders including
children born from screened pregnancies and persons living
with the conditions targeted in prenatal screening and pro-motion of equity of access. The ethical principles are often
connected. Equity for instance comes in. If women are to
make an autonomous choice, this can only be achieved if allwomen have access, and if, whatever their choice, they and
their children will be taken care of. For gene editing the
public debate and legislation seems to draw a line when itcomes to germline gene editing. The PPPC of ESHG col-
laborates with The European Society of Human Repro-
duction and Embryology (ESHRE). Together we are in theprocess of developing recommendations especially for
reproductive gene editing. In many countries germline
interventions have been prohibited. What were the argu-ments behind this legislation, and do these still apply and
are they still considered convincing? If a technique can help
to avoid serious genetic disorders, in a safe and effectiveway, would this be a reason to reconsider earlier stand-
points? After endorsement of these recommendations, more
debate will be needed with stakeholders outside of thegenetics/human reproduction community.
M.C. Cornel: None.
E06.2
Balancing public health & biomedical ethics: The
case of newborn screening
Y. Bombard1,2
1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,
2St Michael ’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
Newborn screening (NBS) is considered a public health
genomics success story. NBS programs identify serious
conditions where early detection and urgent pre-symptomatic treatment were necessary to avert serious
clinical harm. However, three challenges are raising old
ethical issues of consent and public health bene ﬁts with
renewed urgency:
(1)The scope of NBS panels is expanding - around the
world - allowing the early detection of dozens of geneticconditions, including conditions without treatment, where
treatment does not improve mortality and where evidence of
beneﬁt is equivocal.
(2)Further, controversy has emerged concerning the
storage of NBS samples and their secondary uses. NBS
samples are typically stored for QA purposes, but thesedried spots may also be used for other purposes including:research, public health surveillance, and sometimes for
identifying disaster victims or in law enforcement.
(3)Finally, there is growing discussion of the potential to
use genome sequencing (GS) technologies within NBS
programs. However, the possibility of incorporating GS into
population-wide NBS programs would lead to a major shiftin the scope and scale of information generation, which
raises questions about the limits of screening and the moral
authority of NBS to continue to operate as a mandatory oras an implied consent program.
Combined, these developments might alter public
expectations to participate in universal NBS programs andunderscore the need to engage the public on these issues.
This presentation will review these three issues and
ethical principles as well as describe research from anational public engagement study on Canadian citizens ’
views and values on these emerging issues. Results will
describe public expectations of expanded NBS panels andtheir values regarding research with stored samples. Results
will also present citizens ’personal inclinations, and per-
ceived obligations of others, to participate in NBS usingGS. In light of these ﬁndings, key ethical and policy con-
siderations as well as future research questions will be
discussed.
Y. Bombard: None.
E07 Pharmacogenomics in the clinic
E07.1
Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized
Medicine
T. Klein1, M. Ritchie2
1Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford, CA,
United States,2Penn State University, Danville, PA, United
States
Pharmacogenomics (PGx) focuses on the use of genomic
information to guide drug therapy and is a central compo-
nent of precision medicine. Despite substantial progress inunderstanding how genetic variations impact drug ef ﬁcacy
and toxicity, the adoption of pharmacogenomics in clinical
practice has been relatively slow. Major challenges in theimplementation of pharmacogenomics knowledge include
lack of awareness of the available evidence, unsure of how
to interpret and use the genetic information, and lack ofclear guidance on how to deliver information to the prac-
titioners and patients. A central repository of pharmacog-
neomic knowledge is critical in addressing all of thesechallenges. The Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase
(PharmGKB) is a publically available premiere repository30that collects, curates, and disseminates information about
the impact of human genetic variation on drug responses.
Through our research efforts and collaborations with phar-
macogenomics research and clinical communities, we pro-
vide a comprehensive catalogue of genes and genetic
variations that are most important for drug response phe-notypes. I will describe the core content of our knowl-
edgebase and discuss how we use the knowledge to support
clinical implementation of PGx. In addition, I will highlightour collaboration with the Clinical Pharmacogenetics
Implementation Consortium (CPIC) to develop freely
available, peer-reviewed gene/drug practice guidelines forphysicians that aids implementation of pharmacogenetic
testing and improves the precision of drug selection and
dosing. Lastly, I will present the development of ThePharmacogenomics Clinical Annotation Tool (PharmCAT),
a software tool that extract all CPIC level-A variants from a
genetic dataset (represented as a vcf), interpret the variantalleles, and generate a report that can then be used to inform
prescribing decisions. PharmCAT is currently being devel-
oped in a collaboration between the PGRN StatisticalAnalysis Resource (P-STAR), PharmGKB, the Clinical
Genome Resource (ClinGen), and CPIC. References: M.
Whirl-Carrillo, E.M. McDonagh, J. M. Hebert, L. Gong, K.Sangkuhl, C.F. Thorn, R.B. Altman and T.E. Klein.
“Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized Medi-
cine”.Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics (2012) 92(4):
414–417.; M.V. Relling, T.E. Klein. “CPIC: Clinical
Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium of the
Pharmacogenomics Research Network. ”Clin Pharmacol
Ther. 2011 Mar;89(3):464 –7
T. Klein: None. M. Ritchie: None.
E07.2
Implementation of pharmacogenomics in the clinic
M. Pirmohamed
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Pharmacogenetics/genomics has been around for a long
time: although this has led to many discoveries, i.e. asso-ciations between phenotypes (drug ef ﬁcacy and safety) and
genotypes, translation of these discoveries into clinical
practice has generally been poor. Worldwide, there is nowgreater emphasis on implementation, with many different
approaches and areas being investigated including pre-
emptive genotyping. Lack of robust evidence is cited as themain reason for lack of implementation. Conventionally, the
randomised controlled trial is regarded as the top of the
evidence hierarchy, but very few trials have been under-taken in pharmacogenomics. Undertaking a RCT for a
pharmacogenomics phenotype is more complicated thanundertaking a conventional RCT - apart from the usual
factors such as design, sample size, clinical outcome mea-
sures, and follow-up, additional factors such as how patients
will be genotyped, how genotype will affect drug dose/
choice, whether it will be cost-effective, and how many
patients will need to be screened to identify those that ﬁt
with the inclusion criteria, all need to be considered. These
additional factors inevitably also make it much more
expensive to undertake pharmacogenomics-based RCTs -given that many of the drugs being studied for pharmaco-
genomics are off-patent, it can be dif ﬁcult to obtain funding
to undertake these trials. Therefore, in order to improve thetranslation of laboratory ﬁndings into the clinic, we need to
consider different forms of evidence in a more intelligent,
rather than purely relying on a hierarchy of evidence. Thetalk will be illustrated by several case studies to show how
different implementation approaches are now being
investigated.
M. Pirmohamed: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Modest; EU-PACT Trial Eur-opean Commission, UK National Institute of Health
Research. C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment,
receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; LGC,MC Diagnostics.
E08
Multi-omics data integration
E08.1
Functional Genomics
P. Beales
London, United Kingdom
No abstract received.
E08.2
Methods of integrating genomics data
M. D. Ritchie
Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States
Modern technology has enabled massive data generation
of molecular data types including DNA sequence variation,RNA gene expression, methylation, and protein expression,
among others. However, tools and software to work with
these data in effective ways are limited. Genome science, inparticular, has advanced at a tremendous pace during recent
years with dramatic innovations in highthroughputAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 31molecular data generation technology, data collection, and a
paradigm shift from single lab science to large, collabora-
tive network/consortia science. These massive datasets
provide a rich resource for sophisticated data analysis to
identify the underlying patterns that explain or predict
complex trait architecture. Our group, and others, have beenexploring the use of machine learning strategies to analyze
these multiomics datasets. We have speci ﬁcally focused on
meta-dimensional analysis where we integrate multiple datatypes to identify multivariate models that predict disease
states. The goal of this technology is to integrate across
multiple datasets as well. In this presentation, I will describethe strategies in the ﬁeld for integrating genomics data and
provide some examples of where these techniques have
identi ﬁed novel association signals.
M.D. Ritchie: None.
E09
Phakomatosis Update
E09.1
Neuro ﬁbromatosis Update
D. Evans
Manchester, United Kingdom
Since the discovery of the NF1 gene in 1990 and NF2 in
1993 there has been the promise of gene based therapies.Initial work in NF1 using farnesyl transferase inhibitors was
disappointing. However work on NF1 mice suggested that
statins may have a role in helping the neuro-cognitivedeﬁcit in NF1. Again initial studies were not convincing but
larger scale international initiatives are still awaited. More
latterly many more target both in NF1 and NF2 have beensuggested and early evidence suggested that imatinib was
likely to have ef ﬁcacy in at least a minority of growing
plexiform tumours in NF1. This was shown to have only a17% response rate in a clinical trial. The big breakthrough
came nonetheless in NF2 with Bevacizumab. Bevacizumab
is a vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor that hasrecently been used in the treatment of schwannoma growth
associated with NF2 and appears to work in short to med-
ium term tumour shrinkage or control in about 70% of caseswith rapidly growing tumours. Bevacizumab was approved
for such treatment through the National NF2 service in
England in September 2010. Seventy patients have so farbeen treated through 4 NF2 centres. This includes 10
patients with extracranial schwannomas that have respon-
ded to treatment with bevacizumab and 8 ependymomaswith both symptomatic improvement, and decrease in
tumour size. Bevacizumab treatment appears to haveefﬁcacy on rapidly growing schwannomas throughout the
nervous system. Just this year MEK inhibitors were shown
in a paediatric phase 1 trial to be effective in treating
plexiform tumours in NF1 and may have ef ﬁcacy in other
tumour types. Other targets include nilotinib and sorafenib
which are in phase 0 studies in Plymouth/Manchester.
E09.2
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Update
S. Jozwiak1,2
1Department of Child Neurology, Warsaw Medical Uni-
versity, Warsaw, Poland,2The Children ’s Memorial Health
Institute, Warsaw, Poland
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is one of the most
frequent neurocutaneous disorders. It affects 1 in 6,000 inpediatric population. Familial cases comprise about 30% of
all TSC patients. Up to 90% of patients suffer from epilepsy
and about 50% present with different forms of mentalretardation. Diagnosis of TSC may be dif ﬁcult due to the
fact that majority of clinical presentations of the disease
develop over time in older children, adolescents and adults.According to the recent recommendations, TSC diagnosis
may be established if pathogenic mutation is found in either
ofTSC1 orTSC2 genes, or when two major diagnostic
clinical criteria are present in the patient. Recent update on
newest diagnostic criteria of TSC will be presented.
Usually, cardiac tumors, especially multiple, present a ﬁrst
clinical symptom of TSC and may be disclosed on routine
fetal echocardiography performed at about 30
thweek of
pregnancy. Early diagnosis of TSC in young infants may beparticularly important as currently available early inter-
ventions may change the natural course of this devastating
disease. Identi ﬁcation of infants with high risk of epilepsy
allows implementation of preventative treatment, which
signiﬁcantly improves their neurodevelopmental outcome.
Recent results of preventative studies and the EPISTOPproject ( www.EPISTOP.eu ) will be discussed. Treatment
with mTOR inhibitors of TSC-associated renal (angio-
myolipomas; AMLs) and brain (subependymal giant cellastrocytomas; SEGAs) tumors, signi ﬁcantly improved long-
term prognosis of affected persons. New recommendations
for SEGAs treatment will be presented. mTOR inhibitorshave been found to be effective also in drug-resistant epi-
lepsy associated with TSC. Also these aspects of manage-
ment will be covered in the lecture. Acknowledgements. SJwas partly ﬁnanced by the European Community ’s7
thFP
(FP7/2007 –2013; EPISTOP, grant agreement no. 602391)
and the Polish Ministerial funds for science (years 2014 –
2018) for the implementation of international co- ﬁnanced
project.32S. Jozwiak: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers
bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis. F.
Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Eisai, UCB.
E10
Whole-genome haplotyping methods for
human embryo selection
E10.1
Karyo- and Meio-mapping for human embryo
selection
D. Wells
Nufﬁeld, United Kingdom
No abstract received.
E10.2
Haplarithmisis for human embryo selection
J. R. Vermeesch
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Large scale whole genome and exome sequencing is
uncovering a plethora of novel mutations that cause highly
penetrant, early-onset, severe, or later-onset life-threatening
dominant and recessive disorders. For couples who areknown carriers of mutant alleles, preimplantation genetic
diagnosis enables the detection of genetic disorders in
embryos that have been fertilized in vitro, thereby avoidingtheir transmission to offspring. Traditional PGD methods
require a mutation and family speci ﬁc work-up. We and
others have developed generic methods that can be readilyapplied for all transmitted genetic disorders. The method
reconstructs genome-wide haplotype architectures as well
as the copy-number and segregational origin of those hap-lotypes by employing phased parental genotypes and deci-
phering WGA-distorted SNP B-allele fractions using a
process we coin haplarithmisis. We demonstrate the methodcan be applied as a generic method for preimplantation
genetic diagnosis on single cells biopsied from human
embryos enabling to diagnose both disease alleles genomewide, as well as numerical and structural chromosomal
anomalies. Moreover, meiotic segregation errors can be
distinguished from mitotic ones. In addition to the princi-ples, I will present the results following the ﬁrst year of
clinical implementation. The introduction of genome wide
screening of embryo ’s raised novel ethical questions. The
principles guiding embryo selection and prioritization that
are applied at our centre according to the chromosomalcontent and mutational load of the embryos, will also be
discussed.
J.R. Vermeesch: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well
as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; Agilent. E. Own-
ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intel-lectual property); Signi ﬁcant; patents licensed to Agilent.
E11
Strategies to avoid sudden cardiac death
E11.1
Sudden Cardiac Death in the Young
C. Semsarian
Sydney, Australia
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is a tragic and devastating
complication of a number of cardiovascular diseases. Thedeath is most often unexpected and has major implications
for the surviving family and the community. While in the
older populations, SCD is most frequently caused byunderlying coronary artery disease and heart failure, in
those aged under 35 years, the causes of SCD commonly
include genetic disorders, such as inherited cardiomyo-pathies and primary arrhythmogenic diseases.
1In the eva-
luation of families in which SCD has occurred, the key
combination of both clinical screening and targetted genetictesting is the cornerstone of both establishing an underlying
diagnosis and in screening at-risk family relatives. Speci ﬁ-
cally, in cases where no de ﬁnitive cause is identi ﬁed at
postmortem, i.e. Sudden Unexpected Death (SUD), the
“molecular autopsy ”has emerged as a key process in the
investigation of the cause of death. The combination ofclinical and genetic evaluation of families with SCD in the
setting of a specialized multidisciplinary clinic provides a
platform for early initiation of therapeutic and preventionstrategies, with the ultimate goal to reduce sudden death
among the young in our communities.
1Bagnall et al. A
Prospective Study of Sudden Cardiac Death among Chil-dren and Young Adults. N Engl J Med 2016;374:2441 –
2452.
E11.2
Recommendations for the management of sudden
cardiac death
F. Fellmann
Lausanne, SwitzerlandAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 33In November 2016 the Brocher Foundation hosted an
interdisciplinary workshop on Ethical, legal and practical
aspects of post-mortem genetic analysis for sudden cardiac
death in young adults . The workshop was organised in
collaboration with the Public and Professional Policy
Committee of the ESHG. Twelve experts in (forensic)pathology, cardiology, genetics and law from Europe and
Canada presented their views. Together with PPPC mem-
bers and invited experts they participated in group work toidentify common challenges and list recommendations. The
workshop focussed on cases of sudden unexpected death in
adults below the age of 40, potentially indicative ofunderlying hereditary cardiac disorders. In such cases post-
mortem genetic testing can be relevant for medical reasons
as well as for public health purposes. Though (forensic)autopsy procedures are available, these poorly integrate
post-mortem genetic testing. Aim of the workshop was to
address the lack of coordination between the forensic andmedical domain and the various professions and respective
regulations by drafting recommendations to improve Eur-
opean guidance.
This presentation will address the ethical, legal, and
practical (including economical) challenges of post mortem
genetic testing and the use of the results for medical pur-poses. Autopsy procedures in cases of sudden unexpected
death vary per European country or region; the procedures
for selecting cases suspected of sudden cardiac death, thenumber of autopsies performed, and the extent to which the
heart is thoroughly examined as part of these autopsies,
vary. It needs to be clari ﬁed at what stage and by whom the
family members are informed and asked for consent to store
samples or DNA. It needs to be clari ﬁed who is responsible
for storing the sample, for what purpose and by whom agenetic test may be performed. Forensic pathologists and/or
medical examiners) may not have suf ﬁcient training and/or
resources (including time) to properly interpret genetictesting results. Further challenges include the transfer of
information and samples from the forensic or medico-legal
to the medical domain. Insuf ﬁcient communication between
different medical specialties (i.e. pathology, cardiology and
genetics), further hinders an adequate information of the
relatives of the deceased person.A list of recommendationswill be presented to improve communication and attune-
ment between professionals involved in post mortem ana-
lysis and genetics at a regional level as well as betweendifferent representing bodies and dedicated policymakers to
improve adherence to existing guidelines whenever avail-
able, while suggesting further guidance in the absence ofprocedures.
Contributors: C. Basso, Padua, Italy; S. Boers, Utrecht,
The Netherlands; P. Charron, Paris, France; A. Clarke,Cardiff, UK; M. Cornel, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
E. Delmarre, Angers, France; A. M. Duguet, Toulouse,France; C. van El, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; F. Fell-
mann, Switzerland; F. Forzano, London, UK; H. Howard,
Uppsala, Sweden; S. Kauferstein, Frankfurt, Germany;
K. Michaud, Lausanne, Switzerland; H. Kayserili, Istanbul,
Turkey; A. Lucassen, Southampton, UK; A. Mendes, Porto,
Portugal; C. Patch, London, UK; D. Radojkovic, Belgrade,Serbia; E. Rial-Sebbag, Toulouse, France; A. Sajantila,
Helsinki, Finland; M. Sheppard, London, UK; A. M. Tassé,
Canada; S. Temel, Turkey; A. Wilde, Amsterdam, theNetherlands; C. Yakicier, Istanbul,Turkey
E12
The evolution of genetic counseling: Lessons
learned from psychotherapy
E12.1
The added value of psychotherapy in the geneticcounselling process
R. Moldovan
Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Genetic counselling is rooted in many different psycho-
logical traditions, ranging from theory-based approaches to
evidence-based interventions. However, overarching fra-meworks that bring together the range of models and per-
spectives are lacking, and the breadth of research is dif ﬁcult
to translate into effective practice. Research has consistentlydemonstrated that genetic counselling improves patient
knowledge, risk perception and autonomy in decision-
making, decreases stigma, emotional distress and generateshigh satisfaction. Nevertheless, genetic counselling inter-
ventions are not traditionally evidence-based while a num-
ber of evidence-based psychological interventions arealready available. The presentation will focus on how
research, practice and training in genetic counselling could
take account of the ef ﬁcacy of evidence-based psy-
chotherapies such as cognitive and behavioural
psychotherapy.
R. Moldovan: None.
E12.2
Genetics and Family Dynamics: Navigating theSometimes Bumpy Road to Effective
Communication
S. H. McDaniel
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY,
United States34Communicating genetic information is challenging
because of the complexity and ambiguity of the scienti ﬁc
information that must be transmitted by the clinician, and
because the patient hears that information through ﬁlters
that often include anxiety, idiosyncratic health beliefs, and
longstanding family dynamics. This talk will provide spe-ciﬁc evidence-based, communication techniques for the
clinician to improve patient understanding of complex
information. It will also describe tools based on familysystems theory to understand and plan for communication
with patients and their families in ways that support the
genetic information being heard, understood, and actedupon.
S.H. McDaniel: None.
E13
Network Medicine
E13.1
Mining biological networks
N. Pr žulj
London, United Kingdom
No abstract received.
E13.2
Cellular Networks and Human diseases
A. Sharma
Boston, MA, United States
No abstract received.
Concurrent Sessions
C01 Personalized Medicine and Pharmacogenomics
C01.1
The role of Next-generation sequencing in tumoursin Adolescents and young adults (AYA) with
advanced solid tumors participating in phase I trials
T. P. McVeigh, R. Sundar, N. Diamantis, S. Kaye, U. Banerji, J. Lopez,
J. de Bono, W. van der Graaf, A. J. George
Royal Marsden NHS foundation trust, Sutton, United
KingdomIntroduction: Adolescents and young adults(AYAs) aged
15–39years at cancer diagnosis are uncommon. Hereditary
cancer predisposition syndromes confer signi ﬁcantly
increased risks of cancer at unusually young ages. Genetic
mutations (somatic and/or germline) represent putative
therapeutic targets. The aim of this study is to investigatethe clinical and genomic assessment of AYAs with
advanced solid tumours managed in a specialist drug
development unit (DDU).
Methods: AYAs treated in the DDU at the Royal Marsden
Hospital between 2002 and 2016, were identi ﬁed from
departmental databases. Data regarding clinicopathologicalfeatures, clinical assessments, and germline and tumour
genetic testing were retrieved by electronic chart review.
Results: 219 AYA patients were identi ﬁed. The most
common cancer types included sarcoma (42,18%); cervical
(27,12%); breast (25; 11%); ovarian (21,10%) and color-
ectal (21,10%) cancers. Tumour Molecular Characterisation(MC) was performed by next generation sequencing in 45
cases. Mutations were detected most commonly in TP53
(14,31%); PIK3CA (8,18%); KRAS (4,9%) and MET
(4,9%). Twenty-one patients were known to have a cancer
predisposition syndrome. Six others were referred to
genetics or underwent mainstreamed genetic testing. Usingcurrent guidelines, a further 33 would now be eligible for
mainstream BRCA1/2 testing and 5 for TP53 testing based
on their personal history alone. In 108 cases, no familyhistory was taken.
Discussion: A signi ﬁcant proportion of AYAs presenting
with advanced tumours will have targetable mutations in thesoma or the germline. Thorough assessment of familial risk
factors, and inclusion of germline testing in appropriate
circumstances can complement tumour testing to helpoptimize patient management.
T.P. McVeigh: None. R. Sundar: None. N. Diamantis:
None. S. Kaye: None. U. Banerji: None. J. Lopez: None.
J. de Bono: None. W. van der Graaf: None. A.J. George:
None.
C01.2
Less is More: knockdown of the aberrant
HBBIVSI-110(G>A)mRNA restores HBB expression
and enhances gene therapy by gene addition in
primary erythroid cells
P. Patsali1,2, P. Papasavva1,3, C. Stephanou1,2, S. Christou4,
M. Sitarou4, M. Antoniou2, C. W. Lederer1, M. Kleanthous1
1Department of Molecular Genetics Thalassaemia, The
Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics and Cyprus
School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,2Depart-
ment of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King ’s College
London, London, United Kingdom,3Cyprus School ofAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 35Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus,4Thalassaemia
Centre, Ministry of Health, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
Mutations reducing β-globin production and thus causing
β-thalassemia are of global clinical importance. β-Tha-
lassemia caused by the HBBIVSI-110(G>A)mutation (HGVS
name: HBB:c.93-21G > A), which produces an abnormal
splice acceptor site, is particularly frequent in many Wes-
tern countries and causes severe thalassemia major inhomozygotes.
Preclinical and clinical studies have highlighted patients
with HBB
IVSI-110(G>A)as dif ﬁcult to treat with gene therapy
by gene addition, suggesting an effect of the mutant locus
on normal, endogenous or vector-encoded, β-globin alleles.
Towards improved gene-addition treatment of affectedpatients and supposing that the mutant locus acts in trans by
aberrant HBB
IVSI-110(G>A)-derived mRNA, we therefore set
out to reduce the latter by RNA interference. We recog-nised, ﬁrst in a novel humanised murine erythroleukemia
model and then in primary CD34
+-derived erythroid cells
from HBBIVSI-110(G>A)-homozygous patients, that speci ﬁc
knock-down of the aberrant HBBIVSI-110(G>A)mRNA alone
results in extremely signi ﬁcant induction of β-globin pro-
duction from the mutant locus. In primary cells the resultingβ-globin expression and phenotypic correction of erythroid-
lineage differentiation is equal to or exceeds that achieved
by same-sample control treatment with the clinically suc-cessful GLOBE gene-therapy vector. Furthermore, combi-
nation of HBB
IVSI-110(G>A)knockdown with GLOBE results
in signi ﬁcant improvement of both disease parameters
compared to either treatment alone.
This study establishes aberrant HBBIVSI-110(G>A)mRNA
as the main causative agent of disease severity in -HBB
IVSI-110(G>A)thalassaemia and as a potent target for
mutation-speci ﬁc gene therapy for β-thalassaemia. It
moreover puts forward HBBIVSI-110(G>A)thalassaemia as a
paradigm for the importance of allelic heterogeneity when
applying gene therapy by gene addition.
P. Patsali: None. P. Papasavva: None. C. Stephanou:
None. S. Christou: None. M. Sitarou: None. M. Anto-
niou: None. C.W. Lederer: None. M. Kleanthous: None.
C01.3
Aﬁrst genome-wide systems genetics approach
identi ﬁes risk loci and pathways for candidaemia
susceptibility
V. Matzaraki1, M. Jaeger2, R. A. Gamboa1, S. Smeekens2, M. Oosting2,
F. van de Veerdonk2, L. A. B. Joosten2,Y .L i1, M. G. Netea2,
C. Wijmenga1,3, V. Kumar1
1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Gro-
ningen (UMCG), Groningen, Netherlands,2Department ofMedicine, Radbound University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands,3K.G. Jebsen Coeliac Disease
Research Centre, Department of Immunology, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Introduction: Candida albicans (C. albicans ) is the most
common opportunistic fungal pathogen, causing a blood-
stream infection (candidaemia). However, not all at-risk
patients develop candidaemia, indicating that geneticsinﬂuences their susceptibility to the infection.
Materials and Methods: To identify novel susceptibility
genes, we have performed the ﬁrst genome-wide association
analysis (GWAS) by using the largest candidaemia cohort
to date of European ancestry. Due to the cohort size lim-
itations, we followed a systems genetics approach to pro ﬁle
genetic variants that showed association with known risk
factors for candidaemia, such as neutrophil counts, cytokine
production and transcriptome. Therefore, we pro ﬁled tran-
scriptome response to C. albicans in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 75 healthy individuals and
identi ﬁed the Candida -response expression QTLs (eQTs).
Candida -induced cytokine pro ﬁling in PBMCs from heal-
thy volunteers was also assessed and we mapped cytokine
QTLs (cQTLs).
Results: We identi ﬁed EHD4 locus as the genome-wide
signiﬁcant region to be associated with candidaemia. We
further validated the role of EHD4 in regulation of IFN γ,a
well-known pathway involved in anti- Candida host
immune defense, using co-expression data upon Candida
stimulation. Three genome-wide signi ﬁcant QTLs in ﬂuen-
cing Candida -induced cytokine production (IL6, TNF-a and
IL22), and one locus in ﬂuencing IL17 production induced
byCandida were identi ﬁed. In addition, variants with
suggestive association (P < 9.99 × 10
−5) with candidaemia
susceptibility identi ﬁed to be associated with either neu-
tropenia or cytokine-QTLs.
Conclusions: Integration of transcriptional responses, cQTs
and genetic studies in candidaemia patient cohort identi ﬁed
several new susceptibility genes that may represent diag-nostic and therapeutic targets in candidaemia.
V. Matzaraki: None. M. Jaeger: None. R.A. Gamboa:
None. S. Smeekens: None. M. Oosting: None. F. van de
Veerdonk: None. L.A.B. Joosten: None. Y. Li: None. M.G.
Netea: None. C. Wijmenga: None. V. Kumar: None.
C01.4
Whole genome sequencing yields medically
signiﬁcant secondary variants in ~25% of a
paediatric cohort
M. Meyn1,2, S. C. Bowdin1,2, C. Marshall1,2, D. J. Stavropoulos1,2,
R. Basran1, M. Reuter1, D. Merico1,3, R. Z. Hayeems1,2, M. Szego1,4,2,
R. Zlotnik Shaul1,2, C. Shuman1,2, T. Nalpathamkalam1, G. Pellecchia1,36B. Thiruvahindrapuram1, M. Girdea1,2, M. Brudno1,2, R. D. Cohn1,2,
S. W. Scherer1,2, P. N. Ray1,2, N. Monfared1
1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada,2Uni-
versity of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,3Deep Genomics,
Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada,4St. Joseph ’s Health Centre
and St. Michael ’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
To pilot paediatric genomic medicine we developed the
SickKids Genome Clinic, a research project centered on
diagnostic whole genome sequencing (WGS) of children
undergoing genetic evaluation. With parents ’consent, we
also search for predictive secondary variants (PSVs) asso-
ciated with occult or future disease.
A search of 100 patients ’WGS data for candidate PSVs
affecting 3000 +disease genes yielded 26 SNVs that met
2015 ACMGG criteria for pathogenic/likely pathogenic
classi ﬁcations. An additional 10 SNVs were deemed
returnable PSVs based on more limited evidence of patho-
genicity. None of 610 CNVs that overlapped OMIM genes
were classi ﬁed as PSVs. All PSVs were inherited and 9/36
predicted adult onset disease. The majority were rare (MAF
< 0.0001) variants that cause dominant Mendelian dis-
orders. The remainder included variants linked to attenuatedMendelian phenotypes, common disease risk variants, an X-
linked variant, and a protective variant.
25 children had one PSV, four children had two PSVs
and one child had three. Structured family histories per-
formed before result disclosure were negative for disease
states predicted by the secondary PSVs. However, follow-ing disclosure, positive family histories related to the PSVs
were obtained by targeted questioning in more than a third
of cases. Reverse phenotyping of children with PSVs andtheir ﬁrst-degree relatives uncovered unsuspected disease
and demonstrated incomplete penetrance.
Comprehensive genomic searching can yield PSVs in
~25% of children, mostly rare familial mutations associated
with childhood disorders. While predictive WGS yields
false positives, it uncovers occult disease states and issubstantially more sensitive than family history for identi-
fying familial genetic disorders.
M. Meyn: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Gene42. S.C. Bowdin: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;
Modest; Gene42. C. Marshall: None. D.J. Stavropoulos:
None. R. Basran: None. M. Reuter: None. D. Merico: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Deep Geno-
mics, Inc.. R.Z. Hayeems: None. M. Szego: None. R.
Zlotnik Shaul: None. C. Shuman: None. T. Nalpatham-
kalam: None. G. Pellecchia: None. B. Thiruvahin-
drapuram: None. M. Girdea: E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Modest; Gene42. M. Brudno: E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Signi ﬁcant; Gene42. R.D. Cohn: None. S.W. Scherer:
None. P.N. Ray: None. N. Monfared: None.
C01.5
Secondary actionable ﬁndings identi ﬁed by whole-
exome sequencing from 693 consecutive tests:implications for organization of care and patients?
C. Thauvin-Robinet1, J. Thévenon1, S. Nambot1, P. Kuentz1, A. Bruel1,
A. Chassagne1, E. Cretin1, O. Putois1, A. Pélissier1, C. Peyron1,
E. Gautier1, J. Skrzypski2, D. Lehalle1, N. Jean-Marçais1, P. Callier1,
A. Mosca-Boidron1, C. Poe1, T. Jouan1, M. Chevarin1, M. Lefebvre1,
E. Tisserant1, C. Binquet1,3, J. Deleuze4, Y. Duffourd1, L. Faivre1
1FHU TRANSLAD, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon,
France,2Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France,
3Inserm Centre d ’investigation Clinique (CIC) 1432 Mod-
ule Epidémiologie Clinique (EC) - CHU Dijon Bourgogne,Dijon, France,
4Centre national de génotypage, Evry,
France
Background: With the integration of whole exome
sequencing (WES) in medicine practice, there is potential
for the reporting of secondary ﬁndings unrelated to the
indication for prescribing WES but of medical value for
patient care. In 2013, the American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) examined the issue ofsecondary ﬁndings in WES/WGS, and introduced recom-
mendations to report medically actionable variants in a
minimal set of 56 genes, recently updated to 59.
Methods: In order to evaluate the implications of these
recommendations in the organization of care, we conducted
a retrospective study to evaluate the frequency of variants ina list of actionable genes in a cohort of 693 probands with
multiple congenital anomalies explored by WES, as well as
the extra work generated.
Results: We identi ﬁed 2.4% of patients with pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variants in the 59 ACMG actionable
genes (3.6% when extended to the Dorschner list). 10% ofpatients were heretozygous for a variant responsible for the
four most frequent autosomal recessive diseases in France.
If returned to patients, these results should induce 693 pre-test and 96 post-test genetic consultations, and 31 specia-
lised follow-up and additional family evaluations. Variant
interpretation took about 15 min.
Conclusions: This study evaluated consequences in terms
of organization of care. Although multiple surveys in var-
ious populations have been massively in favour of returningsuch results, this opportunity should be discussed given the
work overload generated, and the absence of large studies
evaluating the impact of transmitting such results to affectedpatients/families.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 37C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. J. Thévenon: None.
S. Nambot: None. P. Kuentz: None. A. Bruel: None.
A. Chassagne: None. E. Cretin: None. O. Putois:
None. A. Pélissier: None. C. Peyron: None. E. Gautier:
None. J. Skrzypski: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Jean-
Marçais: None. P. Callier: None. A. Mosca-Boidron:
None. C. Poe: None. T. Jouan: None. M. Chevarin:
None. M. Lefebvre: None. E. Tisserant: None. C. Bin-
quet: None. J. Deleuze: None. Y. Duffourd: None.
L. Faivre: None.
C01.6
Genetics- ﬁrst analysis of high-risk variants for
breast, ovarian and prostate cancer in participants
of Estonian Genome Center
M. Palover1, L. Leitsalu1, A. Reigo1, T. Nikopensius1, K. Vaiküll1,
M. Kals1, P. Padrik2,3,4, T. Esko1,5, A. Metspalu1,6, N. Tonisson1,7
1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia,2Haematology-Oncology Clinic, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,3Cancer Center, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,4Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,5Broad Institute,
Cambridge, MA, United States,6Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
7Dept. of Clinical Genetics in Tallinn, Tartu University
Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia
The American College of Medical Genetics and Geno-
mics has published a minimum list of 59 genes that should
be reported back if found mutated in clinical sequencing.
We are adapting these recommendations for genomic ana-lyses in Estonian Genome Center to favour personalized
management and early detection. Hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer (HBOC) was selected as one of primarycandidates for the participant feedback as it has the highest
frequency in our dataset, together with familial hypercho-
lesterolemia. By Estonian Gene Research Act, the biobankparticipants have a right to know about their genetic data.
To date, we have identi ﬁed 34 individuals with 9 known
and expected pathogenic variants (3 recurrent variants,6 singletons) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. 18 individuals
were identi ﬁed from whole genome sequencing data (WGS;
n=2240) and additional 16 individuals by using long-
range haplotyping. So far, 9 participants have visited
Estonian Genome Center for additional validation. 3 of 9
had been diagnosed with breast and prostate cancer; 8 of 9had a positive family history of HBOC-related malig-
nancies. Based on WGS data from 2240 individuals, the
prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 high-risk variants inEstonia is approximately 1/125. Therefore, it will be
extremely important to establish a close collaboration withclinicians for a proper follow-up. Giving feedback on high-
risk genetic variants to currently healthy individuals may
have a large psychosocial impact. This needs to be further
studied, together with the individual ’s compliance to man-
agement recommendations. This research was supported by
the EU project 2014 –2020.4.01.15 –0012 and PUT736
personal grant.
M. Palover: None. L. Leitsalu: None. A. Reigo: None.
T. Nikopensius: None. K. Vaiküll: None. M. Kals: None.
P. Padrik: None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None.
N. Tonisson: None.
C02
Neurogenetics 1
C02.1
Allele-speci ﬁc silencing as therapeutic strategy for
disorders due to gene duplication: a proof-of-
principle in Autosomal Dominant LeukoDystrophy
(ADLD)
E. Giorgio1, A. Bartoletti-Stella2, A. Brussino1, C. Mancini1,
S. Cavalieri3, M. Ferrero1, E. Di Gregorio3, E. Pozzi1, E. Riberi4,
L. Gasparini5, P. Cortelli2, S. Capellari2, A. Brusco1
1University of Torino-Dept. Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy,
2University of Bologna-Dept. of Biomedical and Neuro-
motor Sciences, Bologna, Italy,3“Città della Salute e della
Scienza ”University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Tor-
ino, Italy,4University of Torino, Dept. Public Health and
Pediatrics, Torino, Italy,5Dept. Neuroscience and Brain
Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Torino, Italy
Allele-SPeci ﬁc silencing by RNA Interference (ASP-
iRNA) allows to speci ﬁcally inhibiting the expression of
disease-causing alleles with minimal suppression of the
corresponding wild-type alleles. This therapeutic strategy
has been effectively used to target dominant activatingmutations or SNPs in cis with aberrantly expanded trinu-
cleotide repeats. We reasoned that ASP-iRNA could be
exploited also in genetic diseases due to gene duplication.Here, we demonstrate its ef ﬁcacy in Autosomal Dominant
LeukoDystrophy (ADLD), a fatal disorder associated with
CNS demyelination. As ADLD is caused by LMNB1 gene
duplication-mediated overexpression, the paramount choice
for ADLD treatment would be a drug capable of restoring
physiological levels of LMNB1 expression without the
deleterious side effects of an excessive gene knock-down.
ADLD patients have three, equally expressed, LMNB1
alleles. Hence, we chose to target the non-duplicated alleleby ASP-siRNA, exploiting a frequent coding SNP. We
designed and screened a siRNA library centred on the SNP38and evaluated siRNAs ef ﬁcacy and speci ﬁcity by using a
customized dual reporter system. We identi ﬁed four siR-
NAs with a high ef ﬁcacy (p < 0.0001) and allele-speci ﬁcity
(p < 0.001). These were further tested in four ADLD
patient-derived ﬁbroblast lines. Three siRNAs selectively
silenced the target allele (p < 0.0005) and restored LMNB1
mRNA level to the wild type. Notably, siRNA treatments
restored LMNB1 protein to physiological levels and
improved ADLD-speci ﬁc cellular alterations, corroborating
ASP-iRNA therapeutic potential in ADLD. Our work
represents a proof-of-principle in the use of ASP-RNAi in
genetic disorders with gene overexpression, opening newtherapeutic possibilities for all Mendelian and syndromic
disorders associated with gene(s) duplication.
E. Giorgio: None. A. Bartoletti-Stella: None.
A. Brussino: None. C. Mancini: None. S. Cavalieri:
None. M. Ferrero: None. E. Di Gregorio: None. E. Pozzi:
None. E. Riberi: None. L. Gasparini: None. P. Cortelli:
None. S. Capellari: None. A. Brusco: None.
C02.2
CHRNA7 CNVs: shared clinical phenotypes mediated
by differing molecular mechanisms
M. A. Gillentine1, J. Yin1, S. Cummock2, J. J. Kim3, A. Bajic1,C .P .
Schaaf1
1Baylor College of Medicine/Jan and Dan Neurological
Research Institute, Houston, TX, United States,2Jan and
Dan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, TX, UnitedStates,
3Baylor College of Medicine Human Stem Cell Core,
Houston, TX, United States
Chromosome 15q13.3 is an extremely unstable region in
the genome with multiple pathogenic recurrent copy num-
ber variants (CNVs) observed. Probands with 15q13.3deletions present with cognitive de ﬁcits, epilepsy, and aut-
ism spectrum disorder (ASD), while duplication probands
have a milder phenotype including borderline cognitivedeﬁcits, ASD, and ADHD. Encoding for the α7 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) highly expressed in the
brain, CHRNA7 has been suggested as a candidate gene for
these CNVs.
We have utilized patient-derived induced pluripotent
stem cells and differentiated neural progenitor cells (NPCs)to determine the molecular phenotypes of 15q13.3 CNVs.
In these cells, mRNA levels of genes within 15q13.3 CNVs
correlate to their genomic copy number. For CHRNA7
duplications, we are able to show that the entire CHRNA7
gene is duplicated, resulting in mRNA overexpression.
Importantly, small duplications that include the ﬁrst exon of
OTUD7A do not appear to disrupt its expression.Surprisingly, both CHRNA7 gains and losses result in
decreased α7-speci ﬁc calcium ﬂux in patient-derived NPCs.
While this is puzzling considering the genomic and
expression data, it does mirror clinical phenotypes observed
in patients. Deletions likely have decreased calcium ﬂux
due to haploinsuf ﬁciency of CHRNA7 . Overexpression of
α7 subunits from duplications, on the other hand, result in
ER stress, likely due to insuf ﬁcient chaperones required for
folding, assembly, and traf ﬁcking of nAChRs. Subse-
quently, fewer functional receptors reach the cell mem-
brane. For both deletions and duplications, the decreased
calcium ﬂux results in down-regulation of calcium signaling
cascades, which may explain the neurobehavioral pheno-
types observed in patients.
M.A. Gillentine: None. J. Yin: None. S. Cummock:
None. J.J. Kim: None. A. Bajic: None. C.P. Schaaf:
None.
C02.3
17q21.31 duplication causes prominent Tau-related
Dementia with Increased MAPT expression
K. Le Guennec1, O. Quenez1, G. Nicolas1, D. Wallon2, S. Rousseau1,
A. Richard1, J. Alexander3, P. Paschou3, C. Charbonnier1,
C. Bellenguez4,5,6, B. Grenier-Boley4,5,6, D. Lechner7, M. Bihoreau7,
R. Olaso7, A. Boland7, V. Meyer7, J. Deleuze7,8, P. Amouyel4,5,6,
H. Munter9, G. Bourque9, M. Lathrop9, T. Frébourg10, R. Redon11,12,
L. Letenneur13,14, J. Dartigues13,14, O. Martinaud15, O. Kalev16,
S. Mehrabian17, L. Traykov17, T. Ströbel18,I .L eB e r19, P. Caroppo19,
S. Epelbaum19, T. Jonveaux20, F. Pasquier21, A. Rollin-Sillaire21,
E. Génin22, L. Guyant-Maréchal23, G. Kovacs18, J. Lambert4,5,6,
D. Hannequin24, D. Campion1,25, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, CNR-MAJ
collaborators
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Per-
sonalized Medicine, Rouen, France,
2Normandie Univ,
UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospi-tal, Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, F 76000,
Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,
3Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexan-
dropouli, Greece,4Inserm, U1167, RID-AGE - Risk factors
and molecular determinants of aging-related diseases, F-59000, Lille, France,
5Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59000,
Lille, France,6University Lille, U1167 - Excellence
Laboratory LabEx DISTALZ, F-59000, Lille, France,
7Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de Génomique,
CEA, Evry, France,8Fondation Jean Dausset, Centre
d’études du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France,
9McGill University and Génome Québec Innovation Centre,
Montréal, QC, Canada,10Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 39Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department
of Genetics, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and
Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France,11Inserm, UMR
1087, l ’institut du thorax, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France,
12CNRS, UMR 6291, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France,
13INSERM, U1219, Bordeaux, France,14Université de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France,15Rouen University Hospital,
Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, F 76000, Nor-
mandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,Rouen, France,
16Institute of Pathology and Neu
Introduction: Association analyses based on whole-exome
sequencing (WES) data have highlighted the genetic con-
tribution of rare single nucleotide variants and indels in
Alzheimer Disease (AD). The study of copy-number var-iations (CNVs) in large case-control series was initially
restricted to chip-based analysis focusing on large and fre-
quent CNVs. The development of new algorithms dedicatedto CNVs allows the detection from WES data of rare, exon-
scale rearrangements.
Methods: To assess the role of rare CNVs in AD, we
conducted a case-control study using WES data from 522
early-onset AD cases (onset before 65 years) and 584
controls using CANOES, a software based on read depthcomparison.
Results: The most recurrent rearrangement, found in 4
unrelated cases and absent in controls, was a 17q21.31microduplication, reciprocal to the Koolen-De Vries syn-
drome microdeletion, overlapping CRHR1 ,MAPT ,STH and
KANSL1 . Interestingly, one was de novo, and one was
cosegregating in a large pedigree. Duplication carriers
exhibited increased expression of the MAPT mRNA; clin-
ical signs, neuroimaging and CSF biomarker pro ﬁles were
consistent with an AD diagnosis, but amyloid PET imaging
was negative. Neuropathological examination con ﬁrmed
that the MAPT duplication causes a complex tauopathy
including prominent neuro ﬁbrillary tangle pathology, but
without A βdeposits, yet a hallmark of AD.
Conclusion: 17q21.31 duplication is therefore the genetic
basis of a novel entity characterized by prominent tauo-
pathy, leading to early-onset dementia with an AD clinical
phenotype. This entity could account for a proportion ofprobable AD cases with negative amyloid PET imaging
recently identi ﬁed in large clinical series.
K. Le Guennec: None. O. Quenez: None. G. Nicolas:
None. D. Wallon: None. S. Rousseau: None. A. Richard:
None. J. Alexander: None. P. Paschou: None. C. Char-
bonnier: None. C. Bellenguez: None. B. Grenier-Boley:
None. D. Lechner: None. M. Bihoreau: None. R. Olaso:
None. A. Boland: None. V. Meyer: None. J. Deleuze:
None. P. Amouyel: None. H. Munter: None. G. Bourque:
None. M. Lathrop: None. T. Frébourg: None. R. Redon:
None.
L. Letenneur: None. J. Dartigues: None.O. Martinaud: None. O. Kalev: None. S. Mehrabian:
None. L. Traykov: None. T. Ströbel: None. I. Le Ber:
None. P. Caroppo: None. S. Epelbaum: None. T. Jon-
veaux: None. F. Pasquier: None. A. Rollin-Sillaire: None.
E. Génin: None. L. Guyant-Maréchal: None. G. Kovacs:
None. J. Lambert: None. D. Hannequin: None.
D. Campion: None. A. Rovelet-Lecrux: None.
C02.4
MCM3AP in recessive axonal neuropathy and mild
intellectual disability
E. Ylikallio1, R. Woldegebriel1, M. Tumiati1, P. Isohanni1, M. M. Ryan2,
Z. Stark2, W. Maie2, S. L. Sawyer3, K. M. Bell2, A. Oshlack2,P .L .
Lockhart2, M. Shcherbii1, A. Estrada-Cuzcano4, D. Atkinson4,
T. Hartley3, M. Tetreault5, I. Cuppen6, W. L. van der Pol6,
A. Candayan7, E. Battaloglu7, Y. Parman8, K. L. I. van Gassen6,M .H .
van den Boogaard6, K. M. Boycott3, L. Kauppi1, A. Jordanova4,
T. Lönnqvist1, H. Tyynismaa1
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2Murdoch Chil-
drens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia,3Children ’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa,
ON, Canada,4University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium,
5McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada,6University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,7Bogazici
University, Istanbul, Turkey,8Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey
Defects in mRNA export from the nucleus have been
linked to various neurodegenerative disorders. We report
mutations in the gene MCM3AP , encoding the germinal
center associated nuclear protein (GANP), in nine affectedindividuals from ﬁve unrelated families. The variants were
associated with severe childhood onset axonal (four famil-
ies) or demyelinating (one family) Charcot-Marie-Toothneuropathy (CMT). Mild to moderate intellectual disability
(ID) was present in six out of nine affected individuals. The
affected individuals were either compound heterozygous orhomozygous for different MCM3AP variants, which were
predicted to cause depletion of GANP or affect conserved
amino acids with likely importance for its function.Accordingly, ﬁbroblasts of affected individuals from one
family demonstrated severe depletion of GANP. GANP has
been described to function as an mRNA export factor, andto suppress TDP-43-mediated motor neuron degeneration in
ﬂies. Thus our results suggest defective mRNA export from
nucleus as a potential pathogenic mechanism of axonaldegeneration in these patients. The identi ﬁcation of
MCM3AP variants in affected individuals from multiple
centers establishes it as a disease gene for childhood-onsetrecessively inherited CMT with ID.40This work was supported by Academy of Finland,
Melbourne Genomic Health Alliance, Care4Rare Canada,
Bogazici University, Fund for Scienti ﬁc Research-Flanders.
E. Ylikallio: None. R. Woldegebriel: None.
M. Tumiati: None. P. Isohanni: None. M.M. Ryan: None.
Z. Stark: None. W. Maie: None. S.L. Sawyer: None.
K.M. Bell: None. A. Oshlack: None. P.L. Lockhart:
None. M. Shcherbii: None. A. Estrada-Cuzcano: None.
D. Atkinson: None. T. Hartley: None. M. Tetreault:
None. I. Cuppen: None. W.L. van der Pol: None.
A. Candayan: None. E. Battaloglu: None. Y. Parman:
None. K.L.I. van Gassen: None. M.H. van den Boo-
gaard: None. K.M. Boycott: None. L. Kauppi: None.
A. Jordanova: None. T. Lönnqvist: None. H. Tyy-
nismaa: None.
C02.5
BZRAP1 (RIM-BP1) mutations cause a novelautosomal recessive dystonia syndrome
S. Pajusalu1,2, N. E. Mencacci3,4, B. Atasu5,6, R. Rein7, S. Puusepp1,2,
K. Reinson1,2, T. Tomberg8, S. Wiethoff3, A. Papandreou9,T .T .
Warner3, B. Balint10,11, K. P. Bhatia10, T. Gasser5,6, J. Simon-
Sanchez5,6, M. A. Kurian9, C. Acuna12, M. Pak13, E. Lohmann5,6,13,
N. Wood3, K. Õunap1,2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,2Department of
Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,3Department of Molecular Neu-
roscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United
Kingdom,4Department of Neurology, Northwestern Uni-
versity, Chicago, IL, United States,5Hertie Institute for
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany,6German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases
(DZNE)-Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,7Children ’s Clinic,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,8Radiology
Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia,9Mole-
cular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Pro-gramme, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom,
10Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience,
UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom,
11Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany,12Department of Cellular and
Molecular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical Insti-tute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
United States,
13Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department
of Neurology, Behavioral Neurology and Movement Dis-orders Unit, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
RIM-binding proteins (RIMBPs) are large multidomain
active zone proteins that bind to calcium channels. In mice,
deletion of RIM-BPs disrupts localization of calciumchannels at the active zones, thereby impairing the ﬁdelity
of synaptic transmission. In humans, BZRAP1 (TSPOAP1 )
encoding RIMBP1 has not been associated with any Men-
delian disorders.
We performed exome sequencing in an Estonian
patient with progressive generalized dystonia with onset at12 years of age. A homozygous stop-gain mutation
c.2449_2450delinsTG p.(Gln817*) (RefSeq NM_004758.3)
in a BZRAP1 was identi ﬁed. Using GeneMatcher, another
family originating from India was found with three sibs
affected by generalized dystonia that carried a segregating
homozygous frameshift mutation in BZRAP1 (c.538delG p.
(Ala180Profs*9)). Importantly, there are no homozygous
loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in gnomAD database of
141,352 individuals, supporting the pathogenicity of thesemutations.
The shared features between homozygous LoF mutation
carriers were onset of dystonia in the second decade, pro-gressive decline in cognitive performance, progressive
cerebellar atrophy, and marginally low 5-
methyltetrahydrofolate in cerebrospinal ﬂuid. A muscle
biopsy indicated a synaptic defect in the Estonian patient. In
addition, a patient from Turkey carrying homozygous
missense mutation (c.5422G > A p.(Gly1808Ser)) wasidenti ﬁed with a signi ﬁcantly milder phenotype, consisting
of adult-onset cervical and upper-limb dystonia, without
any evidence of cerebellar atrophy.
In conclusion, we describe the novel gene-phenotype
association of biallelic mutations in BZRAP1 gene causing
autosomal recessive dystonia syndrome. Functional studiesare in progress to characterize the pathogenesis of BZRAP1 -
related disorder.
Funding: Estonian Science Foundation PUT355; German
Research Foundation GA402/23-1, LO2046/2-1; Depart-
ment of Health ’s NIHR Biomedical Research Centers
S. Pajusalu: None. N.E. Mencacci: None. B. Atasu:
None. R. Rein: None. S. Puusepp: None. K. Reinson:
None. T. Tomberg: None. S. Wiethoff: None.
A. Papandreou: None. T.T. Warner: None. B. Balint:
None. K.P. Bhatia: None. T. Gasser: None. J. Simon-
Sanchez: None. M.A. Kurian: None. C. Acuna: None.
M. Pak: None. E. Lohmann: None. N. Wood: None.
K. Õunap: None.
C02.6
De novo mutations in regulatory elements cause
neurodevelopmental disorders
P. Short1, J. McRae1, G. Gallone1, S. Gerety1, C. Wright1, H. Firth1,2,
D. FitzPatrick1,3, J. Barrett1, M. Hurles1, on behalf of the DDD study
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United King-
dom,2East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 41United Kingdom,3MRC Human Genetics Unit, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
De novo mutations in hundreds of different genes col-
lectively cause 25 –42% of severe developmental disorders
(DD). The cause in the remaining cases is largely unknown.The role of de novo mutations in regulatory elements in
severe developmental disorders is largely unexplored. We
identi ﬁed de novo mutations in three classes of putative
regulatory elements in almost 8,000 DD patients and ﬁnd
that de novo mutations in highly evolutionarily conserved
elements active in the fetal brain are signi ﬁcantly and spe-
ciﬁcally enriched in neurodevelopmental disorders. We
identi ﬁed a signi ﬁcant two-fold enrichment of recurrently
mutated elements. We estimate that, genome-wide, de novomutations in fetal-brain active elements are likely to be
diagnostic for 1 –3% of patients without a pathogenic coding
variant and that only a small fraction ( <1%) of de novomutations in these elements are pathogenic with high
penetrance. Using sequence data from 13,000 unaffected
parents, we show that identifying strongly deleterious var-iants in regulatory elements is not possible using current
tools, highlighting the need for improved methods to stratify
more or less damaging variation in regulatory elements. Ourﬁndings represent a robust estimate of the contribution of de
novo mutations in regulatory elements to this genetically
heterogeneous set of disorders, and emphasise the impor-tance of combining functional and evolutionary evidence to
delineate regulatory causes of genetic disorders.
P. Short: None. J. McRae: None. G. Gallone: None.
S. Gerety: None. C. Wright: None. H. Firth: None.
D. FitzPatrick: None. J. Barrett: None. M. Hurles: None.
C04
Epigenetics and Gene Regulation
C04.1
Polymer physics predicts the effects of structuralvariants on chromatin architecture
D. G. Lupiáñez1,2,3, S. Bianco4, A. M. Chiariello4, C. Annunziatella4,
K. Kraft1,2, R. Schöp ﬂin5, L. Wittler6, G. Andrey1, M. Vingron5,
A. Pombo7, S. Mundlos1,2,3, M. Nicodemi4
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Develop-
ment and Disease, Berlin, Germany,2Institute for Medical
and Human Genetics, Charité –Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,
Germany,3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative
Therapies (BCRT), Charité –Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,Germany,4Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Napoli
Federico II, and INFN Napoli, CNR-SPIN, Complesso
Universitario di Monte Sant ’Angelo, Naples, Italy,
5Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
6Department Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute
for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany,7Epigenetic
Regulation and Chromatin Architecture Group, Berlin
Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max-Delbrück Centerfor Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany
The 3D folding of the genome and especially the orga-
nization of topologically associating domains (TADs) can
be disrupted by genomic rearrangements, such as deletions,
duplications or inversions, collectively called structuralvariants (SVs). SVs can originate a re-wiring of enhancer-
promoter contacts, gene misexpression and disease. How-
ever, the prediction of such effects remains a challenge. Wepresent a polymer physics based approach (PRISMR) to
model chromatin folding and predict enhancer-promoter
contacts. Our PRISMR algorithm aims to ﬁnd the minimal
number, types and position of binding sites in a String&-
Binders (SBS) polymer chain, that best reproduce an input
contact matrix of a given chromosomal locus. Using theEPHA4 locus as a model, the effects of pathogenic SVs
were predicted in-silico and compared to capture Hi-C data
from mouse limb buds and patient-derived ﬁbroblasts.
PRISMR deconvolves the folding complexity of the EPHA4
locus, and identi ﬁes SV-induced alterations of 3D genome
organization in homozygous and heterozygous states.PRISMR accurately predicts the speci ﬁc genomic positions
with ectopic contacts that produce extensive rewiring of
regulatory interactions, causing disease by gene mis-expression. PRISMR can be used to predict interactions in-
silico thereby providing a tool for analyzing the disease
causing potential of SVs. Furthermore, PRISMR can also beused when affected tissues or equivalent cell types are not
available. Thus, polymer modelling by PRISMR emerges as
a valid method to facilitate the interpretation and diagnosisof this type of genomic rearrangements.
Funding: DFG, MPF, BIH, CINECA ISCRA, INFN,
Scope at the University of Naples and Einstein BIH grants/fellowships.
D.G. Lupiáñez: None. S. Bianco: None. A.M. Chiar-
iello: None. C. Annunziatella: None. K. Kraft: None.
R. Schöp ﬂin:None. L. Wittler: None. G. Andrey: None.
M. Vingron: None. A. Pombo: None. S. Mundlos: None.
M. Nicodemi: None.42C04.2
Changes in chromatin interaction dynamics at the
PITX1 locus cause congenital limb malformations
M. Spielmann1,2, B. Kragesteen1, C. Paliou1, R. Schoep ﬂin1,
V. Heinrich1, I. Harabula1, D. Lupianez1, M. Franke1, M. Hochradel1,
K. Kraft1, I. Jerkovic1, L. Wittler1, S. Mundlos1, G. Andrey1
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,
Germany,2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United
States
Non-coding genomic diversity critically impacts funda-
mental biological processes (e.g. gene regulation, 3D
chromatin folding), and can contribute to human disease. Inthis study, we systematically investigated the cis-regulatory
landscape of PITX1 , a hindlimb speci ﬁc transcription factor.
Mutations and non-coding structural variations at the PITX1
locus have been shown to associate with a variety of con-
genital limb defects, including clubfeet, polydactyly, and
arm-to-leg transformation. We performed in vivo enhancerreporter assays in transgenic mice and identi ﬁed several
limb enhancer elements at the Pitx1 locus; surprisingly they
all showed both forelimb and hindlimb activity, althoughPitx1 is never expressed in the forelimb. We termed this
regulatory region the “pan-limb enhancer. ”Chromosome
conﬁrmation capture experiments (Capture Hi-C) in mouse
limb buds revealed a tissue-speci ﬁc chromatin organization
at the Pitx1 locus, which uniquely enables hindlimb-speci ﬁc
contact between the Pitx1 promoter and the pan-limb
enhancer. To investigate whether this tissue-speci ﬁc chro-
matin folding plays a causal role, we used CRISPR/Cas9 to
generate a set of deletions and inversions in the Pitx1 cis -
regulatory region in mice. Genetic perturbations of this
regulated chromosomal conformation led to ectopic fore-
limb expression of Pitx1 and an arm-to-leg transformation
in mice and in human patients. Our data highlight how non-
coding mutations affecting chromatin folding can contribute
to congenital disease, and give new insights into PITX1 -
associated limb defects.
M. Spielmann: None. B. Kragesteen: None. C. Paliou:
None. R. Schoep ﬂin:None. V. Heinrich: None. I.
Harabula: None. D. Lupianez: None. M. Franke: None.
M. Hochradel: None. K. Kraft: None. I. Jerkovic: None.
L. Wittler: None. S. Mundlos: None. G. Andrey: None.C04.3
Generating large-scale datasets of mutational
effects for interpreting regulatory variants
M. Kircher1,2, F. Inoue3, C. Xiong3, B. Martin2, N. Ahituv3, J. Shendure2
1Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany,2Department
of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, United States,3Department of Bioengineering and
Therapeutic Sciences, Institute for Human Genetics, Uni-
versity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
United States
The use of sequencing approaches for the identi ﬁcation
of disease causal mutations is rapidly gaining traction.However, interpretation of the identi ﬁed variants remains a
major challenge. When scaling from exome to genome
sequencing, the vast majority of variants fall in non-codingregions. However, we currently have a very limited toolset
for their interpretation and almost no training data that can
be applied for machine learning strategies.
Recently, we enhanced our massively parallel reporter
assays (MPRAs) to directly quantify effects from RNA tag-
sequencing read-outs and developed a lentiviral integrationsystem for MPRA (lentiMPRA), achieving replicate corre-
lations of 0.92 –0.98 depending on the type of assay (Inoue
& Kircher et al. 2016). We believe that the broad cell-typerange of lentivirus transduction will permit MPRAs to be
conducted in neurons, primary cells or organoids.
In a second effort, we scaled saturation mutagenesis
MPRAs to empirically measure effects of >20,000 point
mutations in human disease associated cis-regulatory ele-
ments. More speci ﬁcally, we aimed to generate variant-
speciﬁc activity maps for more than 20 clinically relevant
promoter ( F9,HBB ,TERT and others) and enhancer
sequences ( SORT1 ,RET and others). For example, using
our map of the TERT core promoter, we rediscovered pre-
viously identi ﬁed activating mutations and were able to
assign activating effects to variants of unknown sig-niﬁcance; comparing across cell-types we further mapped
the effects of mutations to an E2F-repressor site. Our
experiments provide a rich dataset for benchmarking pre-dictive models of variant effects and an unprecedented
database for the interpretation of potentially disease-causing
regulatory mutations.
M. Kircher: None. F. Inoue: None. C. Xiong: None.
B. Martin: None. N. Ahituv: None. J. Shendure: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 43C04.4
Local regulatory networks across two tissues and
applications to analyze rare non-coding variants
A. Reymond1, O. Delaneau2, M. Zazhytska1, K. Popadin1, S. Kumar3,
G. Ambrosini4, A. Gschwind1, C. Borel2, D. Marbach5, D. Lamparter5,
M. Wiederkehr1, S. Bergmann5, P. Bucher3, S. E. Antonarakis2,E .T .
Dermitzakis2
1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Dpt of Genetic Medicine, Uni-
versity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,3Ecole Poly-
technique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
4Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland,
5Dpt of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland
Population measurements of gene expression and genetic
variation enable the discovery of thousands of expression
Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL), an extensive resource to
determine the function of non-coding variants. To describethe effects of eQTL on regulatory elements such as
enhancers and promoters, we quanti ﬁed gene expression
(mRNA) and three key histone modi ﬁcations (H3K4me1,
H3K4me3 and H3K27ac) across two cell types, 320 Lym-
phoblastoid Cell Lines and 80 Fibroblasts densely geno-
typed European samples. We ﬁnd that nearby regulatory
elements form local chromatin modules (LCM) often
comprising multiple sub-compartments and overlapping
topologically associating domains (TADs). These modulesbring multiple distal regulatory elements in close proximity,
vary substantially across cell types and drive co-expression
of multiple genes. This regulation is under strong geneticcontrol as ~34,000 chromatin QTLs (cQTLs) affect ~30%
of the histone marks and as ~70% of LCMs are associated
with QTLs. These LCMs empower association studies ofrare variants when whole genome sequencing is available.
Using the Geuvadis transcriptomic data we unravel that
expression of ~20% of genes is associated with rare non-coding variants in modules, for example. Coordination
between regulatory elements located on different chromo-
somes (i.e. in trans ) is well supported by Hi-C sequencing
data and seem to drive in some cases trans eQTL effects.
We replicated up to 80% of the strongest inter-chromosomal
Hi-C contacts. Overall, this large-scale study integratinggene expression, chromatin activity and genetic variation
across two cell types and hundreds of samples provides key
insights into the biology underlying gene regulation andeQTLs.
A. Reymond: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Gene Predictis, Lausanne, Saphetor, Lausanne. O. Dela-
neau: None. M. Zazhytska: None. K. Popadin: None.
S. Kumar: None. G. Ambrosini: None. A. Gschwind:None. C. Borel: None. D. Marbach: None. D. Lampar-
ter: None. M. Wiederkehr: None. S. Bergmann: None.
P. Bucher: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. E.T.
Dermitzakis: None.
C04.5
Cis-Regulatory Noncoding Elements, the hidden
master weavers of CDH1 expression: lessons from
HDGC patients
A. S. Valente1, H. Pinheiro1, P. Oliveira1, J. Carvalho1, R. Bordeira-
Cariço2, S. Sousa1, G. Almeida1, J. Bessa2, D. Huntsman3,4,5,
C. Oliveira1,6
1Ipatimup/i3S, Porto, Portugal,2IBMC/i3S, Porto, Portu-
gal,3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
4Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics (CTAG),
BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada,5Genetic
Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British
Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,BC, Canada,
6Faculty of Medicine of the University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal
Introduction: Half of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer
(HDGC) families lack genetic diagnosis. We hypothesize
that this rare monogenic cancer-syndrome is caused byintronic cis-regulatory variants in the major disease-
causative gene, CDH1 /E-cadherin. Supporting our hypoth-
esis, we demonstrated that most CDH1 coding mutation-
negative HDGC families, lacking coding mutations in other
genes, display germline CDH1 -monoallelic downregulation
and aberrant E-cadherin expression in tumours. Herein, weaim at disclosing the functional role of CDH1 intronic cis-
regulatory elements (iCREs) and the impact of their dis-
ruption in CDH1 /E-cadherin expression.
Methods: We sequenced (NGS) the full CDH1 locus of
>200 bona ﬁdeHDGC CDH1 -negative families. Noncoding
variants (NCVs) were bioinformatically prioritized accord-ing to their absence from public genome databases and
rareness within this cohort. NCVs were integrated with
regulatory functional annotation to select iCREs, whosefunction was evaluated through in vitro and in vivo (zeb-
raﬁsh) reporter assays and CRISPR-Cas9-mediated iCRE
deletion.
Results : Twelve potential iCREs were de ﬁned within
CDH1 . We found that 2/12 act as enhancers in vitro and
in vivo, but its enhancer function was abrogated by randompoint mutations. Homozygous deletion of iCREs in cell
lines led to massive CDH1 mRNA downregulation and E-
cadherin loss of expression, while heterozygous deletedclones showed a strong monoallelic downregulation, reca-
pitulating the phenotype observed in HDGC patients. These44results support our assumption that identi ﬁed iCREs are true
regulatory elements modulating CDH1 /E-cadherin
expression.
Conclusion: High numbers of clinically homogeneous
HDGC families and a locus -targeted approach allowed
identifying new CDH1 inactivating mechanisms likely
causative in HDGC. Support: Portuguese FCT and Amer-
ican NSFC Foundation.
A.S. Valente: None. H. Pinheiro: None. P. Oliveira:
None. J. Carvalho: None. R. Bordeira-Cariço: None.
S. Sousa: None. G. Almeida: None. J. Bessa: None.
D. Huntsman: None. C. Oliveira: None.
C04.6
Single Cell Methyl-Seq for Analysis of EpigenomicDiversity in Mammalian Brain
L. Kurihara1, C. Luo2, E. Mukamel3, R. Castanon4, J. Lucero5, J. Nery4,
C. Keown3, T. Harkins1, M. Behrens5, J. Ecker2
1Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States,2Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States,3Department of Cog-
nitive Science, University of California, San Diego, LaJolla, CA, United States,
4Genomic Analysis Laboratory,
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA,
United States,5Computational Neurobiology Laboratory,
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA,
United States
Epigenomic marks such as cytosine DNA methylation
(mC) have highly diverse patterns across brain cell types.
Human and mouse brains accumulate high levels of non-CGmethylation (mCH) throughout the genome, where >
200,000 regions showing differential CG methylation were
identi ﬁed between three cortical excitatory and inhibitory
neuron types. In addition, ~16% of the mouse genome
contains differential mC signatures that distinguish neuronal
cell types by low coverage single cell WGBS (whole-gen-ome bisul ﬁte sequencing). Extending cell type speci ﬁcm C
analysis to all brain cell types requires unbiased single cell
mC pro ﬁling, and also enables the study of mC hetero-
geneity across cells of the same type. To meet the need of
large-scale single cell methylome pro ﬁling, we developed a
single cell methylome work ﬂow using Adaptase
TM, the
technology underlying the Accel-NGS Methyl-Seq Library
Preparation Kit. Through more ef ﬁcient adapter attachment
to bisul ﬁte converted ssDNA, libraries with greater com-
plexity are generated and single cell pooling enables high-
throughput library preparation. Single cell methylomes were
generated from over 4,000 single neuronal nuclei isolatedfrom human and mouse frontal cortex using FACS. We
demonstrated robust cell type classi ﬁcation, readilyseparating excitatory and inhibitory populations and also
identi ﬁed distinct inhibitory cells. The data further allowed
an accurate classi ﬁcation of pyramidal neurons in super-
ﬁcial versus inner layers of mouse frontal cortex. The single
cell Methyl-Seq method will enable unbiased characteriza-
tion of brain epigenomic diversity without the need forisolation of speci ﬁc cell populations.
L. Kurihara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. C. Luo: None. E. Mukamel:
None. R. Castanon: None. J. Lucero: None. J. Nery:
None. C. Keown: None. T. Harkins: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. M. Behrens:
None. J. Ecker: None.
C05
Skin and Bones
C05.1
Mutations in three genes encoding proteins
involved in hair shaft formation cause uncombablehair syndrome
F. Ü. Basmanav1, L. Cau2, A. Tafazzoli1, M. Méchin2, S. Wolf1,
M. Romano1, F. Valentin3, H. Wiegmann3, A. Huchenq2, N. Garcia
Bartels4, A. Kilic5, S. George6, D. J. Ralser1, D. J. Ferguson7, H. Thiele8,
J. Altmüller8, P. Nürnberg8, A. Büchner9, L. Weibel9, N. Wagner10,
R. Grimalt11, A. Bygum12, G. Serre2, U. Blume-Peytavi4, E. Sprecher13,
V. Oji3, H. Hamm14, P. Farrant6, M. Simon2, R. C. Betz1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany,2CNRS
UMR5165 and INSERM U1056 and University of Toulouse,
Toulouse, France,3Department of Dermatology, University
of Münster, Münster, Germany,4Clinical Research Center
for Hair and Skin Science, Department of Dermatology and
Allergy, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,Germany,
5Balikesir University School of Medicine,
Dermatology Department, Balikesir, Turkey,6Dermatology
Department, Brighton and Sussex University HospitalsNHS Trust, Brighton General Hospital, Brighton, United
Kingdom,
7Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Laboratory
Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,
8Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany,9Pediatric Dermatology Department,
University Children ’s Hospital Zurich, University Hospital
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,10Clinical Center Darm-
stadt, Darmstadt, Germany,11Universitat Internacional de
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain,12Department of Dermatol-
ogy and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark,13Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel,141Department
of Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, University
Hospital, Würzburg, GermanyAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 45Uncombable hair syndrome (UHS), also known as “spun
glass hair syndrome ”,“pili trianguli et canaliculi ”,o r
“cheveux incoiffables ”is a rare anomaly of the hair shaft
which occurs in children and improves with age. UHS is
characterized by dry, frizzy, spangly and often fair hair that
is resistant to being combed ﬂat. Up to date both simplex
and familial UHS cases with autosomal dominant as well as
recessive inheritance have been reported. However, none of
these cases were linked to a molecular genetic cause. Here,we report the identi ﬁcation of UHS causative mutations
located in the three genes PADI3 ( peptidylarginine deimi-
nase 3 ),TGM3 ( transglutaminase 3 )and TCHH ( tricho-
hyalin) in a total of eleven children. All of these individuals
carry homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in
one of these three genes, indicating an autosomal recessiveinheritance pattern in the majority of UHS cases. The two
enzymes PADI3 and TGM3, responsible for posttransla-
tional protein modi ﬁcations, and their target structural
protein TCHH, are all involved in hair shaft formation.
Elucidation of the molecular outcomes of the disease
causing mutations by cell culture experiments and tridi-mensional protein models demonstrated clear differences in
the structural organization and activity of mutant and wild
type proteins. Scanning electron microscopy observationsrevealed morphological alterations in hair coat of Padi3
knockout mice. All together, these ﬁndings elucidate the
molecular genetic causes of UHS and shed light on itspathophysiology, and hair physiology in general.
F. Ü. Basmanav: None. L. Cau: None. A. Tafazzoli:
None. M. Méchin: None. S. Wolf: None. M. Romano:
None. F. Valentin: None. H. Wiegmann: None.
A. Huchenq: None. N. Garcia Bartels: None. A. Kilic:
None. S. George: None. D.J. Ralser: None. D.J. Fergu-
son: None. H. Thiele: None. J. Altmüller: None.
P. Nürnberg: Other; Modest; Cologne Center for Geno-
mics. A. Büchner: None. L. Weibel: None. N. Wagner:
None. R. Grimalt: None. A. Bygum: None. G. Serre:
None.
U. Blume-Peytavi: None. E. Sprecher: None.
V. Oji: None. H. Hamm: None. P. Farrant: None.
M. Simon: None. R.C. Betz: None.
C05.2
Genotype-phenotype correlation in Jeune thoracic
dysplasia/short rib-polydactyly type III: review of
130 cases
C. Michot1, C. Huber1, K. Le Quan Sang1,C .B o l e2, P. Nitschke3,
E. Abdalla4, J. Alessandri5, C. Baumann6, M. Bedeschi7, E. Bieth8,
F. Brancati9, K. Chandler10, M. Cordier11, K. Devriendt12, A. Dieux13,
C. Do Ngoc Thanh6, S. El Chehadeh14, L. Faivre15, C. Francannet16,
D. Gaillard17, D. Geneviève18, M. Gérard19, B. Gilbert20, F. Giuliano21,
A. Goldenberg22, B. Isidor23, M. Irving24, P. Jouk25, J. Martinovic6,
M. Mathieu26, A. Mégarbané27, G. Mortier28, S. Odent29, J. Piard30,M. Port-Lis31, M. Rossi11, S. Sigaudy32, M. Simon33, P. Simsek-Kiper34,
Y. Sznajer35, S. Tomkins36, V. Tasic37, A. Toutain38, P. Turnpenny39,
I. Vogel40, S. Whalen6, M. Wright41, A. Yeung42, G. Baujat1, V. Cormier-
Daire1
1INSERM 1163, IMAGINE, Necker Hosp, Paris, France,
2IMAGINE, Paris, France,3Paris V Univ, Paris, France,
4MRI, Alexandria, Egypt,5CHU, St-Denis, France,6AP-
HP, Paris-IdF, France,7Policlinico, Milano, Italy,8CHU,
Toulouse, France,9D’Annunzio Univ, Chieti, Italy,10St
Mary ’s Hosp, Manchester, United Kingdom,11HFME,
Bron, France,12Univ Hosp, Leuven, Belgium,13CHRU,
Lille, France,14CHU, Strasbourg, France,15CHU, Dijon,
France,16CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France,17CHU,
Reims, France,18CHRU, Montpellier, France,19CHU,
Caen, France,20CHU, Poitiers, France,21CHU, Nice,
France,22CHU, Rouen, France,23CHU, Nantes, France,
24Guy’s Hosp, London, United Kingdom,25CHU, Grenoble,
France,26CHRU, Amiens, France,27St Joseph Univ,
Beyrouth, Lebanon,28Univ Hosp, Antwerpen-Edegem,
Belgium,29CHU, Rennes, France,30CHU, Besançon,
France,31CHU, Pointe à Pitre, France,32AP-HM, Mar-
seille, France,33Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
34Hacettepe Univ, Ankara, Turkey,35UCL, Bruxelles, Bel-
gium,36St Michael ’s Hosp, Bristol, United Kingdom,
37Univ Children ’s Hosp, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of,38CHRU, Tours, France,39RD&E,
Exeter, United Kingdom,40Univ Hosp, Aarhus, Denmark,
41IGM, Newcastle, United Kingdom,42MCRI, Parkville,
Australia
Short rib-polydactyly type III (SRPIII) and asphyxiating
thoracic dysplasia (ATD) are ciliopathies ranging fromsevere fetal form to life-compatible ATD, characterized by
narrow thorax and shortened limbs. ATD symptoms may
involve respiratory, hepatic and renal dysfunctions andretinal degeneration. To date, mutations in 12 ciliary genes
are reported in ATD/SRPIII. To establish genotype-
phenotype correlations and delineate long-term evolutionof ATD, we recruited 75 fetuses and 55 ATD patients (age
range 1 –43 years). We performed targeted sequencing of
1221 ciliary genes and further exome if negative. Weidenti ﬁed mutations in 84% cases, including 60% in
DYNC2H1 (79/130). Other mutations involved IFT140
(4.5%), WDR60 (3%), WDR34 (3%), IFT80 (2%), TTC21B(2%), DYNC2LI1 (1%), WDR19 (1%), WDR35 (1%),
TCTEX1D2 (1%) . We also identi ﬁed mutation in KIAA0753
in one ATD living case and in KIF24 , a new ciliary gene, in
one fetal ATD. Fetus cases linked to DYNC2H1 (50/75)
mostly presented only skeletal signs. 8/50 (16%) presented
few dilated renal tubules and 3/50 (6%) abnormal liverportal spaces. Comparatively, 50% of fetus linked to other
genes displayed renal cysts and/or glomerular dysplasia and4633% abnormal liver. Among the 55 alive ATD, 31 had
DYNC2H1 mutations. 9 (16%) patients died of respiratory
distress, including 5 with DYNC2H1 mutations (17%).
Abnormal electroretinogenesis equally affected both groups
(10%). No case with DYNC2H1 mutations displayed renal
or liver dysfunctions. Conversely 35% patients with muta-tions in other genes had renal insuf ﬁciency and 10% liver
ﬁbrosis. Our results suggest that medical follow-up can be
modulated depending on the molecular basis.
C. Michot: None. C. Huber: None. K. Le Quan Sang:
None. C. Bole: None. P. Nitschke: None. E. Abdalla:
None. J. Alessandri: None. C. Baumann: None.
M. Bedeschi: None. E. Bieth: None. F. Brancati: None.
K. Chandler: None. M. Cordier: None. K. Devriendt:
None. A. Dieux: None. C. Do Ngoc Thanh: None. S. El
Chehadeh: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Francannet: None.
D. Gaillard: None. D. Geneviève: None. M. Gérard:
None. B. Gilbert: None. F. Giuliano: None. A. Gold-
enberg: None. B. Isidor: None. M. Irving: None. P. Jouk:
None. J. Martinovic: None. M. Mathieu: None.
A. Mégarbané: None. G. Mortier: None. S. Odent: None.
J. Piard: None. M. Port-Lis: None. M. Rossi: None.
S. Sigaudy: None. M. Simon: None. P. Simsek-Kiper:
None. Y. Sznajer: None. S. Tomkins: None. V. Tasic:
None. A. Toutain: None. P. Turnpenny: None. I. Vogel:
None. S. Whalen: None. M. Wright: None. A. Yeung:
None. G. Baujat: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None.
C05.3
Phenomics analysis of zebra ﬁsh type I collagen
mutants reveals a spectrum of skeletal phenotypes
mimicking the clinical variability in human brittle
bone
C. Gistelinck1, R. Y. Kwon2, F. Malfait1, P. Vermassen1, H. De Saffel1,K .
Henke3, M. P. Harris3, A. De Paepe1, M. Weis2, D. R. Eyre2, A. Willaert1,
P. J. Coucke1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium,2Department
of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,3Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, UnitedStates
Introduction: The brittle bone disease (or osteogenesis
imperfecta, OI) is a rare congenital disorder, caused by defects
mainly related to type I collagen, which forms the structural
scaffold of the bone extracellular matrix. Clinically, OI ischaracterized by a broad disease spectrum, ranging from mild
forms with minimal fractures, to severely deforming or even
lethal forms. The underlying pathogenic mechanisms betweenthe different types of OI, remains one of the most puzzling
questions in the ﬁeld. In this study we illustrate the potentialof zebra ﬁsh as a tool to better understand and de ﬁne genotype
- phenotype correlations in OI.
Materials and Methods: We conducted a phenomics
analysis on a large set of zebra ﬁsh mutants representing
different forms of OI by mapping and quantifying skeletal
parameters.
Results: Our study revealed a remarkably high phenotypic
reproducibility of the human disease features between our
set of zebra ﬁsh mutants and patients with comparable
genetic forms of OI. These ﬁndings, along with advanced
computational analysis of quantitative parameters argued
for the presence of similar genetic mechanisms, responsiblefor in ﬂuencing the presence and penetrance of disease
features, both in zebra ﬁsh models and human OI patients.
Conclusions: Bone phenotypes in mice often cause peri-
natal lethality, making many bone mutants unavailable for
the study of later stages. Zebra ﬁsh overcomes this chal-
lenges. With our study, we demonstrate that zebra ﬁsh is
able to both genocopy and phenocopy different forms of
human OI. We therefore propose zebra ﬁsh as a new tool to
investigate unknown genetic modi ﬁers and mechanism
underlying human OI.
C. Gistelinck: None. R.Y. Kwon: None. F. Malfait:
None. P. Vermassen: None. H. De Saffel: None.
K. Henke: None. M.P. Harris: None. A. De Paepe: None.
M. Weis: None. D.R. Eyre: None. A. Willaert: None. P.J.
Coucke: None.
C05.4
A 10q24.32 duplication causes bilateral femoralhypoplasia through formation of a novel sub-TAD
M. Socha1, A. Sowi ńska-Seidler1, S. Mundlos2,3,4, M. Spielmann2,3,4,
A. Jamsheer1,5
1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Pozna ń, Poland,2Max Planck Institute
for Molecular Genetics (MPIMG), Berlin, Germany,
3Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany,4Berlin-
Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT),
Berlin, Germany,5Centers for Medical Genetics Genesis,
Poznan, Poland
Bilateral hypoplasia of the femoral bones is an extremely
rare limb malformation with unknown genetic origin. In our
study we investigated a sporadic female patient with iso-
lated severe bilateral femoral hypoplasia, in whomarrayCGH revealed a 533 kb duplication at chromosome
10q24.32, which occurred de novo. The rearrangement
demonstrated a signi ﬁcant overlap with the split hand/foot
malformation type 3 (SHFM3) locus , yet included a knownAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 47developmental gene, FGF8 , absent in the SHFM3 causative
aberrations.
CRISPR/Cas9 approach was utilized to recapitulate the
patient ’s phenotype in mice. The Fgf8+/dupmutant mani-
fested multiple skeletal abnormalities, including a severe
shortening of the humeri and the femoral bones. The secondmutant, Fgf8
del/dupcarried the same duplication on one allele
and a corresponding deletion on the other allele, yet man-
ifested the same skeletal defects. Based on the mouse stu-dies we hypothesize that the patient ’s phenotype resulted
speciﬁcally from the duplication, which restructured the
genes and cis-regulatory elements (REs) in the locus , and
not from the gene dosage effect.
Next, we performed circular chromosome conformation
capture (4C) assay to investigate the interactions betweenrelocated genes and REs in patient ’sﬁbroblasts. 4C-seq
revealed ectopic interaction within the altered region and
indicated to the formation of a novel sub-TAD (Topologi-cally Associated Domain) as the underlying pathomechan-
ism of the femoral hypoplasia phenotype.
This research was supported by the Polish National
Science Centre grant UMO-2011/03/D/NZ2/06136, the
National Centre for Research and Development grant
LIDER/008/431/L-4/12/NCBR/2013, German ResearchFoundation (DFG), the Berlin Institute for Health, and Max
Planck Foundation.
M. Socha: None. A. Sowi ńska-Seidler: None. S.
Mundlos: None. M. Spielmann: None. A. Jamsheer:
None.
C05.5
Cross-mapping analysis identi ﬁes 9 modi ﬁer loci in
Marfan syndrome
M. Aubart1,2, L. Benarroch1,3, P. Arnaud1,4, S. Gazal5,6, M. Gross1,
J. Burrati7,8, A. Boland9, V. Meyer9, N. Hanna4, O. Milleron10,
C. Stheneur10, T. Bourgeron7,8,3, I. Desguerre2,11, M. Jacob1,
L. Gouya12,3, E. Génin13, J. Deleuze9, G. Jondeau1,10,3, C. Boileau1,4,3
1INSERM U1148, Paris, France,2Service de Neuropédia-
trie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France,
3Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Paris, France,
4Département de Génétique, AP-HP CHU X. Bichat, Paris,
France,5INSERM U1137, IAME, Paris, France,6Plate-
forme de génomique constitutionnelle du GHU Nord, AP-HP CHU X. Bichat, Paris, France,
7Institut Pasteur,
Human genetics and coginitive functions unit, Paris,
France,8CNRS UMR 3571: Genes, synapses and cognition,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France,9Centre National de Gén-
otypage, Institut de Génomique, CEA, Evry, France,
10Centre de Référence National syndrome de Marfan et
syndromes apparentés, AP-HP CHU X. Bichat, Paris,
France,11Université Paris 5 René Descartes, Paris,France,12INSERM U1149, Paris, France,13INSERM
U1078, CHRU Brest, Université de Bretagne Occidentale,
Brest, France
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a connective tissue disorder
with an autosomal dominant inheritance, mainly due tomutation within FBN1 gene. Several systems are affected,
such as ocular ( ectopia lentis ), skeletal (scoliosis) and car-
diovascular system (thoracic aortic aneurysm). MFS dis-plays great variability, for age of onset as well as severity of
clinical manifestations. Absence of strong genotype-
phenotype correlation, extra- and intra-familial variabilityand the use of quantitative models to estimate heritability
suggest the existence of genetic factors underlying pheno-
typic variability.
We combined various genome-wide approaches and
performed a cross-mapping of signi ﬁcant results to identify
these genetic modi ﬁers. Within a collection of 1070 clini-
cally well-characterized FBN1 mutation carriers, we com-
bined 1) an FBN1 eQTL analysis in 80 ﬁbroblasts of FBN1
mutation-carriers, 2) a linkage analysis and 3) a kinshipmatrix association study in 14 clinically concordant and
discordant sib-pairs, 4) a genome-wide association study
and 5) a whole exome sequencing analysis in 98 extremephenotype samples.
We found 3 genetic factors underlying phenotype
variability: 1) new phenotype-genotype correlations, 2) co-occurrence in 5 patients of the FBN1 disease-initiating
mutation with an additional mutation in another vascular
disorder gene, and 3) combined effects of frequent alleleswith identi ﬁcation of 9 modi ﬁer loci (common to at least
two different analysis) containing excellent candidate genes,
including one in which mutations are known to be involvedin familial thoracic aortic aneurysm.
These results con ﬁrm that combination of various stra-
tegies is ef ﬁcient to overcome obstacles to identify genetic
architectures of clinical variability in rare diseases
M. Aubart: None. L. Benarroch: None. P. Arnaud:
None. S. Gazal: None. M. Gross: None. J. Burrati: None.
A. Boland: None. V. Meyer: None. N. Hanna: None.
O. Milleron: None. C. Stheneur: None. T. Bourgeron:
None. I. Desguerre: None. M. Jacob: None. L. Gouya:
None. E. Génin: None. J. Deleuze: None. G. Jondeau:
None. C. Boileau: None.
C05.6
Can we predict PIK3CA mosaicism genotype from
deep phenotyping variables in overgrowth?
S. Polubothu1,2, R. Knox3, K. Andrews3, L. Al-Olabi1, D. Eastwood2,
K. Gholam2, M. Glover2, D. Lomas2, C. Mahon2, A. Martinez2, J. Ong2,48V. Parker3,4, R. Shah2, L. Shaw2, B. Sivakumar2, G. Smith2, S. Syed2,
R. Semple3,4, V. A. Kinsler1,2
1Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child
Health, London, United Kingdom,22. Paediatric Derma-
tology, Great Ormond St Hospital for Children, London,United Kingdom,
3Metabolic Research Laboratories,
Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Uni-
versity of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,44. The
National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biome-
dical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Individuals with PIK3CA mutations are currently eligible
for international trials of mTOR inhibitors, however many
affected individuals present with overlapping features ofsyndromes previously thought to be clinically distinct,
making selection for genotyping dif ﬁcult. We undertook
targeted deep next generation sequencing of 60 knownovergrowth genes on tissue samples from a cohort of 110
children with a diagnosis of vascular malformation and/or
overgrowth. Multiple logistic regression was used to modelPIK3CA mutation status on the basis of deep phenotyping
variables (clinical, radiological, histopathological and hae-
matological) and clinical outcome measures (pain requiringregular analgesia, thrombotic complications, sclerotherapy,
surgery and death). Median age at presentation was 1.2yrs,
median follow up 5.5yrs. 42% of patients had truncal/limbovergrowth, 7% macrocephaly, 49% abnormal clotting, and
95% positive mTOR immunohistochemistry. 59% required
surgery, 41% sclerotherapy, 21% suffered super ﬁcial
thrombophlebitis and 2.5% deep vein thrombosis, 30% had
signiﬁcant pain and there were no deaths. 41% had
detectable PIK3CA mutations, with mutant allele frequency
1.2–28%. No phenotypic variables were statistically pre-
dictive of all-genotype PIK3CA mosaicism, however,
PIK3CA hotspot mutations were signi ﬁcantly associated
with mixed vascular malformations (OR 15.5, p =0.01),
and a requirement for surgery (OR 3.4, p =0.039) which is
a proxy measure for severity of overgrowth. Our ﬁndings
conﬁrm the broad phenotypic spectrum reported with post-
zygotic mutations in PIK3CA . Thus far we have not iden-
tiﬁed any phenotypic predictors of genotype. However, our
preliminary results suggest exact genotype may help predict
clinical outcome.
S. Polubothu: None. R. Knox: None. K. Andrews:
None. L. Al-Olabi: None. D. Eastwood: None. K.
Gholam: None. M. Glover: None. D. Lomas: None.
C. Mahon: None. A. Martinez: None. J. Ong: None.
V. Parker: None. R. Shah: None. L. Shaw: None.
B. Sivakumar: None. G. Smith: None. S. Syed: None.
R. Semple: None. V.A. Kinsler: None.C06
ELSI genomics
C06.1
Uncertainty about carrier results from exome
sequencing: A randomized controlled trial ofdisclosure
B. B. Biesecker, K. Lewis, K. L. Umstead, J. Johnston, L. G. Biesecker
National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda,
MD, United States
Exome sequencing often generates uncertain results.
How individuals perceive the uncertainty can affect theutility of the results. Adult participants ( N=462) from an
NIH clinical cohort study who chose to learn carrier results
generated from sequencing were randomized to disclosureby a web-based platform or by a genetic counselor. Half of
each group was further randomized to a follow-up coun-
seling session. Participants were on average 63 years old,white, and highly educated. They received a median of 3
heterozygous variants and a median of 0.7 VUS results. A
two-way ANOVA was used to evaluate the in ﬂuence of
education mode and counseling on perceptions of practical
uncertainty about results at six-months follow-up. The main
effect of education mode indicated signi ﬁcantly greater
practical uncertainty among participants in the web arm ( p
=0.018). The interaction effect was also signi ﬁcant,
yielding a ratio of F(1,363) =4.01 ( p=0.046). Practical
uncertainty was signi ﬁcantly correlated with tolerance of
uncertainty (r=0.169, p=.001) and ambiguity aversion ( r
=0.213, p< .001), demonstrating perceptions consistent
with personality characteristics. Our ﬁndings demonstrate
that receiving results from an online platform can generate
higher perceptions of practical uncertainty than receivingresults from a counselor, and that follow-up counseling can
mitigate the elevated uncertainty. Uncertainty may lead to
reduced utility of the results, and may be a limitation ofreceiving carrier results from a web-based platform without
genetic counseling. This study was funded by the intramural
research program of the National Human Genome ResearchInstitute, National Institutes of Health.
B.B. Biesecker: None. K. Lewis: None. K.L. Umstead:
None. J. Johnston: None. L.G. Biesecker: F. Consultant/
Advisory Board; Modest; uncompensated advisor to
Illumina.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 49C06.2
Recommendations for the reporting of results from
diagnostic next generation sequencing
D. F. Vears1, K. Sénécal2, A. J. Clarke3, H. G. Yntema4, L. Jackson5,
L. Lovrecic6, A. Piton7, K. L. I. Van Gassen8, B. M. Knoppers2, P. Borry1
1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven,Belgium,
2Centre of Genomics and Policy, McGill Uni-
versity, Montreal, QC, Canada,3Division of Cancer &
Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff,United Kingdom,
4Department of Human Genetics, Rad-
boud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
5Genomic Medicine Centre, University of Exeter, Exeter,
United Kingdom,6Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics,
University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
7Molecular diagnostic laboratory, Strasbourg University
Hospitals, Strasbourg, France,8Department of Genetics,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
Introduction: Although next generation sequencing tech-
nologies (NGS) are well-embedded in the clinical setting for
identi ﬁcation of genetic causes of disease, most current
recommendations by professional bodies do not provide
detailed guidance about whether variants of uncertain sig-
niﬁcance (VUS) and unsolicited ﬁndings should be reported
by laboratory personnel to clinicians.
Methods: A working group was formed comprising a panel
of experts (clinical geneticists, laboratory specialists, ethi-cists, researchers and lawyers) from Europe, Canada and
Australia. The working group considered the current
guidelines, their own experiences and data from a recentqualitative study exploring laboratories ’reporting practices
in these countries, to develop recommendations for clinical
laboratory scientists and policy makers regarding thereporting of VUS and USF from diagnostic NGS.
Results: The working group recommends that in general,
a targeted approach to analysis of data from NGS shouldbe considered. VUS that are identi ﬁed in known genes,
which are related to the clin ical question but with insuf-
ﬁcient evidence of pathogenicity, and also variants iden-
tiﬁed in candidate genes, should be reported to clinicians.
Unsolicited ﬁndings that are relevant to the health of adult
patients should be reported, provided that informed con-sent has been obtained for such reporting from patients
prior to sequencing. A patient ’s choice not to know
unsolicited ﬁndings should be respected. In children,
unsolicited ﬁndings that are a) relevant to their health
during childhood or adolescence, and b) medicallyactionable, should be reported, even without the consent
of the parents
Conclusions: These recommendations will help guide
laboratory practices in Europe and internationally.
D.F. Vears: None. K. Sénécal: None. A.J. Clarke:
None. H.G. Yntema: None. L. Jackson: None. L.
Lovrecic: None. A. Piton: None. K.L.I. Van Gassen:
None. B.M. Knoppers: None. P. Borry: None.
C06.3
Legal framework for genomic data sharing in view
of the new EU General Data Protection Regulation
M. Shabani, P. Borry
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Genomic data contain sensitive health and non-health
related information about the individuals and their family
members. Therefore, adopting adequate privacy safe-
guards is paramount when processing genomic data forresearch or clinical purposes. One of the major legal
instruments for personal data protection in the EU is the
new General Data Protecti on Regulation (GDPR), which
has entered into force in May 2016 and repealed the
Directive 95/46/EC, with an ultimate goal of enhancing
effectiveness and harmonization of personal data protec-tion in the EU. This paper explores the major provisions
of the new Regulation with re gard to processing genetic
data, and assesses the in ﬂuence of such provisions on
reinforcing the legal safeguards when sharing genomic
data for research purposes. The new Regulation attempts
to elucidate the scope of personal data, by recognizingpseudonymised data as personal (identi ﬁable) data, and
including genetic data in the catalogue of special cate-
gories of data (sensitive data). Moreover, a set of newrules is laid out in the Regulation for processing personal
data under the scienti ﬁc research exemption. For instance,
further use of personal data for scienti ﬁc research pur-
poses, without obtaining additional consent will be
allowed, if the speci ﬁc conditions are met. The new
Regulation has already fueled concerns among variousstakeholders, owing to the challenges that may emerge
when implementing the Regulation across the countries.
Notably, the provided de ﬁnition for pseudonymised data
has been criticized, because it leaves too much room for
interpretations, and it might undermine the harmonization
of the data protection across the countries.
M. Shabani: None. P. Borry: None.50C06.4
Recontact about clinically signi ﬁcant variant
reclassi ﬁcations in cardiogenetics; patient
experiences
T. F. Halbersma-Konings, J. el Mecky, A. V. Ranchor, M. Plantinga,
E. Birnie, I. M. van Langen
UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands
Research question: What are patient perceptions on and
experiences with our current recontacting practice?
Introduction: Technical advances and increasingly broader
diagnostic genetic testing have highlighted the importance
of recontact for variant reclassi ﬁcations. It is ethically
desirable to inform patients about reclassi ﬁcations, espe-
cially those of clinical signi ﬁcance. Information on best
practices regarding recontacting is limited. Due to anadaptation of the diagnostic guidelines in our centre, 62
patients who previously underwent genetic testing for car-
diomyopathy were recontacted by an extensive letter fromtheir counselor about the reclassi ﬁcation of ‘their’variant.
We explored how patients experienced recontact, their
understanding of the information, and what actions theytook.
Method: Semi-structured interviews in 8/25 eligible car-
diomyopathy patients who were recontacted about a LikelyPathogenic to VUS or Pathogenic reclassi ﬁcation.
Results: Patients were positive and felt reassured about
being informed about the reclassi ﬁcation and the advancing
knowledge. Understanding of the information about the
reclassi ﬁcation was incomplete and led to misinterpreta-
tions, e.g. on perceived changed risks for family members,hampering family communication. None of the patients
took initiative to discuss the reclassi ﬁcation with medical
professionals, although encouraged to do so. Trust ingenetics/their counselor was not affected negatively.
Recontact led to expectations about updates of test results in
the future.
Conclusions: Preliminary ﬁndings suggest that patients are
positive about recontacting. Information on reclassi ﬁcation
does not impair trust in genetics/their counselor. To ensurebetter understanding though, information must be adapted
to patient ’s needs and patients should feel encouraged to
contact their counselor.
T.F. Halbersma-Konings: None. J. el Mecky: None. A.
V. Ranchor: None. M. Plantinga: None. E. Birnie: None.
I.M. van Langen: None.C06.5
Evaluation of the 100,000 Genomes Project Consent
Process and Participant Materials
C. M. Benjamin1,2, M. Boudioni3,4, H. Ward3, E. Marston5,
A. Lindenmeyer5, M. Bangee1, J. Cook Lucas1, R. Leavey1, M. Caul ﬁeld6,
T. Fowler6, A. Lucassen7,8, F. Rennie6, L. Riley6, M. Parker7,9, V. Parry6,
E. Thomas6, C. Patch6,10, A. Cranage6, L. Dinh6
1College of Health & Wellbeing, University of Central
Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom,2North West Coast
Genomic Medicine Centre, Liverpool, United Kingdom,
3Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,4PPI
Lead West London Genomic Medicine Centre, London,
United Kingdom,5University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
United Kingdom,6Genomics England, London, United
Kingdom,7Genomics England (Ethics Advisory Commit-
tee), London, United Kingdom,8University of Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom,9Chair ETHOX Centre,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,10Florence
Nightingale Faculty of Nursing & Midwifery, Kings CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: The 100,000 Genomes Project is an English
National Health Service Transformational Project focusing
on patients with rare diseases (RD) and cancer. The eva-
luation included 10 pre-de ﬁned topic areas, selected from
feedback raised during initial recruitment.
Methods: We undertook a cross-sectional, formative pro-
cess evaluation using mixed methods (exit postcards, focusgroups and on-line survey). Working with three stakeholder
groups, consented participants (exit postcards), patient &
public (focus groups) and active recruiting staff (on-linesurvey), we evaluated the consent experience in multiple
geographical sites and from contrasting perspectives.
Results : All 13 Genomic Medicine Centres participated.
Respondents included 174/1,196 participants (14.6%), 58/
161 recruiters (36%), and ﬁve focus groups (34 members).
For participants, 98% described their consent experience asgood or excellent, only 66% read in detail the participant
information sheet (PIS), and 81% of consents took more
than 30 min (RD). Fifty percent of recruiters said partici-pants often or very often presented with speci ﬁc needs e.g.
needing extra explanation, low levels of literacy, high
anxiety levels or visual impairment. Views differed on theamount of information and length of the PIS, with most
participants stating it was ‘about right ’, but focus group
members and recruiting staff felt it would bene ﬁt from
revision.
Conclusions: Recommendations made, 8 ‘things to main-
tain’and 15 ‘changes to consider ’. These were adopted and
following research ethics committee approval went live in
February 2017.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 51Funding: Genomics England, The Innovation Agency.
C.M. Benjamin: None. M. Boudioni: None. H. Ward:
None. E. Marston: None. A. Lindenmeyer: None.
M. Bangee: None. J. Cook Lucas: None. R. Leavey:
None. M. Caul ﬁeld: None. T. Fowler: None. A. Lucas-
sen: None. F. Rennie: None. L. Riley: None. M. Parker:
None. V. Parry: None. E. Thomas: None. C. Patch:
None. A. Cranage: None. L. Dinh: None.
C06.6
Recontacting in clinical practice: results from an
investigation of the perspectives of patients andhealthcare professionals in the United Kingdom
D. Carrieri1, S. Dheensa2, S. Doheny3, P. D. Turnpenny4, A. J. Clarke3,
A. M. Lucassen2,5, N. Hawkins6, S. E. Kelly1
1Egenis, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,
2Clinical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom,3School of
Medicine, Cardiff University, United Kingdom, Cardiff,United Kingdom,
4Royal, Devon & Exeter Hospital, United
Kingdom, Exeter, United Kingdom,5Wessex Clinical
Genetics Service, University Hospitals Southampton NHSFoundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom,
6Law
School, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom
As the interpretation of genomic data evolves, the
question of whether former patients should be recontacted
when updated information is available becomes morepressing. There is no professional consensus about whether
and how recontacting should happen. There is also limited
empirical evidence concerning the perspectives of health-care professionals (HCPs) in genetic and ‘mainstream ’
specialties, and patients.
We discuss the ﬁndings of a multi-site project conducted
in the UK and with international collaborators. The project
investigated socio-ethical and legal issues related to recon-
tacting and gathered empirical evidence on: current clinicalpractices in the UK via a survey of 20/24 genetics centres;
expectations of patients and HCPs via interviews (n =71)
and questionnaires (n =130). Our data show that HCPs
sometimes recontact, however there is no uniform system
for how and when. HCPs and patients tended to view
recontacting as desirable, but were unsure about whetherformalized recontacting systems should be implemented.
Both groups expressed concerns about the feasibility of
recontacting within the current constraints of the NationalHealth Service, and a lack of clarity about roles and
responsibilities. Some patients ’preferences (e.g. to receive
regular updates from HCPs) corresponded to a model offollow-up rather than recontacting.We make several recommendations to guide future pol-
icy and professional debate. These include clarifying: dif-
ferences between recontact and follow- up; which
methodologies and infrastructures might be required and
with whom responsibilities lie; how genome data should be
shared; any differences between professional, legal, orethical duties/responsibilities to recontact, and the implica-
tions of these differences.
Funder: ESRC(UK)
Webpage: http://ex.ac.uk/mgc
D. Carrieri: None. S. Dheensa: None. S. Doheny:
None. P.D. Turnpenny: None. A.J. Clarke: None. A.M.
Lucassen: None. N. Hawkins: None. S.E. Kelly: None.
C07
Novel genomics technologies
C07.1
Mosaic mutation detection using single molecule
molecular inversion probes (smMIPs) forautoin ﬂammatory disorders
E. C. Carbo1, M. J. Koudijs1, S. M. C. Savelberg1, F. Mulder1, J. Frenkel2,
M. A. Swertz3, H. PloosvanAmstel1, M. E. van Gijn1
1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,22Dept. of Pediatrics, Uni-
versity Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Gro-
ningen, Groningen, Netherlands
Systemic autoin ﬂammatory diseases (SAID) affect
patients that suffer from an uncontrolled innate immune
system leading to recurrent in ﬂammation. Due to the variety
of symptoms, diagnosis of patients is dif ﬁcult. This can
result in a delayed treatment and irreversible organ damage
as a consequence. In several patients with a phenotype
consistent with an autosomal dominant form of SAID,mosaicism for a somatic mutation has been detected. Only a
small percentage of mosaicism is necessary to generate even
severe forms of SAID. Currently many laboratories useNext Generation Sequencing (NGS) to detect mutations in
SAID genes. However, with the standard coverage, ﬁltering
and analysis settings many patients with low frequencysomatic mosaics will be missed. NGS deep sequencing
could solve this, although it is not able to discriminate
mosaic mutations with a low allele frequency from PCR orsequencing artefacts. We designed and validated a sensitive
deep sequencing assay using single molecule molecular
inversion probes (smMIPs) for SAID gene mutationdetection. Our results show the accurate detection of variant
allele frequencies as low as 1%. Moreover, we can52distinguish heterozygous mutations from higher levels of
mutational mosaicism. Additionally, we detect differences
in variant allele frequencies of a patient when investigating
mutational allele frequencies at different time points. These
ﬁndings make smMIPs a very promising assay to study the
development and progress of mutational mosaicism in time.Moreover it is a ﬂexible, time- and cost effective assay to
use in a diagnostic setting to prevent misdiagnosing of
SAID patients with somatic mosaic mutations.
E.C. Carbo: None. M.J. Koudijs: None. S.M.C.
Savelberg: None. F. Mulder: None. J. Frenkel: None. M.
A. Swertz: None. H. PloosvanAmstel: None. M.E. van
Gijn: None.
C07.2
Ultra-sensitive detection of mosaic mutations in
blood DNA of healthy individuals provides new
insights into age-related clonal hematopoiesis
R. Acuna Hidalgo1, H. Sengül1, M. Steehouwer1, M. van der Vorst1,
J. A. Veltman1,2, C. Gilissen1, A. Hoischen1
1Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Newcastle, United Kingdom
Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) results from somatic muta-
tions in hematopoietic stem cells, which grant an advantageto mutant cells and drive their clonal expansion. The
acquisition of CH-driver mutations (CHDMs) occurs with
normal aging and these mutations are reportedly detectablein blood in over 10% of individuals over 65. We present a
targeted re-sequencing assay combining high throughput
with ultra-high sensitivity based on single-molecule mole-cular inversion probes (smMIPs). Using smMIPs, we
screened for CHDMs in over 100 loci in 2,007 blood DNA
samples from healthy donors between 20 and 69 years ofage and with no previous diagnosis of cancer. Loci screened
included 40 known drivers of CH and 64 novel candidate
loci. We identi ﬁed a total of 225 somatic mutations
throughout our cohort, of which 217 were in known CH-
driver genes, such as DNMT3A, JAK2, GNAS, TET2 and
ASXL1 , including 196 substitutions and 21 indels. Our
assay allowed for the detection of mutations with variant
allele frequencies < 0.1%. This improved sensitivity led to
the identi ﬁcation of CHDMs in over 20% of individuals
between the age of 60 and 69 and in close to 3% of indi-
viduals between 20 and 29 years of age, suggesting that
CHDMs are more prevalent in all age groups than pre-viously reported. Our ﬁndings support the occurrence of CH
due to CHDMs as a widespread phenomenon associated
with ageing, suggesting that clonal evolution of cells har-boring somatic mutations is a universal mechanism which
occurs at all ages in healthy humans.R. Acuna Hidalgo: None. H. Sengül: None. M. Stee-
houwer: None. M. van der Vorst: None. J.A. Veltman:
None. C. Gilissen: None. A. Hoischen: None.
C07.3
Quantifying the role of paralogous genes in tissueselective hereditary diseases
R. Barshir, N. Shemesh, I. Hekselman, O. Basha, M. Sharon,
L. Alfandri, L. Novack, E. Yeger-Lotem
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
We aim to tackle a long standing enigma in human
genetics: what limits the clinical manifestation of hereditarydiseases to certain tissues or cell types, while their causal
genes are expressed across the human body? Previously, we
developed a novel interactome analysis to tackle thisquestion for over 300 hereditary diseases. We showed that
causal genes tend to have elevated transcript levels in their
disease-manifesting tissue. Moreover, causal genes weresigniﬁcantly more involved in protein interactions that were
unique to the disease-manifesting tissue, thus pointing to
potential disease mechanisms. Here we investigate the roleof causal genes paralogs. It has been shown across organ-
isms that paralogs can compensate for the loss of each other.
Here we hypothesize that, speci ﬁcally in the disease-
manifesting tissue, this compensation may become insuf ﬁ-
cient, and thus disease phenotypes emerge. Notably, this
hypothesis has been demonstrated previously in the contextof few speci ﬁc diseases, but was never assessed at large-
scale. We analyzed 152 tissue-speci ﬁc hereditary diseases
that manifest speci ﬁcally in one of seven tissues. To test
whether insuf ﬁcient compensation occurs speci ﬁcally in the
disease tissue, we used hundreds of RNA sequencing data
covering over 40 different human tissues. We found strongevidence for insuf ﬁcient compensation in the disease tissues
for most hereditary diseases. Moreover, in 20% of the dis-
eases, insuf ﬁcient compensation arose only due to the
paralog being signi ﬁcantly under-expressed in the disease
tissue. Our results shed a new light on this long-standing
enigma, and may point to new directions in treating tissue-speciﬁc hereditary diseases.
R. Barshir: None. N. Shemesh: None. I. Hekselman:
None. O. Basha: None. M. Sharon: None. L. Alfandri:
None. L. Novack: None. E. Yeger-Lotem: None.
C07.4
Mapping and phasing of structural variation in
patient genomes using nanopore sequencing
M. Cretu-Stancu1, M. van Roosmalen1, I. Renkens1, M. Nieboer1,
S. Middelkamp1, J. de Ligt1, G. Pregno2, D. Giachino2, G. Mandrile2,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 53J. Espejo Valle-Inclan1, J. Korzelius1, E. de Bruijn1, E. Cuppen1,
M. Talkowski3, T. Marschall4, J. de Ridder1, W. Kloosterman1
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
2University of Torino, Turin, Italy,3Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States,4Saarland University,
Saarbrücken, Germany
Large capital investments are needed for second gen-
eration sequencing equipment, which has led to the con-
centration of human genome sequencing efforts in
specialized sequencing centers. An interesting alternativefor human genome sequencing is the MinION nanopore
sequencer, a small and low-cost device that can generate
long sequence reads in real-time. Here, we demonstratesequencing of the genomes of two patients with congenital
abnormalities using the MinION at 11x and 16x mean
coverage, respectively. We developed a bioinformaticpipeline - NanoSV - to ef ﬁciently map genomic structural
variants (SVs) from the nanopore data. Using NanoSV, we
readily detected all de novo rearrangements involvingmultiple chromosomes and comprising complex chromo-
thripsis events. Genome-wide surveillance of SVs, revealed
1,090 (27,4%) novel variants that were missed in short-readdata of the same sample, the majority of which are short
variations <200bp in size. Nanopore reads enabled ef ﬁcient
phasing of genetic variations, allowing the construction ofgenome-wide maps of phased SVs. Finally, we show that all
de novo chromothripsis breakpoints occurred on paternal
chromosomes and we used this information to resolve thelong-range structure of the chromothripsis. This work
demonstrates the value of portable and low-cost sequencing
devices for human genome sequencing in future life sci-ences research and clinical diagnostics.
M. Cretu-Stancu: None. M. van Roosmalen: None. I.
Renkens: None. M. Nieboer: None. S. Middelkamp:
None. J. de Ligt: None. G. Pregno: None. D. Giachino:
None. G. Mandrile: None. J. Espejo Valle-Inclan: None.
J. Korzelius: None. E. de Bruijn: None. E. Cuppen:
None. M. Talkowski: None. T. Marschall: None. J. de
Ridder: None. W. Kloosterman: None.
C07.5
Enrichment of unampli ﬁed DNA and long-read
SMRT Sequencing to unlock repeat expansiondisorders
C. J. Koenig, Y. Tsai, D. Greenberg, T. A. Clark
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States
Nucleotide repeat expansions are a major cause of neu-
rological and neuromuscular disease in humans, however,the nature of these genomic regions makes characterizing
them extremely challenging. Accurate DNA sequencing of
repeat expansions using short-read sequencing technologies
is dif ﬁcult, as short-read technologies often cannot read
through regions of low sequence complexity. Additionally,
these short reads do not span the entire region of interestand therefore sequence assembly is required. Lastly, most
target enrichment methods are reliant upon ampli ﬁcation
which adds the additional caveat of PCR bias.
We have developed a novel, ampli ﬁcation-free enrich-
ment technique that employs the CRISPR/Cas9 system for
speciﬁc targeting of individual human genes. This method,
in conjunction with PacBio ’s long reads and uniform cov-
erage, enables sequencing of complex genomic regions that
cannot be investigated with other technologies. Usinghuman genomic DNA samples and this strategy, we have
successfully targeted the loci of Huntington ’s Disease
(HTT; CAG repeat), Fragile X (FMR1; CGG repeat), ALS(C9orf72; GGGGCC repeat), and Spinocerebellar ataxia
type 10 (SCA10; variable ATTCT repeat) for examination.
With this data, we demonstrate the ability to isolate hun-dreds of individual on-target molecules in a single SMRT
Cell and accurately sequence through long repeat stretches,
regardless of the extreme GC-content. The method iscompatible with multiplexing of multiple targets and mul-
tiple samples in a single reaction. This technique also cap-
tures native DNA molecules for sequencing, allowing forthe possibility of direct detection and characterization of
epigenetic signatures.
C.J. Koenig: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. Y. Tsai: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences.
D. Greenberg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences. T.A. Clark: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Paci ﬁc Biosciences.
C07.6
CLIP-Cap: Combined Long-Insert Paired-End and
Capture sequencing, a novel method for the
analysis of complex genomic aberrations
C. Purmann1, X. Zhu1, D. Palejev2, J. Bernstein1, J. F. Hallmayer1,A .E .
Urban1
1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States,2Bul-
garian Academy of Sciences, So ﬁa, Bulgaria
CLIP-Cap is a method that allows to completely resolve
complex chromosome rearrangements in the human gen-ome using standard laboratory equipment and an ef ﬁcient
and multiplexable work ﬂow.54CLIP-Cap is based on creating a paired-end sequencing
library where the inserts of genomic DNA are of variable
length in the kbp-range (i.e. 2 –8 kbp as opposed to 400 –800
bp in standard paired-end sequencing), also known as mate-
pairs, and then to carry out semi-targeted capture from that
paired-end library with oligomers representing one of thechromosomes involved in the structural genome aberration
at hand. This is then followed by limited (i.e. benchtop or
multiplexed) ‘next-generation ’DNA sequencing and data
analysis with standard software tools (for paired-end map-
ping, split-read analysis and read-depth analysis,
respectively).
We resolved the three main Philadelphia Chromosome
aberrations, in three different cancer cell lines (Kasumi-4,
which contains a three-way translocation, SUP-B15 andK562). And we furthermore resolved the complex rearran-
gements in four cases of developmental disorder that all
involved chromosome 22, but also other chromosomes (9,10 or 11) or multiple different aberrations (e.g. deletions
and isodicentric translocations) present in a mosaic fashion.
Currently there is no single approach to resolve typical
complex chromosomal rearrangements that are a common
hallmark of cancer and also of developmental disorders. We
have tested CLIP-Cap on seven different cases of genomicrearrangements to demonstrate that it is suf ﬁcient to resolve
a wide range of scenarios, the only requirement at the outset
being knowledge of one of the chromosomes involved inthe aberration.
Funding: Stanford/Freidenreich Foundation
C. Purmann: None. X. Zhu: None. D. Palejev: None.
J. Bernstein: None. J.F. Hallmayer: None. A.E. Urban:
None.
C08 Neuromuscular Disorders
C08.1
Biallelic mutations in the myopalladin gene, MYPN
are associated with childhood-onset, slowlyprogressive nemaline myopathy
N. Matsumoto, S. Miyatake
Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan
Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a common form of con-
genital nondystrophic skeletal muscle disease characterizedby muscular weakness of proximal dominance, hypotonia,
and respiratory insuf ﬁciency, but typically without cardiac
dysfunction. Wide variation in severity has been reported.Intranuclear rod myopathy is a subtype of NM in which rod-
like bodies are seen in the nucleus, often expressing a severephenotype. Although ten mutant genes are currently known
to be associated with NM, only ACTA1 is associated with
intranuclear rod myopathy. In addition, the genetic cause
remains unclear in approximately 25 –30% of individuals
with NM. We performed whole exome sequencing on
individuals with histologically con ﬁrmed but genetically
unsolved NM. Our study included individuals of milder NM
with later onset age, and identi ﬁed biallelic loss-of-function
mutations in the myopalladin gene ( MYPN ) in four families.
Encoded MYPN is a sarcomeric protein exclusively loca-
lized in striated muscle in humans. Individuals in all four of
these families with identi ﬁedMYPN mutations had rela-
tively mild NM with childhood- to adult-onset, slowly
progressive muscle weakness. Walking dif ﬁculties were
recognized around their forties. Decreased respiratoryfunction, cardiac involvement, and intranuclear rods in
biopsied muscle were observed in two individuals. MYPN
was localized at the Z-line in control skeletal muscles, butwas absent from affected individuals. Homozygous knock-
in mice with a nonsense mutation in Mypn showed Z-
streaming and nemaline-like bodies adjacent to a dis-organized Z-line on electron microscopy, recapitulating the
disease. MYPN screening should be considered in indivi-
duals with mild NM, especially when cardiac problems orintranuclear rods are present.
N. Matsumoto: None. S. Miyatake: None.
C08.2
Neurocalcin delta as a novel protective modi ﬁer for
spinal muscular atrophy: A full story from geneidenti ﬁcation to therapy
S. Schneider1,2,3, M. Riessland1,2,4, A. Kaczmarek1,2,3, K. J. Swoboda5,
H. Loehr6,7, C. Bradler8,7, V. Grysko1,2,3, M. Dimitriadi9,10,
S. Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, L. Torres-Benito1,2,3, M. Peters1,2,3,
A. Upadhyay1,2,3, N. Biglari1,2,3, S. Kroeber1,2,3, I. Hoelker1,2,3,
L. Garbes1,2,3, C. Gilissen11, A. Hoischen11, G. Nuernberg7,12,
P. Nuernberg7,12, M. Walter13, F. Rigo14, C. F. Bennett14, M. J. Kye1,2,3,
A. C. Hart9, M. Hammerschmidt6,7, P. Kloppenburg8,7, B. Wirth1,2,3
1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany,2Center
for Molecular Medicine, Cologne, Germany,3Institute for
Genetics, Cologne, Germany,4Laboratory of Molecular
and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY, United States,5MassGeneral Hospital for
Children, Boston, MA, United States,6Institute for Zoology
- Developmental Biology, Cologne, Germany,7Excellence
Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging AssociatedDiseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany,
8Institute for
Zoology - Neurophysiology, Cologne, Germany,9Depart-
ment of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI,United States,
10Department of Biological and Environ-
mental Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, Hat ﬁeld,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 55United Kingdom,11Department of Human Genetics, Don-
ders Centre for Neuroscience, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
12Center for Genomics Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
13Institute of Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany,
14IONIS Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, United States
Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
with an incidence of 1 in 6,000 people and a carrier fre-
quency of 1:35 is the most frequent cause of infant lethality.Recently, the ﬁrst SMA therapy based on antisense oligo-
nucleotides (ASOs) elevating SMN protein levels, namely
SPINRAZA, has been FDA-approved. SMN is crucial forall cells but particularly for motoneurons (MN) and neu-
romuscular junctions (NMJ). In the most severe type I -
accounting for 60% of SMA-affected individuals - theelevated SMN level may be still insuf ﬁcient to restore MN
function lifelong.
Using a combined strategy of linkage and transcriptome
analysis, we identi ﬁed neurocalcin delta (NCALD) as a
novel SMA protective modi ﬁer. Low NCALD expression
was found in ﬁve asymptomatic SMN1 -deleted individuals
in comparison to type III SMA affected individuals, all
carrying four SMN2 copies. We demonstrate that low
SMN level reduces Ca
2+-inﬂux and impairs endocytosis.
NCALD binds clathrin Ca2+-dependently and acts as a
Ca2+-dependent negative regulator of endocytosis.
Indeed, NCALD inhibition restores impaired endocytosis inSMA.
Using three different SMA models, C. elegans , zebra ﬁsh,
and mouse, we prove that NCALD downregulation ame-liorates SMA disease pathologies at MN and NMJ level and
improves motoric abilities. Most importantly, a combina-
torial therapy using low dose of SMN-ASOs and 50%NCALD reduction restored survival, MN and NMJ function
and motoric abilities in a severe SMA mouse model. A
similar strategy may cure and not only ameliorate SMA inthe future.
DFG Wi-945/13-1, Wi-945/14-1, RTG 1970, SMA
Europe, EU FP7 NEUROMICS, CMMC, IGSDHD, AFM-Telethon and NIH PO1NS066888.
S. Schneider: None. M. Riessland: None. A. Kacz-
marek: None. K.J. Swoboda: None. H. Loehr: None.
C. Bradler: None. V. Grysko: None. M. Dimitriadi:
None. S. Hosseinibarkooie: None. L. Torres-Benito:
None. M. Peters: None. A. Upadhyay: None. N. Biglari:
None. S. Kroeber: None. I. Hoelker: None. L. Garbes:
None. C. Gilissen: None. A. Hoischen: None. G. Nuern-
berg: None. P. Nuernberg: None. M. Walter: None.
F. Rigo: None. C.F. Bennett: None. M.J. Kye: None. A.C.
Hart: None. M. Hammerschmidt: None. P. Kloppen-
burg: None. B. Wirth: None.C08.3
Dissecting the causal mechanism of X-linked
dystonia-parkinsonism by integrating genome and
transcriptome assembly
T. Aneichyk1,2, W. T. Hendricks3, R. Yadav1,2, D. Shin3, D. Gao1,2,C .A .
Vaine3, R. L. Collins1, B. Currall1,M .E .D y3, J. Dhakal3, N. Ito3,
N. Sharma3, X. O. Breake ﬁeld4, L. J. Ozelius4,2, C. D. Bragg3,
M. Talkowski1,2
1Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States,2Department of Neu-
rology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United
States,3The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia
Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,MA, United States,
4Department of Neurology, Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States
Introduction: X-linked Dystonia Parkinsonism (XDP) is a
neurodegenerative disorder endemic to the Philippines that
was linked to a founder haplotype over two decades ago.
Materials and Methods: We constructed a high-resolution
population-speci ﬁc genetic map of XDP from de novo
genome and transcriptome assembly using short-read andmultiple long-read and linked-read technologies. We char-
acterized transcriptomes from ﬁbroblasts among 46 subjects
(probands, carriers, and unaffected family members) as wellas induced pluripotent stem cell derived neural stem cells
(NSCs), and induced neurons from a subset of individuals.
Results: These analyses identi ﬁed 17 alleles shared among
all XDP probands, as well as three independent recombi-
nation events that narrowed the putative causal region to a
genomic segment including TAF1 . Differential gene
expression and de novo transcriptome assembly in NSCs
revealed novel alternative splicing and partial transcription
of intronic sequence as a consequence of retrotranspositionof a disease-speci ﬁc sine-VNTR-Alu (SVA) into the XDP
founder haplotype; remarkably, both the aberrant splicing
and reduced TAF1 expression signatures in XDP probands
were rescued following CRISPR/Cas9 excision of the SVA.
We also identi ﬁed a highly interconnected co-expression
network that have been previously implicated in neurode-velopmental disorders.
Conclusions: Collectively, the integration of XDP genome
and transcriptome assembly suggest a unique pathogenicmechanism of XDP involving aberrant splicing and tran-
scription as a consequence of SVA retrotransposition, as
well as perturbations of pathways of relevance to dystonia,parkinsonism, and neurodevelopment. These studies further
suggest a potential role for emerging technologies in
reference-free discovery of novel sequences and pathogenicmechanisms.56T. Aneichyk: None. W.T. Hendricks: None. R. Yadav:
None. D. Shin: None. D. Gao: None. C.A. Vaine: None.
R.L. Collins: None. B. Currall: None. M.E. Dy: None.
J. Dhakal: None. N. Ito: None. N. Sharma: None. X.O.
Breake ﬁeld: None. L.J. Ozelius: None. C.D. Bragg:
None. M. Talkowski: None.
C08.4
Application of exome sequencing technologies to1,000 patients affected by limb-girdle weakness of
unknown origin
K. Johnson1, A. Töpf1, M. Bertoli1, L. Phillips1, A. Blain1, M. Ensini1,
M. Lek2,3,L .X u2,3, T. Mullen2,3, E. Valkanas2,3, D. G. MacArthur2,3,
V. Straub1
1Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom,2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States,3Program in Medical and Population Genetics,
Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, MA, UnitedStates
Introduction: Rare diseases collectively affect 8% of the
general population, eliciting a signi ﬁcant global health and
economic burden. Muscular dystrophies are a hetero-
geneous group of rare genetic disorders that are char-acterised by progressive skeletal muscle wasting and
weakness, and can directly precipitate premature mortality.
Here, we apply targeted whole exome sequencing (WES) tothe largest ever cohort of patients with unexplained prox-
imal muscle weakness. We aim to decipher disease aetiol-
ogy, enhance diagnostic pathways and heighten theawareness of neuromuscular disorders - particularly limb-
girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs).
Materials and Methods: 1,000 European participants
presented with limb-girdle weakness and/or elevated crea-
tine kinase activity. WES was performed using Illumina
exome capture (38 Mb target) and a Picard-based pipeline.The variant call set was uploaded onto seqr and 169 can-
didate genes examined.
Results: Suspected pathogenic variants were identi ﬁed in
49% of participants across 73 genes. LGMD2A ( CAPN3 )
was the most common disease accounting for 15% of solved
cases. Patients with extremely rare diseases includingLGMD2Z ( POGLUT1 ) were identi ﬁed in our cohort, while
a LGMD2J ( TTN) founder mutation was detected in a
Serbian sub-population. Genotype-phenotype correlationsand inheritance patterns were expanded for many diseases.
Crucially, we diagnosed nineteen patients with treatable
conditions including CMS5 ( COLQ ), CMS10 ( DOK7 ),
glutaric acidemia IIC ( ETFDH ), Pompe ( GAA ), CMS12
(GFPT1 ) and CMS11 ( RAPSN ).Conclusions: We have facilitated the integration of next-
generation sequencing technologies into healthcare. This
study has signi ﬁcantly enhanced the capacity of standard
clinical work-ups and has pioneered an accessible pathway
to expedite future diagnoses.
K. Johnson: None. A. Töpf: None. M. Bertoli: None.
L. Phillips: None. A. Blain: None. M. Ensini: None.
M. Lek: None. L. Xu: None. T. Mullen: None.
E. Valkanas: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. V. Straub:
B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or
consultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Modest; Sano ﬁGenzyme, GSK, Prosensa/Bio-
marin, Ionis Pharmceuticals, Sarepta, Ultragenyx. D.
Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia,
and expert witness); Modest; Sano ﬁGenzyme. F. Con-
sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Acceleron Pharma,
Audentes Therapeutics, Biomarin, Bristol-Myer Squibb,
Italfarmaco S.p.A., Nicox, P ﬁzer, Sano
ﬁGenzyme, San-
thera, Sarepta Therapeutics, Summit Therapeutics, Tivor-
san, TrophyNOD.
C08.5
Autosomal recessive myopathy associated with
cataracts caused by mutations in the gene INPP5K,in inositol phosphatase
A. Roos1,2, M. Wiessner3, D. Cox1, R. Barresi1, D. Hathazi2, L. Swan4,
H. Lochmüller1, J. Senderek3
1Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United
Kingdom,2Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften
-ISAS- e.V., Dortmund, Germany,3Friedrich-Baur-Institut,
München, Germany,4University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
United Kingdom
INPP5K encodes the type II inositol phosphatate 5-
phoaphatase K, a muscle enriched inositol phosphatase
interacting with the BiP chaperone and negatively regulat-
ing assembly of the actin cytoskeleton. Here, we report onrecessive missense mutations and one in-frame deletion
affecting the functionality of the INPP5K protein in six
families with congenital muscular dystrophy further com-plicated by bilateral early childhood cataracts and intellec-
tual disability or learning dif ﬁculties. Notably, mutations of
another binding partner of BiP called SIL1 have been linkedto a similar phenotype. Muscle biopsy specimen of
INPP5K-patients reveal clear features of muscle dystrophy
and moreover indicate that the mutant protein is stillexpressed in the diseased tissue. Pathogenicity of loss of
functional INPP5K was con ﬁrmed in zebra ﬁsh via injection
of respective morpholinos. Knock-down of protein expres-sion resulted in disturbed architecture of skeletal muscle,
narrowed eyes and cranial nerve abnormalities 48 h postAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 57injection. Moreover, label-free global proteome pro ﬁling
utilizing patient-derived ﬁbroblasts was carried out. The
obtained results are in line with the known cellular func-
tions of INPP5K and provide further insights into the
molecular basis of the phenotype by showing vulnerability
of proteins affected in phenotypically similar disorders, thusbiochemically linking a group of rare disease. Identi ﬁcation
of INPP5K mutations along with the results of our zebra ﬁsh
studies and proteomic ﬁndings put INPP5K on the growing
list of complicated myopathic phenotypes und in addition
build a molecular bridge between some subtypes of those.
A. Roos: None. M. Wiessner: None. D. Cox: None. R.
Barresi: None. D. Hathazi: None. L. Swan: None. H.
Lochmüller: None. J. Senderek: None.
C08.6
Homozygous variants in LMOD1 and MYLK cause
Megacystis Microcolon Intestinal HypoperistalsisSyndrome by disruption of smooth muscle
contractility
M. M. Alves1, D. Halim1, E. Brosens1, M. P. Wilson2, J. B. J. M. Verheij3,
F. Muller4, M. F. Wangler5, A. Beaudet5, M. Doukas1, H. J. Stoop1,
B. de Graaf1, R. W. W. Brouwer1, W. F. J. van Ijcken1, Y. Han2,
V. Nanda2, O. J. Slivano2, C. K. Christie2, K. L. de Mesy Bentley2,S .X u2,
G. Jin2, D. Oliver6, T. Djuwantono7, W. Yan6, R. Kapur8, A. J. Burns9,1,
D. Tibboel1, J. M. Miano2, R. M. W. Hofstra1,9
1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether-
lands,2University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, New York, NY, United States,3Univeristy Medi-
cal Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,4Hôpital
Universitaire Robert Debré, Paris, France,5Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,6University of
Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV, United States,
7Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung,
Indonesia,8Seattle Children ’s Hospital, Seattle, WA, United
States,9Birth Defects Research Centre, UCL Institute of
Child Health, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Megacystis Microcolon Intestinal Hypoper-
istalsis Syndrome (MMIHS) is a rare congenital disordercharacterized by severe dilation of the bladder and intestinal
obstruction. To date, two genes are known to be involved in
MMIHS pathogenesis, ACTG2 and MYH11 , but in some
patients the genetic etiology of this disease is still unknown.
Material and Methods: Homozygosity mapping and
whole exome sequencing were performed in four MMIHSpatients derived from three consanguineous families for
which no variant in ACTG2 and MYH11 was identi ﬁed.
Pathogenicity of the variants identi ﬁed was determined by a
series of expression studies, in vitro and in vivo assays.Results: Homozygous variants in two different genes where
identi ﬁed in the four patients analyzed. In one family a
nonsense variant in the Leimodin-1 gene ( LMOD1 ) was
found, while the other two families carried two different
homozygous variants in the Myosin light chain kinase gene
(MYLK). Expression studies showed that the variants inLMOD1 andMYLK affected protein expression, and in vitro
data con ﬁrmed pathogenicity of these variants due to
impairment of smooth muscle contractility. Moreover,Lmod1 knock out mice generated using CRISPR-Cas9
genome editing, and homozygous mutant mice for Mylk
previously described
1, showed pathology consistent with
MMIHS.
Conclusions: Our results present LMOD1 and MYLK as
two new disease causing genes for the recessive form ofMMIHS, con ﬁrming that MMIHS is a myopathy with
multiple patterns of inheritance caused by disruption of the
smooth muscle contractile apparatus.
1He et al., 2008;135(2):610-20.
M.M. Alves: None. D. Halim: None. E. Brosens: None.
M.P. Wilson: None. J.B.J.M. Verheij: None. F. Muller:
None. M.F. Wangler: None. A. Beaudet: None. M.
Doukas: None. H.J. Stoop: None. B. de Graaf: None.
R.W.W. Brouwer: None. W.F.J. van Ijcken: None.
Y. Han: None. V. Nanda: None. O.J. Slivano: None. C.K.
Christie: None. K.L. de Mesy Bentley: None. S. Xu:
None. G. Jin: None. D. Oliver: None. T. Djuwantono:
None. W. Yan: None. R. Kapur: None. A.J. Burns: None.
D. Tibboel: None. J.M. Miano: None. R.M.W. Hofstra:
None.
C09 Molecular Mechanisms of Disease
C09.1
X chromosome inactivation in human single cells
F. A. Santoni1,2, C. Borel2, M. Garieri2, M. Garieri2, G. Stamoulis2,S .E .
Antonarakis2,1,3
1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,
2University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland,3iGE3, Gen-
eva, Switzerland
One X chromosome is randomly inactivated in each
female cell (XCI). However, some genes on the silenced X
chromosome escape from XCI and are expressed from both
X chromosome alleles. To date, the majority of X inacti-vation studies were performed in populations of cells (bulk)
from organs and tissues. The ability to study the single cell
transcriptome (scRNA-seq) now provides an unprecedentedopportunity to revisit X-inactivation. We have studied
902 single cell ﬁbroblasts from ﬁve female individuals and58performed scRNA-seq in order to investigate XCI at single
cell resolution. To this aim we developed a computational
and statistical framework integrating single cell tran-
scriptome and whole genome sequencing to robustly elim-
inate confounding artifacts and identify genes which escape
X inactivation. We identi ﬁed 19 genes as escapees (14
known and 5 novel genes signi ﬁcantly escaping X inacti-
vation). Unexpectedly, among cells coming from the same
individual, we observed that each gene exhibited a variablepropensity to escape XCI. Through the calculation of an
Inactivation Score as the mean of the allelic expression
proﬁles of the escapees per cell, we discovered some cells
being “inactive ”, i.e. exclusively expressing the escaping
genes from the active allele and others being “escapers ”, i.e.
expressing the escapee from both alleles. A possiblemechanism to explain this cellular heterogeneity is the
single cell variability of XIST transcription in concert with
LINEs expression, which we revealed being both positively
correlated with the Inactivation Score. These results provide
evidence of an unexpected cellular heterogeneity of the
mechanism of X-inactivation.
F.A. Santoni: None. C. Borel: None. M. Garieri: None.
M. Garieri: None. G. Stamoulis: None. S.E.
Antonarakis: None.
C09.2
Morbidity risk of chromosomal breakpoints intopological domains enriched in non-exonic
conserved elements
M. Bak1, A. Fonseca2, M. Mehrjouy1, M. Rasmussen1, C. Halgren1,
I. Bache1, P. Kroisel3, S. Midyan4, J. Vermeesch5, A. Vienna-Morgante2,
K. Abe6, D. Moretti-Ferreira7, L. Angelova8, E. Rajcan-Separovic9,
C. Sismani10, C. Aristidou10, Z. Sedlacek11, C. Fagerberg12, K. Brøndum-
Nielsen13, I. Vogel14, A. Bojesen15, K. Õunap16, L. Roht16,
J. Lespinasse17, C. Beneteau18, V. Kalscheuer19, N. Ehmke20, C. Daumer-
Haas21, E. Stefanou22, M. Czako23, F. Sheth24, C. Bonaglia25,
A. Novelli26, M. Fannemel27, J. Engelen28, A. Travessa29, N. Kokalj-
Vokac30, M. Ramos-Arroyo31, L. R. Martínez32, M. Guitart33,
A. Schinzel34, F. Silan35, C. de Almeida36, Y. Akkari37, J. Batanian38,
H. Kim39, P. Jacky40, N. Tommerup1, International Breakpoint
Mapping Consortium
1Uni, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Uni, S ão Paulo, Brazil,
3Med.Uni, Graz, Austria,4Med.Genet, Yerevan, Armenia,
5UZLeuven, Leuven, Belgium,6RedeSarah, Brasilia, Brazil,
7St.Uni, Botucatu, Brazil,8UniHosp, Varna, Bulgaria,
9ChildFamRes.Inst, Vancouver, BC, Canada,10Inst.Neurol.
Genet, Nicosia, Cyprus,11Motol UniHosp, Prague, Czech
Republic,12UniHosp, Odense, Denmark,13KennedyRH,
Glostrup, Denmark,14UniHosp, Aarhus, Denmark,15Hosp,
Vejle, Denmark,16UniHosp, Tartu, Estonia,17CentreHosp,
Chambéry, France,18ServGénétMéd, Nantes, France,19MPI Mol.Genet, Berlin, Germany,20Charité, Berlin,
Germany,21Pränat-Med, München, Germany,22UniHosp,
Rio, Greece,23Uni, Pécs, Hungary,24FRIGE, Ahmedabad,
India,25EugenioMedea, BosisioParini, Italy,26CSS Men-
del, Roma, Italy,27UniHosp, Oslo, Norway,28Uni, Maas-
tricht, Netherlands,29Uni, Lisboa, Portugal,30UniMedCtr,
Maribor, Slovenia,31Comp.Hosp.Navarra, Pamplona,
Spain,32AbaCid-Genética, Madrid, Spain,33UniHosp
ParcTauli, Sabadell, Spain,34Uni, Zürich, Switzerland,
35Uni, Canakkale, Turkey,36UniRepub, Montevideo, Uru-
guay,37Legacy Health Syst, Portland, OR, United States,
38Uni.Sch.Med, St.Louis, MO, United States,39Uni,
Augusta, GA, United States,40NWPermanente, Portland,
OR, United States
Introduction: The human genome is organised into reg-
ulatory regions termed topological associating domains
(TADs). Disruption of TADs by balanced chromosomalrearrangements (BCRs) e.g. translocations and inversions,
can be deleterious due to long range position effect (LRPE)
caused by displacement of regulatory elements. Most BCRsrearrange TADs without phenotypic consequences, so
deﬁnition of TADs at high risk for LRPE is needed. Several
known LRPE loci overlap with clusters of evolutionarilyconserved non-exonic elements (CNEs). Here we identify
the most CNE-enriched TADs (CNE-TADs) and examine
the effects of chromosomal breakpoints within these inaffected and unaffected BCR carriers.
Materials and Methods: All human TADs were ranked by
enrichment of CNEs to de ﬁne CNE-TADs. We mate-pair
sequenced two-way BCRs from 87 affected and 117 healthy
carriers. Together with breakpoints from ~200 published
BCRs, and 120 known BCRs associated with LRPE, weanalysed a total of ~900 breakpoints in the context of CNE-
TADs.
Results: We de ﬁne ~400 CNE-TADs covering ~16% of the
genome. Notably, boundaries of CNE clusters correlate with
TAD boundaries, highlighting the conservation of CNE-
TADs as regulatory units. CNE-TADs are enriched for keydevelopmental genes and they overlap with 23 out of 32
(70%) known LRPE-associated loci. Breakpoints truncating
CNE-TADs are more frequent among affected versushealthy BCR carriers (p =0.003), and even more so are
intergenic breakpoints within CNE-TADs (p =0.0015).
Conclusions: CNE-TADs are high risk regions for LRPE,
and their disruption by balanced genomic rearrangements
are associated with an increased morbidity risk.
Supported by the Danish Council for Independent
Research [4183-00482B]
M. Bak: None. A. Fonseca: None. M. Mehrjouy:
None. M. Rasmussen: None. C. Halgren: None. I. Bache:
None. P. Kroisel: None. S. Midyan: None. J. Vermeesch:
None. A. Vienna-Morgante: None. K. Abe: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 59D. Moretti-Ferreira: None. L. Angelova: None. E. Raj-
can-Separovic: None. C. Sismani: None. C. Aristidou:
None. Z. Sedlacek: None. C. Fagerberg: None.
K. Brøndum-Nielsen: None. I. Vogel: None. A. Bojesen:
None. K. Õunap: None. L. Roht: None. J. Lespinasse:
None. C. Beneteau: None. V. Kalscheuer: None.
N. Ehmke: None. C. Daumer-Haas: None. E. Stefanou:
None. M. Czako: None. F. Sheth: None. C. Bonaglia:
None. A. Novelli: None. M. Fannemel: None. J. Engelen:
None. A. Travessa: None. N. Kokalj-Vokac: None.
M. Ramos-Arroyo: None. L.R. Martínez: None.
M. Guitart: None. A. Schinzel: None. F. Silan: None.
C. de Almeida: None. Y. Akkari: None. J. Batanian:
None. H. Kim: None. P. Jacky: None. N. Tommerup:
None.
C09.3
Whole genome characterization of array de ﬁned
clustered CNVs reveals two distinct complex
rearrangement subclasses generated through either
non-homologous repair or template switching
L. Nazaryan-Petersen1, J. Eisfeldt2,3, J. Lundin2,4, M. Pettersson2,D .
Nilsson2,3,4, J. Wincent2, A. Lieden2,4, F. Vezzi5, V. Wirta6, M. Käller6,
T. Duelund7, R. Houssari7, L. Pignata7, M. Bak1, N. Tommerup1,E .S .
Lundberg2,4, Z. Tümer7, A. Lindstrand2,4
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome
Research, Institute of Cellular and Molecular Medicin,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Kar-
olinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,3Science for Life
Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna,Sweden,
4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,5SciLifeLab,
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, StockholmUniversity, Stockholm, Sweden,
6SciLifeLab, School of
Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stock-
holm, Sweden,7Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Clustered copy number variants (CNVs) as
detected by chromosomal microarray are often reported as
germline chromothripsis. However, such cases might needfurther investigations by massive parallel whole genome
sequencing (WGS) in order to properly de ﬁne the under-
lying complex rearrangement.
Material and Methods: 22 carriers of clustered CNVs,
previously referred to the Departments of Clinical Genetics
at the Karolinska University Hospital (Stockholm, Sweden)or Kennedy Center, Rigshospitalet (Copenhagen, Denmark)
for a clinical chromosome microarray due to congenitaldevelopmental disorders, were sequenced using either
Paired-End or Mate Pair libraries. To utilize the WGS data
for structural variant analysis, a WGS caller (TIDDIT), a
pipeline (FindSV) and a program to visualize the rearran-
gement end-products were developed.
Results: By combining read depth and discordant read pair
analysis 154 junctions were characterized (range 4 –26;
median =5) and an overall connectivity picture is given in
21 cases. These rearrangements were sub-classi ﬁed
depending on the patterns observed:
(1) Cases with clustered deletions only (e.g. del-nml-del-
nml-del) often had additional hidden structural rearrange-ments, such as insertions and inversions, that may be the
result of multiple simultaneous double-strand DNA breaks
followed by non-homologous repair typical tochromothripsis.
(2) Cases with only duplications (e.g. dup-nml-dup) or
combinations of deletions and duplications (e.g. del-nml-dup-del-nml-dup-nml-del), demonstrated a pattern of
inversions, deletions and duplications more consistent with
serial template switching during DNA replication suggest-ing chromoanasynthesis.
Conclusion: Multiple copy number changes clustered on a
single chromosome may arise through both chromothripsisand chromoanasynthesis.
Grants: SciLifeLab National Projects; The Danish Council
for Independent Research [4183-00482B].
L. Nazaryan-Petersen: None. J. Eisfeldt: None.
J. Lundin: None. M. Pettersson: None. D. Nilsson: None.
J. Wincent: None. A. Lieden: None. F. Vezzi: None.
V. Wirta: None. M. Käller: None. T. Duelund: None.
R. Houssari: None. L. Pignata: None. M. Bak: None.
N. Tommerup: None. E.S. Lundberg: None. Z. Tümer:
None. A. Lindstrand: None.
C09.4
Biallelic mutations of Prune-1 are causing PEHO-like
syndrome with microcephaly and
neurodevelopmental impairment
V. Ferrucci1,2,3, V. Salpietro4, F. Asadzadeh2, J. Jemielity5,
F. Pennino3,2, M. Ahmed6,7, I. Scognamiglio3, L. Musella2,A .D i
Somma8, F. Cozzolino2, A. Duilio8, P. Pucci2,8, E. Karaca9,A .H .
Crosby6,7, E. L. Baple7,10, H. Houlden4, J. R. Lupsky9, M. Zollo3,2,1
1SEMM European school of molecular Medicine, University
of Milan, Milan, Italy,2CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate,
Naples, Italy,3DMMBM Dipartimento di Medicina Mole-
colare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli studi di
Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy,4Department of Mole-
cular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London,United Kingdom,
5Division of Biophysics, Institute of
Experimental Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw,60Réunion,6Genetics Research Centre, St. George ’s Uni-
versity London, London, United Kingdom,7RILD Wellcome
Wolfson Centre, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation,
Exeter, United Kingdom,8Dipartimento di Scienze Chi-
miche, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples,
Italy,9Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
10University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust,
Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, UnitedKingdom
Introduction: The correct development of the brain is
strictly regulated by the correct balance between symmetric
and asymmetric division of neuronal progenitor cells
(NPGs). Alterations in NPGs proliferation, migration anddifferentiation result in neurodevelopmental disorders with
intellectual disabilities and brain malformations, including
tubulinopathies.
Material and Methods: Using cell-proliferation/migration
(XCELLinge),biochemical-assays, immuno ﬂuorescence,
microtubules(MT)spin-down/polymerization, we examinedthe functional consequences of Prune1 mutations.
Results: Prune1 biallelic-mutations were found in several
individuals in extended families with tubulinopathies:Microcephaly(MIM#251200) and PEHO-syndrome
(MIM#260565) (Zollo et al, Brain.2017. https://doi.org/10.
1093/brain/awx014 ). The mutations identi ﬁed in Prune1
(D30N-R297W-D106N) show enhancement of its enzy-
matic exopolyphosphatase (PPase/PPX) activity. These
“neomorphic-mutations ”enhance the catalytic ability of
Prune1 to hydrolyze tetrapolyphosphates(P4) producing
inorganic-polyphosphates(PPi-Pi), that mediate signal
transmission in mammalian brain. We further found wild-type and mutated Prune1 colocalize with Microtubules(MT)
to mitotic-spindle via binding to a/b-Tubulin. Our genotype/
phenotype correlation studies demonstrate that thesePrune1-mutants caused a delay in MT-polymerization in-
vitro, affecting nucleation-phase in patients-derived-
ﬁbroblasts. These alterations result in mitotic-defects
(micronuclei/lagging-chromosomes) and impaired cell-pro-
liferation/migration. Moreover, we found NDPK-A/-B
(D’Angelo et al,2004) colocalize with mitotic-spindle and
negatively affect in-vitro MT-polymerization. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest a role for Prune1/NDPK-protein-complex in
MT-dynamics during cell division. Furthermore,two smallmolecules are indicating action on impairment of Prune1
augmented PPase/PPX-activity in-vitro.
Conclusions: We link the clinical feature of these
neurodevelopmental-disorders to PPX-iperactivity of
Prune1 mutants. Our data establish biochemical-activity of
Prune1 is necessary to assure a correct cell division, espe-cially during brain/cerebellum development. These results
would bene ﬁt future therapeutic applications with smallmolecules impairing PPase/PPX activity. Our results
in-vitro are encouraging.
Grant-references: AIRC(11963)- PRIN(E5AZ5F)-
FP7TUMIC(HEALTH-F2-2008-201662)- POR MOVIE
(ReteDelleBiotecnologieInCampania)- RegioneCampania
(leg,5).
V. Ferrucci: None. V. Salpietro: None. F. Asadzadeh:
None. J. Jemielity: None. F. Pennino: None. M. Ahmed:
None. I. Scognamiglio: None. L. Musella: None. A. Di
Somma: None. F. Cozzolino: None. A. Duilio: None.
P. Pucci: None. E. Karaca: None. A.H. Crosby: None.
E.L. Baple: None. H. Houlden: None. J.R. Lupsky:
None. M. Zollo: None.
C09.5
A human developmental syndrome caused by
germline mutation to a histone H4 gene highlights
the importance of H4K91 in DNA damage responseand cell cycle control
F. Tessadori1,2, J. Giltay1, J. Hurst3, M. Massink1, K. Duran1, K. van
Gassen1, R. Scott3, J. Bakkers2,1, G. van Haaften1
1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,2Hubrecht Institute,
Utrecht, Netherlands,3Great Ormond Street Hospital,
London, United Kingdom
Chromatin is a repeat of nucleosomes, consisting of the
DNA ﬁber wrapped around histone octamers. Its covalent
modiﬁcations, whether affecting DNA or histone N-
terminal tails, govern cellular processes such as DNA
replication, transcription and repair. Mutations on genes
belonging to histone tail-modifying complexes have beenreported to cause developmental disorders or carry an
oncogenic effect. Recently, mutations directly affecting the
histone tail were shown to play a role in tumorigenesis.Very little is known, however, about modi ﬁcations affecting
the histone core.
Here we show that mono-allelic missense mutations
affecting Lysine 91 in the histone H4 core (H4K91) cause a
human syndrome of growth delay, microcephaly, intellec-
tual disability, characteristic facial features and foot rayanomalies. We report three patients with a missense muta-
tion at H4K91 and overlapping phenotypes.
The human genome contains ﬁfteen histone H4 genes, all
differing at the nucleotide level but coding for an invariant
H4 protein. RNA sequencing analysis of patient cells
showed that ± 8% of H4 cDNA molecules carried themutated allele. We observed differentially expressed histone
genes and cell-cycle related genes compared to controls,
suggesting an effect on processes such as DNA replicationor cell cycle progression.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 61Expression of the H4 variants in zebra ﬁsh embryos
recapitulated the anomalies seen in individuals carrying the
H4 mutations. We link the H4 mutations to genomic
instability, resulting in increased apoptosis and cell cycle
progression anomalies during early development. Our
ﬁndings imply an important role for ubiquitination of
H4K91 in genomic stability during embryonic
development.
F. Tessadori: None. J. Giltay: None. J. Hurst: None.
M. Massink: None. K. Duran: None. K. van Gassen:
None. R. Scott: None. J. Bakkers: None. G. van Haaften:
None.
C09.6
The ciliopathy protein Talpid3/KIAA0586 plays a role
upstream of Rab8 activation in outer segment
formation and maintenance in zebra ﬁsh retinal
photoreceptors
I. Ojeda Naharros1, F. Cristian1,2, J. Zang1, M. Gesemann1,S .C .F .
Neuhauss1, R. Bachmann-Gagescu3,1
1University of Zurich- Molecular Life Sciences, Zürich,
Switzerland,2Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany,3University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich,
Switzerland
Ciliopathies are a group of human disorders caused by
dysfunction of primary cilia, ubiquitous microtubule-based
organelles involved in signal transduction. Cilia areanchored inside the cell through basal bodies, modi ﬁed
centrioles also acting as microtubule organization centers.
Photoreceptors (PR) are sensory neurons, whose primarycilium has evolved into a highly specialized compartment
called the outer segment (OS) responsible for sensing
incoming light. Thus, retinal degeneration is frequent inciliopathies.
Mutations in the novel ciliopathy gene KIAA0586 /Tal-
pid3, cause Joubert syndrome and lethal ciliopathies. Toelucidate the function of Talpid3 in photoreceptors, we
studied zebra ﬁshta3mutants which undergo progressive
retinal degeneration. The majority of ta3-/- PR do not form
OS due to a defect in the initial basal body docking steps
required for ciliogenesis. These PRs also display intracel-
lular accumulation of the photopigment opsin and pro-gressive loss of cell polarity. In a small subset of PRs,
persistence of maternally deposited Ta3 rescues this phe-
notype and allows formation of initially normal-looking OS.However, progressive abnormalities in cell shape and OS
maintenance in these PRs indicate that Ta3 plays additional
roles beyond basal body docking in ciliary-directed traf-ﬁcking or cytoskeletal maintenance. We further show that a
constitutively active form of the small GTPase Rab8 rescuesthe OS formation defect but not the subsequent cell shape
defect. Together, our results indicate that Ta3 plays a role
upstream of Rab8a activation in the initial steps of cilio-
genesis and additional roles in ciliary function and cell
shape maintenance which are independent of Rab8.
SNSF Ambizione-SCORE:PZ00P3_163979/PZ00P3_
142404.
I. Ojeda Naharros: None. F. Cristian: None. J. Zang:
None. M. Gesemann: None. S.C.F. Neuhauss: None.
R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None.
C10
GWAS: Resolving Missing Causality
C10.1
Systems Genetics and Transcriptome analysis on
Circulating Proteins
D. V. Zhernakova1,2, U. Vosa1, A. Claringbould1, M. J. Bonder1,
A. Kurilshikov1, S. Sanna1, B. Atanasovska1, R. A. Boer3, F. Kuipers4,
L. Franke1, C. Wijmenga1, A. Zhernakova1,J .F u1,4
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Gro-
ningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands,
2Theodosius Dobzhansky Center for Genome Bioinfor-
matics, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg,Russian Federation,
3University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Department of Cardiology,
Groningen, Netherlands,4University of Groningen, Uni-
versity Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pedia-
trics, Groningen, Netherlands
Proteins circulating in blood are often measured as bio-
markers for various diseases, including immune diseases,
cancers and cardiovascular diseases (CVD). There is con-siderable evidence that human genetic variation in ﬂuences
gene expression. The effect of genetic variants on serum
level of circulating proteins is still largely unknown. Weperformed a systems genetics analysis to integrate genetics,
transcriptome and circulating proteins in 1,294 individuals
from a Dutch population cohort (LifeLines-DEEP), forwhom we had data on genome-wide genotype, tran-
scriptome by RNAseq and serum levels of 92 CVD-relevant
proteins, as well as over 200 various clinic parameters. AtFDR 0.05, we identi ﬁed 125 novel cis-pQTLs. The stron-
gest cis-effects were observed for IL-6R (P =3.3 × 10 –
310), SHPS1 (P =2.2 × 10 –307) and IL-17RA (P =3.1 ×
10–184). Thirty novel trans-pQTLs have suggested pleio-
tropic effects of KLKB1, ABO and PLAUR loci that trans-
affected 10, 7 and 3 proteins respectively. Over 70% ofpQTLs effects cannot be explained by expression level in
blood. These proteins were enriched for “leakage proteins ”62from other tissues. These proteins have shown associations
not only to metabolic traits but also to electrocardiography
parameters of heart function, suggesting their promise in
disease diagnosis. It was further con ﬁrmed by mendelian
randomization approach that 48 proteins were associated
with genetic risk scores (GRS) of blood lipids, coronaryartery disease, metabolites and blood cell counts. Most
associations remained signi ﬁcant after controlling cis-pQTL
effect. Our study highlights that plasma proteomics is understrong genetic control, which should be taken into account
when using them as potential biomarkers for complex
diseases.
D.V. Zhernakova: None. U. Vosa: None. A. Clar-
ingbould: None. M.J. Bonder: None. A. Kurilshikov:
None. S. Sanna: None. B. Atanasovska: None. R.A. Boer:
None. F. Kuipers: None. L. Franke: None. C. Wijmenga:
None. A. Zhernakova: None. J. Fu: None.
C10.2
The deCODE replication server, a resource for the
replication of published genotype-phenotypeassociations
A. Oddsson1, P. Sulem1, G. Thorisson1, S. A. Gudjonsson1,
S. Benonisdottir1, G. Arnadottir1, B. O. Jensson1, R. P. Kristjansson1,
G. Sulem1, U. Thorsteinsdottir1,2, G. Masson1, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,3,
K. Stefansson1,2
1DeCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland,2Faculty of Medi-
cine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland,3School of
Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland
Introduction: Since 2005, the number of genome-wide
association (GWAS) studies reporting associations of
sequence variants with disease and quantitative traits hasgrown fast. Publications of validation of ﬁnding have not
always kept pace. By focusing on the Icelandic population
deCODE genetics contributed early and often to the ﬁeld of
GWAS and after 20 years of data collection, information on
the most common disease and traits is available for a large
fraction of the population.
Materials and Methods: We have created a resource that
access matching genotype-phenotype associations of pub-
lished GWASs and rare variant associations in the Icelandicpopulation using sequence variants identi ﬁed through
whole-genome sequencing of over 30 thousand Icelanders
and imputed into 300 thousand chip-typed individuals andtheir close relatives.
Results: Using sequence variants for which statistical
power can be estimated, we quantify the extent to whichpublished GWAS associations replicate across and within
different phenotypes and ancestry groups. We show that therational in choosing genome wide signi ﬁcance thresholds
drastically affects replication outcomes. Finally, scrutiniz-
ing association studies for Alzheimer ’s disease for the full
spectrum of allele frequencies we demonstrate the useful-
ness of independent replication in investigating rare variant
effects.
Conclusions: This resource provides a powerful tool for
assessing published GWAS associations and to examine the
proposed role of common as well as rare variants on diseaserisk identi ﬁed by GWAS or other approaches.
A. Oddsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. P. Sulem:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode
genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Thorisson: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc.
S.A. Gudjonsson: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. S. Beno-
nisdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
decode genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Arnadottir: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode genetics/
AMGEN inc. B.O. Jensson: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. R.P.
Kristjansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Sulem:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode
genetics/AMGEN inc. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode genetics/
AMGEN inc. G. Masson: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi
ﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. D.F.
Gudbjartsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. K. Stefansson: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; decode genet-
ics/AMGEN inc.
C10.3
Assessing the causal role of body mass index oncardiovascular health in young adults: a Mendelian
randomization and recall-by-genotype analysis
K. H. Wade1, S. T. Chiesa2, A. D. Hughes3, N. Chaturvedi3,M .
Charakida2, A. Rapala2, V. Muthurangu2, T. Khan2, A. Fraser1,
D. Lawlor1, G. Davey Smith1, J. E. Dean ﬁeld2, N. J. Timpson1
1Integrative Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom,2Vascular Physiology Unit,
Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College
London, London, United Kingdom,3Cardiometabolic Phe-
notyping Group, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Uni-versity College London, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: The association between body mass index
(BMI) and cardiovascular health may be explained by
reverse causation, confounding or bias, rather thanAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 63causality. Mendelian randomization (MR) studies in mid-to-
late life imply causality but whether this applies to younger
ages is unclear. Using complementary Mendelian rando-
mization (MR) and recall-by-genotype (RbG) methodolo-
gies, we estimated the causal effect of BMI on
cardiovascular health in European individuals aged 17 –21
from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
Methods: For MR analyses, a genetic risk score (GRS)
comprising 97 genetic variants was used as an instrument totest the causal effect of BMI on cardiovascular phenotypes
measured at 17 (N =7924). An independent sample of
participants from the same cohort participated in a RbGstudy at 21, which allowed additional detailed cardiovas-
cular phenotyping (N =418; 191/227 from the tails of a
GRS predicting variation in BMI).
Results: In both MR and RbG analyses, results suggest that
increased BMI causes higher blood pressure and left ven-
tricular mass (indexed to height2.7, LVMI) (e.g. change inLVMI per kg/m2 using MR: 1.09g/m2.7; 95% CI: 0.63,
1.54; P =3.32 × 10-06), plus increasing stroke volume
(estimate per 3.55kg/m2: 1.49ml/m2.04; 95% CI: 0.62,2.35; P =0.001) and cardiac output (estimate per 3.55kg/
m2: 0.11l/min/m1.83; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.19; P =0.01) in RbG
analyses. Neither analysis suggested a causal role for BMIon heart rate.
Conclusions: Complementary causal methodologies
showed greater BMI causing poorer cardiovascular health,even in young adults.Grants: BHF (RG/10/004/28240, PG/
06/145 and CS/15/6/31468); UK MRC, UoB and Wellcome
Trust (MC_UU_12013/1 –9, 102215/2/13/2, 096989/Z11/Z,
086676/7/08/Z and MR/M009351/1).
K.H. Wade: None. S.T. Chiesa: None. A.D. Hughes:
None. N. Chaturvedi: None. M. Charakida: None.
A. Rapala: None. V. Muthurangu: None. T. Khan: None.
A. Fraser: None. D. Lawlor: None. G. Davey Smith:
None. J.E. Dean ﬁeld: None. N.J. Timpson: None.
C10.4
Fine-mapping analysis of 158 breast cancer risk locifrom OncoArray data
L. Fachal1, J. Allen2, M. Ghoussaini1, J. Beesley3, J. S. Carroll4,
G. Chenevix-Trench3, J. Simard5, P. Kraft6, D. F. Easton2,1, A. Dunning1
1Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,2Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Universityof Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
3Cancer
Division, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia,4Cancer Research UK, Cambridge
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec andLaval University, Quebec, QC, Canada,6Department of
Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, United States
Introduction: One hundred and ﬁfty-eight breast cancer
risk loci have been discovered through genome-wide asso-ciation studies (GWAS). For most, the mechanisms under-
lying these associations remain unknown. To explore them
in more detail, we combined association data for all 158known susceptibility regions with in-silico genomic feature
annotation.
Material and Methods: Genotypes for 660,053 variants
across these regions were determined using the custom
arrays iCOGS and Oncoarray, or estimated by imputation,
in 88,937 Controls and 84,642 Cases of European ancestry.We determined, using stepwise multinomial logistic
regression, the signals associated with ER-positive (ER +)
or ER-negative breast cancer risk, and the credible sets ofcandidate variants driving each signal. We also determined
whether these variants overlapped with transcription factor
(TF) binding sites, histone marks or DNase hypersensitivitysites, speci ﬁcally in breast tissue.
Results: Across the 158 con ﬁrmed loci, we identi ﬁed 202
independent association signals and the credible candidatevariants within each one. For ER +disease, we found sig-
niﬁcant enrichment of binding sites for 21 different TFs,
including FOXA1, GATA3, and ESR1; as well as histonemarks H3K27ac and H3K4me1 coincident with the posi-
tions of the candidate variants.
Conclusions: Our results suggest signi ﬁcant overlap of
credible causal variants with active gene regulatory ele-
ments and binding sites for speci ﬁc TFs. Further analysis
will elucidate the roles of these TFs in breast cancerdevelopment. Funding: EC [MSCA-IF-2014-EF-656144],
CR-UK [C1287/A10118, C1287/A16563], Genome
Canada, NCI [U19 CA148065, X01HG007492].
L. Fachal: None. J. Allen: None. M. Ghoussaini:
None. J. Beesley: None. J.S. Carroll: None. G. Chenevix-
Trench: None. J. Simard: None. P. Kraft: None. D.F.
Easton: None. A. Dunning: None.
C10.5
Prospects of ﬁne-mapping causal genetic variants
using summary statistics from genome-wide
association studies
C. Benner1, A. Havulinna2, M. Järvelin3, V. Salomaa2, S. Ripatti1,
M. Pirinen1
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Hel-
sinki, Finland,2National Institute for Health and Welfare
(THL), Helsinki, Finland,3Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom64Identifying the causal genetic variants from a much lar-
ger set of highly correlated ones is an important next step
towards translating results from Genome-Wide Association
Studies (GWAS) into therapeutic targets. Public availability
of GWAS summary statistics from large international con-
sortia has generated exciting new opportunities to carry outsuch ﬁne-mapping studies without access to the original
data. This is a promising approach to utilize the increasing
GWAS sample sizes while avoiding privacy concerns andlogistics of sharing individual-level genotype data.
Although all ﬁne-mapping methods using summary statis-
tics require information about the Linkage Disequilibrium(LD) between variants, so far, it has not been veri ﬁed
whether LD information from publicly available reference
genotype panels could replace the original genotype data inthese analyses. We show that one should not rely only on
the reference genotypes from the 1000 Genomes Project
due to its small sample size for any one population, whereasa reference panel of 1,000 individuals from the study
population is typically enough for cohort size of up until
10,000 individuals. More generally we show, both theore-tically and empirically, that the size of the reference panel
needs to scale with the GWAS sample size, which has
important consequences for large GWAS meta-analyses andbiobank studies. We conclude by providing software tools
and practices for sharing LD information to ef ﬁciently
exploit summary statistics in biomedical research. Ourresults are based on Finnish population cohorts, UK Bio-
bank data and detailed ﬁne-mapping of the APOE region
discovering a novel variant associated with LDL-C.
C. Benner: None. A. Havulinna: None. M. Järvelin:
None. V. Salomaa: None. S. Ripatti: None. M. Pirinen:
F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genomics plc.
C10.6
Genome-Wide Inferred Statistics (GWIS) forHomeostatic Model Assessment of β-cell function
and Insulin Resistance
I. O. Fedko1, M. G. Nivard1, J. J. Hottenga1,2, Cross Consortia
Pleiotropy (XC-Pleiotropy) Group, Meta-Analyses of Glucose and
Insulin-related traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investigators, R. Mägi3,I .
Prokopenko4, D. I. Boomsma1,2,5
1Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,2EMGO +institute for Health
and Care Research, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands,3Estonian Genome Center, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,4Department of Genomics of Com-
mon Disease, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom,5Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
NetherlandsIntroduction: Genome wide association studies (GWAS)
of Homeostatic Model Assessment of β-cell function and
Insulin Resistance (HOMA-B/-IR) require Fasting Glucose
(FG) and Fasting Insulin (FI) to be measured in the same
individual.
Materials and Methods: We implemented the Genome
Wide Inferred Statistics (Nieuwboer et al. 2016. GWIS for
Functions of Multiple Phenotypes. AJHG) approach to
carry out a GWAS of HOMA-B/-IR based on the summarystatistics for both traits, thereby increasing power over tra-
ditional HOMA-B/-IR GWAS. We used partially over-
lapping GWASs of FI (N =64,090) and FG (N =88,320)
from recent MAGIC meta-analyses and did GWIS tests for
HOMA-B/-IR in up to 75,240 non-diabetic individuals of
European descent. Next, we used LD Score regression toevaluate genetic relations with related traits.
Results: We detected one novel HOMA-B ( FOXA2 ) and
three novel HOMA-IR ( LYPLAL1, PER4, PPP1R3B ) loci,
and con ﬁrmed one HOMA-IR ( GCKR) and eight HOMA-B
(ADCY5, DGKB, GCK, SLC30A8, GLIS3, TCF7L2,
ARAP1, MTNR1B ) loci previously associated with type 2
diabetes (T2D). Blood triglycerides, body mass index,
waist-to-hip ratio, waist and hip circumferences show
positive genetic correlation ranging from r
g=0.35 to r g=
0.70 (p < 10−4) with both HOMAs. Genetic correlation with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol is inverse (r g=-0.36
and r g=−0.53, respectively for HOMA-B/-IR, p < 10−4).
Additionally, HOMA-IR correlates with T2D (r g=0.56,
p<1 0−9).
Conclusions: GWIS can aid GWAS of traits calculated
from other phenotypes using mathematical formulae, espe-
cially if some subjects or cohorts have incomplete mea-
sures. Characterization of genetic loci within HOMA-B/-IRGWIS provides mechanistic clues about heterogeneous
processes contributing to T2D pathophysiology and gly-
caemic traits variability in non-diabetics.
I.O. Fedko: None. M.G. Nivard: None. J.J. Hottenga:
None. R. Mägi: None. I. Prokopenko: None. D.I.
Boomsma: None.
C11
Sensory disorders
C11.1
FDXR mutations cause sensorial neuropathies, a
new mitochondrial Fe-S disease
A. Paul1, A. Drecourt1, D. Dupin Deguine2, C. Vasnier3, M. Oufadem1,
F. Petit1, C. Masson1, C. Bonnet4, S. Masmoudi5, I. Mosnier6,
L. Mahieu7, D. Bouccara6, J. Kaplan1, G. Challe8, C. Domange9,
F. Mochel10, O. Sterkers6, S. Gerber1, P. Nitschke1, C. Bole-Feysot1,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 65L. Jonard11, G. Souad12, I. Ben Aissa12, S. Lyonnet1,13, A. Rotig1,
A. Delahodde3, S. Marlin1,12,13
1Institut Imagine, Paris, France,2Service de Génétique
Médicale, Hôpital Purpan., Toulouse, France,3Institute for
Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ.Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay., Gif-sur-Yvette, France,
4Institut de la Vision, UMRS 1120., Paris, France,
5Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Pro-
cesses, Center of Biotechnology of Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia,
6Service d ’ORL, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP., Paris,
France,7Service d ’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Rangueil., Tou-
louse, France,8Service d ’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Pitié-
Salpêtrière, APHP., Paris, France,9Service d ’ORL, Hôpital
Lariboisière., Paris, France,10Département de Génétique,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP., Paris, France,11Service
de Génétique, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire,
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP., Paris, France,
12Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Service de
Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP., Paris,
France,13Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, APHP., Paris, France
Hearing loss and retinis pigmentosa have mostly
genetic origins, some of them being related to sensorialneuronal defects. Here, we re port eight subjects from four
independent families presenting with auditory neuropathy
and optic atrophy. Whole-exome sequencing revealedbiallelic mutations in the FDXR gene in affected subjects
of each family. FDRX encodes the mitochondrial ferre-
doxin reductase, the sole human ferredoxin reductasew h i c hi si m p l i c a t e di nt h eb i o s y n t h e s i so fi r o n - s u l f u r
clusters (ISC) and in the heme f ormation. ISC proteins are
involved in enzymatic cataly sis and gene expression,
DNA replication and repair. We observed deregulated
iron homeostasis in FDXR mutant ﬁbroblasts and indirect
evidence of mitochondrial iron overload. Functionalcomplementation in a yeast strain deleted for ARH1 ,t h e
human FDXR counterpart, established the pathogenicity
of these mutations. These data emphasize the wide clinicalheterogeneity of mitochondrial disorders related to ISC
synthesis.
A. Paul: None. A. Drecourt: None. D. Dupin Deguine:
None. C. Vasnier: None. M. Oufadem: None. F. Petit:
None. C. Masson: None. C. Bonnet: None. S. Masmoudi:
None. I. Mosnier: None. L. Mahieu: None. D. Bouccara:
None. J. Kaplan: None. G. Challe: None. C. Domange:
None. F. Mochel: None. O. Sterkers: None. S. Gerber:
None. P. Nitschke: None. C. Bole-Feysot: None.
L. Jonard: None. G. Souad: None. I. Ben Aissa: None.
S. Lyonnet: None. A. Rotig: None. A. Delahodde: None.
S. Marlin: None.C11.2
A homozygous variant in mitochondrial RNase
P subunit PRORP is associated with Perrault
Syndrome characterised by hearing loss and
primary ovarian insuf ﬁciency
L. A. M. Demain1,2, I. Hochberg3, J. E. Urquhart1,2, A. Amberger4,A .J .
Deutschmann4, K. Thompson5,J .O ’Sullivan1,2, I. A. Belyantseva6,
M. Barzik6, S. G. Williams1,2, S. S. Bhaskar1,2, E. M. Jenkinson1,
N. AlSheqaih1, Z. Blumenfeld7, S. Yalonetsky8, S. Oerum9,W .
Rossmanith10, W. W. Yue9, J. Zschocke4, R. W. Taylor5, T. B. Friedman6,
K. J. Munro11,12,R .T .O ’Keefe13, W. G. Newman1,2
1Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Bio-
logical Sciences, Division of Evolution and Genomic Sci-ences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom,
2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS FoundationTrust, Manchester, United Kingdom,
3Institute of Endocri-
nology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Rambam Health Care
Campus, Haifa, Israel,4Division of Human Genetics,
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria,5Well-
come Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of
Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Medical School,Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,
6Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes ofHealth, Bethesda, MD, United States,
7Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Endocrinology,
Rambam Health Care Campus, The Rappaport Faculty ofMedicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel,
8Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Rambam
Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel,9Structural Genomics
Consortium, Nuf ﬁeld Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,10Center for Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,Austria,
11School of Health Sciences, University of Man-
chester, Manchester, United Kingdom,12Central Manche-
ster University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester,
United Kingdom,
13Division of Cellular & Molecular
Function, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Uni-versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
Perrault syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive condition
characterised by sensorineural hearing loss in both sexesand primary ovarian insuf ﬁciency in 46 XX, females. It is
genetically heterogeneous with biallelic variants in ﬁve
genes identi ﬁed to date ( HSD17B4, HARS2, LARS2, CLPP
andC10orf2 ). We describe a consanguineous family with
three affected individuals homozygous for a novel missense
variant c.1454C > T; p.(Ala485Val) in KIAA0391 encoding
proteinaceous RNase P (PRORP). PRORP is the metallo-
nuclease subunit of the mitochondrial RNase P complex,66responsible for the 5 ’-end processing of mitochondrial
precursor tRNAs. In enzyme activity assays, RNase P
complexes containing the PRORP disease variant produced
~35–45% less 5 ’-processed tRNA than wild type PRORP.
Consistently, the accumulation of unprocessed polycistronic
mitochondrial transcripts was observed in patient ﬁbro-
blasts, leading to an observable loss of steady-state levels of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation components.
Rescue experiments demonstrated that expression of wildtype PRORP in patient cells partially recovered tRNA
processing. Immunocytochemistry analyses of mouse inner
ear sensory epithelium showed high levels of PRORP in theefferent synapses and nerve ﬁbres of the auditory hair cells
which highlights a possible pathology for the sensorineural
hearing loss observed in affected individuals. We haveidenti ﬁed a novel Perrault syndrome gene and with the
identi ﬁcation of this variant, defects in all three subunits of
mitochondrial RNase P have now been found to causemitochondrial dysfunction, each with distinct clinical
presentations.
L.A.M. Demain: None. I. Hochberg: None. J.E.
Urquhart: None. A. Amberger: None. A.J. Deutsch-
mann: None. K. Thompson: None. J. O ’Sullivan: None.
I.A. Belyantseva: None. M. Barzik: None. S.G. Williams:
None. S.S. Bhaskar: None. E.M. Jenkinson: None. N.
AlSheqaih: None. Z. Blumenfeld: None. S. Yalonetsky:
None. S. Oerum: None. W. Rossmanith: None. W.W.
Yue: None. J. Zschocke: None. R.W. Taylor: None. T.B.
Friedman: None. K.J. Munro: None. R.T. O ’Keefe:
None. W.G. Newman: None.
C11.3
Rare genetic variants in MEPE cause congenitalfacial paresis with stapes ﬁxation, and are
associated with otosclerosis
H. Valgaeren1, I. Schrauwen1,2, L. Tomas-Roca3,4, U. Altunoglu5,M .
Wesdorp4,6,7, M. Sommen1, M. Rahmouni3,4, E. van Beusekom3,M .J .
Huentelman2, E. Offeciers8, I. dHooghe9, R. Vincent10, A. Huber11,
P. Van de Heyning12, D. Zanetti13, E. M. R. De Leenheer6,9, C. Gilissen3,
C. W. Cremers6, B. Verbist14,15, A. P. M. de Brouwer3,4,G .W .
Padberg4,16, H. Kremer3,4,6, G. Van Camp1, H. van Bokhoven3,4
1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp &
Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium,2Neuro-
genomics Division, Translational Genomics Research
Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States,3Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nij-megen, Netherlands,
4Donders Institute for Brain, Cogni-
tion and Behaviour, Radboud university medical center,Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Medical Genetics Department,
Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul,
Turkey,6Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing &
Genes, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,7Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
8University Department of Otolaryngology, St-Augustinus
Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium,9Department of
Otolaryngology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Bel-gium,
10Causse Ear Clinic, Colombiers, France,11Uni-
versity Hospital Zurich, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Zurich,Switzerland,
12Department of ORL, University Hospital of
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium,13Dept. of Clinical Sciences
and Community Health, Audiology Unit, University ofMilan, I.R.C.C.S. Fondazione “Cà Granda ”, Osp.le Mag-
giore Policlinico, Milano, Italy,
14Department of Radiology,
Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
15Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands,16Medical Genetics Depart-
ment, Koç University School of Medicine (KUSOM),Istanbul, Turkey
Whole exome sequencing in a family with Hereditary
Congenital Facial Paresis (HCFP) associated with mixed
hearing loss and stapes ﬁxation resulted in the identi ﬁcation
of a pathogenic heterozygous frameshift variant c.1273delC(p.Gln425Lysfs*38) in MEPE .MEPE encodes a matrix
extracellular phosphoglycoprotein and plays an inhibitory
role in bone mineralization. Because of the stapes ﬁxation it
was hypothesized that MEPE might be important in the
pathophysiology of otosclerosis. MEPE was screened for
variations in 91 patients with familial otosclerosis, resultingin the identi ﬁcation of an additional heterozygous frame-
shift variant, c.199_202delGAAA (p.Lys70Ilefs*26) in two
unrelated families. Subsequently, MEPE was screened in
336 otosclerosis patients, which lead to identi ﬁcation of the
p.Lys70Ilefs*26 variant in three additional patients and p.
Ser206Ilefs*3 in one patient. Analysis of a single ampliconincluding the p.Lys70Ilefs*26 variant was performed in
1065 unrelated otosclerosis patients and 1308 controls. The
p.Lys70Ilefs*26 frameshift variant was present in 5 patientsand none of the controls, resulting in an overall presence of
the variant in 8 patients (p =0.003, Fisher ’s exact test).
Two additional rare variants (c.184G > T; p.Glu62* andc.229G > A; p.Ala77Thr) were identi ﬁed in cases and not in
controls (overall p =0.0020, Fisher ’s exact test). These
results pinpoint that MEPE might be a key player in tem-poral bone and middle ear mineralization implicating its
importance in the pathogenesis of otosclerosis. Currently, aAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 67follow-up study is being performed investigating the con-
tribution of rare variants in the complete gene in a popu-
lation of approximately 3400 otosclerosis patients and
ethnically matched controls.
H. Valgaeren: None. I. Schrauwen: None. L. Tomas-
Roca: None. U. Altunoglu: None. M. Wesdorp: None. M.
Sommen: None. M. Rahmouni: None. E. van Beusekom:
None. M.J. Huentelman: None. E. Offeciers: None. I.
dHooghe: None. R. Vincent: None. A. Huber: None. P.
Van de Heyning: None. D. Zanetti: None. E.M.R. De
Leenheer: None. C. Gilissen: None. C.W. Cremers:
None. B. Verbist: None. A.P.M. de Brouwer: None. G.W.
Padberg: None. H. Kremer: None. G. Van Camp: None.
H. van Bokhoven: None.
C11.4
Naturally-occuring exon-skipping allows bypassing
complete CEP290 loss-of-function in individuals with
unusually mild retinal disease
I. Barny1, I. Perrault1, S. Thomas2, T. Attié-Bitach2, C. Hamel3,H .
Dollfus4, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1, X. Gérard1
1Institut Imagine - Lab of Genetics in Ophthalmology -
Inserm U1163 - Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France,
2Institut Imagine - Lab of Embryology and Genetics of
Congenital Malformations - Inserm U1163 - UniversitéParis Descartes, Paris, France,
3Centre de Références des
Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques et INSERM U1051-
Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, CHU-SaintEloi Montpellier, Montpellier, France,
4Centre de référ-
ence pour les affections génétiques ophtalmologiques
CARGO, CHRU Strasbourg, INSERM1112, Université deStrasbourg, Strasbourg, France
Introduction: CEP290 is pivotal for the assembly/main-
tenance of primary and motile cilia in a wide range of cell
systems. Biallelic CEP290 mutations cause a spectrum of
devastating ciliopathies ranging from monosymptomaticLeber congenital amaurosis (LCA10) to multi-visceral and
sometimes embryo-lethal syndromes (Meckel Syndrome,
MKS). LCA10 manifests invariably as a congenital anddramatically severe cone-dominant disease with visual
function reduced to light perception. Using targeted-NGS,
we identi ﬁed homozygosity and compound heterozygosity
forCEP290 truncating mutations (p.Ile556Phefs*17 and p.
Lys170*/p.Glu1364*) in two unrelated individuals having a
rod-dominant disease with preserved cone function (visualacuity from 3/10 to 6/10). The present study aimed at
understanding the molecular bases of these observations.
Material and Methods: mRNA, protein and ciliation
analyses were performed in patient, LCA, MKS and control
ﬁbroblasts.Results: mRNA analysis evidenced the presence of
CEP290 isoforms lacking exons encompassing the pre-
mature termination codons (PTC) in the two individuals but
not in other cell lines. Protein analysis detected a CEP290
protein around 290 KDa, which like the wildtype counter-
part, could be detected in a 670 KDa protein complex(BNPage), supporting the view that exon-skipping allowed
bypassing PTC. In sharp contrast with MKS and LCA
ﬁbroblasts, which exhibited severe to mild cilia defects, the
ﬁbroblasts from the two individuals had apparently unal-
tered ciliation ability, as determined by comparison to
control cells.
Conclusions: Here, we report naturally occurring exon-
skipping and protein synthesis in two individuals having an
unusually mild retinal phenotype despite biallelic PTCmutations, providing strong support for CEP290 splice
switching oligonucleotide-mediated therapy.
I. Barny: None. I. Perrault: None. S. Thomas: None.
T. Attié-Bitach: None. C. Hamel: None. H. Dollfus:
None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. X. Gérard:
None.
C11.5
Hidden genetic variation in Stargardt disease: novelcopy number variations, cis-regulatory and deep-
intronic splice variants of the ABCA4 locus
M. Bauwens1, R. Sangermano2, T. Cherry3, C. Van Cauwenbergh1,
J. Gómez-Skarmeta4, N. Weisschuh5, S. Kohl5, B. Leroy1,6, F. Cremers2,
E. De Baere1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium,2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3University of Washington,
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States,4Centro
Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC, UniversidadPablo de Olavide, Sevila, Spain,
5Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, University Eye Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany,6Dept of Ophthalmology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
Purpose: Stargardt disease (STGD1) is hallmarked by a
large proportion of patients with single coding variants in
the disease gene ABCA4, suggestive for hidden genetic
variation in non-coding regions. We aimed to assess thecontribution of copy number variations (CNVs) and non-
coding sequence variations in STGD1 patients.
Methods: A total of 116 monoallelic STGD1 patients
underwent targeted resequencing of the whole ABCA4
gene. Candidate splice variants were tested by mini-gene
assays while putative cis-regulatory variants were investi-gated by ex vivo electroporation in mouse retinas. 4C-seq
was performed on human retinal cells, using an anchor in68the ABCA4 promoter region. Customized arrayCGH
(arrEYE) was used for CNV analysis of 5 patients.
Results: Mini-gene assays were performed for a subset of
12 intronic variants, con ﬁrming a splice effect for 3 var-
iants. The cis-regulatory effect of 3 promoter and 2 deep-
intronic variants were tested in mouse retinal explants,revealing a signi ﬁcant effect on regulation for some of
them. A chromatin interaction map of the ABCA4 region
was generated by 4C-seq in human adult retinal cells. CNVanalysis revealed a novel ABCA4 deletion (ex 40 –50) and a
duplication (ex 2 –6) in 2 patients without candidate non-
coding variants.
Conclusions: Resequencing of the whole ABCA4 locus
uncovered novel deep-intronic splice variants and cis-acting
regulatory variants, representing the ﬁrst report of non-
coding regulatory ABCA4 variants. In addition, a retinal
chromatin interaction dataset for the ABCA4 locus was
generated. Finally, apart from a novel deletion, the ﬁrst
duplication was identi ﬁed in ABCA4, expanding the CNV
spectrum of ABCA4.
M. Bauwens: None. R. Sangermano: None. T.
Cherry: None. C. Van Cauwenbergh: None. J. Gómez-
Skarmeta: None. N. Weisschuh: None. S. Kohl: None. B.
Leroy: None. F. Cremers: None. E. De Baere: None.
C11.6
New diagnostic biomarkers for peroxisomalbiogenesis disorders revealed by untargeted
metabolomics pro ﬁling include signi ﬁcant reduction
of sphingomyelin, bile acid alterations, and uniquelong chain fatty acid elevations
S. H. Elsea1, L. Hubert1, T. Donti2, M. Ventura1, M. Miller1,N .
Braverman3, M. Bose4, W. RIzzo5, R. Jones6, A. Moser6, Q. Sun1,
A. Kennedy7, M. Wangler1
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,
2Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United
States,3McGill University-Montreal Children ’s Hospital
Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada,4Montclair
State University, Montclair, NJ, United States,5Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States,6Kennedy
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States,7Metabo-
lon, Inc., Durham, NC, United States
Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger
spectrum (PBD-ZSD) encompass a range of multisystem
diseases with prominent neurological, hepatic, renal, andbone features, comprising a broad clinical spectrum, with
phenotypes ranging from severe, presenting with intractable
seizures, neuronal migration defects and neonatal hypoto-nia, to milder forms with mild-moderate developmental
delay, retinopathy, adrenal insuf ﬁciency, and hearing loss.We ascertained a cohort of 18 individuals with mild to
moderate PBD-ZSD with mutations in PEX1 who presented
with hearing loss, developmental delay, and varied obser-
vations of microcephaly, retinopathy, and movement dis-
orders. Analysis of plasma samples included quantitative
peroxisomal biochemical diagnostics in parallel withuntargeted small molecule metabolomic pro ﬁling with
detection of > 650 named molecules. Metabolomic pro ﬁling
show anticipated elevations in pipecolic acid, long chainfatty acids, and several bile acids, as well as reduced plas-
malogens, with concordance between quantitative and
untargeted measurements. Metabolomics analyses alsorevealed unanticipated signi ﬁcant reductions in sphingo-
myelins in every patient sample. These perturbations in the
plasma metabolomic pro ﬁles are unique, speci ﬁc, and not
previously seen in >700 other samples analyzed as normal
controls or for other indications. Reduced sphingomyelin
was one of the strongest effects observed in these samplesand detected only by the untargeted metabolomic pro ﬁling
process. As the clinical presentation of mild PBD-ZSD
broadens and as sequencing identi ﬁes novel genetic var-
iants, the need for assessment of peroxisomal function
increases. Untargeted metabolomic screening identi ﬁes
several speci ﬁc biomarkers that taken together allow for
effective detection of these mild cases of PBD-ZSD, ending
the diagnostic odysseys for many of these patients.
S.H. Elsea: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest;
Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor Genetics. L. Hubert:
None. T. Donti: None. M. Ventura: None. M. Miller:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Baylor Collegeof Medicine, Baylor Genetics. N. Braverman: None.
M. Bose: None. W. RIzzo: None. R. Jones: None.
A. Moser: None. Q. Sun: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Modest; Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor
Genetics. A. Kennedy: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Modest; Metabolon, Inc. M. Wangler: None.
C12
Engaging Patients in Genomics
C12.1
SEQUAPRE: Preferences and representations from
patients and parents with regard to the use of Next-
Generation Sequencing technologies in medicalgenetics. The case of development anomalies
A. Chassagne1,2, A. Pélissier3,2, C. Peyron3,2, F. Houdayer4, D. Salvi3,
S. Kidri3, A. Charpin5, A. Godard1, O. Putois6,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet7,2,
A. Masurel7, N. Jean7,2, D. Lehalle7, J. Thevenon7, L. Joly7, E. Gautier2,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 69P. Ancet8, A. Lapointe9, P. Morin9, P. Edery4, M. Rossi4, D. Sanlaville4,
S. Bejean3,2, E. Cretin1,2, L. Faivre7,2
1Centre d ’Investigation Clinique –Inserm 1431 –CHRU
Besançon, Besançon, France,2FHU TRANSLAD –CHU
Dijon, Dijon, France,3LEDI - UMR6307 CNRS - U1200
Inserm –UBFC Dijon, Dijon, France,4Centre de Référence
Anomalies du Développement –CHU Lyon, Lyon, France,
5Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement –CHU
Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, France,6SuLiSoM EA 3071,
Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,7Centre de
Référence Anomalies du Développement –CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France,8Centre Georges Chevrier –UMR 7366 –
UBFC Dijon, Dijon, France,9Alliance Maladies Rares,
Paris, France
Background: Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) of gen-
ome has revolutionized diagnostic odyssey in developmentdiseases. In order to optimize information given to patients
to obtain consent to undergo this examination, it is neces-
sary to ask them about their preferences and representationswith regard to the arrival of these new technologies in
healthcare.
Methods: A mixed methodology was implemented to
answer these questions in two centers of expertise for rare
diseases in France. The study involved teams from human
and social sciences as well as patient organizations. Theobjectives were: 1/ to estimate and analyze the preferences
of parents of patients with development anomalies, who are
potential candidates for NGS, concerning the nature and theannouncement of the results (quantitative study before the
NGS); 2/ Describe, analyze and understand, following the
use of NGS for diagnostic purposes, the experiences,expectations and reactions of families with regard to their
diagnostic trajectory and the announcement of the results
(qualitative study).
Results: 528 parents completed questionnaires for the
quantitative analysis. The respondents were strongly in
favor of the communication of uncertain (particularly themost likely uncertain results) and unsolicited results, and for
the reanalysis of examinations, mainly in an automatic way.
47 interviews with parents were conducted. Whatever theresult of the NGS, it was considered a step and not an end in
itself. Even when a diagnosis is made, the trajectory con-
tinues and a feeling of powerlessness may persist.
Conclusions: NGS thus represents a transition from a
diagnostic odyssey to a step in care trajectory.
A. Chassagne: None. A. Pélissier: None. C. Peyron:
None. F. Houdayer: None. D. Salvi: None. S. Kidri:
None. A. Charpin: None. A. Godard: None. O. Putois:
None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Masurel: None.
N. Jean: None. D. Lehalle: None. J. Thevenon: None.
L. Joly: None. E. Gautier: None. P. Ancet: None.A. Lapointe: None. P. Morin: None. P. Edery: None.
M. Rossi: None. D. Sanlaville: None. S. Bejean: None.
E. Cretin: None. L. Faivre: None.
C12.2
Children with a rare chromosome disorder. Howhave UK families ’experiences of diagnosis and
counselling changed over the ten year period
2003 - 2013?
A. Szczepura1, S. Wynn2, B. Searle2, A. J. Khan1, T. Palmer3,
D. Biggerstaff4, J. Elliott1, M. Hultén5
1Coventry University, Coventry, United Kingdom,2Unique,
The Rare Chromosome Disorder Support Group, OxtedSurrey, United Kingdom,
3Lancaster University, Lancaster,
United Kingdom,4University of Warwick, Coventry, United
Kingdom,5Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
ABSTRACT
Background: The UK 2014 Strategy for Rare Diseases
(SRD) recommends involving those affected by such dis-
eases in order to improve diagnosis, intervention, and
coordination of care in clinical genetics services1. Patient
Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS) for genetics ser-
vices are still in their infancy2. UK families ’experiences of
RCD diagnosis and counselling have been analysed over aten year period (2003 - 2013) leading up to the launch of the
national SRD.
Methods: Two surveys were undertaken ten years apart
(2003 and 2013) by Unique ( http://www.rarechromo.co.uk/
html/History.asp ). An identical questionnaire investigated
seven stages of the clinical genetics service pathwayincluding: pre-testing process; testing and communication
of test result; referral to genetics expert; conduct of genetics
consultation; RCD information provided; follow-up genet-ics counselling; sign-posting to peer support; plus the
quality of the overall service. Comparison of responses at
different time-points revealed trends and changes over time,and helped identify areas for improvement.
Results: 583 UK families ’responses in 2003 were com-
pared to 575 in 2013. Respondents were mainly mothers(reducing from 92.3% to 85.9% in 2013); mean age was
similar (42.3 years and 43.0 years in 2013). Most families
had only one child with a RCD (rising from 86.1% to92.3%). Families ’ratings of overall service received were
not particularly high, and have not improved signi ﬁcantly
over time. Key areas for improvement are identi ﬁable.
Conclusions: Theﬁndings reported will hopefully enable
the experiences of families of children with RCDs to be
integrated more effectively into national strategies andpolicies for rare diseases.70A. Szczepura: None. S. Wynn: None. B. Searle: None.
A.J. Khan: None. T. Palmer: None. D. Biggerstaff: None.
J. Elliott: None. M. Hultén: None.
C12.3
BRCA1/BRCA2 population screening in AshkenaziJews: Long term impact
S. Lieberman1, A. Tomer1, A. Ben Chetrit2, O. Olsha3, R. Beeri1, A. Raz4,
A. Lahad5, E. Levy-Lahad1
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel,2Women ’s Health Center, Clalit Health
Services, Jerusalem, Israel,3Surgical Department, Shaare
Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel,4Department of
Sociology and Anthropology, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel,5Department of Family Medi-
cine, Clalit Health Services, Jerusalem, Israel
Background: Ashkenazi Jews (AJ) population screening
for common (2.5%) BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations couldidentify all carriers, including many (approximately half)
lacking suggestive family history. Towards implementation,
we examined the long-term impact of BRCA screening.
Methods: Unaffected AJs, age ≥25 years were either self-
referred (SR) or recruiter-enrolled (RE), received pre-test
written information and self-reported family history (FH).Post-testing, non-carriers with signi ﬁcant FH and carriers
received in-person genetic counseling. Psychosocial out-
comes and health behaviors were assessed quantitativelyone week, 6 months and 2 years post-testing
Results: We report the 2 year follow-up of 1771 partici-
pants, including 32 carriers.
Psychosocial outcomes: RE and SR participants had
similar rates of satisfaction (94%), and endorsement of
population screening (90%), and similarly low stress (IESscore=4.1). Knowledge scores were higher in SR vs. RE
(7.5 vs. 6.9/10, P < 0.001). Among carriers, 94% expressed
satisfaction and 92% endorsed population screening. Stresswas higher but declined over time (IES score 13.9 vs. 19.9
at 6 months (NS)). Knowledge was greater than in non-
carriers (8.7 vs. 7.15/10, p < 0.001).
Health behaviour: All 25 women carriers had breast sur-
veillance, 3/25 (12%) underwent risk-reducing bilateral
mastectomy (similar to published rates in Israeli carriers).15/16 (94%) carriers age > 40 underwent Risk-reducing
salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO). Among non-carriers,
mammography screening rates did not decline compared topretest rates, and even increased in non-carriers > 50 with
non-suggestive FH (p =0.003).
Conclusions : Long-term, BRCA screening is highly
acceptable. Non-carriers do not demonstrate false reassur-
ance, whereas carriers universally adopted increasedsurveillance with the vast majority undergoing age-
appropriate RRSO. Funded by BCRF.
S. Lieberman: None. A. Tomer: None. A. Ben Chetrit:
None. O. Olsha: None. R. Beeri: None. A. Raz: None.
A. Lahad: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None.
C12.4
The European Gen-Equip project to create accessible
resources for genetics education in primary care: anaccount of the process, the challenges and the
successes
L. Jackson1,2, M. Cornel3, M. Paneque4, V. Stefansdottir5, D. Turchetti6,
V. Curtisova7, P. W. Lunt2, M. Campos8, A. Kent8, M. Macek Jnr7,
E. Houwink9,A .O ’Connor2, H. Skirton2
1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom,2University
of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom,3VUMC,
Amsterdam, Netherlands,4IBMC, University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal,5Landspitali Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland,
6Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy,7Charles Uni-
versity, Prague, Czech Republic,8Genetic Alliance UK,
London, United Kingdom,9Maastricht University, Maas-
tricht, Netherlands
The Gen-Equip project was undertaken to provide
accessible genetics education to primary care health pro-fessionals in Europe. With advancing genomic medicine, all
health professionals require knowledge and skills to detect
patients at genetic risk, to provide them with appropriatehealthcare. However, obtaining access to current genetics
education, appropriate to their setting and language, is
challenging. Partners from six European countries haveworked collaboratively to produce nine online modules
based on patient cases relevant for primary care. The pro-
cess has involved: 1) Writing materials and agreeing con-tent, 2) Production of videos and other resources to
supplement text, 3) Uploading to a multi-media platform, 4)
Translation and adaptation of modules to suit speci ﬁc
requirements of each partner country. Educational evalua-
tion is crucial. Learners can undertake pre and post-module
quizzes: we have now collected over 200 sets of pre andpost-module data. Statistical analysis indicates that there are
highly signi ﬁcant differences in knowledge as a result of
taking a module. For example, mean pre-test score for thebreast/ovarian cancer module was 77.6% (standard error =
2.97), compared with the post-test score of 90.4% (standard
error=2.69) and this represented a highly signi ﬁcant dif-
ference in the means (t(33) =−5.87, p =0.000). We pre-
sent the full results of the module evaluations, the process of
preparing and disseminating these materials, and how wehave addressed the challenges of involving multiple part-
ners from different professions and countries. The onlineAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 71case-based approach seems effective and the Gen-Equip
experience has transferable lessons for further genetics
education programmes in Europe.
L. Jackson: None. M. Cornel: None. M. Paneque:
None. V. Stefansdottir: None. D. Turchetti: None.
V. Curtisova: None. P.W. Lunt: None. M. Campos:
None. A. Kent: None. M. Macek Jnr: None. E. Houwink:
None. A. O ’Connor: None. H. Skirton: None.
C12.5
UK investigation of the experiences and information
preferences of patients with an increased risk ofbowel cancer; Family Web Study survey results
informing website content
S. M. A. Goodman, H. Skirton, R. Jones
Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom
Relatives of people diagnosed with an increased risk of
bowel cancer may also share a high lifetime risk of thiscancer and it is important that patients share information
about the implications of their diagnoses. However, evi-
dence indicates that less than half of at-risk relatives accessgenetic testing or screening colonoscopy: this is sometimes
due to a lack of understanding of personal risk.
The aim of this cross-sectional survey was to investigate
experiences and preferences for receiving information about
the familial diagnosis and risk. Participants (n =238) at risk
of colorectal cancer were recruited either online via charitywebsites or by post via genetics and colorectal clinics in six
hospitals. Quantitative data were analysed using descriptive
statistics with additional qualitative analysis of free textresponses. Results indicate that only a third (79/238)
received all or most of the information they wanted when
they learnt of their risk. Most (148/238) indicated theywould like information in other formats; via email, websites
or social media, but also through follow-up appointments
(102/238). Issues of particular interest were: healthy life-style (111/238) genetic testing (108/238) and talking to
children (73/238).
These data are being used in the Family Web study to
improve the dissemination of information within families
via a website ( www.familyweb.org.uk ) designed so rela-
tives can share personal information securely online. Thissurvey has informed web site development. Survey
responses endorse the need to improve existing information
and support to this population, but these results may also beapplicable to other genetic conditions.
S.M.A. Goodman: None. H. Skirton: None. R. Jones:
None.C12.6
Genomics Education at Scale
M. Bishop, E. Miller, A. McPherson, A. Pope, A. Seller
Health Education England Genomics Education Pro-
gramme, Birmingham, United Kingdom
Health Education England ’s Genomics Education Pro-
gramme (GEP) has the mandate to ensure all staff working
within the National Health Service (NHS) are prepared for
the integration of genomic medicine into clinical practice.To educate and inform at this scale the GEP is utilising
different learning technologies. In 2016, the GEP launched
a three-week Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) onwhole genome sequencing via the FutureLearn platform.
Over three iterations, the course has registered 15,000
learners, representing a range of professions within theNHS. This MOOC is a synchronous learning activity, with
course educators and mentors facilitating the education
experience in real time. Crucially, the platform allowsparticipants to interact and learn from each other ’s experi-
ences. This interprofessional learning environment, as well
as the presence of course mentors (clinical scientists in theNHS) was shown via course evaluation to be extremely
effective. We have also used social media as a tool to
educate and inform the largest NHS professional group,nurses and midwives. Using the WeCommunities platform,
the GEP has facilitated a series of twitter conversations,
with experts driving the discussion by posting key ques-tions. Our data demonstrates that the power of this platform
is its reach, and therefore its potential to inform and educate
on a large scale: each conversation reached ﬁve million
people. As well as proving to be successful learning and
awareness raising tools, these platforms have also provided
valuable insight into education and training gaps andhighlighted areas good practice within genomic medicine in
the NHS.
M. Bishop: None. E. Miller: None. A. McPherson:
None. A. Pope: None. A. Seller: None.
C13
Innovative Variant Interpretation
C13.1
Novel diagnostic guidelines for prediction of variant
spliceogenicity derived from a set of 311 combinedin silico and in vitro studies: an international
collaborative effort
S. Krieger1,2,3, R. Leman1,2,3, P. Gaildrat2, M. Parsons4, N. Boutry-
Kryza5, F. Bonnet-Dorion6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, A. Rousselin1,2,72G. Davy1,2, V. Caux-Montcoutier8, S. Caputo8, S. Mazoyer5, E. Rouleau7,
G. Castelain2, B. Wappenschmidt9, T. Van Overeem Hansen10,
L. Castéra1,2, D. Muller11, V. Bourdon12, F. Revillon13, J. Sokolowska14,
F. Coullet15, N. Sevenet6, A. Spurdle4, A. Martins2, C. Houdayer8,16
1Laboratoire de Biologie et Génétique du Cancer, Centre
François Baclesse, Caen, France,2INSERM U1245,
Genomics and Personalized Medecine in Cancer and
Neurological Disorders, Université de Rouen, Rouen,France,
3Université Caen-Normandie, Caen, France,
4Department of Genetics and Computational Biology,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston,Queensland, Australia,
5Unité Mixte de Génétique Con-
stitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Centre Léon Bérard,
Lyon, France,6INSERM U1218, Département de Patholo-
gie, Laboratoire de Génétique Constitutionnelle, Institut
Bergonié, Bordeaux, France,7Service de Génétique, Institut
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France,8Service de Génétique,
Institut Curie, Paris, France,9Center for Hereditary Breast
and Ovarian Cancer and Centre for Integrated Oncology,
Medical Faculty, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne,Germany,
10Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
11Laboratoire d ’Oncogénétique, Centre Paul Strauss,
Strasbourg, France,12Laboratoire d ’oncogénétique Molé-
culaire, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France,
13Laboratoire d ’Oncogénétique Moléculaire Humaine,
Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France,14Service de Génét-
ique, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France,15Service de Génétique,
Hôpital Pitié Salpétrière, AP-HP, Paris, France,16INSERM
U830, Institut Curie et Université de Paris Descartes,
Paris, France
Variant interpretation is the key issue in molecular
diagnosis. Splice variants exemplify this issue as each
nucleotide variant can be deleterious viadisruption, creation
of splice site consensus sequences. Consequently, reliable
in silico prediction of variant spliceogenicity would be a
major improvement. Thanks to a collaborative effort fromthe French UGG splice network and the ENIGMA con-
sortium, a set of 311 BRCA1 andBRCA2 variants studied at
the mRNA level and occurring in 5 ’and 3 ’consensus
regions (de ﬁned as the 9 and 23 bases surrounding the exon/
intron junction, respectively) was collected and used to
optimize previous prediction guidelines. Among these 311variants, 147 (including 40 novel ones), were used to train a
new prediction protocol named SPiCE (Splicing Prediction
in Consensus Elements). Brie ﬂy, SPiCE ﬁrst uses in silico
splice predictions from Splice Site Finder and MaxEntScan.
After that probability of splicing alteration and optimal
decision thresholds are calculated by logistic regression.Following training, SPiCE was evaluated on a set of con-
secutive publications gathering 164 BRCA variants withtheir corresponding transcript analysis. We met an unpre-
cedented sensitivity of 99.2% (134 out of 135) and speci-
ﬁcity of 93.7% (30 out of 32). In other words, impact on
splicing was correctly predicted for 161 out of 164 variants
(98%). We therefore propose the SPiCE protocol as the new
guideline for prediction of variant spliceogenicity. It couldbe easily implemented in any diagnostic laboratory as a
routine decision making tool to help geneticists to face the
deluge of variants in the nextgen era.
S. Krieger: None. R. Leman: None. P. Gaildrat: None.
M. Parsons: None. N. Boutry-Kryza: None. F. Bonnet-
Dorion: None. M. Guillaud-Bataille: None. A. Rousselin:
None. G. Davy: None. V. Caux-Montcoutier: None.
S. Caputo: None. S. Mazoyer: None. E. Rouleau: None.
G. Castelain: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. T. Van
Overeem Hansen: None. L. Castéra: None. D. Muller:
None. V. Bourdon: None. F. Revillon: None. J. Soko-
lowska: None. F. Coullet: None. N. Sevenet: None.
A. Spurdle: None. A. Martins:
None. C. Houdayer:
None.
C13.2
PEDIA study Phase 2: Prioritizing Exomes of
unsolved patients with Image Analysis
P. M. Krawitz1, I. Vrecar2, S. Kamphausen3, J. Zschocke4, D. Mitter5,
S. Wilson6, G. Lyon7, A. Orrico8, I. Ivanovski9, G. Rudolf2, D. Wahl6,
L. Graul-Neumann1, D. Horn1, N. Ehmke1, M. A. Mensah1, C. E. Ott1,
R. Flöttmann1, M. Coutelier1, J. T. Pantel1, U. Kornak1, B. Fischer1,
M. Jäger1, M. Schubach1, S. Köhler1, M. Spielmann10, P. N. Robinson11,
A. Knaus1, B. Wollnik12, M. Rodriguez de los Santos1, N. Hajjir1,
K. Boss13, E. Mangold14, A. Kaindl15, S. Picker-Minh15, H. Muhle16,
M. Zenker17, K. Hoffmann18, P. Lorini18, S. Mundlos1
1Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany,
2Ljubljana University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
3Institute of Human Genetics - University hospital Magde-
burg, Magdeburg, Germany,4Medical Genetics and
Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria,5MedVZ Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany,6MVZ Martinsried, Martinsried, Ger-
many,7Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY, United States,8Molecular and Genetic Medi-
cine - Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena,
Italy,9Genetica Clinica - Azienda Ospedaliera Arcispedale
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy,10University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,11Jackson Lab,
Farmington, CT, United States,12Human Genetics, Göt-
tingen, Germany,13Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany,
14Humangenetik, Bonn, Germany,15Charité, Berlin, Ger-
many,16Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Kiel,
Germany,17Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany,
18Human Genetics, Halle, GermanyAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 73Combining molecular data with phenotype information
has become the key bioinformatics strategy in interpreting
exomes of patients with rare Mendelian disorders. With this
approach, the correct mutation can be ranked ﬁrst place in
roughly half of patients with known dysmorphic syndromes
and a disease-causing sequence variant in the coding part ofthe genome. As the high information content of dysmorphic
human faces is only incompletely describable by the ter-
minology of the human phenotype ontology, we aimed toanalyze the gain in performance by including automated
image analysis. We used facial recognition technology from
FDNA to detect dysmorphic features in frontal photographsof patients, and derived similarity scores for the comparison
of the gestalt to all known syndromes. In a multicenter
effort with currently 15 participating institutions, we built acohort of more than 400 meticulously studied and mole-
cularly con ﬁrmed monogenic syndromic cases. The inclu-
sion of pattern recognition for the human face in theprioritization process increased the ratio of exome cases
with the top-ranked disease-causing mutation by more than
thirty percent. In the clinical routine, where only a limitednumber of candidate mutations is evaluated, this also
translates into a higher diagnostic yield. Interestingly, we
were also able to delineate classi ﬁers for gene-speci ﬁc
phenotypes of recently identi ﬁed disease genes and we are
therefore advocating to de ﬁne case groups of yet undiag-
nosed patients by computer-assisted image analysis.
P.M. Krawitz: None. I. Vrecar: None. S. Kamphau-
sen: None. J. Zschocke: None. D. Mitter: None. S.
Wilson: None. G. Lyon: None. A. Orrico: None.
I. Ivanovski: None. G. Rudolf: None. D. Wahl: None.
L. Graul-Neumann: None. D. Horn: None. N. Ehmke:
None. M.A. Mensah: None. C.E. Ott: None.
R. Flöttmann: None. M. Coutelier: None. J.T. Pantel:
None. U. Kornak: None. B. Fischer: None. M. Jäger:
None. M. Schubach: None. S. Köhler: None. M. Spiel-
mann: None. P.N. Robinson: None. A. Knaus: None.
B. Wollnik: None. M. Rodriguez de los Santos: None.
N. Hajjir: None. K. Boss: None. E. Mangold: None.
A. Kaindl:
None. S. Picker-Minh: None. H. Muhle:
None. M. Zenker: None. K. Hoffmann: None. P. Lorini:
None. S. Mundlos: None.
C13.3
Genetic diagnosis of Mendelian disorders via RNAsequencing
L. S. Kremer1,2, D. M. Bader3, C. Mertes3, R. Kopajtich1,2, G. Pichler4,
A. Iuso1,2, T. B. Haack1, E. Graf1, T. Schwarzmayr1, C. Terrile1,
E. Konarikova1, B. Repp1, G. Kastenmueller5, J. Adamski6, P. Lichtner1,
C. Leonhardt7, B. Funalot8, A. Donati9, V. Tiranti10, A. Lombes11,
C. Jardel11, D. Glaeser12, R. W. Taylor13, D. Ghezzi10, J. A. Mayr14,A. Roetig7, P. Freisinger15, F. Distelmaier16, T. M. Strom1,2,
T. Meitinger1,2, J. Gagneur3, H. Prokisch1,2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany,2Institute of Human
Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University ofMunich, Munich, Germany,
3Computational Biology,
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,
4Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-
Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany,
5Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz
Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany,6Institute of
Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, Helm-
holtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany,7Neuro-
pädiatrie, Neonatologie, Villingen-Schwenningen,Germany,
8INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes -
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France,
9Metabolic Unit, A. Meyer Children ’s Hospital, Florence,
Italy,10Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Foundation
IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carettere Scienti ﬁco)
Neurological Institute “Carlo Besta ”, Milan, Italy,
11Inserm UMR 1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France,
12Genetikum, Genetic Counseling and Diagnostics, Neu-
Ulm, Germany,13Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial
Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle, United
Kingdom,14Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria,15Department of Pediatrics,
Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany,16Department
of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardi-
ology, University Children ’s Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-
University Düsseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany
Across a large variety of Mendelian disorders, ~50 –75%
of patients do not receive a genetic diagnosis by whole
exome sequencing indicative of underlying disease-causing
variants in non-coding regions. In contrast, whole genomesequencing facilitates the discovery of all genetic variants,
but their sizeable number, coupled with a poor under-
standing of the non-coding genome, makes their prior-itization challenging. Here, we demonstrate the power of
transcriptome sequencing to provide a con ﬁrmed genetic
diagnosis for 10% (5 of 48) of undiagnosed mitochondrialdisease patients and identify strong candidate genes for
patients remaining without diagnosis. We found a median of
1 aberrantly expressed gene, 5 aberrant splicing events, and6 mono-allelically expressed rare variants in patient-derived
ﬁbroblasts and established disease-causing roles for each
kind. Private exons often arose from sites that are weaklyspliced in other individuals, providing an important clue for
future variant prioritization. One such intronic exon-
creating variant was found in three unrelated families inthe complex I assembly factor TIMMDC1, which we con-
sequently established as a novel disease-associated gene. In74conclusion, our study expands the diagnostic tools for
detecting non-exonic variants of Mendelian disorders and
provides examples of intronic loss-of-function variants with
pathological relevance.
Paper preprint available: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/
2017/01/16/066738
L.S. Kremer: None. D.M. Bader: None. C. Mertes:
None. R. Kopajtich: None. G. Pichler: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; PreOmics GmbH, Am
Klopferspitz 19, D-82152 Planegg/Martinsried. A. Iuso:
None. T.B. Haack: None. E. Graf: None. T. Schwarz-
mayr: None. C. Terrile: None. E. Konarikova: None.
B. Repp: None. G. Kastenmueller: None. J. Adamski:
None. P. Lichtner: None. C. Leonhardt: None.
B. Funalot: None. A. Donati: None. V. Tiranti: None.
A. Lombes: None. C. Jardel: None. D. Glaeser: None.
R.W. Taylor: None. D. Ghezzi: None. J.A. Mayr: None.
A. Roetig: None. P. Freisinger: None. F. Distelmaier:
None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. J. Gag-
neur: None. H. Prokisch: None.
C13.4
Mutation spectrum of NOD2 reveals recessive
inheritance as a main driver of Early Onset Crohn ′s
Disease
J. Horowitz1, N. Warner2, J. Staples1, E. Crowley2, R. Murchie2, C. Van
Hout1, A. K. King1, K. Fiedler2, J. G. Reid1, J. D. Overton1,A .R .
Shuldiner1, A. Baras1, A. Grif ﬁths2, F. Dewey1, O. Gotessman1,
A. Muise2, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1
1Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals
Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United States,2Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
Introduction: Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), encom-
passing Crohn ’s Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC),
results in chronic and destructive in ﬂammation of the gas-
trointestinal tract in genetically susceptible individuals. IBDis typically diagnosed in the 3rd decade of life; however
pediatric-onset IBD, diagnosed before age 18, represents
~25% of all diagnoses and is generally more severe. NOD2
was the ﬁrst and to date most replicated gene associated
with adult CD; its role in pediatric IBD remains not well
understood.
Methods: We performed WES in a cohort of 1183 pro-
bands with pediatric IBD ( <18y) and their available parents
and siblings. Trio-based analysis was executed on 492complete trios for initial discovery, and replicated our
ﬁndings in the remaining probands.Results: In total, we identi ﬁed 92 probands in our cohort
with recessive inheritance of NOD2 alleles, carrying
homozygous or compound heterozygous combinations of
rare and low-frequency CD-risk alleles or novel variants.
We investigated the contribution of recessive inheritance of
NOD2 in IBD patients from the DiscovEHR study and
conﬁrmed that recessive inheritance of NOD2 rare and low-
frequency variants explained ~7% of cases.
Conclusions: In sum, ~8% of the probands in our pediatric-
onset IBD cohort conform to a recessive inheritance mode
ofNOD2 rare and low frequency deleterious variants. This
was similarly con ﬁrmed in an independent IBD cohort with
several cases having been diagnosed with CD at an earlier
than average age. Our ﬁndings implicate NOD2 as a Men-
delian disease gene for a subset of early-onset CD,molecularly de ﬁned by recessive inheritance of NOD2
variants.
J. Horowitz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. N. Warner: None.
J. Staples: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Crowley: None.
R. Murchie: None. C. Van Hout: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E.
Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.A.K. King: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. K. Fiedler: None. J.G. Reid:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. J.D. Overton: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
A.R. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest
(stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);
Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Baras: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Grif ﬁths:None. F. Dewey:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. O. Gotessman: A. Employ-
ment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; RegeneronAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 75Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Muise: None. C. Gonzaga-
Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest;Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
C13.5
Podocytes differentiated from urine renal precursor
as a tool for Alport syndrome diagnosis and for
assessing therapeutic strategies based on patient-derived cells
S. Daga1, M. Baldassarri1,2, C. Lo Rizzo2, C. Fallerini1, V. Imperatore1,
I. Longo2, E. Frullanti1, F. Ariani1,2, M. A. Mencarelli1,2, F. Mari1,2,A .M .
Pinto1,2, A. Renieri1,2
1Medical Genetics, Univeristy Of Siena, Siena, Italy,
2Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Senese, Siena, Italy
Alport syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by muta-
tions in collagen IV genes, leading to ultrastructural lesionsof the glomerular basement membrane up to end-stage renal
disease. COL4 chains expression is restricted to kidney, eye
and ear. Podocytes, key component of the glomerularstructure, are the only cells able to produce the three COLIV
alpha chains and thus, they are key-players in ATS patho-
genesis. However, podocytes-targeted therapeutic strate-gies, have been hampered by the dif ﬁculty of isolating them
by non-invasive methods and transcripts-based diagnostic
approaches have been complicated by the inaccessibility ofother cell types expressing COL4 chains. For the ﬁrst time,
we have recently demonstrated that it is possible to isolate
and differentiate renal precursors from urine of Alportsyndrome patients and healthy carriers, providing an easily
available cell system closer to podocytes ’physiological
conditions. RT-PCR analysis revealed COL4A3 ,COL4A4
and COL4A5 expression associated with Podoplanin
expression, marker involved in shaping podocytes mem-
brane. RNA studies on patients-derived podocytes harbor-ing intronic variants of uncertain signi ﬁcance in COLIV
genes led to identify aberrant splicing patterns leading to
premature stop codons and truncated proteins. Our datahighlight that urine-derived podocytes ’precursors can be
used as tool to establish the pathogenic role of uncertain
variants, thus allowing us to provide the patient with amolecular diagnosis and with a recurrence risk for the sib-
lings. Furthermore, the established system opens up the
possibility of testing personalized gene therapy-basedapproaches on disease-relevant cells taking advantage of aCRiSPR/Cas9 technology, in combination with the easily-
deliverable AAV9 system.
S. Daga: None. M. Baldassarri: None. C. Lo Rizzo:
None. C. Fallerini: None. V. Imperatore: None. I. Longo:
None. E. Frullanti: None. F. Ariani: None. M.A.
Mencarelli: None. F. Mari: None. A.M. Pinto: None.
A. Renieri: None.
C13.6
Machine learning models for the characterization of
genes associated with adult brain diseases
J. A. Botía1, S. Guel ﬁ1,K .D ’sa1, J. Vandrovcova1, J. Hardy1, M. Weale2,
M. Ryten1
1Institute of Neurology, University College London, Lon-
don, United Kingdom,2King ’s College London, London,
United Kingdom
Over the past 5 years there has been a massive growth in
genetic testing and this has had a huge and arguably dis-proportionate impact on our understanding of adult neuro-
logical disorders. In parallel there has been an equally
impressive growth in the availability of omics data. Giventhis critical mass of data we ask whether we can identify the
key features of a gene relevant to adult brain disease. We
apply Machine Learning (ML) on DNA, RNA and proteinfeatures of disease genes de ﬁned by DisGeNET and expert
curation to achieve this. Regarding DNA, we include as a
predictor ExAC pLI (probability of being intolerant to Lossof Function). Regarding RNA data, we consider speci ﬁcity
of gene expression in 42 tissues as detailed in GTExV6, and
the overall and speci ﬁc connectivity patterns of the genes as
measured by WGCNA-based co-expression networks. We
use data from HEXEvent to account for variability in
transcript structure. Using this approach we demonstratethat gene connectivity rather than gene expression is a more
useful classi ﬁer. Furthermore, this approach highlights the
importance of gene expression within adipose tissue (overbrain tissue) for Alzheimer ’s disease (AD), in keeping with
evidence linking adiposity and AD risk. A p-value of 5.79e-
10 for the classi ﬁer accuracy being better than the non-
information ratio suggests the utility of this approach.
Thus, we conclude that by using ML we can ef ﬁciently
generate novel insights into the location and processesdriving disease in genetic forms of adult neurological
disorders.
J.A. Botía: None. S. Guel ﬁ:None. K. D ’sa:None.
J. Vandrovcova: None. J. Hardy: None. M. Weale: None.
M. Ryten: None.76C14
Population Genetics and Ancient DNA
C14.1
Extremely rare variants reveal patterns of germline
mutation rate heterogeneity in humans
S. Zoellner, J. Carlson, BRIDGES Consortium, J. Li
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States
Precise estimates of the single-nucleotide mutation rate
and its variability are essential to the study of human gen-
ome evolution and genetic diseases. However, estimates
using common variants are biased by selection and biasedgene conversion while analyzing de novo variants provides
insufﬁcient observations to consider sequence context. Here
we use ~36 million singleton variants observed in 3,716whole-genome sequences to characterize the heterogeneity
of germline mutation rates across the genome. These sin-
gletons arose very recently in the population, and are thuslargely unaffected by confounding evolutionary factors. We
show that nucleotide context is the strongest predictor of
mutability, with mutation rates varying by >650-folddepending on the identity of three bases upstream or
downstream of the mutated site. Histone modi ﬁcations,
replication timing, recombination rate, and other localgenomic features further modify mutability; magnitude and
direction of this modi ﬁcation varies with the sequence
context. We evaluate the estimated models in an indepen-dent dataset of ~46,000 de novo mutations and show that
singleton-based estimates provide a more accurate predic-
tion of the mutation patterns than estimates based oncommon variants used in previous approaches. Incorporat-
ing the effects of genomic features further improves the
prediction. Finally we demonstrate how highly mutable 7base pair motives can help identify new mechanisms of
germ-line mutation. The effects of sequence contexts,
genomic features, and their interactions we present capturethe most re ﬁned portrait to date of the germline mutation
patterns in humans.
S. Zoellner: None. J. Carlson: None. J. Li: None.C14.2
Clustered de novo mutations with large intra-
mutational distance contribute to the maternal age
effect
J. M. Goldmann1, V. Seplyarskiy2, T. Vilboux3, D. L. Bodian3,B .D .
Solomon3,4,5,6, J. F. Deeken3, J. A. Veltman1,7, W. S. W. Wong3,
C. Gilissen1, J. E. Niederhuber3,8
1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Division of Genet-
ics, Brigham and Women ’s Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, United States,3Inova Translational
Medicine Institute (ITMI), Inova Health Systems, Falls
Church, VA, United States,4GeneDx, 207 Perry Pkwy,
Gaithersburg, MD, United States,5Department of Pedia-
trics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medi-
cine,, Richmond, VA, United States,6Department of
Pediatrics, Inova Children ’s Hospital, Inova Health System,
Falls Church, VA, United States,7Institute of Genetic
Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle Uni-
versity, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,8Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MA,
United States
Clustered mutations are series of point mutations
occurring in close proximity. Clustering of mutations has
been observed in humans in germline, somatic and cancercells. Evidence suggests that these mutation clusters mostly
arise from single mutational events, giving rise to point
mutations with reciprocal distances of up to 20kb. However,the exact mutational mechanism of germline mutation
clusters remains elusive.
Here, we collected data on clustered de novo mutations
by sequencing whole genomes of 1,291 parent-offspring
trios. We identi ﬁed 1,796 clustered de novo mutations
(cDNMs) and determined the parent-of-origin for 660cDNMs (37%) to investigate the differences between male
and female germline cDNMs.
We show that mutation clusters containing C-G sub-
stitutions prefer speci ﬁc mutation orders, suggesting that the
underlying mutational in ﬂuences are oriented according to
the DNA backbone. Unlike unclustered DNM, we do notﬁnd a paternal age effect for clustered DNM. However,
speciﬁcally maternal DNM clusters with inter-mutational
distances above 1kb are correlated with maternal age,accounting for a signi ﬁcant proportion of the maternal age
effect of all DNMs. Interestingly, these clusters are enriched
on chromosomes 8, 9 and 16 in known maternal acceleratedregions.
In conclusion, our study sheds light on the potential
mechanisms underlying these events and reveals the sig-niﬁcant contribution of cDNMs to the maternal age effect.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 77J.M. Goldmann: None. V. Seplyarskiy: None. T. Vil-
boux: None. D.L. Bodian: None. B.D. Solomon: None.
J.F. Deeken: None. J.A. Veltman: None. W.S.W. Wong:
None. C. Gilissen: None. J.E. Niederhuber: None.
C14.3
Admixture mapping identi ﬁes Inuit ancestry loci
associated with metabolic traits in the Greenlandic
population
V. Yakimov, L. Skotte, A. Koch, B. Søborg, M. Andersson, S. W.
Michelsen, M. L. Pedersen, F. Geller, M. Melbye, B. Feenstra
Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark
Background: Greenland is inhabited by a small, histori-
cally isolated Inuit population, which only in the last few
centuries admixed with Europeans. Indigenous InuitGreenlanders have adapted to harsh Arctic conditions,
including low temperatures and restricted access to plant-
based food. We aim to make use of recent admixture in theGreenlandic population to investigate ancestry speci ﬁc
genetic associations with metabolism.
Materials and Methods: We genotyped 1570 Green-
landers and inferred locus-speci ﬁc (local) ancestry. Using
linear mixed models to control for the population structure,
we performed admixture mapping with 232 serum meta-bolites quanti ﬁed by NMR spectroscopy.
Results: We found three loci where local ancestry asso-
ciated with changed levels of one or more metabolites. Theﬁrst is located on 11q13.2, where Inuit ancestry was asso-
ciated with several metabolites including decreased degree
of fatty acid unsaturation (p =8.5e-38). At the second
locus, located on 8q21.3, Inuit ancestry was associated with
an increased ratio of ω-3 fatty acids to all fatty acids (p =
1.1e-6). Finally, at 12q13.13, Inuit ancestry was associatedwith increased levels of lactate (p =1.1e-6).
Conclusions: Ourﬁndings indicate that Inuit ancestry at
speciﬁc regions in the genome is associated with the reg-
ulation of metabolism in the Greenlandic population,
demonstrate that admixture mapping can localize ancestry-
speciﬁc functional variants, and illustrate the power of
genetic studies in small, historically isolated populations.
Funding: Danish Medical Research Council, The Green-
landic Ministry of Education, Church, Culture and GenderEquality, Maersk Foundation, Aase and Ejnar Danielsens
Foundation, Novo Nordisk Foundation, Oak Foundation,
Carlsberg Foundation.
V. Yakimov: None. L. Skotte: None. A. Koch: None.
B. Søborg: None. M. Andersson: None. S.W. Michelsen:
None. M.L. Pedersen: None. F. Geller: None. M. Melbye:
None. B. Feenstra: None.C14.4
Farming in Estonia was introduced by Early Bronze
Age migrants from the Steppe
L. Saag1,2, L. Varul3, C. L. Scheib4, J. Stenderup5, M. E. Allentoft5,
L. Saag2, L. Pagani2, M. Reidla2,1, K. Tambets2, E. Metspalu2,1,
A. Kriiska6, E. Willerslev5, T. Kivisild4,2,1, M. Metspalu2
1Department of Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Cell and
Molecular Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,
2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia,3School of Humanities,
Tallinn University, Tallinn, Estonia,4Department of
Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom,5Centre for GeoGenetics,
Natural History Museum of Denmark, University ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
6University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia
The shift from hunting-gathering to farming and animal
husbandry happens relatively late in Northeast Europe and
the extent to which it involved genetic ancestry change isstill poorly understood.
To shed more light on the genetic changes during the
shift to farming based economies in Estonia, we extractedand sequenced aDNA from skeletal remains uncovered in
the context of Mesolithic Narva Culture (MNC) (7,200 –
5,900 yr BP), and Neolithic Comb Ceramic Culture (CCC)(5,900 –3,800 yr BP) and Corded Ware Culture (CWC)
(4,800 –4,000 yr BP) from Estonia. We compared these
autosomal as well as mtDNA, X and Y chromosome data tosequence and genotype data from modern and ancient
populations of Europe, West Asia and Siberia to make
inferences about the extent of continuity and genetic changeduring the end of the Stone Age in Estonia.
Weﬁnd that Estonian hunter-gatherers of Comb Ceramic
Culture are closest to Eastern hunter-gatherers. The Esto-nian ﬁrst farmers of Corded Ware Culture show high
similarity in their autosomes with Steppe Belt Late Neo-
lithic/Bronze Age individuals, Caucasus hunter-gatherersand Iranian farmers while their X chromosomes are most
closely related with the European Early Farmers of Anato-
lian descent.
These ﬁndings suggest that the shift to intensive culti-
vation and animal husbandry in Estonia presents a unique
case of a sex-speci ﬁc process triggered by the arrival of new
people and culture, whose ancestry can be traced back to the
Steppe rather than to Anatolia.
L. Saag: None. L. Varul: None. C.L. Scheib: None.
J. Stenderup: None. M.E. Allentoft: None. L. Saag:
None. L. Pagani: None. M. Reidla: None. K. Tambets:
None. E. Metspalu: None. A. Kriiska: None. E. Will-
erslev: None. T. Kivisild: None. M. Metspalu: None.78C14.5
Complex spatio-temporal distribution and
genogeographic af ﬁnity of mitochondrial DNA
haplogroups in 24,216 Danes
J. Bybjerg-Grauholm1, C. M. Hagen1, V. F. Goncalves2, M. Bækvad-
Hansen1, C. S. Hansen1, P. L. Hedley1, J. K. Kanters3, J. Nielsen4,
M. Theisen1, O. Mors5, J. Kennedy6, A. B. Demur7, T. M. Werge7,
M. Nordentoft8, A. Børglum5, P. B. Mortensen5, D. M. Haugaard1,
M. Christiansen1
1Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark,2University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada,3University of Copen-
hagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,4Aalborg University Hos-
pital, Aalborg, Denmark,5Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark,6Toronto University, Toronto, ON, Canada,
7Mental Health Centre, Sct Hans, Copenhagen, Denmark,
8Mental Health Centre, Capital Region, Copenhagen,
Denmark
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups (hgs) are
evolutionarily conserved sets of mtDNA SNPs. Associa-
tions of hgs with geographical origin, disease and physio-
logical characteristics have been reported, but havefrequently not been reproducible. We assessed, using 418
mtDNA SNPs on the PsychChip (Illumina), the spatio-
temporal distribution of mtDNA hgs in DNA isolated from24,642 geographically un-biased dried blood spots (DBS),
collected from 1981 to 2005 through the Danish National
Neonatal Screening program. Geno-geographic af ﬁnity was
established with ADMIXTURE using a reference of 100K
+autosomal SNPs in 2,248 individuals from nine popula-
tions. The hg distribution was typically Northern European,and hgs were highly variable based on median-joining
analysis, suggesting multiple founder events. Considerable
heterogeneity and variation in autosomal geno-geographicafﬁnity (ancestry background) was observed. Thus,
individuals with hg H exhibited 95 %, and U hgs 38.2 % –
92.5 %, Danish ancestry. Signi ﬁcant clines between geo-
graphical regions and rural and metropolitan populations
were found. Over 25 years, macro-hg L increased from
0.2 % to 1.2 % (p =1.1*E-10), and M from 1 % to 2.4 %
(p=3.7*E-8). Hg U increased among the R macro-hg from
14.1 % to 16.5 % (p =1.9*E-3). Geno-geographic af ﬁnity,
geographical skewedness, and sub-hg distribution suggestedthat the L, M and U increases are due to immigration. The
complex spatio-temporal dynamics and geno-geographic
heterogeneity of mtDNA in the Danish population re ﬂect
repeated migratory events and, in later years, net immigra-
tion. Such complexity may explain the often contradictory
and population-speci ﬁc reports of mito-genomic association
with disease.J. Bybjerg-Grauholm: None. C.M. Hagen: None. V.F.
Goncalves: None. M. Bækvad-Hansen: None. C.S.
Hansen: None. P.L. Hedley: None. J.K. Kanters: None.
J. Nielsen: None. M. Theisen: None. O. Mors: None.
J. Kennedy: None. A.B. Demur: None. T.M. Werge:
None. M. Nordentoft: None. A. Børglum: None. P.B.
Mortensen: None. D.M. Haugaard: None. M. Chris-
tiansen: None.
C14.6
From lost empires to modern cities with ancient GPS
E. Elhaik1, R. Das2, M. Pirooznia3, U. Esposito1
1University of Shef ﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,2Man-
ipal University, Manipal, India,3NIH, Bethesda, MD,
United States
Recent studies have demonstrated that geographical ori-
gin can be accurately inferred from genomic data and
prompted us to embark on the unresolved question ofinferring the geographical origin of skeletal ﬁnds, thus far
assumed to be synonymous with their burial site. Whereas
geographical inference based on anatomical or morpholo-gical information is highly complex and error-prone, parti-
cularly when the remains are physically damaged or
fragmented, using ancient DNA for localization entailsdifferent challenges due to the lack of intermediate samples
over space or time, the small number of SNPs, and their
spurious nature. We developed the ancient GeographicPopulation Structure (aGPS), an admixture-based method
that uses the relationship between admixture and geography
to predict the geographical locations of samples. aGPSimplements a genetic clustering approach and uses a
dynamic reference panel based on the chronology of the
sample. Applied to a genomic dataset of over 300 ancientEurasians and Near-Easterners (Pleistocene - Late Iron
Age), aGPS localized ~50% of the samples within 0 –200km
from their burial site, ~32% within 200 –1,000km, and the
remaining within 1,000 –3,175km, with an overall average
accuracy of 525km. We have also identi ﬁed“biodiversity
centers ”, which correspond with ancient Empires that drew
immigrants from other countries, and the spatio-temporal
structure of the corresponding migration ﬂuxes. Our results
conﬁrm the massive Yamnaya migration from the steppe to
Central Europe during the Late Neolithic. Our ﬁndings
allow addressing long standing questions in history con-
cerning the identity of the Old World residents.
E. Elhaik: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; DNA
Diagnostic Center. R. Das: None. M. Pirooznia: None.
U. Esposito: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 79C15
Reproductive Genetics
C15.1
Aging oocytes accelerate regional sequence
diversity in humans and African apes
H. Jónsson, P. Sulem, B. Kehr, S. Kristmundsdottir, F. Zink, E.
Hjartarson, M. T. Hardarson, K. E. Hjorleifsson, H. P. Eggertsson, S. A.Gudjonsson, L. D. Ward, G. A. Arnadottir, E. A. Helgason, H. Helgason,
A. Gylfason, A. Jonasdottir, A. Jonasdottir, T. Rafnar, M. Frigge, S. N.
Stacey, O. T. Magnusson, U. Thorsteinsdottir, G. Masson, A. Kong, B. V.Halldorsson, A. Helgason, D. F. Gudbjartsson, K. Stefansson
deCODE genetics / Amgen Inc., Reykjavík, Iceland
Introduction : The accumulation of germline de novo
mutations (DNMs) is a primary requisite for evolution.Despite this, there is considerable uncertainty about the
parent-of-origin effects on DNM accumulation and the
mutational mechanisms inducing them.
Material and Methods: We whole-genome sequenced
1,548 Icelanders (~35X coverage), their parents, and for a
subset of 225, at least one child.
Results: We found 108,778 DNMs, whereof we identi ﬁed
parental origin of 42,961 DNMs. We estimated a paternal
and maternal age effect of 1.51 and 0.37 DNM per year ofthe age of the parents, respectively. There was a consider-
able difference in the relative contribution of maternal CpG
> TpG (0.26% decrease per year) and C > G (0.33%increase per year) DNMs with increasing maternal age.
Strikingly, the maternal age at conception affects the
regional distribution of DNMs especially for C > G DNMs,resulting in a 50 fold greater C > G mutation rate in a 20
megabase region of chromosome 8p. We found that age-
related gene conversions from mothers mostly occur withinthe regions enriched with maternal C > G DNMs, providing
a causal link between double strand break repair and the
accumulation of DNMs with maternal age. This age-relatedregional in ﬂux of maternal C > G DNMs is re ﬂected in rare
and common C > G mutations and pairwise divergence
between African great ape species.
Conclusions: Our result showcase the interaction of par-
ental age effect on the location, type and rate of mutations;
and how these sex differences have shaped generation ofsequence diversity throughout human history and African
great ape divergence.
H. Jónsson: None. P. Sulem: None. B. Kehr:
None. S. Kristmundsdottir: None. F. Zink: None.
E. Hjartarson: None. M.T. Hardarson: None. K.E.
Hjorleifsson: None. H.P. Eggertsson: None. S.A. Gud-
jonsson: None. L.D. Ward: None. G.A. Arnadottir:
None. E.A. Helgason: None. H. Helgason: None.A. Gylfason: None. A. Jonasdottir: None. A. Jonasdottir:
None. T. Rafnar: None. M. Frigge: None. S.N. Stacey:
None. O.T. Magnusson: None. U. Thorsteinsdottir:
None. G. Masson: None. A. Kong: None. B.V.
Halldorsson: None. A. Helgason: None. D.F. Gudb-
jartsson: None. K. Stefansson: None.
C15.2
Interactome between embryo trophectoderm cellsand endometrial epithelial and stromal cells: novel
insights into implantation process in human
M. Koel1, K. Krjut škov1,2, A. Reddy2, M. Saare3, S. Katayama2,
L. Kumar4, K. Gemzell Danielsson4, F. Lanner5,6, E. Einarsdottir2,7,
D. Blesa8, C. Simon9, J. Kere2,7, A. Salumets1,3,10, S. Altmäe1
1Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu, Esto-
nia,2Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska
Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden,3Institute of Clinical Medi-
cine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,4Department of Women ’s and
Children ’s Health, Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,5Department of
Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, KarolinskaInstitute, Stockholm, Sweden,
6Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset, Stockholm,
Sweden,7Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, and Molecular
Neurology Research Program, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland,8Igenomix, Valencia, Spain,9Valencia
University/INCLIVA & Igenomix, Valencia, Spain,
10Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland
Human embryo implantation is a complex process that
requires dialogue between the receptive lineage of uterusi.e. endometrium and blastocyst stage embryo. As it is
ethically and technically impossible to study human embryo
implantation in vivo, the molecular processes during theimplantation process are still not well known. Protein-
protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed using
transcriptome data on upregulated genes from receptiveendometrial epithelium or stromal cells and polar-
trophectodermal cells. The detected mRNAs were con-
verted into corresponding proteins, the subset of proteinslocalized in cell membrane and surface were extracted, and
PPI networks were created based on interactions in
STRING 10.0 database. Endometrial epithelial-trophectodermal cell network contains 157 and endo-
metrial stromal-trophectodermal network 138 interacting
cell surface proteins. Biological processes related to cellattachment and proliferation were detected in both
blastocyst-epithelial and blastocyst-stromal cell-speci ﬁc PPI80networks. The largest super-cluster in stromal-speci ﬁc cell
network was related to the positive regulation of kinase
activity and extracellular matrix organization, while in
epithelial-speci ﬁc cell network blood coagulation and cell
junction assembly clusters were detected. The hyaluronan
metabolism pathway, known to be important in embryoimplantation, was uniquely enriched in epithelial cell net-
work, underlining the cell type speci ﬁc nature of human
embryo implantation process. This is the ﬁrst comprehen-
sive study of molecular networks between blastocyst and
speciﬁc cell types of receptive human endometrium, pro-
viding new understanding about the molecular processesthat lead to successful embryo implantation, thus allowing
to predict the best timing for embryo transfer in in vitro
fertilization cycles. Funding: grants IUT34-16; EU48695;EU324509.
M. Koel: None. K. Krjut škov: None. A. Reddy: None.
M. Saare: None. S. Katayama: None. L. Kumar: None.
K. Gemzell Danielsson: None. F. Lanner: None.
E. Einarsdottir: None. D. Blesa: None. C. Simon: None.
J. Kere: None. A. Salumets: None. S. Altmäe: None.
C15.3
Diagnostic value of non-invasive prenatal testing(NIPT) using genomic imbalance pro ﬁling (GIPseq)
N. Brison, K. Van Den Bogaert, L. Dehaspe, H. Peeters, H. Van Esch,
G. Van Buggenhout, A. Vogels, J. Breckpot, T. de Ravel, E. Legius,
K. Devriendt, J. R. Vermeesch
Centre for Human Genetics - KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) enables risk esti-
mation for common fetal autosomal aneuploidies with high
sensitivity and speci ﬁcity. Using clinical analysis of over
20.000 pregnancies, we show that NIPT by in-house opti-mized genomic imbalance pro ﬁling (GIPseq) increases the
sensitivity for detection of fetal trisomy 21, 18 and 13 to
100%, 97,2% and 100% respectively without reducing thespeciﬁcity, which exceeds 99,9% for each of these triso-
mies. Furthermore, NIPT by GIPseq offers the advantage of
detecting other genomic imbalances that are clinicallyrelevant for fetal or maternal health. These ﬁndings include
(i) other aneuploidies (0.5%), with the highest incidence for
trisomy 7, 16 and 22 respectively, (ii) fetal or maternalsegmental imbalances (15 and 13 cases respectively) and
(iii) maternal cancer (7 cases). We show that, although
uncommon aneuploidies mostly exist as con ﬁned placental
mosaicism with different grades of mosaicism depending on
the sampled region, they pose a risk for intra-uterine growth
retardation and uniparental disomy (UPD), as illustrated in afetus with mosaic trisomy 15 and a UPD15 cell line. We
also demonstrate that placental chromosomal imbalancescan pass the developmental barrier, resulting in complex
fetal segmental anomalies with severe clinical implications.
In addition, the detected maternal and fetal segmental
imbalances triggered expert ultrasound follow-up and, in
some cases, had implications on future reproductive choice.
Genome-wide NIPT also enables presymptomatic detectionof maternal tumors. Altogether, we demonstrate that
genome-wide NIPT analysis improves pregnancy manage-
ment without introducing unnecessary invasive testing.
N. Brison: None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None.
L. Dehaspe: None. H. Peeters: None. H. Van Esch:
None. G. Van Buggenhout: None. A. Vogels: None.
J. Breckpot: None. T. de Ravel: None. E. Legius: None.
K. Devriendt: None. J.R. Vermeesch: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Modest; Cartagenia. Other; Modest; Collabora-
tion with Cartagenia.
C15.4
Clinical implementation of non-invasive prenatal
diagnosis (NIPD) for single gene disorders
E. C. Young1, B. Bowns1, A. Gerrish1, M. Parks2, S. Court1, S. Cleary1,S .
Clokie1, J. Hewitt1, D. Williams1, T. Cole1, M. Grif ﬁths1, F. MacDonald1,
S. K. Allen1
1West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham,
United Kingdom,2Nonacus Ltd., Birmingham, United
Kingdom
Introduction: We have developed and implemented a
method for NIPD of multiple single gene disorders (SGD),
including spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), Duchenne andBecker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD), cystic ﬁbrosis
(CF) and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). We laun-
ched a diagnostic service for SMA and DMD/BMD inSeptember 2016.
Materials and Methods: The test involves targeted
enrichment of thousands of SNPs across multiple genomicregions and massively parallel sequencing (Illumina MiSeq)
of cfDNA followed by relative haplotype dosage (RHDO)
analysis. Maternal, paternal and proband genomic DNAsamples are tested alongside cfDNA for haplotype phasing
and to measure fetal fraction. Our method can test 2 –3
patients on a single MiSeq run, thus increasing the multi-plexing capacity and decreasing testing costs for clinical
laboratories.
Results: We have received referrals from across the world,
including 8 pregnancies at risk of SMA, 1 pregnancy at risk
of DMD and 1 pregnancy at risk of BMD. Samples have
ranged in gestational age from 8 to 13 weeks, with anaverage turnaround time for results of 12 calendar days.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 81Overall, we have reported 3 normal, 5 unaffected carrier and
2 affected pregnancies.
Conclusions: We have encountered a number of scenarios,
including consanguinity, 2 +0 SMA carrier parents and
recombination events. We have shown that NIPD by RHDO
is feasible in a clinical setting, increasing accessibility tomany more couples with a pregnancy at risk of a SGD.
Validation is still ongoing for CF and CAH, with similarly
promising results so far.
Funding: Health Innovation Challenge Fund (DoH, Well-
come Trust).
E.C. Young: None. B. Bowns: None. A. Gerrish:
None. M. Parks: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Nonacus Ltd. S. Court: None. S. Cleary: None.
S. Clokie: None. J. Hewitt: None. D. Williams: None.
T. Cole: None. M. Grif ﬁths:None. F. MacDonald: None.
S.K. Allen: None.
C15.5
Exome sequencing of 406 parental/fetal trios with
structural abnormalities revealed by ultrasound inthe UK Prenatal Assessment of Genomes and
Exomes (PAGE) project
D. J. McMullan1, J. Lord2, R. Eberhardt2, G. Rinck2, S. Hamilton1,
R. Keelagher1, L. Jenkins3, E. Quinlan-Jones4, D. Williams5, R. Scott6,
M. Kilby4,7, L. Chitty6, E. Maher8, M. Hurles2
1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birming-
ham Women ’s and Children ’s NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom,2The Wellcome Trust San-
ger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom,3NE Thames Regional Genetics
Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, Lon-
don, United Kingdom,4Department of Fetal Medicine,
Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s Hospital, Birming-
ham, United Kingdom,5West Midlands Clinical Genetics
Service, Birmingham Women ’s and Children ’s NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom,6Genetics
and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health and
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Founda-
tion Trust, London, United Kingdom,7Centre for Women ’s
and New-born Health, IMSR, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, United Kingdom,8Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Cambridge and Cambridge NIHRBiomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom
PAGE aims to apply whole exome sequencing (WES) to
1000 trios recruited in the UK-NHS over 3 years to identify
pathogenic variation underlying heterogeneous fetal struc-
tural abnormalities detected by ultrasound scan (USS).
Trio WES is conducted after resolution of pregnancy if
conventional testing (QF-PCR, chromosomal microarray ortargeted single/panel gene testing) fails to establish a de ﬁ-
nitive diagnosis. Genetic variants are triaged via a stringent
ﬁltering pipeline established for the UK Deciphering
Developmental Disorders (DDD) project and potentially
pathogenic variants are assessed and classi ﬁed by a UK-
wide multidisciplinary clinical review panel (CRP), tech-nically validated in NHS accredited labs and reported back
to Clinical Genetics units and families where appropriate.
Thus far from 259 trios reviewed by the CRP, 16 likely
diagnoses have been revealed, giving a diagnostic yield of
~6%. Diagnostic yield varies by phenotypic class, with
multisystem phenotypes showing the highest (~16%).Diagnoses include de novo mutations in known dominant
developmental disorder genes (n =9), biparentally inherited
homozygous/compound heterozygous variants (n =6) and
maternal UPD chromosome 15. The majority of variants are
SNVs/indels which would escape targeted detection by
conventional testing. When compared to a null model basedon triplet mutation rate, an excess of de novo mutation is
observed, more pronounced in known dominant genes (such
as KMT2D). Further analysis is predicted to identify newgene and mechanistic associations underlying observed
phenotypes as more samples are processed. PAGE aims to
catalyse responsible adoption of WES and potentially WGSin routine diagnostics in the prenatal setting.
D.J. McMullan: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest;
Congenica. J. Lord: None. R. Eberhardt: None.
G. Rinck: None. S. Hamilton: None. R. Keelagher: None.
L. Jenkins: None. E. Quinlan-Jones: None. D. Williams:
None. R. Scott: None. M. Kilby: None. L. Chitty: None.
E. Maher: None. M. Hurles: None.
C15.6
Evaluation of an expanded carrier screening offer in
a non commercial setting
P. Lakeman1, S. van Koningsbruggen1, E. J. W. Redeker1,C .P .E .
Ottenheim1, I. B. Mathijssen1, M. C. Cornel2, M. M. A. M. Mannens1,
E. J. Meijers-Heijboer1,2, L. Henneman2
1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Since May 2016, expanded carrier screening for
50 severe recessive disorders is available in a non-commercial hospital setting in Amsterdam, to facilitate
informed reproductive decision-making. The screening aims
at couples without a priori increased risk (no family his-tory). Couples can apply for counseling via www.dra
gerschapstest.nl , or hospital referral. Pre- and posttest
counseling is provided by genetic professionals at the out-patient clinic. External geneticists can send in blood sam-
ples as well. Outcome and impact of testing was evaluated.82Methods: A capture-based next generation sequencing
strategy is used. Only pathogenic variants are reported
(individual reports). CNV analyses is included. Reimbur-
sement is possible for couples with high-risk indication
(HRI) based on ancestry/consanguinity. Pre- and posttest
questionnaires were completed including reasons for test-ing, knowledge, psychological impact, and satisfaction.
Partners could opt for parallel or sequential testing.
Results: In the ﬁrst nine months, 39 couples (25 with HRI)
and 6 individuals (4 with HRI) visited the outpatient clinic.
One couple refrained from testing. Sixteen couples choose
parallel testing. Eventually, eighty individuals were tested,including 5 partners sequentially tested after positive tested
carriers, and 15 additional external requests. Carrier status
of one (n =21 persons), two (n =3), three (n =1) or four
(n=1) mutation(s) was identi ﬁed. Fifty-four (68%) indi-
viduals tested negative. No carrier couples were found.
Conclusions: Preliminary analyses shows that about one
third of tested individuals were carriers. Although the test
was designed for couples with no a priori risk, more than
half reported HRI. One-year outcome will be presented atESHG Conference, including results from questionnaires.
P. Lakeman: Other; Signi ﬁcant; All authors are af ﬁli-
ated to a hospital that offers (expanded) carrier screening ina non-commercial setting. S. van Koningsbruggen: None.
E.J.W. Redeker: None. C.P.E. Ottenheim: None. I.B.
Mathijssen: None. M.C. Cornel: None. M.M.A.M.
Mannens: None. E.J. Meijers-Heijboer: None. L.
Henneman: None.
C16
Intellectual Disability
C16.1
Mutations in epigenetic regulation genes are amajor cause of overgrowth with intellectual
disability
N. Rahman1,2, C. Loveday1, S. Yost1, M. Clarke1, E. Ramsay1,
A. Zachariou1, A. Elliott1, H. Wylie1, S. Mahamdallie1, S. Seal1,
E. Ruark1, A. Ardissone3, O. Rittinger4, F. Stewart5, K. Temple6,
T. Cole7, K. Tatton-Brown1,8
1Institute of Cancer Research, London, Sutton, United
Kingdom,2Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,3Child Neu-
rology Unit, Foundation IRCCS C Besta NeurologicalInstitute, Milan, Italy,
4Landeskrankenanstalten Salzburg,
Kinderklinik Department of Pediatrics, Klinische Genetik,
Salzburg, Austria,5Northern Ireland Regional Genetics
Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Ireland,6Human
Development and Health Academic Unit, Faculty ofMedicine, University of Southampton and Wessex Clinical
Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS
Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom,7West Midlands
Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women ’s Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust and University of Birmingham,
Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham, United King-dom,
8South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St
George ’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom
To explore the genetic architecture of overgrowth syn-
dromes and human growth control we performed experi-mental and bioinformatic analyses of 710 individuals with
overgrowth (height and/or head circumference ≥+2SD)
and intellectual disability (OGID). We identi ﬁed a causal
mutation in one of 14 genes in 50% (353/710). This
includes HIST1H1E , encoding histone H1.4, which has not
been associated with a developmental disorder previously.The pathogenic HIST1H1E mutations are predicted to result
in a product that is less effective in neutralising negatively-
charged linker DNA because it has a reduced net charge,and in DNA binding and protein-protein interactions
because key residues are truncated. Functional network
analyses demonstrated that epigenetic regulation is a pro-minent biological process dysregulated in individuals with
OGID. Mutations in six epigenetic regulation genes, NSD1 ,
EZH2 ,DNMT3A ,CHD8 ,HIST1H1E andEED , accounted
for 44% of individuals (311/710). There was signi ﬁcant
overlap between the 14 OGID genes and 611 genes in
regions identi ﬁed in GWAS to be associated with height
(P=6.84 × 10
−8), suggesting common variation impacting
OGID gene function in ﬂuences height at a population level.
Increased cellular growth is a hallmark of cancer andthere was striking overlap between the OGID genes
and 260 somatically mutated cancer driver genes (P =
1.75 × 10
−14). However, the mutation spectra of genes
involved in OGID and cancer differ, suggesting complex
genotype-phenotype relationships. These data reveal
insights into the genetic control of human growth anddemonstrate that exome sequencing in OGID has a high
(50%) diagnostic yield, and could be have utility as a ﬁrst-
line test in OGID. Funder, Wellcome:100210/Z/12/Z.
N. Rahman: None. C. Loveday: None. S. Yost: None.
M. Clarke: None. E. Ramsay: None. A. Zachariou:
None. A. Elliott: None. H. Wylie: None. S. Mahamdallie:
None. S. Seal: None. E. Ruark: None. A. Ardissone:
None. O. Rittinger: None. F. Stewart: None. K. Temple:
None. T. Cole: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 83C16.2
Mutations in EBF3 disturb transcriptional pro ﬁles
and cause intellectual disability, ataxia, and facial
dysmorphism
F. L. Harms1, K. M. Girisha2, A. A. Hardigan3,4, F. Kortüm1, A. Shukla2,
M. Alawi5,6,7, A. Dalal8, L. Brady9, M. Tarnopolsky9, L. M. Bird10,11,S .
Ceulemans11, M. Bebin12, K. M. Bowling3, S. M. Hiatt3, E. J. Lose4,M .
Primiano13, W. K. Chung13, J. Juusola14, Z. C. Akdemir15,M .
Bainbridge16, W. Charng15, M. Drummond-Borg17, M. K. Eldomery15,A .
W. El-Hattab18, M. A. M. Saleh19, S. Bézieau20, B. Cogné20,B .
Isidor20,21, S. Küry20, J. R. Lupski15, R. M. Myers3, G. M. Cooper3,K .
Kutsche1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany,2Department of
Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal
University, Manipal, India,3HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, United States,4Department
of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Bir-
mingham, AL, United States,5University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Bioinformatics Service Facility,
Hamburg, Germany,6Center for Bioinformatics, University
of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany,7Virus Genomics, Hein-
rich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Vir-
ology, Hamburg, Germany,8Diagnostics Division, Centre
for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Tel-angana, India,
9Department of Pediatrics, McMaster Uni-
versity Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada,
10Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San
Diego, CA, United States,11Division of Genetics/Dysmor-
phology, Rady Children ’s Hospital San Diego, San Diego,
CA, United States,12Department of Neurology, University
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United
States,13Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia
University, New York, NY, United States,14GeneDx, Gai-
thersburg, MD, United States,15Department of Molecular
and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Hous-
ton, TX, United States,16Human Genome Sequencing
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States,17Cook Children ’s Genetic Clinic, Fort Worth, TX,
United States,18Division of Clinical Genetics and Meta-
bolic Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospi-
tal, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates,19Section of Medical
Genetics, Children ’s Hospital, King Fahad Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,20CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique
Médicale, Nantes, France,21INSERM, UMR-S 957, Nantes,
France
From a GeneMatcher-enabled international collabora-
tion, we identi ﬁed ten individuals affected by intellectualdisability, speech delay, ataxia, and facial dysmorphism and
carrying a deleterious EBF3 variant detected by whole-
exome sequencing. One 9-bp duplication and one splice-
site,ﬁve missense, and two nonsense variants in EBF3 were
found; the mutations occurred de novo in eight individuals,
and the missense variant c.625C > T (p.Arg209Trp) wasinherited by two affected siblings from their healthy mother,
who is mosaic. EBF3 belongs to the early B cell factor
family (also known as Olf, COE, or O/E) and is a tran-scription factor involved in neuronal differentiation and
maturation. Structural assessment predicted that the ﬁve
amino acid substitutions have damaging effects on DNAbinding of EBF3. Transient expression of EBF3 mutant
proteins in HEK293T cells revealed mislocalization of all
but one mutant in the cytoplasm, as well as nuclear locali-zation. By transactivation assays, all EBF3 mutants showed
signiﬁcantly reduced or no ability to activate transcription
of the reporter gene CDKN1A , and in situ subcellular
fractionation experiments demonstrated that EBF3 mutant
proteins were less tightly associated with chromatin.
Finally, in RNA-seq and ChIP-seq experiments, EBF3 actedas a transcriptional regulator, and mutant EBF3 had reduced
genome-wide DNAbinding and gene-regulatory activity.
Ourﬁndings demonstrate that variants disrupting EBF3 -
mediated transcriptional regulation cause intellectual dis-
ability and developmental delay and are present in ~0.1% of
individuals with unexplained neurodevelopmentaldisorders.
Grants Sponsors: NIH, Simons Foundation, Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, Cancer Prevention & ResearchInstitute of Texas training program
F.L. Harms: None. K.M. Girisha: None. A.A. Hard-
igan: None. F. Kortüm: None. A. Shukla: None.
M. Alawi: None. A. Dalal: None. L. Brady: None.
M. Tarnopolsky: None. L.M. Bird: None. S. Ceulemans:
None. M. Bebin: None. K.M. Bowling: None. S.M. Hiatt:
None. E.J. Lose: None. M. Primiano: None. W.K.
Chung: None. J. Juusola: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDX. Z.C. Akdemir: None.
M. Bainbridge: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock
options, patent or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant;
Codiﬁed Genomics LLC. W. Charng: None. M. Drum-
mond-Borg: None. M.K. Eldomery: None. A.W. El-
Hattab: None. M.A.M. Saleh: None. S. Bézieau: None.
B. Cogné: None. B. Isidor: None. S. Küry: None. J.R.
Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent
or other intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; 23andMe,
Lasergen Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signi ﬁcant;
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Baylor Genetics. R.M. Myers:
None. G.M. Cooper: None. K. Kutsche: None.84C16.3
Recurrent de novo missense mutations in small
GTPase gene RAB11B cause severe intellectual
disability and a distinctive brain phenotype
M. R. F. Reijnders1, I. J. C. Lamers2, H. Venselaar3, A. Kraus4,
S. Jansen1, B. B. A. de Vries1, G. Houge5, G. Aasland Gradek5,J .S e o6,
M. Choi6, J. Chae7, S. J. F. Letteboer2, S. E. C. van Beersum2,
S. Dusseljee2, H. G. Brunner1,8, D. Doherty9, T. Kleefstra1, R. Roepman2
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition andBehaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands,
2Department of Human
Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center; Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Nether-lands,
3Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Infor-
matics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,4Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service. Chapel
Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom,5Center for
Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway,6Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of,7Department of
Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,Seoul, Korea, Republic of,
8Department of Clinical Genet-
ics and School for Oncology & Developmental Biology
(GROW), Maastricht University Medical Center, Maas-tricht, Netherlands,
9Department of Pediatrics, Seattle
Children ’s Research Institute and University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, WA, United States
The Rab GTPase family comprises approximately 70
GTP-binding proteins that function in vesicle formation,transport and fusion. Interaction with downstream proteins
is only present in their GTP-bound, active state. Here, we
report six patients with two recurrent de novo missensemutations in RAB11B (p.(Val22Met)/four patients; p.
(Ala68Thr)/two patients). An overlapping neurodevelop-
mental (ND) phenotype, including severe intellectual dis-ability with absent speech, epilepsy, and spasticity was
observed in all patients. Additionally, visual problems,
musculoskeletal abnormalities and microcephaly were pre-sent in the majority. Re-evaluation of brain MRI images of
four patients, showed a shared distinct brain phenotype,
consisting of severely decreased white matter volume,thinned corpus callosum, hypoplasia of the cerebellar ver-
mis, optic nerve hypoplasia and mild ventriculomegaly. To
study the functional effect of the identi ﬁedRAB11B var-
iants, and to compare this with known inactive GDP- and
active GTP-bound RAB11B mutants (p.(Ser25Asn) and p.
(Gln70Leu), respectively), we modeled the variants on thethree-dimensional protein structure and performed sub-
cellular localization studies. We found that both variantsaltered the binding pocket of GTP/GDP and resulted in
disturbed cytosolic and Golgi localization in transfected
hTERT-RPE1 cells. Interestingly, these observations were
comparable to the known GDP-bound inactive mutant,
suggesting that the RAB11B mutations in patients resulted
in a predominantly inactive state of the protein. In line withthese ﬁndings, we observed that the patient mutations
altered protein-protein interactions with canonical RAB11B
binding partners. In conclusion, we report two recurrentdominant mutations in RAB11B leading to a ND syndrome,
likely caused by impaired GTP binding and subsequently,
altered protein-protein interactions.
M.R.F. Reijnders: None. I.J.C. Lamers: None.
H. Venselaar: None. A. Kraus: None. S. Jansen: None.
B.B.A. de Vries: None. G. Houge: None. G. Aasland
Gradek: None. J. Seo: None. M. Choi: None. J. Chae:
None. S.J.F. Letteboer: None. S.E.C. van Beersum:
None. S. Dusseljee: None. H.G. Brunner: None.
D. Doherty: None. T. Kleefstra: None. R. Roepman:
None.
C16.4
A syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder is caused
by de novo disruption of the proteasome regulatorysubunit PSMD12
S. Küry1, T. Besnard1, F. Ebstein2, T. N. Khan3, T. Gambin4, J. Douglas5,
C. A. Bacino6, S. J. Sanders7, A. Lehmann2, X. Latypova, M. Pacault1,
K. Khan8, S. Sacharow9, K. Glaser10, E. Bieth11, L. Perrin-Sabourin12,
M. Jacquemont13, M. T. Cho, K. G. Monaghan14, E. Roeder15,
A. Denommé-Pichon16, B. Yuan, F. Xia15, S. Simon17, D. Bonneau18,
P. Parent, K. Uguen19, B. Gilbert-Dussardier20, S. Odent21, A. Toutain22,
L. Pasquier21, D. Barbouth23, C. A. Shaw, A. Patel15, J. L. Smith,
Weimin Bi15, S. Schmitt, W. Deb, M. Nizon, S. Mercier, M. Vincent1,
C. Rooryck24, V. Malan25, I. Briceño, A. Gómez26, K. M. Nugent27,J .B .
Gibson28, B. Cogné1, J. R. Lupski15, H. A. F. Stessman29, E. E. Eichler29,
K. Retterer14, Y. Yang15, R. Redon30, N. Katsanis8, J. A. Rosenfeld15,
P. Kloetzel2, C. Golzio8, S. Bézieau1, P. Stankiewicz15, B. Isidor1
1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France,2Charité Uni-
versitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany,3Center for
Human Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical Cen-ter, Durham, NC, United States,
4Baylor College of Medi-
cine, Houston, TX 77030, USA, TX, United States,5Boston
Children ’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, MA, United States,6Baylor College of Madi-
cine, Houston, TX, United States,7Weill Institute for Neu-
rosciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA,United States,
8Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
NC, United States,9Boston Children ’s Hospital and Har-
vard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,10Miller
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, Uni-
ted States,11Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse,Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 85France,12Hôpital Robert Debré, Assistance Publique –
Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France,13CHU de La Réunion,
Saint Pierre, France,14GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United
States,15Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States,16CHU d ’Angers, Angers, France,17INSERM, Uni-
versité d ’Angers et Université de Nantes, Nantes, France,
18CHU d ’Angers, Angers, France,19CHU de Brest, Brest,
France,20CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France,21CHU de
Rennes, Rennes, France,22CHU de Tours, Tours, France,
23School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL,
United States,24CHU d
Introduction: Degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin-
proteasome system is an essential biological process in the
development of eukaryotic organisms and the maintenanceof physiological homeostasis. Dysregulation of this
mechanism leads to numerous human neurodevelopmental
and/or neurodegenerative disorders. Two independentteams recently highlighted the same candidate gene for
intellectual disability within the ubiquitin-proteasome
system.
Materials and Methods: Additional anomalies of the
candidate gene were sought in data from 50,000 exomes
and 59,000 chromosomal microarray analyses, thanks to aninternational collaboration between six research centers
specialized in neurodevelopmental disorders. To determine
the role of the candidate gene in the disorder, a zebra ﬁsh
model was generated and in vitro ubiquitination assays were
performed from normal and affected individuals ’cells.
Results: We identi ﬁed six de novo genomic deletion CNVs
and four de novo point mutations involving PSMD12 ,
encoding non-ATPase subunit RPN5 of the 19S regulator of
the 26S proteasome complex, in unrelated individuals withintellectual disability, congenital malformations, ophthal-
mologic anomalies, and subtle dysmorphic facial features.
We observed a reduced RPN5 protein level and an accu-mulation of ubiquitinated proteins without any impairment
of proteasome catalytic activity. Our psmd12 loss-of-
function zebra ﬁsh CRISPR/cas9 model exhibited micro-
cephaly, as well as renal and craniofacial anomalies.
Conclusions: Conclusions: our data support the importance
of RPN5 to human biology and disease directly implicatingPSMD12 haploinsuf ﬁciency, and aberrant functioning of
the scaffolding subunit of the proteasome, in impaired
neurodevelopment. These enable the de ﬁnition of a neuro-
developmental disorder due to PSMD12 variants, expanding
the phenotypic spectrum of ubiquitin-proteasome dependent
disorders.
(Grant: HUGODIMS, 2013, RC14_0107)
S. Küry: None. T. Besnard: None. F. Ebstein: None.
T.N. Khan: None. T. Gambin: None. J. Douglas: None.
C.A. Bacino: None. S.J. Sanders: None. A. Lehmann:
None. X. Latypova, M. Pacault: None. K. Khan: None.S. Sacharow: None. K. Glaser: None. E. Bieth: None.
L. Perrin-Sabourin: None. M. Jacquemont: None. M.T.
Cho, K. G. Monaghan: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. E. Roeder: None. A. Denommé-
Pichon: None. B. Yuan, F. Xia: None. S. Simon:
None.
D. Bonneau: None. P. Parent, K. Uguen: None. B. Gil-
bert-Dussardier: None. S. Odent: None. A. Toutain:
None. L. Pasquier: None. D. Barbouth: None. C.A.
Shaw, A. Patel: None. J.L. Smith, Weimin Bi: None.
S. Schmitt, W. Deb, M. Nizon, S. Mercier, M. Vincent:
None. C. Rooryck: None. V. Malan: None. I. Briceño,
A. Gómez: None. K.M. Nugent: None. J.B. Gibson:
None. B. Cogné: None. J.R. Lupski: None. H.A.F.
Stessman: None. E.E. Eichler: None. K. Retterer: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx.
Y. Yang: None. R. Redon: None. N. Katsanis: None. J.A.
Rosenfeld: None. P. Kloetzel: None. C. Golzio: None.
S. Bézieau: None. P. Stankiewicz: None. B. Isidor: None.
C16.5
Biallelic variants of UBA5 reveal that disruption of
the UFM1 cascade can result in early-onset
encephalopathy
E. Colin1,2, J. Daniel3, A. Ziegler1,4, J. Wakim4, A. Scrivo5, T. B. Haack6,
S. Khiati4, A. Denommé1,4, P. Amati-Bonneau1,4, M. Charif4,V .
Procaccio1,4, P. Reynier1,4, K. A. Aleck7, L. D. Botto8, C. L. Herper3,C .S .
Kaiser3, R. Nabbout9,S .N ’Guyen10, J. A. Mora-Lorca11, B. Assmann12,
S. Christ12, T. Meitinger6,13, T. M. Strom6,13, H. Prokisch6,13, The FREX
Consortium, A. Miranda-Vizuete11, G. F. Hoffmann12, G. Lenaers4,P .
Bomont5, E. Liebau3, D. Bonneau1,4
1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University
Hospital, Angers, France,2UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM
1083 and PREMMI, University of Angers, 49933 Angers
Cedex 9, France,3Department of Molecular Physiology,
Westfälische Wilhelms-University Münster, Münster, Ger-
many,4UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM 1083 and PREMMI,
University of Angers, Angers, France,5Avenir-Atip team,
INSERM U1051, Institute of Neurosciences of Montpellier,
University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France,6Institute of
Human Genetics, Technische Universität München,München, Germany,
7Department of Genetics and Meta-
bolism, Phoenix Children ’s Medical Group, Phoenix, AZ,
United States,8Division of Medical Genetics, Department
of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT,
United States,9Department of Pediatric Neurology,
National Reference Center for Rare Epilepsies, UniversityHospital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France,
10Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital,
Angers, France,11Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, Uni-
versity Hospital Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/University of
Seville, Seville, Spain,12Department of General Pediatrics,86Division of Pediatric Metabolic Medicine and Neurope-
diatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger-
many,13Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Neuherberg, Germany
Via whole-exome sequencing, we identi ﬁed rare
autosomal-recessive variants in UBA5 inﬁve children from
four unrelated families affected with a similar pattern of
severe intellectual de ﬁciency, microcephaly, movement
disorders, and/or early-onset intractable epilepsy. UBA5
encodes the E1-activating enzyme of ubiquitin-fold modi-
ﬁer 1 (UFM1), a recently identi ﬁed ubiquitin-like protein.
Biochemical studies of mutant UBA5 proteins and studies
inﬁbroblasts from affected individuals revealed that UBA5
mutations impair the process of ufmylation, resulting in anabnormal endoplasmic reticulum structure. In Cae-
norhabditis elegans, knockout of uba-5 and of human
orthologous genes in the UFM1 cascade alter cholinergic,but not glutamatergic, neurotransmission. In addition, uba5
silencing in zebra ﬁsh decreased motility while inducing
abnormal movements suggestive of seizures. These clinical,biochemical, and experimental ﬁndings support our ﬁnding
of UBA5 mutations as a pathophysiological cause for early-
onset encephalopathies due to abnormal protein ufmylation.
E. Colin: None. J. Daniel: None. A. Ziegler: None.
J. Wakim: None. A. Scrivo: None. T.B. Haack: None.
S. Khiati: None. A. Denommé: None. P. Amati-Bonneau:
None. M. Charif: None. V. Procaccio: None. P. Reynier:
None. K.A. Aleck: None. L.D. Botto: None. C.L.
Herper: None. C.S. Kaiser: None. R. Nabbout:
None. S. N ’Guyen: None. J.A. Mora-Lorca: None.
B. Assmann: None. S. Christ: None. T. Meitinger: None.
T.M. Strom: None. H. Prokisch: None. A. Miranda-
Vizuete: None. G.F. Hoffmann: None. G. Lenaers: None.
P. Bomont: None.
E. Liebau: None. D. Bonneau: None.
C16.6
Is Rett syndrome treatable? In vitro restoration of
neuronal microtubule dynamics and preclinicalstudies
W. Gold1,2, N. B. Sangani1,2, T. Lacina3, S. Williamson1, G. P. Gian
Paolo Vallerini4, L. Cantrill2,5, A. Kozikowski4, J. Christodoulou6,7,1,2
1Children ’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia,
2University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia,3Hochschule
Mannheim - University of Applied Sciences, Mannheim,
Germany,4University of Illinois, Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States,5Children ’s Hospital at Westmead, West-
mead, Australia,6Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Parkville, Australia,7University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
AustraliaIntroduction: Rett syndrome (RTT) is predominantly
caused by Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 ( MECP2 ) muta-
tions. Development of targeted therapeutics has been ham-
pered by an imprecise understanding of the
pathophysiology of RTT. We and others have demonstrated
that neuronal microtubule dynamics are disrupted in RTT,in association with reduced α-tubulin acetylation and
increased histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). We hypothe-
sized that pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 couldrestore microtubule stability and function, potentially ame-
liorating the RTT phenotype.
Materials and Methods: We tested this hypothesis in a
number of in vitro studies and in the Mecp2
T158Amouse
model of RTT. Acetylated tubulin and HDAC6 levels were
measured in MeCP2-de ﬁcient cells. Microtubule stability
was measured in RTT patient ﬁbroblasts and the traf ﬁcking
speed of mitochondria was measured in Mecp2T158Acul-
tured cortical neurons. Further, we tested if a highly speci ﬁc
HDAC6 inhibitor could ameliorate the impaired motor and
behavioural phenotype of the Mecp2T158Amice.
Results: We found reduced acetylated tubulin and
increased HDAC6 expression in both patient and
Mecp2T158Amouse brain, a reduction in mitochondrial
velocity RTT mouse cortical neurons, increased micro-tubule instability in patient ﬁbroblasts, and that HDAC6
inhibition restores tubulin acetylation levels and improves
microtubule stability. Preliminary studies with our HDAC6inhibitor revealed that treated Mecp2
T158Amice show
improvement in their impaired motor, behavioural and
respiratory phenotype.
Conclusions: Together, these early studies suggest that
pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 potentially provides
a novel therapeutic option for RTT, restoring neuronaltrafﬁcking de ﬁcits, and may stabilize the neurological
phenotype associated with the disorder in our animal model
of RTT.
W. Gold: None. N.B. Sangani: None. T. Lacina:
None. S. Williamson: None. G.P. Gian Paolo Vallerini:
None. L. Cantrill: None. A. Kozikowski: None.
J. Christodoulou: None.
C17
Hereditary Cancer
C17.1
The contribution of rare variants, polygenic risk,
and novel candidate genes to the hereditary risk ofAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 87breast cancer in a large cohort of Breast Cancer
families
P. A. James1,2,N .L i1, S. Rowley1, D. Goode1, L. Devereux1,S .
McInerny2, N. Grewal2, A. Trainer2, LifePool, R. Scott3, I. Campbell1
1Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Australia,2Parkville Familial Cancer Centre,
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia,
3Division of Genetics, Hunter Area Pathology Service,
Newcastle, Australia
Identifying the missing hereditary factors underlying the
familial risk of breast cancer could have a major and
immediate impact on managing the breast cancer risk forthese families.
Methods: We identi ﬁed candidate breast cancer predis-
position genes through whole exome sequencing of BRCAxfamilies, and sequenced, up to 1325 genes, along with 76
common variants associated with breast cancer, in index
cases from 5,900 BRCAx families and 5,600 cancer freewomen (ethnically matched on PCA).
Results: The role of recently described ( PALB2 ) or sus-
pected ( MRE11A ) moderately penetrant genes was con-
ﬁrmed. Conversely, the size of the cohort means that the
absence of enrichment for LoF mutations provides strong
evidence against other reported breast cancer genes ( BRIP1 ,
RINT1 ,RECQL ). For further moderate risk variants (in
CHEK2 ,ATM ,BRCA2 ) we observed signi ﬁcant risk mod-
iﬁcation based on the polygenic risk score (PRS - calculated
from the common variant data), with the risk restricted to
the co-occurrence of the rare variant and high PRS. Novel
candidate genes were identi ﬁed based on LoF mutations,
including NTHL1 (38 cases versus 15 controls, OR 2.5 p =
0.002): a member of the base excision repair (BER) path-
way. We analysed data from additional genes in the BERpathway, along with somatic sequencing, tumour mutation
proﬁling and familial segregation to examine this
association.
Conclusions: Our data shows that the effect of rare varia-
tion in established and novel breast cancer genes, along
with consideration of the background polygenic risk, toge-ther explains a substantial component of the heritable risk of
breast cancer in our cohort.
P.A. James: None. N. Li: None. S. Rowley: None.
D. Goode: None. L. Devereux: None. S. McInerny: None.
N. Grewal: None. A. Trainer: None. R. Scott: None.
I. Campbell: None.C17.2
Assessing risk of familial breast cancer:
effectiveness of current UK guidelines
L. A. Littlejohn1,2, J. Gibbs2, L. B. Jordan2, Z. H. Miedzybrodzka3,4,
C. Bell3, D. Goudie2, J. Dunlop2, J. N. Berg1,2
1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom,2NHS
Tayside, Dundee, United Kingdom,3NHS Grampian,
Aberdeen, United Kingdom,4University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, United Kingdom
Introduction: Breast cancer risk is a common indication
for referral to clinical genetics. UK National Institute of
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines use familyhistory to stratify by 10yr risk of breast cancer from age 40.
Patients are divided into low (LR, 10-year risk <3%),
moderate (MR, 3 –8%) and high risk (HR, >8%). Women at
increased risk are offered screening at or prior to age 40.
Methods: Family history data was obtained for all unaf-
fected women with a family history of breast cancer aged<50, referred to Tayside clinical genetics from 2000 –2010.
Patients were risk strati ﬁed de novo by NICE criteria,
identifying patients who subsequently developed breastcancer.
Results: 1,409 women had 15,414 patient-years of follow
up. 30 invasive breast cancers developed, 13 in MR and 13in HR women. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated no
signiﬁcant difference in breast cancer rate between LR and
MR women from ages 40 –49 (Log rank p=0.431). There
was a signi ﬁcant difference from 40 –49yrs between LR and
HR women ( p=0.036), but not on exclusion of BRCA
mutation carriers ( p=0.136). NICE absolute 10yr risk
thresholds from 40 –49 were not met in any risk group
(LR=0.82%, MR =1.68%, HR =3.56%).
Conclusions: Screening prior to age 50 in those without a
BRCA mutation may be unnecessary. NICE family history
criteria do not identify women with the suggested 10yr risk
values. There is a need for further evaluation of the bene ﬁts
of early screening, and criteria for identifying women at
increased risk of breast cancer may need to be improved.
L.A. Littlejohn: None. J. Gibbs: None. L.B. Jordan:
None. Z.H. Miedzybrodzka: None. C. Bell: None.
D. Goudie: None. J. Dunlop: None. J.N. Berg: None.
C17.3
The optimal cancer genetics testing tool? -
Diagnostic whole genome sequencing in researchparticipants with multiple primary tumours
J. Whitworth1, NIHR BioResource - Rare Disease project2, E. Martin-
Rodriguez1, P. Smith1, H. West1, F. Rodger1, A. Luchetti1, A. Skytte3,
J. Hoffmann4, D. Evans5, F. Lalloo5, E. Woodward5, A. Henderson6,88J. Adlard7, J. Barwell8, C. Brewer9, K. Snape10, H. Hanson10, L. Izatt11,
L. Greenhalgh12, L. Side13, V. Ajith Kumar13, M. Tischkowitz1, E. Maher1
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
2Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge,
United Kingdom,3Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark,4Birmingham Women ’s Hospital, Birmingham,
United Kingdom,5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medi-
cine, Manchester, United Kingdom,6International Centre
for Life, Newcastle, United Kingdom,7Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom,8University of Leicester, Leice-
ster, United Kingdom,9Peninsula Genetics Service, Exeter,
United Kingdom,10St Georges Hosptial, London, United
Kingdom,11Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom,
12Liverpool Women ’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom,
13Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) offers a variety of
potential bene ﬁts in diagnostic settings such as improved
coverage of coding regions and the opportunity to detect
structural variation. In the clinical cancer genetics context,application of WGS has thus far been limited and assess-
ments of performance are not abundant in the literature.
Here we present diagnostic interpretation of WGS data fromthe Multiple Primary Tumours arm of the NIHR
BioResource-Rare Disease study (recruitment criteria ≥2
primaries <60 years or ≥3 primaries <70 years and no
identi ﬁed molecular diagnosis), to which 720 individuals
have been recruited. This cohort is expected to be enriched
for tumour predisposing variants but is unselected fortumour type, arguably representing the kind of patient group
that agnostic diagnostic testing might be applied to in a
“mainstreaming ”model of genetic testing. Variants were
called using Illumina Isaac (SNVs and indels), Canvas
(CNVs) and Manta (CNVs, translocations and inversions).
They were extracted for analysis if occurring in a geneincluded in a comprehensive list (n =133) of cancer pre-
disposition genes (CPGs) and annotated with a sequence
ontology term re ﬂecting potential alteration in function.
Variants where then assessed with stringent criteria based
on quality, predicted biological consequence and literature.
The detection rate of clinically relevant variants is presentedand the added value of WGS compared with other techni-
ques is assessed. The majority of samples in the study had
concurrent sequencing of 94 CPGs using the IlluminaTruSight Cancer panel, allowing identi ﬁcation of SNVs and
indels missed by WGS.
J. Whitworth: None. J. Whitworth NIHR BioR-
esource - Rare Disease project: None. E. Martin-
Rodriguez: None. P. Smith: None. H. West: None.
F. Rodger: None. A. Luchetti: None. A. Skytte: None.
J. Hoffmann: None. D. Evans: None. F. Lalloo: None.
E. Woodward: None. A. Henderson: None. J. Adlard:None. J. Barwell: None. C. Brewer: None. K. Snape:
None. H. Hanson: None. L. Izatt: None. L. Greenhalgh:
None. L. Side: None. V. Ajith Kumar: None. M.
Tischkowitz: None. E. Maher: None.
C17.4
A somatic mutational signature in different tumor
types associated with biallelic germline NTHL1
mutations
J. E. Grolleman1, R. D. A. Weren1, R. A. Kuiper1, M. Nielsen2,F .A .
Elsayed2, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, K. Neveling1, I. Rost3, A. Lang3,
D. Schindler3, A. Dimovski4, R. M. de Voer1, T. van Wezel2,
N. Hoogerbrugge1, R. P. Kuiper5
1Radboud University and Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,2Leiden University and Medical Center, Lei-
den, Netherlands,3University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany,4University “St. Cyril and Methodius ”, Skopje,
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of,5Princess
Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht,Netherlands
We previously found that biallelic germline mutations
affecting the base excision repair gene NTHL1 predispose to
the development of adenomatous polyposis and colorectal
cancer (CRC). However, the clinical characteristics asso-ciated with biallelic germline NTHL1 mutations suggest a
broader tumor spectrum that includes multiple extracolonic
malignancies. Characterization of the somatic mutationproﬁle in multiple colorectal carcinomas derived from
individuals with biallelic germline NTHL1 mutations
revealed a bias towards C:G > T:A (C > T) transitions. Theaim of this study was to genetically characterize colorectal
and extracolonic tumors in order to delineate the somatic
mutational signature caused by NTHL1 de ﬁciency to pro-
vide further insight in the associated tumor spectrum.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed on six tumors
from four different tissues (colon ( n=3), thyroid-gland,
urothelium, and tonsil) derived from four individuals with
biallelic NTHL1 mutations. Mutational signatures were
identi ﬁed using MutationalPatterns ( https://doi.org/10.1101/
071761 ).
We analyzed the somatic mutation pro ﬁles of three CRCs
from three newly identi ﬁed NTHL1-de ﬁcient families.
These revealed a strong bias towards C > T mutations at
non-CpG sites, which is clearly distinct from the CpG >
TpG mutations commonly encountered in sporadic CRC.This mutation pro ﬁleﬁts a unique mutational signature that
comprises 40 –70 mutations in the three extracolonic
tumors, but appeared to be extremely rare in the mutationalproﬁles from The Cancer Genome Atlas ( https://ca
ncergenome.nih.gov ).Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 89Our results demonstrate that NTHL1 de ﬁciency is asso-
ciated with a unique mutational signature, and con ﬁrms the
broad tumor spectrum found in individuals with biallelic
germline NTHL1 mutations. This ﬁnding provides an
interesting strategy to correlate tumors to this novel
NTHL1-associated tumor syndrome.
J.E. Grolleman: None. R.D.A. Weren: None. R.A.
Kuiper: None. M. Nielsen: None. F.A. Elsayed: None.
M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. K. Neveling: None. I. Rost:
None. A. Lang: None. D. Schindler: None. A. Dimovski:
None. R.M. de Voer: None. T. van Wezel: None.
N. Hoogerbrugge: None. R.P. Kuiper: None.
C17.5
Genotoxic chemotherapies and X-rays areresponsible for the development of multiple
primary tumours in patients with Li-Fraumeni
syndrome
E. Kasper1, E. Ango2, E. Colasse2, L. Nicol3, J. Sabourin2, S. Adriouch4,
Y. Lacoume5, C. Le Clezio1, S. Raad1, Y. Zerdoumi1, T. Frebourg1,
J. Flaman1, G. Bougeard1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen
University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Normandy
Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen,
France,2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and
Rouen University Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,
Rouen, France,3PICTUR –Small Animal Imaging, Rouen
University, Rouen, France,4Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Inserm U1234, Rouen University, Rouen, France,5Animal
Facility, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Rouen Uni-versity, Rouen, France
Introduction: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), one of the
most severe predispositions to cancer, is due to TP53
germline mutations, and is characterized by the develop-
ment of early-onset and multiple primary cancers (MPC).We recently reported in LFS patients a rate of MPC above
40% including secondary tumours in radiation ﬁelds.
Materials and Methods: Weﬁrst adapted the genotoxicity
assay, previously developed in our laboratory and based on
the p53-transcriptional response to DNA damage in human
lymphocytes, to mouse cells. Then, Trp53 KO-/-,wt/-and
wt/wt mice were exposed to X-rays or to various anti-cancer
drugs. The control group was NaCl treated. Tumour
development was monthly monitored using whole-bodyMRI.
Results: The genotoxicity assay performed on murine cells
exposed in vitro or in vivo con ﬁrmed that all classical
chemotherapies, except spindle poisons, are genotoxic. X-
rays and Etoposide (a topoisomerase inhibitor) were shownto accelerate tumour development in Trp53-/- andwt/-mice
(OR=6.46, p-value =1.24.10
−3and OR =3.91, p-value
=5.76.10−4, respectively), unlike Docetaxel (a spindle
poison), which was devoid of effect.
Conclusions: This study provides evidence that genotoxic
chemotherapies contribute to MPC development in LFSpatients. Therefore, in germline TP53 mutation carriers,
radiotherapy should be avoided, surgical treatment prior-
itized, and non genotoxic treatments should be consideredin the future to reduce the risk of MPC. As we validated
in vivo the results obtained using the genotoxicity assay,
this assay will be helpful to discriminate drugs with andwithout genotoxic risk for LFS patients.
E. Kasper: None. E. Ango: None. E. Colasse: None.
L. Nicol: None. J. Sabourin: None. S. Adriouch: None.
Y. Lacoume: None. C. Le Clezio: None. S. Raad: None.
Y. Zerdoumi: None. T. Frebourg: None. J. Flaman:
None. G. Bougeard: None.
C17.6
Raising the age limit for routine MMR testing incolorectal cancer from 50 to 70 years improves
recognition of new Lynch syndrome families
N. Hoogerbrugge1, I. E. Fakkert1, R. W. Willems2, Y. K. Peeks1,
S. Langenveld3, I. D. Nagtegaal2, E. M. Leter3, A. R. Mensenkamp1,
L. Spruijt1, M. J. Ligtenberg1,2
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university
medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands,2Department of
Pathology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands,3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands
Background: To improve Lynch syndrome (LS) recogni-
tion, in the Netherlands, the age-limit for routine mismatchrepair (MMR) de ﬁciency testing in colorectal cancer (CRC)
by the pathologist was raised from 50 to 70 years. Referral
for genetic counseling is advised for patients with MMRdeﬁcient CRC without MLH1 hypermethylation.
Methods: The Dutch Pathology Registry (PALGA) was
used to evaluate MMR testing in 14 pathology laboratories.Patients referred to two regional genetic centers were cou-
pled to PALGA data to evaluate referral rates. Pathology
laboratories received feedback on percentage of correctlytested CRCs.
Results: From January 15th to October 2016, in 1499 of
1951 (77%) CRCs before age 70 MMR test results wereavailable. Of 68 patients with MMR test results suggestive
for LS, 30 (44%) were referred for genetic counseling. In
eight of 18 (44%) patients with complete diagnosticworkup, germline LS mutations were identi ﬁed. Six of these
new LS patients (75%) represent previously unknown LS90families. Five (83%) had CRC between age 50 and 70, and
did not comply with former referral criteria on young age at
diagnosis or family history.
Conclusions: Raising the age-limit for routine MMR test-
ing in CRC from 50 to 70 years improves recognition of
new LS families, of which the majority would not havebeen identi ﬁed by criteria based on young age at diagnosis
or family history.
The project was supported by the Dutch Digestive
Foundation with funding from the ‘Vriendenloterij ’.
N. Hoogerbrugge: None. I.E. Fakkert: None. R.W.
Willems: None. Y.K. Peeks: None. S. Langenveld: None.
I.D. Nagtegaal: None. E.M. Leter: None. A.R.
Mensenkamp: None. L. Spruijt: None. M.J. Ligtenberg:
None.
C18
Internal organs
C18.1
Mutations in the leukemia inhibitory factor receptor
(LIFR) gene and Lifrdeﬁciency cause urinary tract
malformations
F. Brand1, A. Kosfeld1, A. C. Weiss2, M. Kreuzer3, M. Goerk4,H .
Martens1, S. Schubert1, A. K. Schäfer2, V. Riehmer1, I. Hennies3,J .H .
Bräsen5, L. Pape3, K. Amann4, L. Krogvold6, A. Bjerre6, C. Daniel4,
A. Kispert2, D. Haffner3, R. G. Weber1
1Hannover Medical School - Department of Human
Genetics, Hannover, Germany,2Hannover Medical School
- Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover, Germany,
3Hannover Medical School - Department of Pediatric
Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover,
Germany,4Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-
Nürnberg - Department of Nephropathology, Erlangen,
Germany,5Hannover Medical School - Department of
Pathology, Hannover, Germany,6Oslo University Hospital
- Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo,
Norway
Congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract
(CAKUT) are the most common cause of chronic kidney
disease in children. As most CAKUT cases are geneticallyunexplained, we aimed to identify new CAKUT causing
genes. Using whole-exome sequencing and trio-based de
novo analysis, we identi ﬁed a novel heterozygous de novo
frameshift variant in the leukemia inhibitory factor receptor
(LIFR ) gene causing instability of the mRNA in a patient
presenting with bilateral CAKUT and requiring kidneytransplantation at one year of age. LIFR encodes a trans-
membrane receptor utilized by IL-6 family cytokines,mainly by the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Mutational
analysis of 121 further patients with severe CAKUT yielded
two rare heterozygous LIFR missense variants predicted to
be pathogenic in three patients. LIFR mutants showed
decreased half-life and cell membrane localization resulting
in reduced LIF-stimulated STAT3 phosphorylation. LIFR
showed high expression in human fetal kidney and the
human ureter, and was also expressed in the developing
murine urogenital system. Lifr knockout mice displayed
urinary tract malformations including hydronephrosis,
hydroureter, ureter ectopia, and, consistently, reduced
ureteral lumen and muscular hypertrophy, similar to thephenotypes observed in patients carrying LIFR variants.
Additionally, a form of cryptorchidism was detected in all
Lifr
−/−mice and the patient carrying the LIFR frameshift
mutation. Altogether, we demonstrate heterozygous novel
or rare LIFR mutations in 3.3% of CAKUT patients, and
provide evidence that Lifrdeﬁciency and deactivating LIFR
mutations cause highly similar anomalies of the urogenital
tract in mice and humans (supported by Else Kröner-Fre-
senius-Stiftung grant no. 2014_A234).
F. Brand: None. A. Kosfeld: None. A.C. Weiss: None.
M. Kreuzer: None. M. Goerk: None. H. Martens: None.
S. Schubert: None. A.K. Schäfer: None. V. Riehmer:
None. I. Hennies: None. J.H. Bräsen: None. L. Pape:
None. K. Amann: None. L. Krogvold: None. A. Bjerre:
None. C. Daniel: None. A. Kispert: None. D. Haffner:
None. R.G. Weber: None.
C18.2
The microbiome of in ﬂammatory bowel disease and
irritable bowel syndrome - a case-control study of
1792 individuals
A. Vich Vila1,2, F. Imhann1,2, V. Collij1,2, S. Jankipersadsing2,
Z. Mujagic3, T. Gurry4,5, A. Kurilshikov2, M. J. Bonder2, X. Jiang5,
D. Dijkstra1, E. A. M. Festen1, R. J. Xavier6, E. J. Alm4,5,7, C. Wijmenga2,
D. Jonkers3, A. Zhernakova2, R. K. Weersma1
1University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Groningen, Nether-
lands,2University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen,
Netherlands,3Maastricht University Medical Center +,
Maastricht, Netherlands,4Department of Biological Engi-
neering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, United States,5Center for Microbiome Informatics and
Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Cambridge, MA, United States,
6Crohn ’s and Colitis Cen-
ter, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United
States,7The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cam-
bridge, MA, United StatesAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 91Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and in ﬂammatory bowel
disease (IBD) are two of the most common gastrointestinal
(GI) disorders, affecting respectively 7 –21% and 0.3% –
0.5% of the global population. Next to host-genetics,
microbiome plays an important role in disease pathology.
Here, we present the largest gut microbiome case-controlanalysis in both IBD and IBS to date, using metagenomic
shotgun sequences of stool samples from 1025 Healthy
Controls 355 IBD and 412 IBS patients. Taxonomy wasdetermined for bacteria, viruses and micro-eukaryotes.
Bacterial pathways were determined using HUMAnN2. In
addition, bacterial strain diversity and growth rates wereinferred from the sequencing data. In the case-control ana-
lyses, correcting for 25 previously identi ﬁed microbiome-
modifying factors, we observed 157 differentially abundantspecies associated with CD, 87 species associated with UC
and 125 species for IBS. We observed an increased strain
level diversity for Eschericia coli and Bacteroides vulgatusand several species with differential growth rate dynamics
in patients compared to healthy controls. Prediction models
for differentiating between IBS and IBD based on micro-biome data show a best predictive value up to 94.6%. In
addition, we previously described alterations of the gut
microbiota of healthy individuals with a high genetic riskfor IBD. In this study, we present a high-resolution char-
acterization of changes in the microbiome, and its func-
tional implications, in patients with IBD or IBS, which canbe used in the disease prediction.
A. Vich Vila: None. F. Imhann: None. V. Collij: None.
S. Jankipersadsing: None. Z. Mujagic: None. T. Gurry:
None. A. Kurilshikov: None. M.J. Bonder: None.
X. Jiang: None. D. Dijkstra: None. E.A.M. Festen: None.
R.J. Xavier: None. E.J. Alm: None. C. Wijmenga: None.
D. Jonkers: None. A. Zhernakova: None. R.K.
Weersma: None.
C18.3
Whole-genome sequencing identi ﬁes associations of
sequence variants with clinically relevant urinarydisease markers
S. Benonisdottir1, A. Oddsson1, G. Sulem1, R. P. Kristjansson1,
I. Olafsson2, P. T. Onundarson2, B. Kehr1, G. A. Arnadottir1, H. Holm1,
G. Masson1, V. O. Edvardsson2,3, R. Palsson2, A. Jonasdottir1,
A. Jonasdottir1, E. Mikaelsdottir1, G. I. Eyjolfsson4, B. O. Jensson1,
U. Thorsteinsdottir1,3, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,5, P. Sulem1, K. Stefansson1,3
1deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland,
2Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland,
3Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik,
Iceland,4Icelandic Medical Center (Laeknasetrid),
Laboratory in Mjodd (RAM), Reykjavik, Iceland,5School ofEngineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland
Introduction: Chemical analysis of urine with dipstick
measurements allows for the simultaneous testing of a wide
range of traits typically assessed in clinical practice.
Materials and Methods: We identi ﬁed 35.5 million
sequence variants through whole-genome sequencing of
15,220 Icelanders and imputed them into up to 143,900Icelanders with urinary dipstick measurements. These var-
iants enabled us to perform a genome-wide association
study to search for sequence variants in ﬂuencing the urinary
markers of metabolic disease and kidney function.
Results: We tested all variants for association with the
presence of glucose, ketones, blood and protein in urine anddetected associations at several loci for each trait. These
included four loci that are located in or near genes with a
function that matches the associating urinary trait (SLC5A2,OXCT1, LRP2 and COL4A3). We detected common and
rare independent variants, coding in or close to SLC5A2,
associating with glucosuria. This gene encodes SodiumGlucose Transporter 2, a protein targeted pharmacologically
to treat diabetes. We observed two proteinuria associations,
a novel signal at LRP2 and a previously reported urinaryalbumin excretion signal at CUBN. Interestingly LRP2 and
CUBN encode cubilin and megalin, which interact and
together mediate proximal tubule protein uptake. We iden-tiﬁed a rare Iceland-speci ﬁc 2.5 Kb exonic deletion in
COL4A3 that associates with hematuria (OR =9.4). This
deletion is present in 1/700 Icelanders and mutations inCOL4A3 cause autosomal dominant familial benign
hematuria.
Conclusions: The identi ﬁcation of these associations pro-
vide insight into the biology underlying urinary disease
markers, potential disease mechanisms, and treatment.
S. Benonisdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. A. Oddsson: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE
genetics/Amgen, Inc. G. Sulem: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. R.P.
Kristjansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.. I. Olafsson: None.
P.T. Onundarson: None. B. Kehr: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. G.A.
Arnadottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. H. Holm: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen,
Inc.G. Masson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.. V.O. Edvardsson:
None. R. Palsson: None. A. Jonasdottir: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen,
Inc.A. Jonasdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. E.92Mikaelsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.. G.I. Eyjolfsson:
None. B.O. Jensson: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. U. Thor-
steinsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. D.F. Gudbjartsson: A.
Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE
genetics/Amgen, Inc. P. Sulem: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. K.
Stefansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant;
deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc..
C18.4
Genome wide association study identi ﬁes two novel
loci associated with female stress and urgencyurinary incontinence
R. Cartwright1, M. Jarvelin1, P. Miotla2, V. Khullar1, P. Bennett1,
A. Walley3, the IGNITE Consortium
1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
2University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland,3St George ’s Medical
School, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Stress and urgency incontinence are heri-
table, but no risk loci have been identi ﬁed. We undertook a
GWAS, using three European cohorts, followed by repli-cation in six further studies, with supplementary tran-
scriptomic analyses using human bladder biopsies.
Materials and Methods: Genotyping in discovery cohorts
(n=8,979) was conducted using Illumina arrays. Replica-
tion genotyping used competitive PCR (n =4,069). Biop-
sies from women with urgency or stress incontinence wererun on Affymetrix-U133 arrays.
Results: Discovery analyses identi ﬁedﬁve genome-wide
signiﬁcant loci. Two loci replicated: rs138724718 (p =
3.39 × 10
−09) and rs34998271 (p =1.70 × 10−09). In ana-
lysis of differential expression, the top-ranked process
(GO:0003012, p =7.5 × 10−10), includes CHRM3 (folddifference:4.23, p =0.0007), which is the main drug target
for urgency incontinence, SULF2 (fold difference:1.52, p =
0.005) in the top locus from the discovery phase, and EDN1
(fold difference: −1.60, p =0.09) in the top locus from the
replication phase.
Conclusions: We identi ﬁed two genetic variants strongly
associated with urinary incontinence. The ﬁrst,
rs138724718, is situated near MARCO , with a role in host
defense. The second, rs34998271, is situated near EDN1 a
potent constrictor of smooth muscle, which was differen-
tially expressed in bladder. This work highlights the myo-
genic and urotheliogenic mechanisms for incontinence, andsuggests the potential of endothelin modulating drugs for
urgency incontinence
R. Cartwright: None. M. Jarvelin: None. P. Miotla:
None. V. Khullar: None. P. Bennett: None. A. Walley:
None.
C18.5
APMM2 promoter mutation causing congenital
polycystic kidney and hyperinsulinemichypoglycemia
O. Rubio-Cabezas1, S. Flanagan2, H. Stanescu3, HI PKD Consortium,
R. Kleta3, K. Hussain4, D. Bockenhauer3, S. Ellard2
1Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain,
2University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom,3UCL Centre for Nephrology, London, United
Kingdom,4UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom
Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and congenital poly-
cystic kidney disease are rare, genetically heterogeneous
disorders. The co-occurrence of hyperinsulinemic hypo-
glycemia and enlarged polycystic kidneys in 18 childrenfrom 12 unrelated families suggested a shared cause.
Autozygosity analysis of SNP-chip genotype data in a
consanguineous family with 3 affected members revealed a
GRCh37
PositionSNP Effect Allele Other Allele MAF Phenotype Discovery Cohorts
(n=8,997)Replication Cohorts
(n=4,069)Overall
OR 95% CI p OR 95% CI p p
20 46424160 rs139329202 c g 0.01 UUI 8.50 4.12 –17.55 8.07 × 10−91.35 0.82 –2.21 0.238 2.38 × 10−05
6 1430664 rs146033157 a t 0.03 UUI 0.33 0.23 –0.48 1.73 × 10−80.97 0.35 –2.71 0.960 n/a
14 55489229 rs146757102 a g 0.05 UUI 0.45 0.34 –0.60 1.95 × 10−81.13 0.87 –1.45 0.360 5.12 × 10−03
7 141328145 rs78851245 t c 0.02 Any UI 3.22 2.13 –4.86 2.92 × 10−81.46 1.00 –21.3 0.051 2.11 × 10−07
7 34354797 rs78878767 a c 0.01 UUI 4.26 2.56 –7.10 3.04 × 10−80.86 0.51 –1.43 0.556 2.11 × 10−07
3 55473083 rs13059018 c g 0.07 SUI 0.70 0.61 –0.81 1.01 × 10−71.14 1.00 –1.29 0.054 1.40 × 10−06
12 11049362 rs201363123 ag a 0.06 Any UI 0.65 0.56 –0.76 1.03 × 10−71.14 1.00 –1.29 0.053 5.43 × 10−05
1 154881110 rs1218596 t c 0.06 Any UI 0.64 0.55 –0.75 1.04 × 10−70.95 0.75 –1.20 0.681 4.49 × 10−06
11 39642765 rs10768519 a c 0.26 UUI 0.80 0.74 –0.87 2.26 × 10−71.00 0.85 –1.17 0.954 1.40 × 10−04
9 105517298 rs72738866 t c 0.26 SUI 0.79 0.71 –0.87 2.55 × 10−71.01 0.89 –1.14 0.895 5.97 × 10−05
2 119587824 rs138724718 a g 0.02 SUI 1.85 1.47 –2.35 2.89 × 10−71.73 1.20 –2.48 0.003 3.39 × 10−09
6 12533066 rs34998271 a g 0.05 UUI 1.70 1.40 –2.07 4.97 × 10−71.55 1.20 –2.01 0.0008 1.70 × 10−09Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 93homozygous 2.5Mb region on chromosome 16p13.2.
Whole genome multipoint parametric linkage analysis in
this and 4 other informative families con ﬁrmed and re ﬁned
this to a single signi ﬁcant locus of 2.3 Mb that includes 14
annotated genes (combined LOD score 6.5). Exome or
genome sequencing of the coding regions of these 14 genesfailed to identify bi-allelic mutations but a PMM2 promoter
variant (c.-167G > T) was found in all patients. This variant
was either homozygous or in trans with PMM2 coding
variants, including mutations previously reported in patients
with congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a. Typical
features of systemic autosomal recessive PMM2 glycosy-lation disease were absent and the diagnostic test of trans-
ferrin isoelectric focusing was normal. In vitro studies in
patient cells revealed decreased transcription activity of themutant promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
demonstrated impaired binding of the transcription factor
ZNF143. In silico analysis reveals the importance ofZNF143 for the structural con ﬁrmation of a chromatin loop
including PMM2 to enable tissue-speci ﬁc transcription. In
conclusion we report a previously undescribed rare diseasecharacterized by the combination of hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia and congenital polycystic kidney disease.
The novel promoter variant appears to exert a critical tissue-speciﬁc effect on PMM2 transcription, leading to an organ-
speciﬁc phenotype.
O. Rubio-Cabezas: None. S. Flanagan: None.
H. Stanescu: None. R. Kleta: None. K. Hussain: None.
D. Bockenhauer: None. S. Ellard: None.
C18.6
GREB1L and ROBO1 -Two novel genes associated
with renal agenesis
M. Rasmussen1, D. L. Lildballe1, P. D. Brophy2, M. Parida3, G. Bonde4,
X. Hong3, J. C. Clarke2, M. Schneider5, C. R. Sussman6, L. Sunde1,7,J .M .
Hertz8, M. Ramsing9, A. Petersen10, R. A. Cornell4, J. R. Manak2,3
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hos-
pital, Aarhus, Denmark,2Department of Pediatrics, Uni-
versity of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States,3Department
of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States,
4Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States,5Medical Genetics,
Carle Foundation Hospital and Physician Group, Urbana,IL, United States,
6Department of Nephrology and Hyper-
tension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States,
7Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark,8Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense Uni-
versity Hospital, Odense, Denmark,9Department of
Pathology, Randers Regional Hospital, Randers, Denmark,
10Department of Pathology, Aalborg University Hospital,
Aalborg, DenmarkIntroduction: Renal agenesis is the extreme example of
congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.Weidenti ﬁed two novel genes associated with renal agenesis,
and provide functional validation in zebra ﬁsh for one of
these, GREB1L .
Methods: Fetuses with bilateral kidney agenesis were
screened using a targeted kidney-gene panel. In cases where
candidate variants were not identi ﬁed, whole-exome
sequencing was performed. Genes uncovered by this ana-
lysis were added to our targeted panel, and placed in a
pipeline for functional validation in zebra ﬁsh.
Results: Whole-exome sequencing identi ﬁedGREB1L and
ROBO1 variants in families with renal agenesis. We added
GREB1L andROBO1 to our targeted kidney-gene panel and
identi ﬁed additional variants in both genes (Table 1). SLIT
andROBO genes are involved in cell guidance. Although
variants in ROBO2 orSLIT2 have previously been asso-
ciated with kidney anomalies, this is the ﬁrst example of a
renal agenesis phenotype associated with ROBO variants.
GREB1L encodes a co-activator of steroid hormone/retinoic
acid receptors but has not previously been associated with
kidney anomalies. Analysis of a zebra ﬁshgreb1l mutant
revealed severe defects in the pronephros, the proper spe-ciﬁcation of which is required for downstream kidney
development.
Conclusions: We report identi ﬁcation of multiple ROBO
andGREB1L variants in renal agenesis cases, implicating
two pathways (cell guidance and steroid hormone/retinoicVariants in families with renal agenesis
Family NGS ﬁndings Prediction Polyphen
Mutation Taster SiftProvean CADDMAF
1000GenomesExAC
2000DK
1 ROBO1 c.526C
>Tp .(Pro176Ser)-probably damaging
-disease causing -damaging-deleterious -PHRED 24.7---
1 ROBO1
c.4823C > G p.(Ser1608*)-NA -disease causing -NA
-NA -PHRED 50---
2 GREB1L
c.5608+1del
p.?-NA -disease causing -NA
-NA -PHRED 25.8---
3 GREB1L
c.5378T > G p.
(Leu1793Arg)-probably damaging
-disease causing -damaging
-deleterious -PHRED 31---
4 GREB1L
c.371G > T p.
(Gly124Val)-probably damaging
-disease causing -damaging
-deleterious -PHRED 29.2---
5 ROBO1
c.3685G > T p
(Glu1229*)-NA -disease causing -NA
-NA -PHRED 44---
5 ROBO1
c.4823C > G p.
(Ser1608*)-NA -disease causing -NA
-NA -PHRED 50---94acid signaling) not previously known to be associated with
human renal agenesis.
M. Rasmussen: None. D.L. Lildballe: None. P.D.
Brophy: None. M. Parida: None. G. Bonde: None.
X. Hong: None. J.C. Clarke: None. M. Schneider: None.
C.R. Sussman: None. L. Sunde: None. J.M. Hertz: None.
M. Ramsing: None. A. Petersen: None. R.A. Cornell:
None. J.R. Manak: None.
C19
Diagnostic variant interpretation andquality control
C19.1
The spectrum of sequence and copy-number
variants in 80,000 patients: Implications for test
development and validation
S. Lincoln1, R. Truty1, J. Zook2, C. Huang3, M. Ferber4, B. Shirts5,
R. Garlick3, M. Salit6,7, S. Aradhya1, R. Nussbaum1,8
1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States,2National
Institute for Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD,United States,
3Seracare, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States,5University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States,6National Institute
for Standards and Technology, Palo Alto, CA, United
States,7Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States,
8University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States
Introduction: Many medically important genes are located
in technically challenging regions of the genome. More-over, complex but highly medically relevant classes of
mutation are well-known. The overall impact of these facts
on diagnostic yield and on appropriate technologies forroutine clinical genome/exome sequencing has not yet been
thoroughly described.
Methods: We examined over 80,000 patients clinically
tested for physician-speci ﬁed genes underlying a hereditary
cancer, cardiovascular, neurological or pediatric condition.
Sensitive methods using NGS, long read sequencing,MLPA, and arrays were used to detect and con ﬁrm a broad
spectrum of variants.
Results: Of 12,489 pathogenic, potentially actionable
ﬁndings, approximately 10% belong to a technically chal-
lenging class not easily addressed by short-read NGS
methods. Approximately 3% are CNVs affecting only asingle exon, 2% are either large indels or complex variants,
and 5% were in low-complexity, highly conserved or
extreme-GC regions. This general observation was con-sistent across clinical areas, although speci ﬁcs varied. Verylarge triplet repeat expansions and cytogenetic abnormal-
ities are not included and would increase this total.
Discussion: Technically challenging variants are a sub-
stantial fraction of ﬁndings in routine clinical testing.
However, published validation studies often omit these
variants, and benign SNPs dominate many sensitivity cal-culations. This may, in part, be due to dif ﬁculty obtaining
positive controls. We have thus developed synthetic con-
trols containing a diverse set of challenging mutations incommonly tested genes. These have been tested in multiple
laboratories using different protocols and will be available
to the ESHG community by the time of the meeting.
S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Invitae. R. Truty: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. J. Zook: None. C. Huang:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seracare.
M. Ferber: None. B. Shirts: None. R. Garlick:
A. Employment (full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Seracare.
M. Salit: None. S. Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae. R. Nussbaum: A. Employment
(full or part-time); Signi ﬁcant; Invitae.
C19.2
ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation WorkGroup recommendations for ACMG-AMP guideline
speci ﬁcation
S. M. Harrison1,2, H. Rehm1,2, M. Greenblatt3, L. G. Biesecker4, ClinGen
Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group
1Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, United States,
2Partners HealthCare Laboratory for Molecular Medicine,
Cambridge, MA, United States,3University of Vermont,
Robert Larner, M.D., College of Medicine College, Bur-
lington, VT, United States,4National Human Genome
Research Institute (NHGRI); NIH, Bethesda, MD, UnitedStates
In 2015, the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics (ACMG) and the Association for Molecular
Pathology (AMP) published a guideline for variant inter-
pretation that provides an evidence-based framework toclassify variants (PMID:25741868). The guideline de ﬁnes
28 criteria that address types of variant evidence. The
committee recognized that the guideline was a startingframework that would evolve over time. ClinGen ’s
Sequence Variant Interpretation (SVI) Working Group aims
to standardize application of the ACMG-AMP guidelinesby providing recommendations to adapting the guidelines
and converting qualitative criteria to quantitative, where
applicable. To date, SVI has re ﬁned the “stand-alone ”
benign allele frequency criterion (BA1) for additional
clarity, worked with ClinGen Clinical Domain WGsAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 95(CDWG) to harmonize approaches to calculating gene-
speciﬁc allele frequency thresholds, provided nomenclature
recommendations for documenting criteria strength mod-
iﬁcations, and developed a draft proposal for quantifying
segregation data. Additionally, a subgroup of SVI is
focused on computational and predictive evidence, workingto provide additional guidance on the use of computation
tools sequence variant interpretation. SVI also reviews and
approves gene/disease speci ﬁcations to the guidelines made
by CDWGs and will review proposals from CDWGs to
develop new evidence categories. These harmonization
approaches by the SVI will facilitate transparency andconsistency in application of the ACMG-AMP guidelines
and variant classi ﬁcations across different CDWGs and
laboratories. The SVI has also begun work on a longer termgoal of developing a general Bayesian framework, to better
quantify and integrate different types of evidence in an
overall assessment of pathogenicity. Funded by NIH-NHGRI U41HG006834.
S.M. Harrison: None. H. Rehm: B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpending grants as well as grants already received); Modest;
NIH funding. M. Greenblatt: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Modest; NIH funding.
L.G. Biesecker: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,
collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well asgrants already received); Modest; NIH funding.
C19.3
ClinGen: The Clinical Genome Resource
D. R. Azzariti1, E. R. Riggs2, J. S. Berg3, C. D. Bustamante4,K .A .B .
Goddard5, M. J. Landrum6, D. H. Ledbetter2, C. L. Martin2, S. E. Plon7,
E. M. Ramos8, M. S. Watson9, M. S. Williams2, H. L. Rehm1,10,11,
on behalf of the Clinical Genome Resource
1Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Partners HealthCare
Personalized Medicine, Cambridge, MA, United States,
2Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States,
3University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
NC, United States,4Stanford University, School of Medi-
cine, Stanford, CA, United States,5Center for Health
Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, OR,
United States,6National Center for Biotechnology Infor-
mation, Bethesda, MD, United States,7Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States,8National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,Betheseda, MD, United States,
9American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, MD, United
States,10Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United
States,11Brigham & Women ’s Hospital, Boston, MA, Uni-
ted StatesIntroduction: The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) is
focused on de ﬁning the clinical relevance of genes and
variants through sharing genomic information, developing
and applying standards, deploying tools to store and eval-
uate evidence, and creating a knowledgebase to make this
information freely available.
Materials and Methods: ClinGen utilizes genomic data,
health data and curated knowledge submitted by labora-
tories, clinicians, and patients. Interpreted variants areshared through the ClinVar database. Standardized evidence
frameworks and curation interfaces enable evaluation of
gene-disease associations, gene dosage sensitivity, variantpathogenicity and clinical actionability.
Results: To date, 642 submitters from 59 countries have
submitted 384,623 interpreted variants to ClinVar. Reas-sessment of variants with interpretation differences resolved
72% and 87% of differences in two studies. Ten expert
groups are curating variants using gene-speci ﬁc modi ﬁed
ACMG-AMP criteria. Over 1,200 genes have been
reviewed using one or more ClinGen curation processes,
including: 45 gene-disease associations for clinical validity,66 gene-condition pairs for clinical actionability and 1,237
genes for dosage sensitivity. Results are available on clin-
icalgenome.org.
Conclusions: ClinGen ’s curated information on genes,
diseases, variants and clinical actions is publicly available.
This information is useful in a variety of clinical andresearch applications, including building evidence-based
clinical genetic testing panels, determining the effects of
deletions or duplications identi ﬁed on cytogenomic micro-
array, resolving discrepancies in variant interpretation, and
developing actionability frameworks for deciding when to
return results to patients.
Funding from NHGRI, NICHD, and NCI: U41HG006834,
U01HG007437, U01HG007436, UO1HG006487, and
HHSN261200800001E, also supported in part by IntramuralResearch Program of NLM/NIH.
D.R. Azzariti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; Massachusetts General Hospital. E.R. Riggs:
None. J.S. Berg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. B.
Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator orconsultant and pending grants as well as grants already
received); Signi ﬁcant; National Institutes of Health, UNC
Yang Family Biomedical Scholars Award. C.D. Busta-
mante: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla-
borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants
already received); Signi ﬁcant; MacArthur Foundation,
National Institutes of Health. E. Ownership Interest (stock,
stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig-
niﬁcant; CDB Consulting, LTD. F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; IdentifyGenomics, LLC, Med-Tek, Liberty
Biosecurity, Personalis, Inc., 23andme, Ancestry.com,96Etalon, Inc. K.A.B. Goddard: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants
as well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; National
Institutes of Health. M.J. Landrum: None. D.H. Ledbet-
ter: None. C.L. Martin: B. Research Grant (principal
investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grantsas well as grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; National
Institutes of Health. S.E. Plon: F. Consultant/Advisory
Board; Modest; Baylor Genetics Laboratories. E.M.
Ramos: None. M.S. Watson: A. Employment (full or part-
time); Signi ﬁcant; American College of Medical Genetics
and Genomics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator,collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as
grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; National Institutes of
Health, Maternal and Child Health Bureau of the HealthResources and Services Administration, Genetic Services
Branch. M.S. Williams: A. Employment (full or part-time);
Signi ﬁcant; Geisinger Health System. B. Research Grant
(principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and
pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig-
niﬁcant; National Institutes of Health. D. Speakers Bureau/
Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness);
Modest; Chambersburg Hospital (PA), Harvard Medical
School, Gundersen Health System, Tokyo GenomicResearch Institute, Georgetown University, American Col-
lege of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Association of
Professors of Human and Medical Genetics, University ofWisconsin-Madison, Sanford Health, Mayo Clinic, City of
Hope. H.L. Rehm: B. Research Grant (principal investi-
gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already received); Signi ﬁcant; National Institutes
of Health.
C19.4
High-resolution variant ﬁltering empowers clinical
interpretation and provides insights into variantpenetrance and population-speci ﬁcity
N. Whif ﬁn1,2,3, E. Minikel4,5, R. Walsh2,3,A .O ’Donnell-Luria4,5,K .
Karczewski4,5, A. Y. Ing6, P. J. R. Barton2,3, B. Funke6,7, S. A. Cook1,2,8,
D. G. MacArthur4,5, J. S. Ware1,2,5
1MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, Uni-
ted Kingdom,2National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom,3Cardiovas-
cular BRU, Royal Brompton and Hare ﬁeld NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom,4Analytic and Translational
Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,MA, United States,
5Program in Medical and PopulationGenetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
MA, United States,6Partners HealthCare Personalized
Medicine, Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Cambridge,
MA, United States,7epartment of Pathology, Harvard
Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, United States,8National Heart Centre Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore
Allele frequency (AF) is a key discriminator between
pathogenic variants and benign bystanders, but the thresh-
olds that should be used to classify variants as benign are
often unclear, given that Mendelian diseases may also bepresent in the population. The recent Genome Aggregation
Database (gnomAD) comprises variation from 138,633
individuals, providing unprecedented power to characteriserare variants.
We have developed a rigorous statistical framework to
evaluate whether an observed AF is compatible withpathogenicity. Our approach considers disease prevalence,
genetic/allelic heterogeneity and variant penetrance, to
determine whether a variant frequency is compatible withdisease causation, whilst taking into account sampling
variance.
We evaluated our approach using high quality reference
variants from 7,855 clinically classi ﬁed cardiomyopathy
cases, with gnomAD as a population reference dataset.
Compared to a conventional 0.1% AF ﬁlter, our more
stringent ﬁlter reduced the number of ‘Variants of Uncertain
Signi ﬁcance ’by 10% (69 variants), while preserving 375/
376 ‘Pathogenic ’variants. Additionally, of 28 ClinVar
‘pathogenic ’variants that failed our stringent ﬁlter: none
had robust evidence of disease-causation.
In addition to permitting the safe and appropriate use of
much more stringent AF thresholds, our approach facilitates
investigation of disease architecture. Using a diverse dataset
of >1,500 cardiomyopathy cases we can accurately quantifydisease penetrance and identify disease-causing variants
that are speci ﬁc to a single ethnic population.
To aid variant interpretation, we have released pre-
computed frequency annotations for all variants in the
gnomAD dataset. Additionally, to facilitate investigation of
disease architecture and variant penetrance, we have createdan online tool:
cardiodb.org/allelefrequencyapp/.
N. Whif ﬁn:None. E. Minikel: None. R. Walsh: None.
A. O ’Donnell-Luria: None. K. Karczewski: None. A.Y.
Ing: None. P.J.R. Barton: None. B. Funke: None. S.A.
Cook: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. J.S. Ware: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 97C19.5
External Quality Assessment of Clinical Genetics:
from pilot assessment to full EQA scheme
C. M. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, C. van Asperen2, C. Benjamin3,
L. Garavelli4, B. Peterlin5, M. Nielsen2, T. De Ravel6, L. Tranebjaerg7,
K. Usha8, K. Writzl5, R. Hastings9
1Department of Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands,
2Department of Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands,
3University of Central Lancashire, Liverpool, United
Kingdom,4Azienda Ospedialiera Santa Maria Nuova,
Reggio Enilia, Italy,5Ljubljana UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
6Department of Genetics, KU, Leuven, Belgium,7University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,8The Churchill
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom,9Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, CEQAS, Oxford, United Kingdom
Quality assessment has long been associated with
laboratory, but not clinical, services. To address this gap, in
2012 the ESHG Genetic Services Quality Committeeexplored the needs for a European Quality Assessment
(EQA) scheme for clinical genetics and counselling. Eur-
opean national societies of human genetics were surveyedand a need for EQA for clinical genetics was expressed.
CEQAS was chosen as the EQA provider and three pilot
EQAs have now been completed and evaluated. Each year,the working group prepares four case scenarios in the ﬁelds
of cardiogenetics, oncogenetics, monogenetics and dys-
morphology. Each scenario started with a referral letter andconsisted of multiple stages, to re ﬂect an episode of clinical
care. At each stage further information was given and a
number of questions presented. For each question, con-sensus answers were agreed by independent experts
including two clinical geneticists and a patient organisation.
In 2014, 2015 and 2016, a total of 15, 29 and 42 geneticcentres from 11, 16 and 21 countries respectively partici-
pated in the pilot EQA. All answers were reviewed by two
clinical geneticists. Based on the experiences with the threepilot EQAs, a guideline for the development of suitable case
scenarios was written, including how questions and criteria
should be formulated. The answers provided by the centreshighlighted differences in clinical genetics practice across
Europe. The EQA for clinical genetics proved to be highly
educational. The working group will continue to improvethe process for the bene ﬁt of the Clinical Genetics
community.
C.M. van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. C. van Asperen:
None. C. Benjamin: None. L. Garavelli: None.
B. Peterlin: None. M. Nielsen: None. T. De Ravel: None.
L. Tranebjaerg: None. K. Usha: None. K. Writzl: None.
R. Hastings: None.C19.6
Assessing clinical consistency among inconsistent
variant classi ﬁcations
S. Abbs1, D. Moore2, F. Khawaja3, Z. Deans3
1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge Uni-
versity Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, Uni-
ted Kingdom,2South East Scotland Genetic Service,
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,
3UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, The Royal In ﬁrmary
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
It is essential for diagnostic genetics laboratories to
interpret and report sequence variants consistently. Mucheffort is being directed towards achieving consistency
through the introduction of standardized and objective
classi ﬁcation guidelines (eg ACMG standards and guide-
lines 2015). Once a variant has been classi ﬁed, it is
potentially more important that clinicians are consistent in
whether they use that variant to manage their patients.
To assess and improve consistency between laboratories
the UK National External Quality Assessment Service (UK
NEQAS) for Molecular Genetics has been assessingannually how laboratories classify and interpret variants
since 2012. Laboratories are given typical referral scenarios
and asked to classify and interpret a number of variantsusing the standard 5 point pathogenicity scale.
In a pilot scheme in 2016 twelve clinical geneticists were
asked to classify 7 variants that 44 laboratories had assessedpreviously, and to state whether they would use the variants
to manage patients. Only one variant was classed uniformly
by all laboratories and clinicians (class 1, benign); fourvariants were classed as either 4 or 5, or 1 or 2, respectively;
two variants were classed into one of three classes, (1 –3o r
3–5). Despite similar inconsistencies in classi ﬁcation by
clinicians and scientists, reassuringly there was good con-
sensus among the clinicians regarding use of the variants to
manage patients.
This assessment scheme is being expanded via a virtual
training and competency tool (G-TACT) to help large
numbers of scientists and clinicians learn and improveconsistency in this important skill of classifying and inter-
preting genomic variants.
S. Abbs: None. D. Moore: None. F. Khawaja: None.
Z. Deans: None.98C20
Molecular syndromology
C20.1
Mutations in the cadherin-catenin complex in
Blepharo-Cheilo-Dontic Syndrome
A. Kievit1, F. Tessadori2,3, J. Douben1, I. Jordens2, M. Maurice2,
A. Hoogeboom1, R. Hennekam4, S. Nampoothiri5, H. Kayserili6,
M. Castori7, M. Whiteford8, C. Motter9, C. Melver9, M. Cunningham10,
A. Hing10, N. Kokitsu-Nakata11, S. Vendramini-Pittoli11, A. Richieri-
Costa11, A. Baas2, C. Beugem12, K. Duran2, M. Massink2, P. Derksen13,
W. F. J. van IJcken14, L. van Unen14, F. Santos-Simarro15,
P. Lapunzina15, V. L. Gil-da Silva Lopes16, E. Lustosa-Mendes16,
M. Krall17, A. Slavotinek17, V. Martinez-Glez15, J. Bakkers3,K .L .I .v a n
Gassen2, A. de Klein1, M. J. van den Boogaard2, G. van Haaften2
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,2Department of Genetics, Center
for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW
and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,4Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Cen-
ter, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
5Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of
Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Kerala, India,
6Department of Medical Genetics, Koç University School of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey,7Department of Clinical
Genetics, San Camillo-Forlanini General Hospital, Rome,
Italy,8Department of Clinical Genetics, Queen Elizabeth
University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom,9Division
of Medical Genetics, Akron Children ’s Hospital, Akron,
OH, United States,10Division of Craniofacial Medicine,
University of Washington Department of Pediatrics, Seattle
Children ’s Craniofacial Center, Seattle, WA, United States,
11Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabili-
tation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of S ão Paulo,
Bauru, Brazil,12Department of Pediatric Plastic Surgery,
Wilhelmina Children ’s Hospital, University Medical Centre
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,13Department of Pathology,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,
14Erasmus Center for Biomics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands,15Institute of Medical and Mole-
cular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain,16Department of
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University
of Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil,17Department
of Pediatrics, University of California, Benioff Children ’s
Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States
Blepharocheilodontic syndrome (BCDS) consists of
lagophthalmia, ectropion of the lower eyelids, distichiasis of
the upper eyelids, euryblepharon, cleft lip/palate and dentalanomalies and has an autosomal dominant inheritance with
variable expression. We identi ﬁed heterozygous mutations
in two genes of the cadherin-catenin complex, CDH1 ,
encoding E-cadherin, and CTNND1 , encoding p120-catenin
delta1 in 15 of 17 BCDS index patients. CDH1 plays an
essential role in epithelial cell adherence; CTNND1 binds to
CDH1 and controls the stability of the complex. Functional
experiments in zebra ﬁsh and human cells showed that the
CDH1 mutations impair the cell-adhesion function of the
cadherin-catenin complex in a dominant-negative manner.
Mutations in CDH1 have been linked to familial hereditary
diffuse gastric cancer and invasive lobular breast cancer,however no cases of gastric or breast cancer have been
reported in our BCDS cases. Functional experiments
reported here indicated the BCDS mutations comprise adistinct class of CDH1 mutations. Together, we discovered
the genetic cause of BCDS enabling DNA diagnostics and
counseling, in addition we describe a novel class of domi-nant negative CDH1 mutations.
A. Kievit: None. F. Tessadori: None. J. Douben: None.
I. Jordens: None. M. Maurice: None. A. Hoogeboom:
None. R. Hennekam: None. S. Nampoothiri: None.
H. Kayserili: None. M. Castori: None. M. Whiteford:
None. C. Motter: None. C. Melver: None. M. Cunning-
ham: None. A. Hing: None. N. Kokitsu-Nakata: None.
S. Vendramini-Pittoli: None. A. Richieri-Costa: None.
A. Baas: None. C. Beugem: None. K. Duran: None.
M. Massink: None. P. Derksen: None. W.F.J. van
IJcken: None. L. van Unen: None. F. Santos-Simarro:
None. P. Lapunzina: None. V.L. Gil-da Silva Lopes:
None. E. Lustosa-Mendes:
None. M. Krall: None.
A. Slavotinek: None. V. Martinez-Glez: None. J. Bak-
kers: None. K.L.I. van Gassen: None. A. de Klein: None.
M.J. van den Boogaard: None. G. van Haaften: None.
C20.2
Heterozygous loss-of-function ACTB mutations
result in a novel developmental syndrome
S. Cuvertino1, H. Stuart1,2, K. E. Chandler2, N. A. Roberts1,
R. Armstrong3, L. Bernardini4, S. Bhaskar2, B. Callewaert5, J. Clayton-
Smith1,2, C. H. Davalillo6, C. Deshpande7, K. Devriendt8, M. C. Digilio9,
A. Dixit10, M. Edwards11, J. M. Friedman12, S. Joss13, B. Kerr2,A .K .
Lampe14, R. McGowan13, M. D. Medt8,J .O ’Sullivan2, S. Odent15,M .J .
Parker16, C. Pebrel-Richard17, F. Petit18, Z. Stark19, S. Tinschert20,
P. Vasudevan21, O. Villa6, &. M. White19,22, F. Zahir12,23, The DDD
study, R. Lennon1, A. S. Woolf1, S. Banka1,2
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,
2St. Mary ’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom,
3Addenbrooke ’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
4Mendel Laboratory, Rome, Italy,5Ghent University Hos-
pital, Ghent, Belgium,6Quantitative Genomic MedicineAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 99Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain,7Guy’s Hospital, London,
United Kingdom,8KU Leuven and University Hospital
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,9IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico
Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,10Nottingham City Hospital,
Nottingham, United Kingdom,11University of Western
Sydney, Sydney, Australia,12University of British Colum-
bia, Vancouver, BC, Canada,13Queen Elizabeth University
Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom,14Western General
Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom,15Hôpital SUD,
Rennes, France,16Shefﬁeld Children ’s NHS Foundation
Trust, Shef ﬁeld, United Kingdom,17CHU-Clermont-Fer-
rand, Clermont-Ferrand, France,18CHU Lille, Lille,
France,19Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute, Mel-
bourne, Australia,20Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria,21Leicester Royal In ﬁrmary, Leicester,
United Kingdom,22University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia,23Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar
Introduction: ACTB , encodes β-actin an abundant cytos-
keletal house-keeping protein. Homozygous Actb mice are
embryonic lethal and, in humans, postulated gain-of-function missense mutations cause Baraitser-Winter syn-
drome (BRWS), characterised by intellectual disability,
agyria/pachygyria, coloboma, sensorineural deafness andcharacteristic facial features. To date, the effects of loss-of-
function ACTB mutations are unknown.
Methods and Results: We describe heterozygous ACTB
deletions (gross or intragenic) or truncating mutations in 33
individuals with growth retardation, developmental delay,
intellectual disability, internal organ malformations(affecting heart, kidneys, spine and palate amongst others),
minor anomalies (e.g. nail hypoplasia and overlapping
toes), variable systemic manifestations and a recognisablefacial gestalt (interrupted eyebrows, dense eyelashes, wide
nose, wide mouth and a prominent chin) that is distinct from
individuals with BRWS. Strikingly, this spectrum overlapswith that of several chromatin remodelling disorders.
In developing mice, β-actin was enriched in tissues
correlating with the human disease. ACTB mRNA levels in
patient-derived lymphoblastic lines and ﬁbroblasts were
approximately 50% versus control cells. Patient-derived
ﬁbroblasts and ACTB siRNA knockdown in wild-type
ﬁbroblasts showed altered cell shape and migration, con-
sistent with known roles of cytoplasmic β-actin. Notably, a
decrease in β-actin protein levels was detected in nuclei of
these cells along with altered expression of cell cycle genes
correlating with a decrease in cell numbers.
Conclusions: Loss-of-function ACTB mutations cause a
novel developmental syndrome. Our linked developmental
and cell biology studies suggest that a critically reduced
level of this protein alters cell morphology, migration andgene expression to the detriment of brain, heart and kidney
development.S. Cuvertino: None. H. Stuart: None. K.E. Chandler:
None. N.A. Roberts: None. R. Armstrong: None.
L. Bernardini: None. S. Bhaskar: None. B. Callewaert:
None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. C.H. Davalillo: None.
C. Deshpande: None. K. Devriendt: None. M.C. Digilio:
None. A. Dixit: None. M. Edwards: None. J.M. Fried-
man: None. S. Joss: None. B. Kerr: None. A.K. Lampe:
None. R. McGowan: None. M.D. Medt: None.
J. O
’Sullivan: None. S. Odent: None. M.J. Parker: None.
C. Pebrel-Richard: None. F. Petit: None. Z. Stark: None.
S. Tinschert: None. P. Vasudevan: None. O. Villa: None.
&.M. White: None. F. Zahir: None. R. Lennon: None.
A.S. Woolf: None. S. Banka: None.
C20.3
Variants in the degron motif of AFF3 cause a multi-
sytem disorder with skeletal dysplasia and severe
neurologic involvement
N. Voisin1, R. E. Schnur2,3, S. Douzgou4,5, A. J. Tanaka6, C. F. Rustad7,
S. M. Hiatt8, E. Del Giudice9, A. Mikhaleva1, The DDD study10,
B. Yalcin1, D. Donnai4,5, N. Brunetti-Pierri9,11, A. Reymond1,W .K .
Chung6
1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, Uni-
ted States,3Cooper Medical School of Rowan University,
Division of Genetics, Camden, NJ, United States,4Man-
chester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, ManchesterAcademic Health Sciences Centre, St Mary ’s Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom,
5Institute of Human Devel-
opment, University of Manchester, Manchester, UnitedKingdom,
6Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University,
New York, NY, United States,7Department of Medical
Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,8Hud-
sonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, Uni-
ted States,9Department of Translational Medicine, Section
of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,
10Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United
Kingdom,11Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine
(TIGEM), Naples, Italy
The ALF transcription factor paralogs, AFF1-AFF4 are
components of the transcriptional super elongation complexthat regulates expression of genes involved in neurogenesis
and development. We identi ﬁedﬁve individuals with de
novo missense variants in the AFF3 degron motif, a signalfor protein degradation. They present with a recognizable
pattern of anomalies including microcephaly, global
developmental delay, intellectual disability, brain atrophy,seizures, dysmorphic features, horseshoe kidney, a
mesomelic form of skeletal dysplasia resembling100Nievergelt/Savarirayan type and other skeletal features,
only partially overlapping the AFF4 variants-associated
CHOPS syndrome. Consistent with a causative role of
AFF3 variants in this syndrome, a previously reported
individual with a microdeletion encompassing AFF3
exhibited overlapping clinical features. Murine modelslacking the orthologous gene display brain and skeletal
anomalies, and kidney defects.
The three described CHOPS individuals carry de novo
variants in the degron of AFF4 that altered the binding to
the SIAH E3-ubiquitin ligase and its stability. These indi-
viduals and two additional probands with de novo AFF4
variants we identi ﬁed allow to de ﬁne that seizures, failure to
thrive and a distinctive skeletal dysplasia are speci ﬁct o
individuals with AFF3 variants and absent in CHOPS. In
conclusion, although proteins encoded by AFF2 ,AFF3 and
AFF4 were reported to be partially redundant, the pheno-
types associated with AFF3 andAFF4 variants are clinically
distinct and show only minimal phenotypic overlap. While
CHOPS syndrome is due to an accumulation of AFF4
protein, functional analyses are warranted and underway tounderstand the mechanism of AFF3 -associated syndrome
that may explain phenotype differences.
N. Voisin: None. R.E. Schnur: A. Employment (full or
part-time); Signi ﬁcant; GeneDx. S. Douzgou: None. A.J.
Tanaka: None. C.F. Rustad: None. S.M. Hiatt: None.
E. Del Giudice: None. A. Mikhaleva: None. A. Mikha-
leva The DDD study: None. B. Yalcin: None. D. Donnai:
None. N. Brunetti-Pierri: None. A. Reymond: None.
W.K. Chung: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig-
niﬁcant; GeneDx.
C20.4
KIAA1109 variants are associated with a severe
disorder of brain development and arthrogryposis
L. Gueneau1, R. Fish2, H. Shamseddin3, N. Voisin1, F. Tran Mau-Them4,
E. Preiksaitiene5, G. Monroe6, F. Allias7, Q. Ambosaidi8,L .
Ambrozaityte5, L. Cimbalistiene5, J. Delafontaine9, N. Guex9,M .
Hashem3, W. Kurdi8, T. Pippucci10, S. Pradervand9, B. Roechert11,
P. Van Hasselt6, M. Wiederkehr1, C. Wright12, DDD Study, I. Xenarios9,
G. Van Haaften6, C. Shaw-Smith12, E. Schindewolf13, M. Neerman-
Arbez2, J. Chelly4, V. Kucinskas5, F. Alkuraya3, A. Reymond1
1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland,2Department of Genetic Medicine
and Development, CH-1211 University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland,3Department of Genetics,
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,4Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génét-
ique, Hôpitaux Universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,France,
5Department of Human and Medical Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania,6Department of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medi-
cine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether-
lands,7Department of Pathology, “Hospices Civils de
Lyon ”, Lyon, France,8Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,9Swiss Institute of Bioinfor-
matics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland,10Sant’Orsola-Mal-
pighi Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Bologna, Italy,
11Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), LAUSANNE,
Switzerland,12Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal
Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United
Kingdom,13Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Treatment,
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
United States
Whole exome sequencing of 10 individuals from 9
unrelated families with overlapping clinical manifestations
identi ﬁed loss-of-function (LoF) and missense variants in
KIAA1109 allowing description of a new autosomal reces-
sive multi-system syndrome. Shared phenotypic features
representing the cardinal characteristics of this syndromecombine brain atrophy, hydrocephalus and encephalic
Dandy-Walker malformation with clubfoot and arthro-
gryposis. Severe cases were incompatible with life, whereasthose with milder missense variants presented with severe
global developmental delay, syndactyly of 2
ndand 3rdtoes
and severe muscle hypotonia resulting in incapacity forpatients to stand without support. Histology of the brain of
two affected fetuses revealed defects of cerebellar cortical
lamination. The 5005 amino acid KIAA1109 is evolutio-narily conserved and interacts with proteins previously
associated with intellectual disability and regulation of cell
division such as CTNNB1, PPP2R4 and BUB3. Consistentwith a causative role for KIAA1109 loss-of-function and
hypomorphic variants in this new syndrome, knockdowns
of the zebra ﬁsh orthologous gene with morpholinos resulted
in embryos with hydrocephaly, abnormally curved noto-
chords, and dysmorphic overall body shape. Similarly,
published knockouts of the Mus musculus andDrosophila
orthologs of KIAA1109 resulted in lethality or severe neu-
rological defects reminiscent of proband features.
L. Gueneau: None. R. Fish: None. H. Shamseddin:
None. N. Voisin: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None.
E. Preiksaitiene: None. G. Monroe: None. F. Allias:
None. Q. Ambosaidi: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None.
L. Cimbalistiene: None. J. Delafontaine: None. N. Guex:
None. M. Hashem: None. W. Kurdi: None. T. Pippucci:
None. S. Pradervand: None. B. Roechert: None. P. Van
Hasselt: None. M. Wiederkehr: None. C. Wright: None.
I. Xenarios: None. G. Van Haaften: None. C. Shaw-
Smith: None. E. Schindewolf: None. M. Neerman-Arbez:
None. J. Chelly: None. V. Kucinskas: None. F. Alkuraya:
None. A. Reymond: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 101C20.5
Heterozygous BMP2 mutations leading to
haploinsuf ﬁciency cause a recognisable human
syndrome comprising short stature, palatal
anomalies, congenital heart disease and skeletal
malformations
T. Y. Tan1,2,3, E. Bhoj4, K. Strauss5, K. Brigatti5, E. Puffenberger5,
D. Li4, C. G. Gonzaga-Jauregui6, P. J. Simm7,2, B. O. Jones7,2,
M. Raabus2, L. Miles8, M. Ramialison8, J. Kaslin8, N. L. Baker2,3,P .G .
Farlie2,3
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Mel-
bourne, Australia,2Murdoch Children ’s Research Institute,
Melbourne, Australia,3Dept of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia,4Center for Applied
Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,5Clinic
for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, United States,
6Translational Genetics, Regeneron Genetics Center, Tar-
rytown, NY, United States,7The Royal Children ’s Hospital,
Parkville, Melbourne, Australia,8Australian Regenerative
Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Mel-
bourne, Australia
Bone morphogenetic protein 2 ( BMP2 ) on chromosome
20p12 belongs to a gene superfamily encoding TGF-betasignalling peptides involved in bone and cartilage biology.
Heterozygous chromosome 20p12 deletions are variably
associated with cleft palate, short stature and developmentaldelay. We report individuals with short stature, a recog-
nizable gestalt, skeletal anomalies and congenital heart
disease but normal intellect with heterozygous mutations inBMP2 . Craniofacial features include cleft palate, ﬂat mid-
face, short, upturned nose, long philtrum and low-set ears.
Skeletal features include 11-pairs of ribs, clinodactyly andpectus deformity. Congenital heart disease includes trans-
position of great arteries and Ebstein anomaly. In affected
sisters with a BMP2 splice site mutation we demonstrate
abnormal exon 2 splicing and paternal mosaicism; in an
unrelated individual we identi ﬁed a de novo frameshift
mutation. A heterozygous chromosome 20p12 deletioninvolving BMP2 was identi ﬁed in another individual and his
father with a similar phenotype. The craniofacial and ske-
letal phenotype of individuals with intragenic BMP2
mutations is similar to the deletion phenotype, suggesting
that haploinsuf ﬁciency of BMP2 is the primary phenotypic
determinant. Bmp2 -null mice die from defects including
heart malformation in early gestation while mice with het-
erozygous loss of Bmp2 appear normal. We present ana-
lyses of secreted BMP2 peptide in affected and control celllines as well as the effects of bmp2 knockdown on zebra ﬁsh
craniofacial/skeletal cartilages and cardiac development.
Our data suggest an elevated sensitivity to reduced BMP2
levels in human development and demonstrate involvement
ofBMP2 mutations in a recognizable human syndrome
comprising craniofacial, skeletal and cardiac malformations.
T.Y. Tan: None. E. Bhoj: None. K. Strauss: None.
K. Brigatti: None. E. Puffenberger: None. D. Li: None.
C.G. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. P.J. Simm: None. B.O.
Jones: None. M. Raabus: None. L. Miles: None. M.
Ramialison: None. J. Kaslin: None. N.L. Baker: None. P.
G. Farlie: None.
C20.6
Reverse phenotyping of whole-genome sequencingdata from patients with 22q11.2 deletions identi ﬁes
an extensive catalog of broader phenotypic
variability and benign variation in pathogenicdisease genes
M. S. Hestand1,2, B. A. Nowakowska2,3, E. Vergaelen2, W. Demaerel2,
J. Breckpot2, D. J. Cutler4, T. B. Crowley5, M. Armando6, N. Philip7,
G. Repetto8, M. Schneider9, S. Eliez9, K. Devriendt2, D. M. McDonald-
McGinn5,10, B. E. Morrow11,12, A. Swillen2, J. R. Vermeesch2,
International 22q11.2 Brain Behavior Consortium
1Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,2Department of Human
Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,3Institute of Mother
and Child, Warsaw, Poland,4Department of Human
Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, United States,5Human Genetics, The Children ’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States,
6Department of Neuroscience, Research Hospital IRCCS
Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy,7Department of Medical
Genetics, Aix Marseille University, APHM, GMGF, TimoneHospital, Marseille, France,
8Center for Genetics and
Genomics, Clínica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo,
Santiago, Chile,9Department of Psychiatry, University of
Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland,10Perel-
man School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Phi-
ladelphia, PA, United States,11Department of Genetics,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United
States,12Departments of Ob/Gyn and Pediatrics, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States
The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is the most common
chromosomal deletion syndrome in humans with an inci-dence of 1 in 2 –4000 live births. Individuals with the syn-
drome most often have a classically associated 1.5 –3M b
deletion and extremely variable clinical presentations. The102hemizygous nature of the region offers the opportunity to
evaluate mutations in relation to known recessive disorders.
We have evaluated the remaining allele from 382 whole-
genome sequenced patients. A total of 90% were identi ﬁed
to have the typical 3Mb deletion, 6% the 1.5Mb deletion,
and the remainder a variety of more atypical deletion sizes.We identi ﬁed 8,093 total variant positions, of which 117 are
predicted to be rare (frequency ⩽5%) and protein damaging
across a total of 185 subjects. Reverse phenotyping is nowbeing performed to associate this genetic variation with
expected phenotypes. Findings in these subjects may pro-
vide evidence for broader phenotypic variability in thepreviously described conditions and/or new features that
were not previously recognized to be associated prior to the
identi ﬁcation of mutations on the other allele. Alternatively,
variation that appears damaging may be demonstrated to
actually be benign. For example, four patients (3 variants)
have SCARF2 mutations, but do not clinically present signsof Van den Ende-Gupta syndrome. It has become evident
that mapping the variation in the remaining alleles of
genomic deletion disorders provides a rich annotation ofmore detailed pathogenic variation, but also benign
variation.
Funding: National Institute of Mental Health
(5U01MH101723-02), FONDECYT-Chile (1130392).
M.S. Hestand: None. B.A. Nowakowska: None.
E. Vergaelen: None. W. Demaerel: None. J. Breckpot:
None. D.J. Cutler: None. T.B. Crowley: None.
M. Armando: None. N. Philip: None. G. Repetto: None.
M. Schneider: None. S. Eliez: None. K. Devriendt: None.
D.M. McDonald-McGinn: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria
(speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest;
Natera. B.E. Morrow: None. A. Swillen: None. J.R.
Vermeesch: None.
C21
Cardiovascular disorders
C21.1
Inactivation of KLHL24 is associated with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and abnormalglycogen storage in heart and skeletal muscle
C. Hedberg-Oldfors1, A. Abramsson1, D. P. S. Osborn2, O. Danielsson3,
A. Fazlinezhad4, L. Hübbert3, I. Nennesmo5, K. Visuttijai1, J. Bharj2,
E. G. Karimiani4,6, E. Petropoulou2, A. Shohreim2, R. K. Banote1,
R. Maroo ﬁan2, M. Edling1, M. Taherpour4, H. Zetterberg1,7, A. Oldfors1,
Y. Jamshidi2
1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden,2St
George ’s University of London, London, United Kingdom,
3Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden,4Razavi Hospital, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of,
5Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden,6Mashhad Hope
Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic
Republic of,7Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal,
Sweden
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common
autosomal dominant genetic disease associated with sudden
death and progressive heart failure. Pathogenic variants ofgenes associated with metabolic disorders may also cause
HCM, but usually with recessive inheritance, or maternal
inheritance in the case of mitochondrial DNA mutations.Here we report seven young adults with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy from two consanguineous families. Two
individuals died suddenly and one woman had a cardiactransplant at age 26 due to heart failure. Endomyocardial
biopsy in two individuals from one family showed storage
of polyglucosan, and these two individuals also showedabnormal glycogen storage and other structural abnormal-
ities in skeletal muscle biopsy but no muscle weakness.
Intermediate ﬁlaments composed of desmin were accumu-
lated in both heart and skeletal muscle. Whole-exome
sequencing of affected individuals in both families identi-
ﬁed homozygous potentially deleterious variants in the
Kelch-like family member 24 gene, KLHL24 . One variant
was a nonsense mutation, c.1048G > T, p.Glu350*, and the
other a missense mutation, c.917G > A, p.Arg306His.Kelch-like proteins have been identi ﬁed as adaptors for the
recruitment of substrates for Cul3-based E3-ubiquitin liga-
ses and are important for protein turnover. KLHL24 is
highly expressed in striated muscle. In zebra ﬁsh, the
homolog gene klhl24a is expressed in the heart. Down-
regulation by antisense morpholino resulted in defectiveheart development visible at 2 days post fertilization,
leading ﬁnally to death at around day 5, thus demonstrating
the importance of klhl24 for cardiac development andfunction. These ﬁndings support the pathogenicity of
KLHL24 mutations, and suggest that KLHL24 is a new
cardiomyopathy-associated gene.
C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. A. Abramsson: None.
D.P.S. Osborn: None. O. Danielsson: None.
A. Fazlinezhad: None. L. Hübbert: None. I. Nennesmo:
None. K. Visuttijai: None. J. Bharj: None. E.G.
Karimiani: None. E. Petropoulou: None. A. Shohreim:
None. R.K. Banote: None. R. Maroo ﬁan: None.
M. Edling: None. M. Taherpour: None. H. Zetterberg:
None. A. Oldfors: None. Y. Jamshidi: None.Abstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 103C21.2
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate prevents cardiac
hypertrophy in a Williams-Beuren syndrome mouse
model
P. Ortiz-Romero1,2, G. Aranaz1, L. A. Perez-Jurado1,2,3,
V. Campuzano1,2,3
1Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,2Neu-
rosciences Program, Institut Hospital del Mar d ’Investi-
gacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain,3Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras(CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain
Introduction: The hallmark feature of Williams-Beuren
syndrome (WBS) is a generalized arteriopathy secondary to
elastin de ﬁciency that may lead to serious cardiovascular
complications. A mouse model with complete deletion (CD)of the orthologous interval deleted in WBS recapitulates
most cardiovascular features, increased oxidative stress, and
heart hypertrophy as adults. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate(EGCG) is a ﬂavonoid widely studied due to its safety
and remarkable antioxidant effects that include radical-
scavenger functions.
Materials and Methods: CD mice were fed with EGCG
diluted in the drinking water. Cultured cardiomyocytes were
also treated with EGCG in the media. We then comparedtreated and untreated CD mice and wild-type animals and
cells for several features: 1) heart weight and cardiomyo-
cyte’s area by histology; 2) oxidative stress levels in cardiac
tissue by quanti ﬁcation of dihydroethidium staining; and 3)
gene and protein expression (oxidative stress pathways) by
RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry.
Results: Treated CD mice did not show the cardiac
hypertrophy present in untreated CD animals, mainly due to
normalization of cardiomyocytes size. A slight increase inoxidative stress levels that did not change with treatment
was observed in CD tissue. Treated animals showed a
normalized expression levels of Nqo1 (NADPH-dehy-
drogenase quinone), decreased in untreated CD mice. The
nuclear proportion of NRF2 (direct regulator of Nqo1 ) was
also recovered by treatment in cultured CD cardiomyocytes.
Conclusions: EGCG prevents cardiac hypertrophy in CD
mice by normalizing alterations in NRF2 pathway. Thus,
EGCG is a potential therapeutic agent for preventing car-diovascular complications in WBS individuals.
Grant support: SAF2016-78508-R (AEI/MINEICO/
FEDER, UE)
P. Ortiz-Romero: None. G. Aranaz: None. L.A. Perez-
Jurado: None. V. Campuzano: None.C21.3
Generalized compound heterozygosity analysis
highlights associated loci for coronary artery
disease in genetic and exome data
M. Munoz1,2,3, M. Munz1,2,3, D. Gola2,4,L .Z e n g5,6, T. Keßler5,7,I .R .
König2,4, H. Schunkert5,6, J. Erdmann1,2,3
1Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany,2DZHK (German Research Center for Cardio-
vascular Research), partner site Hamburg-Lübeck-Kiel,
Lübeck, Germany,3University Heart Center Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany,4Institut für Medizinische Biometrie und
Statistik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,
5Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany,6DZHK (German Centre for
Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart
Alliance, Munich, Germany,7Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Munich, Germany
Background : The active search for genetic factors con-
tributing to coronary artery disease(CAD) has seen major
progress from ( hypothesis-free ) genome-wide association
studies(GWAS) of common SNPs. However for CAD, acomplex diseases, GWAS ’s only explain a small portion of
phenotypic variance. A new proposed approach is to look at
the generalized form of compound double heterozygosity(GCDH) to detect the genetic associations caused by com-
pound heterozygosity(CH) and thereby aid in explaining
some of the ‘missing heritability ’. Our study aimed to use
the GCDH test to discover genetic loci associated with CH
of CAD in European ancestry genetic and exome data.
Methods : Our genetic sample are based on the German
Myocardial Infarction Family Study V(GerMIFS V)
population-based study cohort which consists of 1,261
families(Men =64.52%) whereby all cases(N
cases=2,459;
Ncontrols=1,611) had myocardial infarction. Our exome
samples are based on the German CAD North and South
Studies(Ncase|Ncontrol for North:4,464|2,886 andSouth:5,255|2,921). The CollapsABEL software tool was
used, to conduct a genome-wide association scan –PLINK2
was called internally - and subsequently a GCDH test wasperformed.
Results : For chr1, we found 2 genetic loci to be sig-
niﬁcantly associated ( ≤1.25 × 10
−10) with CH in CAD.
Interestingly, of these, one SNP was already identi ﬁed using
the“traditional ”single-SNP based method while the other
SNP was only found by using GCDH. Remaining auto-somal chromosomes and exome data are currently being
analysed.
Conclusions : Based on the analysis of one chromosomone,
GCDH test was able to reveal a locus that was associated104with CH in CAD which could have otherwise been ‘missed ’
using single-SNP based method.
M. Munoz: None. M. Munz: None. D. Gola: None.
L. Zeng: None. T. Keßler: None. I.R. König: None.
H. Schunkert: None. J. Erdmann: None.
C21.4
Copy number variants account for at least 2% of
non-syndromic cardiomyopathies
F. Honti1, G. Beaman2,3, M. Edwards1, T. Monk1, S. Wilkinson1,
L. Brett1, S. Cook4,5,6, J. S. Ware4,6,7, W. G. Newman2,3, D. Morris-
Rosendahl1
1Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Royal Brompton and
Hare ﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, United King-
dom,2Evolution and Genomic Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom,3Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester Uni-
versity Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester,
United Kingdom,4Cardiovascular Genetics and Genomics,
NHLI, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom,
5National Heart Research Institute Singapore, National
Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore,6MRC
London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, United
Kingdom,7Royal Brompton and Hare ﬁeld NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom
Copy-number variants (CNVs) are generally under-
ascertained in routine diagnostics, although their involve-ment in heritable diseases is widely appreciated. CNV
calling from next-generation sequencing data suffers from
low precision - producing uncertain ﬁndings that have to be
tested by orthogonal techniques - while short deletions and
duplications involving one or two exons can remain unde-
tected. Recently, clinically-signi ﬁcant CNVs have been
found in less than 1% of cardiomyopathy patients, ques-
tioning the worth of CNV calling in these conditions.
We have developed a method for reproducible CNV
calling from targeted next-generation sequencing data and
implemented it into routine variant detection and assess-
ment in our laboratory. Using a panel of 169 genes impli-cated in inherited cardiac conditions, we have validated the
CNV-calling method with known deletions and duplications
and by con ﬁrming new CNV predictions with digital PCR
and MLPA. We have compared our method to three widely
used CNV-calling tools and found a superior precision in
calling short intragenic deletions and duplications.
We have examined the burden of CNVs in 882 healthy
volunteers and 1681 cardiac disease patients and observed a
signiﬁcant enrichment of rare CNVs (OR =3.5, p=0.001)
in the patient cohorts. In contrast to published reports, we
ﬁnd clinically-relevant CNVs in more than 2% ofcardiomyopathy patients. We present likely-pathogenic rare
CNVs in non-syndromic heart disease demonstrating the
signiﬁcant contribution of these variants to heritable cardiac
conditions.
F. Honti: None. G. Beaman: None. M. Edwards:
None. T. Monk: None. S. Wilkinson: None. L. Brett:
None. S. Cook: None. J.S. Ware: None. W.G. Newman:
None. D. Morris-Rosendahl: None.
C21.5
A major bene ﬁcial effect of angiotensin II receptor
blockade for preventing spontaneous aortic rupturein a new mouse model of vascular Ehlers Danlos
syndrome
E. Fontaine1, J. Faugeroux1, I. Loisel-Ferreira2, F. Vignol1,
A. Gianfermi1, H. Nematalla3, P. Bruneval3, J. Hadchouel1,
E. Messas3,2, X. Jeunemaitre1,3,2
1INSERM, Paris, France,2University Paris Descartes,
Paris Sorbonne Cité, Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France,
3APHP, Hôpital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris,
France
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare dis-
order caused by genetic defects at the COL3A1 gene which
codes for the pro- α1 chain of collagen type III, a ﬁbrillar
collagen arranged as an homotrimer. The prognosis is
worsened by unpredictable arterial ruptures occurring in
young adulthood. Two thirds of the disease-causing variantscorrespond to missense substitutions at glycine residues of
the mature triple helix, acting in a dominant negative
manner. We report here the characterization of the ﬁrst
knock-in mouse model of the pathology. Heterozygous
mice col3a1
+/G183Rwere viable, had a 10% reduction in
body weight without signi ﬁcant changes in blood pressure
(BP). Their main striking feature was a 60% mortality at
24 weeks of age (0% in controls), mainly observed in males
and caused by aortic rupture which was not preceded byaortic dilatation but with reduced arterial wall thickness.
Electronic microscopy showed collagen ﬁbers less dense
and heterogeneous as well as altered morphology ofadventitial ﬁbroblasts with dilated endoplasmic reticulum
suggesting retention of abnormal collagen. Compared to
placebo, survival rate was not modi ﬁed by propranolol, but
considerably improved by losartan (10% mortality at
24 weeks) that markedly decreased BP −25 mmHg).
Stopping losartan was associated with aortic rupture andmortality in the following weeks. The use of amlodipine
which also reduced BP, albeit to a less extent ( −10 mmHg),
was conversely associated with an increased mortality. Inthis vEDS mouse model, we demonstrate the bene ﬁts of BPAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 105reduction and angiotensin I receptor blockade. This ther-
apeutic strategy should be tested in humans.
E. Fontaine: None. J. Faugeroux: A. Employment (full
or part-time); Modest; SERVIER. I. Loisel-Ferreira: None.
F. Vignol: None. A. Gianfermi: None. H. Nematalla:
None. P. Bruneval: None. J. Hadchouel: None.
E. Messas: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None.
C21.6
Patterns of co-occurrence of congenital heart
defects follows distinct patterns
S. G. Ellesøe1, C. T. Workman2, P. Bouvagnet3, C. A. Loffredo4,K .L .
McBride5, R. B. Hinton6, K. van Engelen7,8, E. C. Gertsen7,B .J .M .
Mulder9, A. V. Postma7,10, R. H. Anderson11, V. E. Hjortdal12,
S. Brunak1, L. A. Larsen13
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,
2Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark,3Laboratoire
Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France,
4Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC, United States,5Center for Cardiovascular
and Pulmonary Research, Nationwide Children ’s Hospital,
Columbus, OH, United States,6Division of Cardiology,
Cincinnati Children ’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
OH, United States,7Department of Clinical Genetics,
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands,8VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands,9Department of Car-
diology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands,10Department of Anatomy, Embryology &
Physiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Neth-erlands,
11Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle Uni-
versity, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom,
12Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Aarhus Uni-
versity Hospital, Skejby, Denmark,13Department of Cel-
lular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark
Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) affect
almost 1% of the population and the number of adults withCHD is increasing. In families where CHD has occurred
previously, estimates of recurrence risk and the type of
recurring heart defect are important for counseling andclinical decision making, but the recurrence patterns of
CHD in families are poorly understood.
Materials and Methods: We investigated the co-
occurrences of congenital heart defects in 1,163 CHD
families, comprising 10,278 individuals, of which 3,080 had
a clinically con ﬁrmed CHD diagnosis. We calculated rates
of concordance and discordance for 41 types of CHD andodds ratios for each of 1,640 pairs of discordant lesions
observed between affected family members.
Results: We observed a high variability in the rates of
concordance and discordance and we were able to identify
178 pairs of malformations that co-occurred signi ﬁcantly
more or less often than expected in families. The data showthat distinct groups of cardiac malformations co-occur in
families, suggesting in ﬂuence from underlying develop-
mental mechanisms. Analysis of human and mouse sus-ceptibility genes showed that they were shared in 19% and
20% of pairs of co-occurring discordant malformations,
respectively, but none of malformations that rarely co-occur, suggesting that a signi ﬁcant proportion of co-
occurring lesions in families is caused by overlapping sus-
ceptibility genes.
Conclusions: Our data show that familial CHD follow
speciﬁc patterns of recurrence and suggest that part of co-
occurrence of malformations in familial CHD may becaused by shared susceptibility genes.
S.G. Ellesøe: None. C.T. Workman: None. P. Bou-
vagnet: None. C.A. Loffredo: None. K.L. McBride:
None. R.B. Hinton: None. K. van Engelen: None. E.C.
Gertsen: None. B.J.M. Mulder: None. A.V. Postma:
None. R.H. Anderson: None. V.E. Hjortdal: None.
S. Brunak: None. L.A. Larsen: None.
C22
Systems Genetics
C22.1
Four glycaemic trait trans-ethnic genome-wide
association meta-analyses using densely imputedgenetic data in up to 281,416 non-diabetic
individuals
I. Prokopenko, for the Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related
traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investigators
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
Introduction: Large-scale glycaemic trait genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have identi ﬁed more than 120
loci in Europeans. We aimed to dissect the trans-ethnic
(71% European, 13% East Asian, 7% Hispanic, 6%African-American and 3% South Asian) genetic architecture
of fasting glucose (FG), fasting insulin (FI), glycated hae-
moglobin (HbA1c) and 2-hour glucose (2hG), in up to281,416 non-diabetic individuals from 144 studies.
Materials and Methods: We inverse normally transformed
all phenotypes, adjusted FG/FI/2hG for body mass index(BMI) and tested for association the 1000 Genomes Project-
imputed (Mar,2012) GWAS, assuming additive genetic106effects. Ethnic-speci ﬁcﬁxed-effects meta-analyses were
combined using MANTRA, allowing for heterogeneity in
allelic effects between ethnicities and assuming log 10Bayes
factor (log 10BF)≥6 for genome-wide signi ﬁcance.
Results: We detected 102 signals for FG (53 novel), 62 for
FI (43 novel), 130 HbA1 cfor (60 novel) and 21 for 2hG (10
novel). These included loci at NFX1 (log 10BF=12.42) and
ZBTB38 (log 10BF=11.79) genes for FG; waist-to-hip ratio/
BMI-associated BCL2 (log 10BF=11.66) for FI, LRRC16A
(log 10BF=18.60) involved in platelet count and volume for
HbA1c, and human cerebrospinal ﬂuid monoamine meta-
bolite level-associated CLEC14A (log 10BF=9.68) for 2hG
not previously known to be involved in diabetes. Cluster
analysis classi ﬁed ~70% of HbA1c signals as in ﬂuencing
erythrocytic and ~30% glycaemic pathways. Enrichmentanalyses with GARFIELD and DEPICT highlighted blood,
hemic and immune system signatures for HbA1c; pancreas
for HbA1c/FG; adipose, fat tissues, adrenal glands andcortex for FI.
Conclusions: Novel clues about genetic architecture of
glucose and insulin level regulation from this trans-ethnicanalysis provide new hypotheses about their biology.
I. Prokopenko: None.
C22.2
Expression insights into the human miRNA-mRNA
interactome
O. M. Plotnikova1, M. Y. Skoblov1,2
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow,
Russian Federation,2Research Centre for Medical Genet-
ics, Moscow, Russian Federation
Introduction: miRNAs play a key role in the regulation of
gene expression, while a majority of miRNA-mRNAinteractions remain unidenti ﬁed. The recent development
of a high-throughput CLASH (crosslinking, ligation and
sequencing of hybrids) technique for discerning miRNA-mRNA interactions allowed an experimental analysis of the
human miRNA-mRNA interactome.
Materials and Methods: The direct miRNA-mRNA
interaction data were gained from the experimental
CLASH data. Expression levels for mRNAs and miRNAs
were retrieved from FANTOM5 and GEO.
Results: Expression analysis of miRNA revealed two
interesting groups: “speciﬁc”regulators expressed at high
levels while forming only a few interactions with cognatemRNAs and “promiscuous ”regulators expressed at low
levels each forming more than 100 interactions with
mRNAs. In normal cells, these “promiscuous ”miRNAs are
kept under tight transcriptional control that may be relaxed
in pathophysiological states, thus forming an attractive poolof potential biomarkers, while the “speciﬁc”regulators may
become candidates for therapeutic modulation.
Conclusions: Both of these miRNA groups are recognized
as biomarkers associated with adverse prognostic features in
cancer and other severe pathologies. Only about 1% of
mRNAs are actively engaged in miRNA interactions. Fur-thermore, we identi ﬁed several coding mRNAs with a
substantial sponge effect, including AGO1, which function
may re ﬂect the competition and resultant coevolution of
mRNAs and miRNAs.
O.M. Plotnikova: None. M.Y. Skoblov: None.
C22.3
Deconvolution of whole blood eQTLs into rare
immune-subpopulations uncovers key players ofimmune mediated diseases
R. Aguirre-Gamboa1, N. de Klein1, D. V. Zhernakova1, P. Deelen1,M .J .
Bonder1, Z. Borek1, Swertz1, I. Jonkers1, S. Withoff1, Joosten2,V .
Kumar1, H. J. P. M. Koenen2, M. Netea3, C. Wijmenga1, L. Franke1,L i1
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Gro-
ningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, the, Gronin-
gen, Netherlands,2Department of Laboratory Medicine,
laboratory for Medical Immunology, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Department of
Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Dis-eases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands
Many genetic variants have been associated to immune
mediated diseases, yet their molecular consequences are
unclear. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studiesrevealed that the majority of these variants have regulatory
effects and that these eQTLs are often cell-type speci ﬁc
(CTs). To study these effects, each subpopulation should besorted and transcriptionally pro ﬁled, but this is often
impossible due to resource constraints. In our study, we
have identi ﬁed these CTs eQTL effects by employing a
deconvolution approach that does not require expression
proﬁles from puri ﬁed cells. We used 89 samples with whole
blood (WB) RNA-seq data and quanti ﬁcations of 73 dif-
ferent blood subpopulations using FACS. From these sub-
populations, 22 could be inferred using WB RNA-seq
(r >=0.5 predicted against measured). Next, we imputed
these subpopulations in an independent cohort (N =2,176)
and subsequently tested how 29,750 previously identi ﬁed
cis-eQTL are in ﬂuenced by these cell-types.
To validate our approach we show that our identi ﬁed
CTs eQTLs have signi ﬁcantly bigger eQTL effect sizes in
puriﬁed cell, such as CD4 and CD8 T cells. We also
observed that the expression of genes in our detected CTsAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 107eQTL is signi ﬁcantly higher in their relevant cell types,
when compared to other cell subpopulations.
Finally, we overlapped the genetic risk factors of
immune-related diseases and observed and enrichment of
CTs eQTLs from immune cell subpopulations. In conclu-
sion, our proposed method detects CTs eQTLs effectswithout transcriptionally pro ﬁling puri ﬁed cell subpopula-
tions, aiding in the characterization of the downstream
effects of auto-immune genetic risk factors.
R. Aguirre-Gamboa: None. N. de Klein: None. D.V.
Zhernakova: None. P. Deelen: None. M.J. Bonder: None.
Z. Borek: None. Z. Borek Swertz: None. I. Jonkers:
None. S. Withoff: None. S. Withoff Joosten: None. V.
Kumar: None. H.J.P.M. Koenen: None. M. Netea: None.
C. Wijmenga: None. L. Franke: None. L. Franke Li:
None.
C22.4
Adipose cis-eQTL variants at enhancer-promoter
interaction circuits regulate obesity genes
D. Z. Pan1, K. Garske1,A .K o1, Y. Bagat1, M. Alvarez1, C. K. Raulerson2,
J. Sinsheimer1, K. L. Mohlke2, M. Laakso3, P. Pajukanta1
1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States,2University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States,3University
of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital,Kuopio, Finland
Introduction: Obesity has a high heritability, but its
polygenic nature and environmental factors have made it
difﬁcult to uncover underlying biological mechanisms.
Materials and Methods: To identify genetic variants
inﬂuencing obesogenic gene expression in adipose tissue,
we combined expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) with
chromatin interaction data. We detected cis eQTLs
(+/−500 kb from the TSS, FDR < 1%) using RNA-
sequence data from 793 subcutaneous adipose biopsies
from the Finnish METSIM cohort, and then detected distalenhancers interacting with promoters by generating pro-
moter capture Hi-C data in primary human white
adipocytes.
Results: We identi ﬁed 10,667 adipose cis-eQTL variants
residing inside distal enhancers that loop to physically
interact with the promoter of the eQTL and enhancer targetgene (permutation p < 0.001). To focus on genes related to
obesity, we correlated the expression of the target genes
with body mass index (BMI). Of 1,312 genes with loopingcis-eQTLs, 54 were correlated with BMI (genome-wide
corrected p < 3.197 × 10
−6). Of these, MAP2K5 and
IL20RB , are regulated by looping cis-eQTLs that are LD
proxies (r2> 0.80) for BMI GWAS SNPs, suggesting them
as the underlying genes at these wide BMI GWAS loci. Byperforming gene-gene expression correlations separately in
the lean (BMI < 25, n =118) and obese group (BMI > 30,
n=118), we discovered that correlation coef ﬁcients for 34
of the 54 genes show signi ﬁcant differences between lean
and obese individuals (permutation p < 0.01), implying that
obesity disrupts normal correlation structure in adiposetranscriptomes among these BMI-correlated genes.
Conclusions: Our results uncover variants in regulatory
enhancer-promoter interaction circuits in ﬂuencing adipose
gene expression underlying obesity.
D.Z. Pan: None. K. Garske: None. A. Ko: None.
Y. Bagat: None. M. Alvarez: None. C.K. Raulerson:
None. J. Sinsheimer: None. K.L. Mohlke: None.
M. Laakso: None. P. Pajukanta: None.
C22.5
Trans- eQTL analysis in 25,000 individuals reveals
clear differences between diseases in the types andnumber of causally involved biological pathways
A. Claringbould1,U .V ōsa1, eQTLGen Consortium, T. Esko2, L. Franke1
1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen,
Netherlands,2Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia
Understanding the role of genetic risk factors identi ﬁed
through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) incomplex disease remains dif ﬁcult. For many diseases,
hundreds of mostly non-coding variants contribute to dis-
ease risk through largely unknown molecular pathways. Toidentify these disease pathways, the eQTLGen consortium
is integrating genetic and gene expression data from whole
blood of >25,000 unrelated individuals, by conductingexpression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) meta-analysis.
We performed local cis- eQTL mapping for 7 million
genetic variants and distal trans -eQTL mapping for >10,000
known genetic risk factors for disease. Finally, by using
GWAS summary statistics for >1,000 (disease) phenotypes
we calculated polygenic risk scores for each individual andcorrelated these to gene expression levels.
In an intermediate analysis ( N=~18,000), we identi ﬁed
36,730 signi ﬁcant trans -eQTLs, representing almost 20% of
all tested GWAS Catalog SNPs. Trans -acting SNPs are 5.4
times as likely to also affect the expression of a cis-gene.
Integrating the effects from single SNPs and combineddisease risk allows for comparison of the number and the
nature of molecular pathways involved in several complex
diseases. For example, in ﬂammatory bowel disease SNPs
affect various pathways (such as the type 1 and type 2
interferon response and B-cell receptor signalling), while
the combined risk SNPs for HDL cholesterol speci ﬁcally
modulate the expression level of genes known to cause
familial hypercholesterolemia. In addition, preliminary108analyses suggest that the large number of blood trans-
eQTLs can also be used to infer relevant associations in
other tissues, and to assess which genes are likely causal for
disease.
A. Claringbould: None. U. V ōsa:None. T. Esko:
None. L. Franke: None.
C22.6
Men with LOY and cells without the Y chromosome -transcriptomes and functional effects studied in
6000 single cells by RNA sequencing using the 10X
Chromium platform
J. Halvardson1,2, M. D. Fernow1,2, H. Davies1,2, C. Rasi1,2,J .P .
Dumanski1,2, L. A. Forsberg1,2,3
1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,2Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,3Beijer
Laboratory of Genome Research, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden
The life expectancy of men is shorter compared to
women but the underlying mechanism(s) are not wellunderstood. Our recent discoveries regarding pathogenic
effects from mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in blood
might help explain this difference in longevity ( Nat. Genet .
2014 PMID:24777449, Science 2015 PMID:25477213,
AJHG 2016 PMID: 27231129).
Here we present the results of single cell RNAsequen-
cing (scRNAseq) of more than 6000 peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) using blood from a 93 year old
man, utilizing the 10X Genomics chromium system. Usingt-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding together with
clustering techniques we could determine cell types and the
fraction of LOY for each cell population.
We also studied the level of LOY in six FACS sorted cell
fractions from the same man using the Illumina In ﬁnium
QC Array −24 kit and found a strong concordance in LOY
fractions in the different cell types. Furthermore, we could
identify genes showing LOY speci ﬁc expression within
cell-types.
A goal of the project is to describe the functional con-
sequences of LOY in blood that could explain associations
with increased risk for disease processes in other organs,such as non-hematological cancers and Alzheimer ’s disease
in aging men. Our results show that scRNAseq methods can
be used to identify LOY in PBMCs. Furthermore, we pro-vide proof-of-concept that our approach will be useful for
studying the impact of LOY at both a cellular and tran-
scriptional level.This work was supported by ERC Starting Grant, Olle
Enqvist Byggmästare Foundation and Beijer Laboratory of
Genome Research to L.A.F.
J. Halvardson: None. M.D. Fernow: None. H. Davies:
None. C. Rasi: None. J.P. Dumanski: E. Ownership
Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectualproperty); Signi ﬁcant; Cray innovation AB. L.A. Forsberg:
E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other
intellectual property); Signi ﬁcant; Cray innovation AB.
C23
Neurogenetics 2
C23.1
Complex cis-interaction is responsible for the
craniofacial and neuroanatomical defects of the
4p16.1 copy number variant
G. Hayot1,2, C. Bonnet1,2, N. Katsanis2, C. Golzio1,2
1Institut de Génétique Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
(IGBMC), Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France,2Center for
Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC,United States
Copy number variants (CNVs) are frequent lesions
involved in both rare and complex disorders. We have
shown previously how the use of structural surrogate phe-
notypes in zebra ﬁsh embryos can identify the major genes
responsible for CNV-associated phenotypes. Here we dis-
sected functionally the ﬁve genes present in a CNV on
4p16.1. Existing cases from both Decipher and AChro-Pucedatabases indicated that the 4p16.1 deletion was associated
with micrognathia (small jaw) and microcephaly whereas
the duplication was associated with an abnormal facialshape and macrocephaly. We thus sought to determine the
contribution of these genes to brain and face development.
To mimic the duplication, we expressed each of the ﬁve
human transcripts in zebra ﬁsh embryos. We found discrete
drivers for the two major anatomical features tested. Over-
expression of either SLC2A9 andZNF518B were suf ﬁcient
to induce macrocephaly. However, scoring for the possible
drivers of the craniofacial defect neither gene induced
appreciable pathology. In contrast, expression of CLNK and
WDR1 led to macrognatia and abnormal U-shaped Meckel ’s
cartilage respectively. Finally, we asked whether the same
transcripts might be relevant to the deletion by inducingdeletions in each of WDR1 and CLNK orthologs by
CRISPR/Cas9; in contrast to the duplication experiment,
only the loss of Wdr1 led to micrognatia. Taken togetherAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 109these data suggest that the craniofacial and neuroanatomical
phenotypes aredue to the dose imbalance of several genes
present in the 4p16.1 following a cis-interaction complex
model rather than the effect of a major gene driver.Labex
Starting Grant, NIH R01 MH106826
G. Hayot: None. C. Bonnet: None. N. Katsanis: None.
C. Golzio: None.
C23.2
Foxp1 is essential for sex-speci ﬁc murine neonatal
ultrasonic vocalization
H. Fröhlich, R. Ra ﬁullah, N. Schmitt, S. Abele, G. A. Rappold
Institute of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg,
Germany
Autism and speech and language de ﬁcits are pre-
dominantly found in boys, however the causative mechan-
isms for this sex bias are unknown. Human FOXP1 is
associated with autism, intellectual disability and speechand language de ﬁcits. Its closely related family member
FOXP2 is involved in speech and language disorder and
Foxp2 de ﬁcient mice have demonstrated an absence of
ultrasonic vocalization (USV). Since Foxp1 and Foxp2
form heterodimers for transcriptional regulation, we inves-
tigated USV in neonatal brain-speci ﬁcFoxp1 KO mice.
Foxp1 KO pups had strongly reduced USV and lacked the
sex-speci ﬁc call rate from WT pups, indicating that Foxp1
is essential for normal USV. As expression differences ofFoxp1 or Foxp2 could explain the sex-dimorphic vocali-
zation in WT animals, we quanti ﬁed both proteins in the
striatum and cortex at P7.5 and detected a sex-speci ﬁc
expression of Foxp2 in the striatum. We further analyzed
Foxp1 and Foxp2 expression in the striatum and cortex
of CD1 mice at different embryonic and postnatal stagesand observed sex differences in both genes at E17.5
and P7.5.
Sex hormones, especially androgens are known to play
a crucial role in the sexual differentiation of vocalizations
in many vertebrates. We show that Foxp1 and the
androgen receptor are co-expressed in striatal mediumspiny neurons and that brain-speci ﬁc androgen receptor
KO mice exhibit reduced Foxp1 expression in the striatum
a tE 1 7 . 5a n dP 7 . 5a n da ni n c r e a s e d Foxp2 level in the
cortex at P7.5. Thus, androgens may contribute to sex-
speci ﬁc differences in Foxp1 and Foxp2 expression
and USV.
Sponsor: Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2013_A212)
H. Fröhlich: None. R. Ra ﬁullah: None. N. Schmitt: None.
S. Abele: None. G.A. Rappold: None.C23.3
Dominant mutations in DCC cause isolated agenesis
of the corpus callosum with sex speci ﬁc penetrance
A. P. L. Marsh1, D. Heron2, T. J. Edwards3, A. Quartier4, A. Rastetter5,
C. Nava5, S. Heide2, B. Keren2, C. Mignot2, C. Garel6, A. Faudet2,C .
Galea7, G. Mcgillivray8, S. A. Mandelstam9, S. Odent10, M. Bahlo11,J .
Mandel4, A. Piton4, A. Méneret5, E. Roze5, M. Moutard12, T. Billette12,
E. H. Sherr13, R. J. Leventer9, L. J. Richards3, P. J. Lockhart1,C .
Depienne4,14,5
1Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Mur-
doch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children ’s Hos-
pital, Victoria, Australia,2AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France,
3The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute,
Brisbane, Australia,4IGBMC, Illkirch, France,5INSERM,
U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMCUniv Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la
Moelle épinière, Paris, France,
6AP-HP, GHUEP, Hôpital
Armand-Trousseau, Service de Radiologie, Paris, France,
7Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics (D4), Monash
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University,
Victoria, Australia,8Victorian Clinical Genetics Services,
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Victoria, Australia,
9Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Vic-
toria, Australia,10Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de
référence CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France,
11Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,Victoria, Australia,
12AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, service de
neuropédiatrie, Paris, France,13Department of Neurology,
UCSF Benioff Children ’s Hospital, San Francisco, CA,
United States,14Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France
Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) is the most
frequent viable brain malformation in humans, usually
detected during the prenatal period by ultrasound. It is awidely heterogeneous condition that can be associated with
a normal or subnormal cognitive development when iso-
lated, or with variable degrees of intellectual disability (ID).Although mutations in many genes cause syndromic ACC
with ID, genes accounting for isolated ACC remain largely
unknown. The netrin receptor Dcc (Deleted in ColorectalCancer) plays a critical role in formation of corpus callosum
in mice by guiding callosal axons at the midline. DCC
mutations have previously been associated with mirrormovements (MM) in humans but not ACC. We used a
combination of genetic approaches to investigate the cause
of isolated ACC in 4 multigenerational families and70 sporadic cases. We demonstrate that DCC mutations
leading to premature termination codons or altering amino110acids preferentially located in the netrin binding domain
cause dominant isolated ACC, with or without MM and
incomplete penetrance. In individuals with ACC and/or
MM, mutations were associated with failure of corticospinal
axons to cross at the pyramidal decussation. Interestingly,
individuals with truncating DCC mutations showed sex-
biased ACC or MM phenotypic expression, possibly related
to enhanced DCC expression by testosterone during brain
development. DCC mutations therefore cause a variable
phenotype ranging from MM to isolated ACC with a
favorable cognitive development in humans and testoster-
one could act as a phenotypic modi ﬁer.
A.P.L. Marsh: None. D. Heron: None. T.J. Edwards:
None. A. Quartier: None. A. Rastetter: None. C. Nava:
None. S. Heide: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot: None.
C. Garel: None. A. Faudet: None. C. Galea: None.
G. Mcgillivray: None. S.A. Mandelstam: None. S. Odent:
None. M. Bahlo: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None.
A. Méneret: None. E. Roze: None. M. Moutard: None.
T. Billette: None. E.H. Sherr: None. R.J. Leventer: None.
L.J. Richards: None. P.J. Lockhart: None. C. Depienne:
None.
C23.4
WD40-repeat 47 is essential for brain development
via microtubule-mediated processes and autophagy
B. Yalcin1, M. Kannan1, C. Wagner1, M. Ross2, B. Rinaldi3, P. Kretz1,
L. McGillewie4, S. Bär3, S. Minocha5,C .P o6, J. Chelly1, J. Mandel1,
R. Borgatti7, A. Piton1, S. Collins8, C. Kinnear4, Y. Hérault1, S. Friant3,
B. Loos9
1IGBMC, Illkirch, France,2Department of Physiological
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, South Africa,3Université
de Strasbourg, CNRS, GMGM UMR7156, Strasbourg,
France,4SAMRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Stel-
lenbosch, South Africa,5Center for Integrative Genomics,
Lausanne, Switzerland,6ICube, UMR 7357, FMTS, Stras-
bourg, France,7IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Lecco, Italy,
8Université Bourgogne Franche Comté, Dijon, France,
9Department of Physiological Sciences, Stellenbosch, South
Africa
The family of WD40-repeat (WDR) proteins is one of the
largest in eukaryotes but little is known about their functionin brain development. Among 26 WDR genes assessed, we
found seven displaying a major impact in neuronal mor-
phology when inactivated in mice. Remarkably, all sevengenes showed corpus callosum defects, from thicker
(Atg16l1 ,Coro1c ,Dmxl2 andHerc1 ), thinner ( Kif21b and
Wdr89 ) to absent ( Wdr47 ), revealing a common implication
of WDR genes in brain connectivity. We focused on the
poorly studied WDR47 protein sharing structural homologywith LIS1, which causes lissencephaly. Mice lacking
Wdr47 showed lethality, extensive ﬁbre defects, micro-
cephaly and sensory-motor gating abnormalities reminis-
cent of a patient harbouring mutation in WDR47 .W e
demonstrated that WDR47 indeed shares functional char-
acteristics with LIS1, as it participates in key microtubule-mediated processes. Interestingly, WDR47 speci ﬁc CTLH
domain was associated with functions in autophagy for the
ﬁrst time in mammals. Silencing WDR47 in hypothalamic
GT1–7 neuronal cells and yeast models independently
recapitulated these ﬁndings, demonstrating highly con-
served mechanisms. Finally, our data identi ﬁed two
WDR47-interacting partners: SCG10 and Reelin. Taken
together, these results provide a starting point for studying
the implication of WDR proteins in neuronal regulation ofmicrotubules and autophagy, bringing a new insight to the
biology of corpus callosum.
B. Yalcin: None. M. Kannan: None. C. Wagner:
None. M. Ross: None. B. Rinaldi: None. P. Kretz: None.
L. McGillewie: None. S. Bär: None. S. Minocha: None.
C. Po: None. J. Chelly: None. J. Mandel: None.
R. Borgatti: None. A. Piton: None. S. Collins: None.
C. Kinnear: None. Y. Hérault: None. S. Friant: None.
B. Loos: None.
C23.5
ATPase-de ﬁcient ATAD3A alters mitochondrial
dynamics in hereditary spastic paraplegia
R. A. Woldegebriel1, H. M. Cooper2, Y. Yang1, E. A. Ylikallio1,
R. Khairullin3, K. Lin2, L. Euro1, E. Palin1, A. Wolf4, R. Trokovic1,
P. Isohanni1, S. Kaakkola1, M. Auranen1, T. Lönnqvist1, S. Wanrooij3,
H. Tyynismaa1
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,2Åbo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland,3Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden,4Helmholtz-Zentrum Muenchen-German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany
ATAD3A is a mitochondrial inner membrane AAA
ATPase with an unknown precise function. Membrane
AAA ATPases form hexameric rings, which are catalyti-cally dependent on the co-operation of the subunits. If ATP
hydrolysis is blocked in one subunit the entire protein is
rendered nonfunctional. ATAD3A was only recently asso-ciated with inherited human disease when de novo muta-
tions were reported in isolated patients presenting with a
neurological syndrome. On the contrary, we identi ﬁed
dominant inheritance of mutant ATAD3A , leading to her-
editary spastic paraplegia (HSP), a disorder of the upper
motor neurons. The mutation p.G355D in our patientsaffects the Walker A motif, which is responsible for ATP
binding in the AAA module of ATAD3A. We show that theAbstracts from the 50thEuropean Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral. . . 111recombinant mutant ATAD3A protein has a strong
dominant-negative effect on the wild type enzyme. We
further observed that the patient ﬁbroblasts with the
ATPase-de ﬁcient ATAD3A have elongated mitochondria
and substantially increased lysosome mass. These altera-
tions were veri ﬁed to associate with upregulated basal
autophagy through mTOR inactivation, resembling starva-
tion. We also derived motor neurons through differentiation
of patient-speci ﬁc induced pluripotent stem cells, and
observed alterations in mitochondrial network dynamics in
the neurons, particularly presenting as elongated mito-
chondria. We currently focus on transcriptome pro ﬁling of
the ATAD3A-de ﬁcient motor neurons using single cell
RNA sequencing.
We present the ﬁrst dominantly inherited ATAD3A
mutation associated with loss of ATPase activity, inducing
mitochondrial elongation. This ﬁnding adds ATAD3A to
the group of mitochondrial inner membrane AAA proteinsassociated with spasticity.
This work was supported by The Academy of Finland.
R.A. Woldegebriel: None. H.M. Cooper: None.
Y. Yang: None. E.A. Ylikallio: None. R. Khairullin:
None. K. Lin: None. L. Euro: None. E. Palin: None.
A. Wolf: None. R. Trokovic: None. P. Isohanni: None.
S. Kaakkola: None. M. Auranen: None. T. Lönnqvist:
None. S. Wanrooij: None. H. Tyynismaa: None.
C23.6
Mutation of ribosomal RNA-processing protein 7
homolog A ( RRP7A ) cause autosomal recessive
microcephaly with intellectual disability
M. Farooq1, L. Lindbæk2, N. Krogh1, V. S. Nielsen2, M. Mönnich1,
S. Sakthivel1, C. Doganli1, Y. Mang1, A. Fatima3, M. S. Hussain4,
K. Møllgård1, H. Eiberg1, L. Hansen1, K. W. Kjær1, H. Nielsen1,S .M .
Baig3, N. Tommerup1, S. T. Christensen2, L. A. Larsen1
1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,2Depart-
ment of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark,3Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory; Health
Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnol-ogy and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, Pakistan,4Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Introduction: Autosomal recessive microcephaly is a rare
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by small brain
and intellectual disability. The disorder is usually associatedwith aberrant neuronal progenitor cell proliferation, caused
by mutation of genes encoding centrosomal proteins.
Materials and Methods: Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0
and whole exome sequencing (WES) was used to identify
regions of homozygosity and rare mutations. Human fetal
brain sections were used for expression analysis. Patient ’s
and control ﬁbroblasts and RPE cells were used for func-
tional studies. Zebra ﬁsh and P19.CL6 cells were used as
model systems.
Results: We identi ﬁed a rare homozygous missense muta-
tion in the gene encoding ribosomal RNA-processing pro-
tein 7 homolog A (RRP7A). Immunostaining showed thatRRP7A is highly expressed in radial glia cells and motile
cilia of the human developing brain, and zebra ﬁshrrp7a
mutants display impaired craniofacial development, smallheads and eyes, cell proliferation defects and increased
apoptosis. Further, P19.CL6 Rrp7a mutant stem cell clones
show defects in neuronal differentiation. At the cellularlevel, RRP7A localizes to nucleoli, primary cilia, centro-
somes as well as spindle pole bodies during all stages of
mitosis in ﬁbroblasts and RPE cells. The missense mutation
in patient-derived primary skin ﬁbroblasts causes ribosome
biogenesis defects detected by impaired rRNA processing
as well as cell cycle defects with slower proliferation ratecompared to wild-type cells. Similarly, RPE cells subjected
to RNAi-mediated depletion of RRP7A display overly long
primary cilia, which are associated with defects in cell cycleentrance.
Conclusions: Impairment of ribosomal RNA processing is
a novel cause of autosomal recessive microcephaly.
M. Farooq: None. L. Lindbæk: None. N. Krogh:
None. V.S. Nielsen: None. M. Mönnich: None. S. Sak-
thivel: None. C. Doganli: None. Y. Mang: None.
A. Fatima: None. M.S. Hussain: None. K. Møllgård:
None. H. Eiberg: None. L. Hansen: None. K.W. Kjær:
None. H. Nielsen: None. S.M. Baig: None. N. Tommerup:
None. S.T. Christensen: None. L.A. Larsen: None.112