Plenary Sessions 61 Abstracts from the long term [10-15 year] strategy that is relatively familiar; from dis- ease gene identification to functional disease links to screenable targets to Plenary Sessions products. A near term [2-6 year] application of pharmacogenetics can affect markets during the real time careers of current CEOs. Using whole PS01. Progress in sequencing and annotating the human genome SNP maps to develop Medicine Response Profiles [MRP] for genome either efficacy or adverse events, it will be possible to test patients before J. Weissenbach prescriptions are filled to determine the right drug for the right patient. Genoscope; Evry, France Proof of Principle experiments have demonstrated that SNP maps can jsbach@genoscope.cns.fr define linkage disequilibrium that can rapidly localize and identify suscep- Despite the availability of most of the human genome sequence, the accu- tibility disease genes. The application of linkage disequilibrium MRPs for rate identification of genes on the DNAsequence remains to be continu- identifying individuals who are more susceptible for troublesome adverse ously improved and updated. This procedure relies on the combined use effects related to specific drug treatments will be presented, as will the of a variety of tools including similarity searches and exon/gene prediction potential effect on the competitive markets for those drugs. programs. Similarity searches rely on a set of sequence data that has been increas- PS05. Predictive Testing for Huntington Disease - 15 Years ing very substantially and rapidly during the past months. These include Later human cDNAs, mouse genomic DNAand cDNAs and puffer fish genomic M. R. Hayden sequences. With these resources, the definition of a vertebrate set of Centre for Molecular medicine & Therapeutics, Department of Molecular genes is progressively approaching completion. Genetics, University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC, Canada The use of a compact vertebrate genome (the pufferfish, Fugu rubripes mrh@cmmt.ubc.ca and Tetraodon nigroviridis) in protein similarity searches has proven to be Predictive genetic testing (PT) for Huntington Disease has now been extremely valuable for the identification of mammalian coding sequences. offered for longer than for any other late onset genetic illness. The signifi- DNAsequences representing in total 1.3 X coverage of the genome of cant number of persons at risk, who have participated in testing, now Tetraodon nigroviridis were used in TBLASTX searches and enabled us to allows insights to be derived that can be generalized for PTfor HD world- detect sequence matches in 75% of human genes with a backround of wide. Long term (5 year assessment) of the psychological effects of PT false positive matches below 1%. These results will be compared to other have revealed that patients receiving a decrease risk have improvement in similarity searches based on mouse genomic sequences that are actively well-being, associated with less depression, that is maintained for at least being produced at present. 5 years after receiving results of PT. By contrast, persons receiving an These searches have been completed by BLASTN comparisons using a increased risk result have an immediate increase in anxiety and depres- set of full length cDNAsequences and applied to human chromosome 22. sion, followed within 6 months by improved in well-being that is not sus- Results of these analyses have been matched to the updated annotation tained. By 5 years, these persons have no obvious change in psychologi- of this chromosome that has been released recently and will be discussed. cal profiles from that seen prior to receiving a predictive test result. Despite fears, the incidence of catastrophic responses to PThas been low (less PS02.Protein Structures, Inherited Mutations and Diseases than 1%), and the concerns that persons at increased risk would have a J. M. Thornton high frequency of suicide, has fortunately not been realized. The advent of University College, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department and a direct genetic test for HD, without requiring DNAfrom family relatives, Birkbeck College; London, United Kingdom resulted in a significant increase in the acceptability of PT. At the present thornton@biochem.ucl.ac.uk time, in countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom, approximate- The mechanisms whereby inherited DNA mutations cause disease are ly 10% of the number of persons estimated at risk, have now participated only beginning to be understood. These are best understood in the context in PTprograms. The advent of a genetic test for Huntington. Disease has of knowledge of the three dimensional structure of the relevant protein. also resulted in numerous new insights, which include the recognition that Therefore to improve our understanding of the molecular basis of inherited there is a much higher mutation rate for HD than previously had been rec- diseases we have mapped the disease related mutations annotated in the ognized, that incomplete penetrance for HD is most frequent, particularly OMIM database onto protein structural data, when available. in the lower ranges of CAG repeats, and that there is significant under- I will present a preliminary review of the relationship between protein ascertainment of persons with CAG repeats less than 40. While PTis gen- sequence, structure, function and disease, highlighting specific examples erally been accepted, there has been little demand for prenatal testing for to illustrate our observations. HD. The involvement in large number of persons in PTprograms, togeth- er with the advent of a genetic test for the diagnosis of HD, has also PS03.Mutations and Their Effect on Protein Structure allowed refinement of the relationship between CAG repeat length and age A.R. Fersht of onset. Using the largest cohort of HD patients analyzed to date (involv- Centre for Protein Engineering, University of Cambridge Cambridge, Unit- ing 3500 patients from 39 centers on four continents), a model to accu- ed Kingdom rately predict probability of disease onset (with mean 95% confidence, hjt1001@cam.ac.uk intervals of 1%) has been developed. Use of this survival model, will allow Missense mutations can knock out residues in proteins that are important for the design of clinical trials which will significantly limit the number of for binding, catalysis or conformational change, or have subtle effects on persons necessary, and therefore, will reduce the cost, as well as the dura- stability or conformation. Because buried residues in proteins tend to be tion of such a trial, thus more quickly bringing such therapies into clinical conserved and surface residues vary, it is generally thought that surface practice. Affected families and professionals have worked together to residues that are not directly involved in the function of proteins are unim- develop guidelines for PT, which is likely to be a significant reason for the portant, especially regarding their effects on stability. But, all residues in successful integration of PTinto the health care system in different parts of proteins make contributions to stability and structural integrity. Further, the the world. stability of proteins has not been optimised in evolution to the maximum value, but proteins appear to have evolved to a stability that is sufficiently PS06.The SNPEndgame adequate and to be consonant with other factors such as requirements for N. Risch degradation. Consequently, some proteins are just on the verge of being Department of Genetics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA stable and are very susceptible to destabilising mutations. I will illustrate, United States using p53 as an example, how binding mutations can inactivate its function risch@lahmed.stanford.edu by a variety of effects from altering residues essential for function to chang- With the recent announcement of a rough draft of the human genome ing structure and stability. sequence came also the identification of between 1.4 and 2.1 million SNPs, from the private and public efforts. An interesting question is PS04. Pharmacogenetics; A Disruptive Technology For The whether these SNPdatabases contain the variants that underlie genetic Next Decade susceptibility to a variety of common, complex diseases, or are at least in A. Roses linkage disequilibrium with them, and if so, how to identify them. At present Senior Vice President, Genetics Research; GlaxoSmithKline; London, it appears that testing such a large number of SNPs either in family-based United Kingdom or case-control association studies is beyond the scope of existing mdb4138@glaxowellcome.co.uk resources, so strategies need to be developed to prioritize the SNPs to be The Genome Project has accelerated the availability of tools to apply phar- tested. Considerable discussion has evolved around the issues of how macogenetics to the development of personalized medicines. This differs many and which SNPs are optimal, what study designs should be62 Plenary Sessions employed, and which populations should be studied. Attempts at answers les. The full power of a genetic analysis of gene function however requires to these questions can be obtained by considering the plausible genetic the availability of multiple alleles of the same gene or of the different genes basis for the diseases being studied, as well as what is currently known involved in the pathogenesis of the same disease. This include hypo- about human evolution, the characterization of genetic variation within and morphs, alleles of different strength and gain of function alleles. Such alle- between human populations, and the epidemiology of the diseases of les can be obtained after chemical mutagenesis with ENU which induce interest. It is likely that no single strategy will be successful in all cases, mainly point mutations. ENU is currently the most powerful mutagen for the and that a broad perspective including a variety of approaches be main- production of mutants in mice and other species. We have set up a large tained. scale ENU-mutagenesis screen at the GSF-Research Center. Acore facil- ity has been created in which mice are treated with ENU. Offspring of the PS07. Candidate Gene SNP-Based Association Studies; G1 and G3 generation are then screened for dominant and recessive phe- Empirical Findings, Problems, and Possible Solutions notypic abnormalities. Within the last 4 years we have screened more than A. Brookes 20000 mice and isolated over 200 genetically confirmed new mouse Center for Genomics Research, Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, Sweden mutants. These include more than 60 mice with skeletal abnormalities and Anthony.Brookes@cgr.ki.se many with obesity, diabetes, hypercholestolemia, deafness, B-cell defi- There is considerable debate about whether or not genetic association ciency or hyper-IGE. Our goal is the production of a large number of new analysis based upon single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) will help deci- animal models for the study of human disease. Future work will involve the pher the causative basis of complex disease states. Success will ulti- cloning of the corresponding genes and the detailed phenotypic character- mately depend upon the existence of common genomic sequence varia- ization of the mutants obtained. tions that have a significant disease-predisposing effect upon cell/organ- ism function. To add practical input to the theoretical debate, a study shall PS09. Public and Private Domains in Genomics: Conflict or be presented that explores the feasibility of using association analysis to Coorporation study non-Mendelian Alzheimers Disease (AD). For this investigation, sev- Moderator: H. Galjaard1 eral new research tools were developed, and shall be described. These Discussants: D. Cohen2, H. Yang3, A. Kent4, M. C. Freire5, M. Oborne6 include the Human Genic Bi-Allelic SEquences (HGBASE) SNPdatabase 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University; Rotterdam, The (http;//hgbase.cgr.ki.se) and the Dynamic Allele Specific Hybridization Netherlands; 2Novartis Pharmaceutical Corp.; Summit NJ, United States; (DASH) genotyping method. 3Human Genome Center, Institute of Genetics; Beijing, China; 4Genetic The AD study was large-scale compared to many contemporary efforts, Interest Group; London, United Kingdom; 5Office of Technology Transfer, and designed to try to circumvent a number of typical pitfalls of association National Institutes of Health; Rockville, MD United States; 6Directorate for analysis, such as i) disease heterogeneity, ii) population stratification, iii) Science Technology and Industry; Paris, France identification of type I errors, and iv) dependence upon LD (we tested prin- How can you patent genes, the elements of the periodical system have cipally coding sequence and promoter SNPs). Atotal of 60 SNPs were not been patenhood? evaluated, taken from candidate genes (N=55) from processes strongly How can you expect industry to invest enormously into the development implicated in neurodegenerative illness (oxidative stress and of new drugs and vaccines without patenting? apoptosis/inflammation). We also included 13 variants previously claimed We, representatives of developing countries are afraid of a widening gap to show significant AD association. Upon completion of this investigation, in access to knowledge compared with the wealthy countries. only two polymorphisms showed replicable disease association, but these Patenting implies publicizing and modern ICTwill further improve access signals would not survive multiple-test correction for 60 markers. None of to knowledge. the 13 prior candidates showed disease association. One of these two These are only four statements picked up during the many meetings and replicated signals entailed a promoter variation in a key apoptosis regula- discussions on patenting genes and they illustrate differences in percep- tor gene (TNFRSF6), and showed evidence for an interaction with APOE tion of the same theme. The more we learn about it, the more complicated alleles. This implies for a role for apoptosis control in the causation of AD, it becomes. and may help explain the mechanism by which the E4 allele of APOE Differences in definition of patenting between the USAand Europe, diver- mediates an increased AD risk. sity in legislation and opinion among and within countries; emotions, some- Overall, these empirical findings emphasize the doubtfulness of previous times based on inadequate knowledge of the facts. positive findings, and highlight the low success rates one should expect for In this session we hope to establish the facts and a choice between coop- typical current investigations. Multiple-testing, study power, and sample- eration and conflict. size issues are central to these problems. From this experience, ways to improve the execution of association studies in the future will be proposed. PS10. Chromosome Translocations in Leukemia; Impact on PS08. Systematic Mutagenesis in Mice: Models for Human Cancer Biology Diseases J. D. Rowley R. Balling1, E. Wolf 2, M. Hrabe de Angelis3 Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago Genetic Ser- 1GBF, German Centre of Biotechnology; Braunschweig, Germany; 2Insti- vices; Chicago, ILUnited States tute of Animal Breeding, LMU Munich; Munich, Germany; 3Institute of jrowley@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu Experimental Genetics, GSF-Research Center of Environment and Health; Chromosome analysis, particularly in leukemia and lymphoma, has had a Neuherberg, Germany dramatic impact on cancer biology. In acute myelogenous leukemia, balling@gbf.de leukemic cells with recurrent balanced translocations may have unique One of the goals of the Human Genome Project is the systematic func- phenotypes. Several hundred recurring translocations have been identified tional analysis of genes that are involved in the pathogenesis of human and the breakpoints of about half have been cloned. Cloning translocation disease. Due to the similarity in their genomes, developmental pathways breakpoints has led to the identification of more than one hundred new and physiology, the mouse has become a major model to study the genet- genes including BCL2, AML1, TEL, PMLand MLL. The mRNAs from the ics and pathogenesis of human diseases. An important tool to obtain fusion genes are inframe and produce functional fusion mRNAs and insight into the function of genes is the use of mutants. Mouse mutants unique, translocation specific proteins. Cloning translocation breakpoints have occured spontaneously in breeding colonies or were chemically has provided unique diagnostic probes used for fluorescence in situ induced. Mutants produced by gene targeting and transgenesis play an hybridization or RT-PCR. Specific therapies based on an understanding of increasing role in the dissection of biological pathways. The use of embry- the altered function of these fusion genes are now available and more will onic stem cells and homologous recombination allows a gene driven be developed. analysis of gene function. Aprerequisite for this approach is the availabili- We need to define the alterations in gene expression in these different ty of the gene(s) whose function is to be investigated. Equally important translocations using an unbiased genome-wide strategy. This will permit a and complementary is a phenotype driven approach, in which as many more sophisticated approach to identification of the genotype of each spe- mutants as possible are obtained with specific diseases or defects and the cific translocation. We used a modified SAGE (Serial Analysis of Gene responsible genes are then identified through positional cloning or other Expression) technique to analyze normal CD34+ and CD15+ myeloid cells. strategies. The validity and success of this approach- was demonstrated in We identified 42,399 and 37,519 unique tags from CD34+ and CD15+ the course of the genetic and molecular dissection on the pathway that set cells, respectively. Comparing changes in gene expression between up the Drosophila body pattern. Although a large number of knockout CD34+ and CD15+ cells, 31,336 tags were absent and 20,054 new tags mutants will be produced in the coming years, most of this mutants will be were present in CD15+ cells. insertions that interrupt gene function and in most cases produce null alle- Information about the similarities as well as the differences in the patternPlenary Sessions 63 of gene expression associated with each translocation will lead to a more vide a discussion of results from the investigation of both sporadic and precise understanding of the genetic differences induced by these fusion hereditary cancers with the focused intent to integrate expression profiling genes in leukemia. Identifying the unique gene expression pattern for each with mutation status and pathway prediction. Information from both biolog- translocation will speed the development of a reliable, cost-efficient diag- ic and mathematical studies will be described to address the consequence nostic DNAmicroarray. This will be critical as we treat each consistent of specific mutations on a cancers gene expression profile. The results translocation with its own genotype specific therapy. suggest the possibility for gene-expression based identification (classifica- tion) of mutation-positive cancers, as well as increased understanding of PS11.Has gene detection benefited the cancer patient? the functional consequences of gene mutations. A. de la Chapelle Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio PS13.Gains and losses in skull and limb development State University; Columbus, OH United States A. Wilkie delachapelle-1@medctr.osu.edu Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine; Oxford, United Kingdom Ideally, the detection of a gene whose mutations contribute to cancer h.goodwin@iop.kcl.ac.uk should lead to the development of a drug or procedure that cures or pre- In the diagnosis of syndromes, malformations of the skull and limbs fre- vents that cancer. So far, this sequence of events has occurred extremely quently occur in the same disorder. This suggests that similar molecular rarely. Aglimmer of hope is provided by the example of chronic myeloid pathways are employed in development of these two evolutionarily distinct leukemia (CML). Over 40 years ago a specific marker, the Philadelphia structures. These parallels will be illustrated from work in my laboratory to chromosome was found. Over 25 years ago the Ph1 was found to be elucidate the molecular basis of skull (craniosynostosis, parietal foramina) caused by a translocation. Over 10 years ago the translocation was found and limb (syndactyly, brachydactyly type B) malformations. These disor- to lead to the fusion of two genes creating a hyperactive tyrosine kinase. ders commonly show dominant inheritance and the causative genes that I In a focused effort to provide an antidote to this kinase, hundreds or thou- will discuss encode proteins of two specific categories; transcription factors sands of small-molecule compounds were tested by a drug company. After (MSX2, ALX4, HOXD13, TWIST) and receptor tyrosine kinases (FGFR1, many years of endeavor the compound named STI 571 was identified that FGFR2, FGFR3, ROR2). Heterozygous loss of function mutations are appeared to have the desired effect. Today, after some 3 years of clinical associated with abnormal phenotypes (haploinsufficiency) in the case of all trials, STI 571 appears to induce complete remission in almost every four transcription factors but none of the four receptor tyrosine kinases; this patient with CML, even at advanced stages of the disease. There may reflects the frequent dosage sensitivity of transcription factors compared to even be hope for cure. What lessons does this story teach us? First, most other proteins. In contrast, diverse gain of function mechanisms painstaking basic research is a prerequisite of any progress. This can best (dominant positive or negative) are commonly encountered in receptor be done by academic researchers who are free to choose their projects. tyrosine kinase mutations but more difficult to establish for transcription Second, drug development requires enormous resources that are only factors, although there is evidence for this type of mechanism in specific available to the industry. Imagination, discipline and hard core targeting is MSX2 and HOXD13 mutations. Homozygous mutations associated with also required. Third, to get from gene discovery totherapy takes a long complete loss of function are usually expected to be lethal, however in the time. Fourth, the example shows that the scenario is possible. It should case of ROR2 a distinct phenotype occurs, recessive Robinow syndrome. start happening more often. Much remains to be learnt about how these proteins are integrated in My second example highlights the need of open-mindedness and imagi- development, but elements of a molecular pathway in the cranial suture nation. Another leukemia, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is often cur- are beginning to emerge. able today through the combined use of trans-retinoic acid and chemother- apy. The disease occurs as a result of the fusion of the APLgene with the PS14. Transcription of Hox Genes Suggests a Link between retinoic acid receptor alpha-gene. So one might think that the story resem- Pattering and the Segmentation Clock bles that of CML; the knowledge of the molecular event (in this case one J. Z k ny1, M. Kmita1, J. L. de la Pompa2, D. Duboule1 interfering with the uptake of retinoic acid) hinting that treatment with 1Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sci- retinoic acid might be useful. Not at all! Treatment of APLwith retinoic acid ences III; Geneva, Switzerland; 2EMBL, Mouse Biology Programme; preceded the molecular genetic findings. It was part of Chinese folk medi- Rome, Italy cine! We learn again something that is hardly new in medicine. Imagina- Denis.Duboule@zoo.unige.ch tion, open-mindedness and keen clinical observation are essential. How During mammalian development, transcription of Hox genes is activated in about the relatively recently detected genes that confer susceptibility to presomitic mesoderm with a time sequence that follows the order of the common cancers? BRCA1 and BRCA2 have been known for approxi- genes along the chromosome. Consequently, newly formed somites con- mately 7 years. Their diagnostic implications are of course huge in affect- tain specific combinations of HOX proteins that define their fates. I shall ed families, and testing for mutations probably leads to better risk aware- discuss the fact that Hoxd1 displays transitory stripes of expression within ness and saved lives. Like in other cancers showing Mendelian inheri- presomitic mesoderm, but not in somites. Stabilization of its transcripts tance, a major benefit is to those at-risk family members who are found to through targeted modification uncovered sustained expression in somites, be mutation negative. But unfortunately, the BRCAgenes have not yet pro- reminiscent of other Hox gene patterns, suggesting that cyclic activation in vided real breakthroughs in our understanding of pathogenetic mecha- presomitic mesoderm may be a general phenomenon masked by slow nisms. Curative, non-cytotoxic drugs are but a dream. Colorectal cancer transcript turnover. Accordingly, in addition to Hoxd1 and Hoxd3, we show looks somewhat brighter. Here the mismatch repair defect caused by that the promoters of both Hoxb1 and Hoxd11 transgenes can respond to mutations in several genes occurs not only in the main Mendelian form of this regulation. We propose that colinearity is associated with bursts of colorectal cancer (HNPCC) but also in a sizeable proportion (up to 20%) of transcriptional activation of Hox genes every time a somite is about to form. sporadic cancers. These mismatch-repair deficient colorectal cancer This dynamic transcriptional behavior appears to depend upon Notch sig- patients have a better prognosis than others. The basis of this phenome- naling, as mice deficient for the Su(H)/RBPJk/CBF1 gene, the effector of non is not yet understood; however, epigenetic phenomena (methylation, the Notch pathway, showed severely reduced Hoxd gene expression in loss of imprinting) seem to play a role. This gives hope that drugs and/or presomitic mesoderm. These results suggest a tight link between Hox procedures may be forthcoming that interfere with these cancers. Already gene activation and the mechanisms behind the segmentation clock. Such mismatch repair deficiency, as defined by microsatellite instability, is a tool a linkage would coordinate the production of novel segments with their in the large-scale molecular screening for HNPCC which in turn facilitates morphological specification. life-saving clinical surveillance. In summary, the detection of cancer-related genes is beginning to impact PS15. I met a traveller from an antique land : Genes as his- the clinical handling of subsets of many cancers, but the road from gene to tory therapy and prevention is slow and unpredictable. B. Sykes Department of Cellular Science, University of Oxford, Institute of Molecu- PS12. Classification and predictive modeling using gene lar Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital; Oxford, United Kingdom expression analysis bsykes@gwmail.jr2.ox.ac.uk J. Trent These days genes may aspire to predicting the future but they are also Div.of Intramural Research, Cancer Genetics Branch, NIH/National Human messengers from the past. Each gene has its own separate history and Genome Research Institute; Bethesda, MD United States has made its own journey from the deep past to all of us in the present day. jtrent@exchange.nih.gov Interpreting the messages genes tell us about our ancestors, and with it The use of gene expression patterns to target and predict functional path- the history of our species, has changed. It has shifted from the accumula- ways is an important goal in the post-sequence era. This lecture will pro- tion of summary statistics and the stale comparisons of one population64 Concurrent Symposia with another to the realisation that the history of our species is the history Geraedts, J., Handyside, A., Harper, J., Liebaers, I., Sermon, K., Staessen, of individuals and their actions. C., Thornhill, A., Vanderfaeillie, A., and Viville, S. (1999). ESHRE Preim- The agents of change have been the uniparental loci found on mitochon- plantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) Consortium: preliminary assessment drial DNAand the Y-chromosome which trace the different histories of men of data from January 1997 to September 1998. ESHRE PGD Consortium and women. Robust phylogenies and accurate mutation rates introduce Steering Committee. Hum Reprod 14, 3138-48. the fourth dimension of time into the interpretation of the patterns of genet- ic variation. The presentation will be illustrated by examples ranging from PS19. The spatial organisation of chromosomes and genes questions on a global dimension to what can be said of the individual within the nuclei of human cells; implications for disease and behaviour and lives of our ancestors. genome plasticity W. Bickmore PS17.Genetic susceptibility to tuberculosis MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital; Edinburgh, United L. M. Mitsos1, L. R. Cardon2, A. Fortin1, L. Ryan3, R. LaCourse3, N. Jaba- Kingdom do1, S. Grinstein4, R. J. North3, P. Gros1 wendy@hgu.mrc.ac.uk 1Department of Biochemistry, McGill University; Montreal, PQ Canada; We now know the sequence of DNAwithin the human genome. However, 2Bioinformatics and Statistical Genetics, University of Oxford; Oxford, Unit- this linear information is an incomplete description of our genetic informa- ed Kingdom; 3Trudeau Institute; Saranac Lake, NY United States; tion. Many levels of chromatin structure are involved in regulating gene 4Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada expression in a heritable (epigenetic) manner. Recently, attention has gros@med.mcgill.ca turned to the spatial organisation and functional compartmentalisation of Genetic factors play a key role in host response, disease severity, and ulti- chromosomes, and of the nucleus itself, in the quest to understand how the mate outcome of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in humans. expression of complex genomes is regulated. Using a mouse model of susceptibility to Mycobacterial infections, we have I will present evidence that individual human chromosomes occupy specif- isolated the Nramp1 gene by positional cloning. Loss-of-function mutations ic positions within the nucleus in both fixed and living cells. Gene-rich at Nramp1in mice cause susceptibility to infection with unrelated intracel- human chromosomes general localise towards the interior of the nucleus lular parasites by impairing macrophage function. Recently, it was shown whereas gene-poor chromosomes are positioned towards the edge of the that polymorphic variants at the human NRAMP1gene are associated with nucleus. Chromosome positioning in relation to cell-cycle changes and to susceptibility to tuberculosis and leprosy in certain endemic areas of dis- certain disease states will be discussed. Relationships between nuclear ease. The Nramp1 protein is expressed in macrophages and neutrophils in organisation, and the occurrence of chromosome rearrangements in the a subcellular compartment that is rapidly recruited to the membrane of the human population will also be examined. phagosome, soon after phagocytosis of inert particles or live bacteria. Evidence from model organisms suggests that the nuclear organisation of Recruitment of Nramp1 to the phagosomal membrane interferes with the individual genes can be important in their regulation. I will present our stud- ability of intracellular parasites to inhibit phagolysosome formation. Micro- ies that begin to reveal the nuclear organisation of genes from different fluorescence imaging in intact cells of single phagosomes containing par- parts of the human genome. I will show that individual genes occupy pre- ticles labeled with metal-sensitive fluorescent dyes demonstrate that ferred sites within interphase chromosome territories but that some genes Nramp1 protein functions as a pH-dependent, divalent cation efflux pump. appear to occupy positions within the nucleus that are quite distinct form To identify additional genes responsible for differences in host response to the space taken up by the rest of the chromosome to which they belong. Mycobacterial infections, ninety five animals of an informative F2 cross derived from highly susceptible DBA/2J and resistant C57Bl/6J parents, Concurrent Symposia were infected intravenously with M. tuberculosis(1 X 105CFU) and dura- tion of survival was used as a quantitative phenotypic measure of suscep- S01. Normal and abnormal CNS development in man and tibility in a whole genome scan. Quantitative trait locus analysis (QTL) mouse. showed that the genetically controlled susceptibility was multigenic. QTL K. K. Sulik analysis identified two significant linkages on the distal portion of chromo- Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, The University of North Carolina; some 1 (LOD, 4.80) and on the proximal portion of chromosome 7 (LOD, Chapel Hill, NC United States 4.66) that each account for approximately 21% of the phenotypic variance. mouse@med.unc.edu Athird suggestive linkage was identified on the proximal portion of chro- Similarities in the prenatal development of the mouse and human CNS mosome 3 (LOD, 3.93; additional 18% of the variance). At each locus, have allowed for extensive extrapolation between species and a rapidly homozygosity for the parental C57Bl/6J alleles was associated with increasing understanding of factors involved in both normal and abnormal increased resistance to infection. The role of these three loci in regulating development. Of particular interest for this review are the formation and M. tuberculosis replication in the lungs is currently being validated in addi- closure of the neural tube; events that occur during the third and fourth tional experiments, using aerosol infection and using bacterial replication weeks of human embryogenesis. Neural tube closure is initiated at similar as a quantitative trait. Such novel mouse loci provide the basis for evalu- developmental stages in the mouse and human, but its progression differs. ating a possible association of the corresponding syntenic chromosomal In the mouse there is an intermittent anterior closure site at the mid- regions in humans with susceptibility to tuberculosis. brain/hindbrain junction while humans lack this intermittent site. This has significant implications relative to our interpretation of the genesis of PS18.Preimplantation genetic diagnosis: an update human neural tube defects. A. H. Handyside Research utilizing mice has helped to reveal key cell populations and Leeds PGD Centre, Assisted Conception Unit, Leeds General Infirmary mechanisms that are involved in the genesis of neural tube defects as well and School of Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom as other CNS abnormalities including holoprosencephaly and hydro- a.h.handyside@leeds.ac.uk cephaly. Additionally, a range of causative environmental, genetic, and Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) following in vitro fertilization multifactorial insults have been examined that are relevant not only to (IVF), cleavage stage embryo biopsy and single cell genetic analysis has major CNS malformations, but also behavioral abnormalities. For example, become increasingly established over the last ten years as a viable alter- ethanol which is the most common nonhereditary cause of mental retar- native to conventional prenatal diagnosis for both chromosomal and single dation, kills selective cell populations in the neural plate and early neural gene defects (Handyside and Delhanty, 1997). The first pregnancies were tube. established in 1989 in a series of couples at risk of various X-linked reces- The pattern of apoptosis resulting from acute ethanol exposure is readily sive diseases by identifying (unaffected or carrier) female embryos for related to failure of the neural tube to close, deficiencies in the forebrain transfer (Handyside et al., 1990). Towards the end of 1999, the European midline, and also to subsequent hindbrain abnormalities. Ethanol also kills Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) PGD Consor- selected CNS populations at fetal and perinatal stages of development. tium reported the first detailed clinical data from 16 centres for 392 cycles Another condition, cholesterol deficiency as underlies the human mental completed in the period January 1997 to September 1998 (Geraedts et al., retardation/malformation syndrome, Smith-Lemli-Opitz (SLO), also can 1999). The overall clinical pregnancy rate for this series was 17% per cause selective cellular loss. This selective vulnerability appears to be oocyte retrieval or 22% per embryo transfer and data from 82 pregnancies related, at least in part, to a signaling pathway involving sonic hedgehog and 79 children was collected. In the latest data, covering a period from and the involvement of cholesterol in hedgehog protein function. 1994 to May, 2000, 1319 cycles from 25 centres are reported with the Both Shh gene knockout and selective modification of the gene that is same overall pregnancy rate together with the details of 163 pregnancies mutated in SLO are examples that will be presented to illustrate the utility and 162 children (Geraedts et al., 2000). The current status of PGD will be of mouse models for the exploration of normal and abnormal CNS devel- briefly reviewed together with prospects for future developments. opment. The following web site is recommended as a resource for micro-Concurrent Symposia 65 graphs illustrating mouse and human embryogenesis recently estimated the minimum number of MRX genes to be approxi- mately 22. S02.LIS1 and DCX; the journey from rare human syndrome to Some lumping of syndromic and non-specific phenotypes as a conse- essential components of cellular mechanics quence of different disease causing mutations in the same gene (eg. W. B. Dobyns ATRX, RPS6KA3 and MECP2 genes) may reduce the overall number of Departments of Human Genetics, Neurology and Pediatrics, The Universi- XLMR genes. ty of Chicago; Chicago, ILUnited States The scenario of many genes affecting normal development of cognitive Classical lissencephaly (LIS) is a human cortical malformation caused by function (eg. MRX genes) is appearing. Alarge proportion of idiopathic MR impaired neuronal migration, which results in reduced gyral formation and remains undiagnosed as a consequence of either the current inability to an abnormally thick, four-layered cortex. Subcortical band heterotopia devise and carry out large scale tests, or the existence of as yet undiscov- (SBH) is a related disorder in which deficient neuronal migration results in ered cause(s) of MR. This represents a great challenge for future applica- a band of heterotopic gray matter between the cortex and ventricular walls, tions of large-scale genomics approaches like DNAchip and microarray and an overlying six-layered cortex with shallow sulci. technologies in particular. Embryology. The cerebral hemispheres form at ~5 weeks gestation as diverticula of the rostral prosencephalon. The wall of the hemispheres S04.Agenome-wide analysis of alternative exon-usage in the develops a periventricular proliferative zone by ~6 weeks, which gives rise human transcriptome to billions of neuroblasts. Some of the early progenitor cells migrate out- S. J. De Souza ward to form the cortical plate, and are followed by billions of immature Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; Sao Paolo, Brazil neurons in two major waves between approximately 7 and 13 weeks ges- sandro@bidu.ludwig.org.br tation, with residual migration continuing for several months thereafter. The completion of the human genome project has revealed a surprising Different types of lissencephaly. The most common type of LIS, known as low number of predicted genes. One of the consequences of this modest classical LIS, is characterized by a very thick 15-20 mm cortex, and gross- number is that we have to look carefully for mechanisms that would gen- ly normal brainstem and cerebellum. About 80% have mutations of either erate the complexity intrinsic to human development and homeostasis. the LIS1 or DCX (XLIS) genes, with LIS1 accounting for most patients with One of these mechanisms at the transcriptome level is alternative splicing. LIS and DCX for most patients with SBH. In addition, most patients have a One of the most common forms of alternative splicing is alternative exon visible front to back gradient of LIS or SBH, which can be most severe pos- usage where exons can be spliced out or skipped, which generates a pat- teriorly (P>A) or anteriorly (A>P). The P>Agradient occurs in patients with tern of exon usage. In my talk I will discuss results from an extensive analy- mutations of LIS1, while the A>Pgradient is typical of patients with DCX sis of alternative exon usage within the human transcriptome. mutations. Many rare forms of LIS have been observed, with the genetic Our approach was centered in three aspects; mapping of all human cDNA basis of most unknown. information onto the draft of the human genome, a genome-based cluster- LIS1 protein function.LIS1encodes a noncatalytic subunit of platelet acti- ing of the cDNAinformation and the generation of a binary matrix repre- vating factor-acetylhydrolase, or Pafah1b1, and is part of a G-protein- senting all the variation found for each cDNAcluster. like?1a2b heterotrimer, although it is not clear whether this is directly relat- The results from this analysis show that alternative exon usage occurs in ed to its? role in neuronal migration. Lis1 is a soluble protein with seven more than 40% of known human genes. We have also been able to iden- WD40 repeats forming a seven-bladed propeller-like structure involved in tify more than 100,000 variants. I will discuss several other aspects of this protein-protein interactions. It is a highly conserved homologue of the analysis including tissue distribution of variants and functional annotation. NUDF protein in Aspergillus, which it is required for nuclear translocation through interaction with a dynein motor and other proteins such as NUDC S05.Computational analysis of microarray data and NUDE. Lis1 also binds to dynein, and to Nude and Nudel, the mouse M. Vingron (and human) homologues of NUDE. mNudE and Nudel are both co-local- Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany ized with Lis1 at the microtubule organizing center (centrosome), and bind vingron@molgen.mpg.de multiple proteins that contribute to centrosome organization. The analysis of gene expression data generated with DNAmicroarrays DCX protein function.DCXencodes a 40 kD soluble protein that has been poses major computational challenges. In this talk we will review the nec- detected only in neurons of the central and peripheral nervous system. It essary steps in processing such data. Image analysis is used to collect contains two internal repeat regions that bind to tubulin to promote precip- intensities, which then have to be normalized in order to determine ratios itation and stabilization of microtubules. Thus, both LIS1 and DCX function of change between mRNAabundancies under different conditions. Given appear critical for microtubule function in developing brain. results from many hybridizations, genes or conditions are grouped togeth- er by similarity using clustering algorithms. Additional knowledge about the S03.The XLMR of mental retardation conditions, e.g. tumor types, pose the problem of identifying characteristic J. Gecz features in the expression data that are associated with the those types. Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Womens and Chil- For several of these steps we will also suggest novel approaches and give drens Hospital; Adelaide, Australia examples of their application. jozef.gecz@adelaide.edu.au Mental retardation (MR) is a significant medical problem affecting ~2-3% of S07.Molecular Genetics of Circadian Rhythms in Flies, Mice general population. MR is not a single disorder; rather, it is a large (genet- and Humans ically and clinically) heterogeneous group of disorders with a range of M. Rosbash, P. Emery, C. Kotarski, D. Lee, M. McDonald, P. Nawathean, severity and associated dysmorphology. When the prevalence of MR Y. Peng between the two sexes (males and females) is compared, the excess of Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Brandeis Uni- males over females at both ends of the normal IQ distribution is apparent. versity; Waltham, MAUnited States The existence of these differences in variance of IQ between males and rosbash@brandeis.edu females (males show consistently higher variance than females) was often Genetic and molecular genetic analyses of the Drosophilacircadian sys- interpreted as supporting evidence for the higher density of genes for men- tem originally identified the period protein as a clock molecule that con- tal retardation on the human X-chromosome. This issue still remains con- tributes to circadian pacemaker function. The gene shows robust circadian troversial. rhythms of transcription, mRNAand protein expression, with strong evi- X-linked mental retardation or XLMR is frequent with an estimated preva- dence in favor of autoregulation. This raised the hypothesis that transcrip- lence of 1.66/1000 males. Mental retardation can be a component of a syn- tion and macromolecular metabolism, a transcription-translation feedback drome, metabolic disorder, or neuromuscular disorder, or MR can be an loop, was central to the mechanism(s) that generated circadian rhythms. exclusive phenotype affecting only the development of cognitive function. This model is still viable today, and transcriptional regulation plays a promi- There are numerous (>210) mental retardation entries in OMIM (syndromic nent role in contemporary circadian studies. Subsequent work identified at and non-specific) associated with the human X-chromosome. Autosomal least seven new Drosophila clock genes; tim, Clock, cycle, doubletime,cry, MR is much less characterised, especially the non-specific forms. pdf, and vrille. There is now a good picture of what these different gene Currently there are 33 known XLMR genes. The majority of these are products do and how they collaborate during the 24 hr cycle. Most if not all genes for syndromic types of XLMR (eg. fragile X syndrome, FMR1; alpha- of these genes have mammalian orthologs, which function in a very simi- thalassemia mental retardation syndrome; ATRX, etc.). The number of lar manner in mice. Therefore, the transcription-translation feedback loop genes for non-specific X-linked mental retardation (MRX genes) has grown hypothesis also appears to be central to mammalian clocks. Moreover, a rapidly over the past three years. There are now at least eight such genes recent human sleep disorder family has been described, with a mutation in recognised. Based on currently available clinical and molecular data we a human period gene protein. Despite all of this substantial recent66 Concurrent Symposia progress, there are a large number of questions that remain unanswered. S10. The Population Dynamics and Genotype/Phenotype Prominent among these are how 24 hr timing is achieved and why the Relationships of the Thalassaemias apparent differences in cryptochrome (cry) function between flies and D. J. Weatherall mammals. New features of these and other issues will also be discussed. The Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Finally, some evolutionary issues will be considered, in an attempt to pro- Hospital; Oxford, United Kingdom vide a framework for considering together different circadian systems liz.rose@imm.ox.ac.uk The thalassaemias are the commonest monogenic diseases. As the coun- S08.Molecular Mechanism of the Regulation of the Biological tries in the developing world go through the demographic transition Clock in Mammals towards improved living conditions many babies with these diseases who, H. Okamura hitherto, would have died are now surviving. Recent studies have con- Department of Anatomy and Brain Science, Kobe University School of firmed the long held belief that these conditions have reached their high Medicine; Kobe, Japan gene frequency by natural selection acting on local mutations. These dis- okamurah@kobe-u.ac.jp orders have remarkably diverse phenotypes and it is now clear that this In the eukaryotic circadian model systems, translocation of the oscillatory results from the action of a number of primary, secondary and tertiary gene products into the nucleus is a key step for generation of a 24 hour genetic modifiers together with major environmental effects. Thus these cycle of the biological clock. We have examined nuclear import of clock diseases offer a model system for understanding the phenotypic diversity proteins of the mammalianperiod gene family and the effect of serum of monogenic disease, for underlining the problems that will be encoun- shock, which induces a synchronous clock in cultured cells. We examined tered when attempting to analyse multifactorial diseases, and for the appli- the nuclear import of mPER proteins in COS7 cells and found that nuclear cation of the tools of molecular genetics to the problems of the developing translocation of mPER1 and mPER2 involves physical interactions with countries. mPER3. This indicates that nuclear translocation of mPER1 also can occur under physiological conditions (i.e. in the intact mouse) in the absence of S11.Disease Profiles in the Genetically Dinstinct Populations any CRYprotein. of South Africa Recently we demonstrated that an accessory transcription loop exists M. J. Kotze helping to the core clock feedback loop. Transcript levels of DBP, a mem- Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stel- ber of the PAR leucine zipper transcription factor family, exhibit a robust lenbosch; Tygerberg, South Africa rhythm in the SCN. We report that DBPis able to activate the promoter of mjk@gerga.sun.ac.za a putative clock oscillating gene,mPer1, by directly binding to themPer1 The genetically distinct populations of South Africa provide valuable infor- promoter. DBPand CLOCK-BMAL1 cooperatively activate themPer1pro- mation for molecular research. Only a small fraction of the sequence moter. On the other hand,dbptranscription is activated by CLOCK-BMAL1 changes that arose in Africa has spread to Europe and other countries. The through E-boxes and inhibited by the mPER and mCRYproteins, as is the indigenous Khoisan people and African Negro slaves contributed to the case formPer1. Antiphase circadian regulated E4BP4, another member of unique gene pool of the white Afrikaner population (~3 million), that origi- leucine zipper transcription factor without PAR domain, antagonistically nated from approximately 2000 settlers who emigrated from Holland, Ger- suppresses mPer1 transcription. Thus, a clock-controlleddbp many and France in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, with a lesser ande4bp4genes may play an important role in the central clock oscillation. increment from England in the 19th century. This group provides an excel- Using transgenic mice carrying themPer1promoter fused to the luciferase lent example of founder events in human evolution. The origin of the (mPer1-luc) gene, we recently succeeded to monitor luciferase-mediated Coloured population of South Africa can be traced back to 1652, when bioluminescence with a day-night variation in the SCN in brain slices and marriages between European colonists and the two indigenous popula- in living animals. We can record for several days oscillating photon emis- tions, the Khoi and the San, occurred relatively frequently. An additional sion with a periodicity and phase that accurately mirrored nativemPer1 gene flow to this gene pool came from the Indian traders and slaves from mRNAexpression. The real-time optical imaging of gene expression will be East Africa and Madagascar, who were either completely Negroid or a new powerful tool to study mammalian brain function. Negroid with Malay or Indonesian admixture. The high prevalence of several genetic diseases in the Afrikaner popula- S09.Smith-Magenis Syndrome; ACircadian Rythm Disorder. tion resulted from a reduction in genetic variability due to geographic iso- From S ymptoms to Treatment lation and religious/cultural bonds, coupled to rapid population expansion H. De Leersnyder over 10-12 generations. This was confirmed by molecular analysis of dis- Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital; Paris, France eases such as familial hypercholesterolaemia, variegate porphyria and deleers@club-internet.fr hereditary haemochromatosis. These studies illustrated the importance of Smith-Magenis Syndrome (SMS) is a contiguous gene syndrome, ascribed genetic factors underlying population/ethnic differences in disease risk and to interstitial deletion of chromosome 17p11.2. The complex phenotype is defined the recently admixed Coloured population as a valuable candidate thought to result from haploinsufficiency effects of contiguous genes that population for the identification of genes/mutations underlying complex dis- map within the critical interval. An alteration of the circadian rhythm of eases. This population is currently studied extensively, in an attempt to melatonin triggers sleep disturbance and causes advanced sleep phase in identify genetic factors associated with hypertension or modified risk of HIV SMS. Normally, the secretion of melatonin, the main hormone of pineal infection and progression to AIDS. Information gained through the analysis gland is stimulated by dark and inhibited by light, photic information being of disease profiles in the African context has contributed to our under- transmitted from retina trough the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothal- standing of why certain diseases affect different populations at different amus and the sympathetic nervous system. How the chromosome 17 dele- rates. tion causes an abnormal circadian rhythm remains unclear. It may result from; i) an alteration of the input/output-signaling pathway, ii) an alteration S12.Disease Gene Profiles Among Jewish Populations of the circadian time-keeping system (clock genes) of the suprachiasmatic H. Ostrer nuclei or iii) the abnormal transmission of postganglionic fibers ascending New York University School of Medicine; New York, NYUnited States to the pineal gland. Considering that behavioural problems correlate with ostreh01@endeavor.med.nyu.edu the inverted circadian rhythm of melatonin and the night sleep insufficien- The Jews are a people of Middle Eastern origin who have retained their cy in SMS, we hypothesized that at least part of hyperactivity and attention religious and genetic identity over 2000 years of Diaspora. Estimates of deficit could occur because the patients struggle against sleep, when historical admixture are as low as 0.5% per generation, suggesting that melatonin rises during the day. Beta1-adrenergic antagonists, which have Jews remained endogamous. During the Diaspora, Jews established geo- been shown to reduce the production of melatonin, were given to 10 SMS graphically dispersed communities in Central and Eastern Europe (Ashke- children. Asingle morning dose of acebutotol suppressed the inappropri- nazim), North Africa, the Balkans, and the Levant (Sephardim), Iran and ate secretion of melatonin during the day (n=10). Asignificant improvement Iraq, Uzbekistan, Yemen and the Gulf states, and Italy, as well as else- of inappropriate behavior with increased concentration ability, increased where. Many Mendelian genetic conditions have been identified within hours of sleep and delayed sleep offset were also noted for all patients. these Jewish groups that share the feature of having founder mutations This study suggests that a pharmacological approach of behavioral phe- with heterozygote frequencies that exceed 1%. Mutations for some of notype in SMS, as considered in part as the result of phase shift of mela- these conditions, such as Tay-Sachs disease, Bloom syndrome, familial tonin, will hopefully help managing hyperactivity, reduce day naps and dysautonomia, phenylketonuria, and oculopharngeal muscular dystrophy, sleep attacks, enhance cognitive experience, and reduce sleep disorders are found exclusively within certain Diapora groups and must have arisen in SMS. during a period of relatively recent geographic isolation. Mutations for other conditions, such as familial Mediterranean fever, cystic fibrosis, GJB1Concurrent Symposia 67 deafness, and Gaucher disease are shared between Jewish groups and genome sequence and the introduction of the revolutionary social and non-Jewish groups of the Mediterranean basin, suggesting a more ancient medical concepts of predictive and predispositional testing, the media reg- origin. Mutations in the BRCA1 and Factor XI genes common to Ashkenazi ularly seeks aggregate information on genetic test availability and use. As and Iraqi Jews are likely to have arisen among the Jews of ancient Pales- genetic testing moves into mainstream medicine, US governmental agen- tine in pre-Diaspora times. The observed intervals of linkage disequilibrium cies rely on centralized sources of genetic test data as they institute regu- for these conditions tend to correlate inversely with the postulated dates of lation of tests and more regulation of laboratories. origin of the founder mutations. The presence of so many founder muta- tions facilitates genetic testing, including heterozygote screening for auto- S16.Antenatal Diagnosis - The Indian Status somal recessive conditions. For Ashkenazi Jews, multiplex heterozygote I. M. Thomas screening for 10 autosomal recessive conditions is now practical. Con- Division of Human Genetics, St.Johns National Academy of Medical Sci- versely, the observation of founder mutations occurring in linkage disequi- ences; Bangalore, India lbrium intervals that may span up to 7 cM suggests that association stud- jato37@hotmail.com ies using genetic markers in linkage disequilibirum may facilitate discovery The X-ray was the only technique used for antenatal diagnosis prior to the for new disease genes. 1960s. The introduction of Ultrasound [1970s] and MRI [1980s] improved the accuracy of diagnosis. The other non-invasive techniques developed S14.Virtual Genomic Medicine in Developing Countries. include maternal serum studies and the study of foetal red cells in mater- J. M. Cantu nal blood[1990s]. Universidad de Guadalajara; Guadalajara, Mexico Invasive procedures like Amniotic Fluid Cell Cultures [1960s] Chorionic jmcantu@koch.mb.udg.mx Villi Biopsies [1970s], Cordocentesis, Fetoscopy, Embryoscopy, Amniog- The enormous advances in science and technology in the XX Century raphy and various other Biopsy techniques [1980s] has further improved have facilitated the process of globalization with the aim of a better quality the prospects of diagnosis of foetal abnormalities and has added to the of life for all. Paradoxically, the gap between the rich and the poor, either existing tests consisting principally of Chromosomal Analysis, Biochemical between nations or persons, is constantly widening. Consequently, the tests and Molecular methods. The introduction of Preimplantation Diagno- access to health care and education, among other benefits, is everyday sis in the1990s has helped to identify diseases and to select normal more limited for the poor. The actual trends in human genome research are embryos. leading towards a promising genomic medicine, which will be expensive India is a developing country and is trying to keep pace with these and inaccesible for many, since the private funding for R&D have at least advances. While the non-invasive techniques, except fetal cells in mater- doubled the public ones in the last few years with the consequent bias in nal blood, are practiced most often, Chorionic Villi Biopsy, Placental Biop- focusing on high prevalence disorders in G7 populations and neglecting sy, Amniotic Fluid Cell Culture, Cordocentesis and other biopsies are the diseases of the poor.The abysmal investment differences in R&D undertaken less often. The tests on the material so obtained consist main- between developed and developing countries (for instance, the 2.7% of the ly of Chromosomal Analysis, a few biochemical tests and even fewer Mol- GNPin the USAversus the 0.4 % in Mxico) is progresively increasing so ecular [DNA] tests which are being mainly done for Deuchenne Muscular it is not only difficult to keep the pace in research but also in the transfer of Dystrophy and Hereditary Anemias [Thalassemia, Sickle Cell Anemia and technology. In an attempt to optimize the scarce human and material med- Hemophilia]. These tests are available principally in urban-based private, ical genetic resources in Mxico an initiative of a network, using internet as non-governmental institutions and research centers. These are, therefore, a means of communication and information has been created. The Mexi- not available to the vast majority of the population. Preimplantation diag- can Network of Molecular Biomedicine aims to provide a program based nosis in India is, however, only being attempted in animals. on cooperation, high-quality service and patient care. Initial steps have Antenatal diagnosis for sexing was started in 1978 and this led to female succeded in the organization of a National Hemophilia Center for the foeticide. Female foeticide exists because of dowry system. This dowry molecular diagnosis of patients and possible carriers. The principles of our system is practiced in many areas of India, wherein money and valuables experience should be aplicable to any developing country. Nevertheless, are given to the groom or his family mostly on demand during marriage. although medicine has traditionally been viewed as a humane activity Although there is a law forbidding it and making it a criminal act, like the guided by altruism, the second half of the XX Century has seen it trans- Antenatal Diagnosis Misuse Act of 1996 [which forbids sexing except for X- formed into a profitable business with an inevitable greed. We need to linked diseases] it is very difficult to implement these two laws, as there are recuperate the escence of Medicine so any health care system be based no complainants. on a spirit of justice, equality and, above all, on compassion. In order to assess the exact status of antenatal diagnosis in India a ques- tionnaire is being sent to various institutions. The results of these replies S15. The GeneTests and GeneClinics Experience Serving a will be compiled and presented. Broadening Community of Users R. A. Pagon S17.Fetal DNAin maternal plasma Childrens Hospital and Regional Medical Center and University of Wash- Y. M. D. Lo ington; Seattle, WAUnited States The Chinese University of Hong Kong; Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong bpagon@u.washington.edu Special Administrative Region of China GeneTests (www.genetests.org) was established in 1993 with funding from loym@cuhk.edu.hk the NIH to help geneticists identify clinical and research laboratories pro- Recently, fetal DNAhas been shown to be present in maternal plasma and viding DNA-based testing for inherited diseases. GeneTests currently is serum. Using quantitative PCR techniques, fetal DNAin maternal plasma comprised of a database of tests for ~800 inherited diseases, a directory and serum has been demonstrated to be present in amounts which are of ~480 international genetics laboratories, a directory of over 900 US easily detectable. This new source of fetal genetic material offers a power- genetics clinics, educational materials on basic concepts in genetic coun- ful approach for the prenatal diagnosis of many fetal genetic characteris- seling and testing, and PowerPoint teaching tools. GeneClinics tics, including blood group status and many paternally-inherited genetic (www.geneclinics.org) was established in 1997 to provide geneticists with traits. Diseases-causing mutations which have been detected in maternal information on test usage in diagnosis, management and genetic counsel- plasma include myotonic dystrophy and achondroplasia. The finding that ing for specific inherited disorders. GeneClinics is comprised of over 100 part of the fetal DNAin maternal plasma exists as intact fetal cells also expert-authored, peer-reviewed disease profiles that link to genomic data- offers new possibilities for the prenatal diagnosis of many chromosomal bases, custom Medline searches, selected patient resources, and policy aneuploidies, including trisomy 21. Quantitative abnormalities of fetal DNA statements of the ASHG, ACMG and NSGC. Each day GeneTests is in maternal plasma and serum have also been found in many disorders, searched ~750 times and GeneClinics ~2500 times. Through the including pre-eclampsia, preterm labour and fetal chromosomal aneuploi- GeneTests registration system, Website user logs, and direct user feed- dies. These results suggest that fetal DNAmeasurement may become a back we have documented over time the expanding international scope useful tool for the detection or monitoring of these disorders. Apart from its and broadening audience of these resources. The laboratory directory has diagnostic implications, circulating fetal DNAalso opens up many previ- become increasingly international as researchers and clinical laboratories ously unexplored research opportunities for understanding the fetomater- have come to depend on worldwide ascertainment of patients with rare nal relationship on a molecular level. inherited disorders. Patients, empowered by the consumer health move- ment, gather information to partner with their healthcare providers in med- ical decision-making. Educators have required students to use GeneTests and GeneClinics in case-based problem-solving in policy-making, labora- tory medicine, and patient care. With the completion of the draft human68 Concurrent Symposia S19.Chromatin, cell cycle and -globin gene transcription S21.Dosage Compensation in Drosophila as a model for epi- F. Grosveld genetic regulation of gene expression Dept. of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University Rotterdam; Rot- P. B. Becker terdam, The Netherlands Adolf-Butenandt-Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians-University; Munich, Ger- grosveld@ch1.fgg.eur.nl many The Locus Control Region (LCR) is required for the activation of all of the pbecker@mol-bio.med.uni-muenchen.de human beta-like globin genes during development. The early embryonic When it comes to their heteromorphic sex chromosomes, humans and fruit developmental programme is executed in nucleated primitive red blood flies resemble each other. In both species males are characterized by an cells that express the epsilon and gamma genes. The foetal/adult pro- X, Ygenotype, whereas females have two X chromosomes. Dosage com- gramme takes place in a definitive red blood cells that first express the pensation is a regulatory process that assures that X chromosomal genes gamma and later the delta- and beta genes. This difference in expression are expressed to an equivalent extent from the single male and the two programme correlates with changes in the chromatin structure within the female X-chromo-somes. In humans, dosage compensation is achieved by beta globin locus. Repression of the early genes (epsilon and gamma) in inactivation of one female X chromosome through facultative heterochro- late cells is achieved by as yet unknown factors acting on sequences flank- matinization. Flies have chosen a different strategy; they express the ing these genes. Superimposed on this is a mechanism in which the early genes on both female X chromosomes at a constant rate, but increase the genes (epsilon and gamma) suppress the late genes (delta and beta) by transcription from the male X chromosomes by two-fold. Failure to activate competition for the interaction with the LCR. In particular the latter mecha- their X chromosome is lethal for Drosophila males. Although dosage com- nism has allowed a series of studies to examine the transcriptional process pensation strategies in flies and men are remarkably different, they are at the level of the single cell. These studies indicate that the LCR interacts also resemble of each other. Both stategies tune the expression status of with individual globin genes and that LCR/gene interactions are dynamic an entire chromosome through epigenetic means; chromatin structure is with complexes forming and dissociating continually. The levels of expres- modified by targeted posttrans-lational modification of histones. Remark- sion of each of the genes appear to depend on; (1) the frequency of inter- ably, both processes also involve non-coding RNA. The proteins that are action which is itself dependent on the distance of the gene to the LCR, (2) involved in dosage compensation in flies are known due to the male-spe- the affinity/stability of the LCR/gene complexwhich is dependent on the cific lethality of their loss-of-function mutation. They form a complex with balance of transcription factors such as EKLF. When individual hypersen- noncoding roX RNAwhich associates with many sites on the X chromo- sitive region in the LCR are deleted from a complete transgenic locus that some. We study the process of dosage compensation in Drosophila as a is integrated in a pericentromeric region, the locus becomes sensitive to paradigm for the targeting of chromatin remodeling factors to a restricted two types of position effects. One of these is classical Position Effect Varia- chromosomal domain, the role of non-coding RNAin epigenetic regulation gation (PEV) while the other is a Timing Position Effect (TPE). The PEV and the mechanisms by which histone modifications affect the higher order can be modified by an increase in the concentration of EKLF which acts on structure and function of chromatin. the LCR and results in more cells expressing the locus, which is accom- panied by a general increase in DNAse sensitivity throughout the locus. S22. The limb-girdle muscular dystrophies- diversity of TPE is dependent on the cell cycle resulting in a limited period of expres- pathogenesis. sion in of all the red cells. Examination of single cells shows that both types K. M. D. Bushby of position effects involve the relocalisation of the transgenic locus in the Department of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne; New- nucleus. The implications of these experiments for the role of the LCR in castle upon Tyne, United Kingdom the activation of the locus will be discussed. kate.bushby@ncl.ac.uk The limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD) are a heterogeneous group S20.Regulation of Imprinting at the H19/Igf2 locus. of disorders which comprise both autosomal dominant and recessive dis- M. S. Bartolomei, J. L. Thorvaldsen eases. Agene and protein based classification for these conditions is now Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell and Develop- possible, based on their underlying molecular pathology. Amongst the mental Biology, University of Pennsylvania Medical School; Philadelphia, autosomal dominant forms of LGMD, mutations in the genes encoding PAUnited States myotilin (a component of the muscle sarcomere) caveolin 3 (a component bartolom@mail.med.upenn.edu of caveolae in the muscle fibre membrane) and lamin A/C, a nuclear enve- H19 and the oppositely imprinted Igf2 gene are located 90 kb apart in lope protein have been described, while mutations in the collagen VI genes mouse and share regulatory elements crucial to their imprinting. It is of par- account for a phenotypically overlapping condition, Bethlem myopathy. ticular interest to determine how and when the imprint that distinguishes Amongst the autosomal recessive types of LGMD, an important subgroup these two alleles is determined. Two epigenetic modifications, DNAmethy- is caused by mutations in the genes encoding a, b, g and d sarcoglycan, lation and chromatin structure, are proposed to confer the allelic mark. proteins which, with dystrophin, form a complex of structural proteins in the Specifically, H19is hypermethylated on the inactive paternal allele in a 2 muscle fibre membrane. The diseases of the dystrophin associated com- kb region 2 kb 5 to the start of transcription (this region is designated at plex share some clinical and pathological similarities, though the mecha- the DMD or differentially methylated domain). This same region is hyper- nisms by which these diseases arise may in some ways be subtly different. sensitive to nucleases on the active maternal allele. Thus, it has been pro- The other recognised forms of autosomal recessive LGMD are more posed that the DMD confers the allelic mark. To test this hypothesis, the diverse- mutations in calpain 3, a protease predominantly expressed in DMD was deleted from the endogenous locus in mice. In the absence of skeletal muscle cause a relatively common type of LGMD, while mutations the DMD, imprinted expression of H19 and Igf2 was perturbed on both in dysferlin, a membrane protein which contains multiple C2 domains parental alleles; on the paternal allele, transcription from the normally silent cause a form of muscular dystrophy which may present either with pre- H19allele was activated and Igf2transcription was coordinately reduced dominantly proximal or distal disease. The latest gene identified as caus- whereas on the mutant maternal allele Igf2expression was activated and ing an autosomal recessive LGMD, telethonin, is a component of the mus- H19expression was coordinately reduced. These experiments prove that cle sarcomere. the DMD is required for imprinted expression on both parental chromo- With these diverse disease mechanisms, it is likely that a number of dis- somes. It has been postulated that the DMD acts as a methylation-sensi- ease pathways can contribute to the causation of these diseases. In the tive boundary element that isolates H19and the enhancers on the mater- meantime, improvements in the classification of this group have resulted in nal chromosome, thereby preventing access of Igf2to the enhancers. On clear benefits to patients in terms of diagnosis and the provision of prog- the paternal chromosome, Igf2is expressed because the DMD and H19 nostic and genetic counselling information. gene promoter are methylated, preventing the boundary proteins from binding and H19from being expressed. It was recently demonstrated that S23.Muscular Dystrophies; Same Mutation but Different Clin- a putative boundary protein, CTCF, binds to a conserved repetitive element ical Courses? The Next Challenge in the DMD in a methylation senstive manner. While these experiments M. Zatz, M. Vainzof, M. R. Passos-Bueno were performed in vitro, we are testing the role of CTCF and the conserved Center for the Study of the Human Genome, Dep. of Biology, Inst. of Bio- DMD elements in vivo. sciences, University of So Paulo; Sao Paolo, Brazil mayazatz@usp.br The autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (AR-LGMD) and autosomal dominant facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) have been the subject of world-wide investigation. Nine AR -LGMD (LGMD2Ato LGMD2I) genes have been mapped and link- age analysis indicates that there is further genetic heterogeneity . The clin-Concurrent Symposia 69 ical course is characterised by great variability, ranging from severe forms An exciting new direction for genetic research is to identify some of the with early onset and rapid progression to milder forms with later onset. The many genes that affect cognitive abilities and disabilities. We have con- gene product is known for 7 forms ; calpain 3 for LGMD2A, dysferlin for ducted an initial scan of the genome using DNApooling with two thousand LGMD2B , alpha-sarcoglycan for LGMD2D , beta-sarcoglycan for DNA markers in order to find genes associated with g. Scientific and LGMD2E , gamma-sarcoglycan for LGMD2C , delta-sarcoglycan for social implications of finding genes for g will be discussed. LGMD2F and the sarcomeric protein telethonin for LGMD2G. Both nature and nurture are important for the development of g. The Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD1) mapped at 4q35, nature-nurture wars are over; For nearly all complex medical and behav- accounts for most cases of FSHD. Affected patients have a deletion of a ioral traits, genetic factors are important but so too are environmental fac- critical number of 3.3kb repeated units at D4Z4. The most likely hypothe- tors. Moreover, genetic and environmental factors interact and correlate. sis to explain the abnormal phenotype is a position effect. The issue is not nature versusnurture but rather nature andnurture. We performed genotype-phenotype correlation studies in 216 LGMD patients classified from calpainopathy to telethoninopathy as well as 248 S26.Genetic Influences on Alcohol Intake and Euphoria FSHD1 patients. In the LGMD group, a similar clinical course among T. J. Phillips patients with non allelic mutations while a discordant phenotype in patients Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Portland Alcohol Research Center, carrying the same mutation was observed. For FHSD1 , in addition to the Oregon Health Sciences University; Portland, OR United States great intra and interfamilial variability a significantly greater proportion of phillipt@ohsu.edu affected males than females (due to a higher proportion of asymptomatic Several behavioral genetic methods exist for studying human disease in women carrying a small EcoRI fragment , < 35kb) was observed. animals. Mouse methods include special populations relevant for gene Understanding how patients with the same mutation may have a discor- mapping such as recombinant inbred strains, genetically segregating pop- dant phenotype, or why a greater proportion of women may be more pro- ulations, congenic strains and short-term selected lines, as well as other tected from the deleterious effect of the FSHD1 mutation remains a major populations critical for disease phenotype analyses, such as long-term challenge. It will depend on future knowledge on gene-protein functions, on selected lines, panels of standard inbred strains, transgenic lines and protein interactions and on identifying modifying genes and other factors knockout mice. All of these methods have been used to study voluntary underlying clinical variability. Supported by FAPESP, PRONEX, CNPq. alcohol intake in mice, a model thought to be relevant to human alcohol self-administration, ultimately associated with the development of alcohol S24.Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy abuse. Some of these methods have also been brought to bear on anoth- R. Frants er common effect of abused drugs, locomotor stimulation. This motivation- Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical ally relevant behavior has been described as a putative model of human Center; Leiden, The Netherlands drug-induced euphoria. Gene mapping efforts have produced convergent r.r.frants@lumc.nl data indicating that genes on chromosomes 2, 3 and 9 influence voluntary Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is the third neuromus- alcohol intake. The region of interest on chromosome 9 harbors at least cular disease with a prevalence of 1/25.000 in most populations. The two interesting candidate genes; the dopamine D2 receptor gene, Drd2 sequence of muscle involvement, the high intra- and interfamilial clinical and the serotonin 1B receptor gene, Htr1b. Genes influencing locomotor variability and lack of treatment have stimulated search for the molecular stimulant responses to several abused drugs, including cocaine, metham- background of this syndrome. Being an autosomal dominant phenotype, a phetamine and ethanol (alcohol) have been provisionally mapped. The genome wide marker scan allowed mapping of the FSHD1 locus to #4q. most definitive information has been gathered for ethanol, for which a The causative mutation in familial and sporadic cases turned out to be a strong association with a region on chromosome 2 has been found. Phar- deletion within a polymorphic repeat array only some 25 kb from the telom- macological studies in lines of mice bidirectionally selectively bred for ere. The molecular dissection of FSHD has been compromised, but also extreme sensitivity (FAST) and insensitivity (SLOW) to ethanols locomotor stimulated, by the extensive chromosomal dispersion of this region. The stimulant effects are another powerful tool for identifying the neurobiologi- highly homologous locus on 10q has been particularly rewarding. In up to cal determinants of alcohol sensitivity. Recent data in our lab suggests that 20% of the population, an exchange between the subtelomeric regions of gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), and in particular, GABA-B type recep- #4q and #10q can be observed. The presence of a supernumerary #4 type tors in the ventral tegmental area, significantly influence ethanols stimulant repeat on #10 seems to induce #4 instability. In most sporadic patients, a effects. Future efforts will be directed at further refinement of the biological somatic mutation can be detected in either the patient or one of the par- circuitry and genetic regions associated with these important alcohol-asso- ents. The detailed physical information on the 4q and 10q regions has ciated traits. The ultimate goals will be identification of the several influen- improved the diagnostic repertoire. However, the molecular mechanism of tial genes and discovery of the central structures and the component parts FSHD remains elusive. The present prevailing model is that the FSHD (e.g., cell types, neurotransmitters, receptor types) that modulate these mutation/deletion induces a change in the chromatin structure and accord- traits. ingly the expression of genes in the region, basically according to position effect variegation. Several candidate genes have been identified in the S27. Perspective in psychiatric genetics; the example of the region; FRG1, FRG2, TUBB4q and DUX4 all being localized within 100 kb Tyrosine Hydroxylase genes and its implications for complex of the D4Z4 repeat array. Implementation of various genomics approaches genetic traits and (transgenic) animal models will be instrumental to reveal the molecu- J. Mallet, N. Faucon Biguet, V. Albanese, T. Aranyi, R. Meloni lar pathways necessary to open the FSHD Pandora box. Laboratoire de Gntique de la Neurotransmission, CNRS, UMR 9923, *On behalf of the Dutch FSHD Team. Hpital de la Piti-Salptrire; Paris, France suorsoni@infobiogen.fr S25.Intelligence Having previously shown a positive association between the (TCAT)n R. Plomin microsatellite HUMTH01 located in the first intron of the Tyrosine Hydrox- Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre, Institute ylase (TH) gene with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia as well as with of Psychiatry; London, United Kingdom disturbances in the catecholamine metabolism, we thereafter established r.plomin@iop.kcl.ac.uk that the alleles of this tetranucleotide repeat activate transcription driven by At the centre of the nature-nurture debate has been general cognitive abil- a minimal promoter. In addition, they are specifically recognized by nuclear ity (g), often called intelligence. Decades of genetic research comparing proteins pertaining to the fos-jun family of transacting factors, as well as to identical and non-identical twins and adoption studies consistently show a class of these factors that remained to be characterized. substantial genetic influence on cognitive abilities such as verbal and spa- Following the inroad opened by these results, the different HUMTH01 alle- tial abilities and on cognitive disabilities such as reading disability and les were thus evaluated in the context of the TH gene. Specific transacting dementia. Genetic research on g has now gone beyond simply demon- factors were then cloned. Finally, the methylation profile of CpG island strating genetic influence to ask questions about development, about rela- flanking the repeated sequence was investigated to evaluate the role of tions between cognitive abilities, and about the environment. Asurprising epigenetic modifications in the transcriptional regulation of the TH gene. developmental finding is that genetic influence on g increases steadily The HUMTH01 alleles were found to differentially modulate TH gene activ- during the life span. Concerning relations between cognitive abilities, ity in a quantitative manner. One of the specific transacting factors exhibits genetic research has shown that the same genetic factors influence affinity for the HUMTH01 sequence correlated with variations in the num- diverse cognitive abilities, suggesting that g is the genetic core of cogni- ber of (TCAT)n repetitions. TH+ and TH-human cell lines exhibited differ- tive abilities. Research at the interface between nature and nurture shows ential methylation patterns, and a new putative Ap2 site in the first exon of that environmental factors that influence the development of g work very the TH gene was identified. differently from the way we thought they worked. The (TCAT)n polymorphic sequence is widespread throughout the70 Concurrent Symposia genome. Thus, the characterization of the transduction pathway impinging suggests the importance of eliciting and discussing with those undergoing on the HUMTH01 microsatellite and its flanking sequences may be rele- such tests, their beliefs about the condition for which testing is being con- vant for the transcriptional regulation of the TH gene as well as that of other ducted. genes implicated in normal and pathological complex genetic traits. S31. Ion channel mutations as a major cause in idiopathic S28. Quality in Molecular Genetic Testing  What is it, How epilepsy can it be measured, How can it be achieved? O. K. Steinlein R. Elles Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universitt; European Molecular Genetics Quality Network, C/o Regional Genetics Bonn, Germany Service; Manchester, United Kingdom osteinl@mailer.meb.uni-bonn.de relles@smh5.cmht.nwest.nhs.uk Mutations in several genes are known to be associated with subtypes of Molecular genetic testing is in a process of transition from a research idiopathic epilepsy. Familial nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy can be caused based activity to a more routine service. Service providers are developing by a few site-specific mutations in the ion pore lining regions of the neu- procedures to make tests more reliable, ways of measuring the errors in ronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits CHRNA4 and CHRNB2. laboratory testing and mechanisms to manage the whole laboratory Other examples are the several different potassium channel mutations process for quality. Scientists leading genetic testing laboratories tend to which have already been described in benign familial neonatal convulsions think about quality first in terms of the accuracy and reproducibility of the (BFNC). Most of these mutations are found in the voltage gated subunit analytical process, the reliability of mechanisms for handling materials and KCNQ2, only a few are located in the homologous subunit KCNQ3. So far information and the quality of the information in the report from the labora- KCNQ2 mutations were shown to cause BFNC by haploinsufficiency of the tory. By contrast the perception of quality by the consumer (patients, their ion channel. We recently found a family with an unusual KCNQ2 mutation families and their physicians) may have a different emphasis. The con- which has a dominant negative effect on channel activity, and causes a for- sumers usually take the accuracy of the test for granted and think first merly unknown syndrome characterised by BFNC and peripheral nerve about whether a test is available, whether they have easy access to the hyperexcitability. The third example for an idiopathic epilepsy as a chan- service and how long a result will take to be reported. Service providers nelopathy is the syndrome of generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures need to place more consideration on the needs of the client and place their plus (GEFS+), which can be caused by mutations in the voltage gated clients at the centre of the quality management process. Policy makers and sodium channel genes SCN1Aand SCN1B. GEFS has a wide spectrum of regulators need to think about the problem of availability and access to phenotypes, and many family members have an increased susceptibility testing given the rarity of many genetic conditions. They also need to for seizures during fever. These three epilepsies with known molecular develop simple but effective systems to promote quality management and defects support the hypothesis that ion channel mutations are a major to encourage service providers to comply with recognised international cause of idiopathic epilepsies. They can serve as a models for further standards. genetic studies which are more and more focusing on the common forms of the disease. S29.Quality Control in a Home Brew Genetic Testing Envi- ronment S32.From Mad Cows to Psi-chotic Yeast; ANew Genetic Par- G. A. Miller adigm Genzyme Corporation; Framingham, MAUnited States S. M. Uptain, S. L. Lindquist Glenn.Miller@genzyme.com Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Med- The number of Home Brew tests being introduced into the genetic test- ical Institute, University of Chicago; Chicago, ILUnited States ing market is increasing at a pace commensurate with the increase in s-uptain@uchicago.edu genetic information resulting from the Human Genome Project. As more Our work supports and extends the hypothesis that a protein can serve as genes relevant to predisposition, diagnosis and prognosis are identified the an element of genetic inheritance. This protein-only mechanism of inheri- pressure to bring clinically relevant genetic tests to the market will tance propagates in much the same way as previously hypothesized for increase. The quality of these tests and the regulatory environment into the mammalian prion protein, the infectious agent in the spongiform which they are introduced will determine, in part, the success of the Human encephalopathies (such as Mad-cow disease). In yeast, however, the Genome Project in terms of its impact on human health in the near term. process produces heritable changes in phenotype, not disease. The yeast Genetic testing laboratories, both commercial and academic, are under prion we study, [PSI+], is a dominant, cytoplasmically inherited trait caused increasing pressure to assure the quality of their testing facilities and tech- when a component of the translational termination factor, Sup35p, under- nologies. The balance that is to be struck between appropriate regulation goes a conformational switch that causes it to aggregate. This reduces the and a regulatory environment that would impede progress is currently efficiency of the termination factor and permits ribosomes to read through under close study. In the interim, an emphasis on quality control for home stop codons at an appreciable frequency. Acrucial aspect of this process brew testing remains a critical part of test development and practice. The is that the prion form of Sup35p promotes conversion of newly synthesized fact that this effort is often driven by individual laboratory commitments to Sup35p to the prion form; thus, Sup35p prion aggregates cause an inher- excellence in test development and practice will be discussed. itable change in phenotype, without a concomitant change in nucleic acid. We have provided genetic, cell biological and biochemical evidence in sup- S30.Communicating genetic risk information port of this revolutionary hypothesis and a molecular model for how pro- T. M. Marteau tein-only inheritance might occur. Most recently, we have begun to deter- Psychology and Genetics Research Group, Kings College; London, Unit- mine the molecular basis of variants of [PSI+], which seem to be analo- ed Kingdom gous to mammalian prion strains. Individual yeast strains can propagate theresa.marteau@kcl.ac.uk different [PSI+] variants which exhibit different nonsense-suppression effi- Genetic testing has most often been associated with predictive testing for ciencies and stabilities. Similarly, mammalian prion variants can be main- untreatable conditions, such as Huntingtons disease, or prenatal testing tained in isogenic mice yet are distinguished by differences in incubation accompanied by an offer of termination of affected pregnancies. The iso- time for disease onset, brain pathology and degree of species specificity. lation of genes associated with common forms of potentially preventable Our data shows that [PSI+] variants differ in how efficiently Sup35p is con- diseases such as heart disease, cancer as well as with risk factors such as verted to the prion form. This affects the balance of the soluble and prion smoking and obesity, raise the possibility of providing such information to form of Sup35p which determines the strength of nonsense suppression those without family histories. It is envisaged that informing individuals of phenotype of [PSI+] variants. their genetic susceptibility to disease will motivate them to change their behaviour to reduce their risks. Drawing upon the few studies to date that S33.The Genetics of Parkinsons Disease have addressed this question, this paper will describe two possible barri- A. Brice ers to behaviour change following the provision of genetic risk information INSERM U289, Dpartement de Gntique, Cytogntique et Embryolo- and consider how these might be overcome. gie, Hpital de la Salptrire; Paris, France 1. Perceived non-salience of genetic risk information Acceptance of risk brice@ccr.jussieu.fr information depends in part upon the extent to which the information Several genetic epidemiological studies have suggested the existence of makes sense to an individual, ie fits with existing schema or representa- predisposing genetic factors in Parkinsons disease, which can be consid- tions of a health threat. Perceiving familial adenomatous polyposis as ered to be a multifactorial disorder. However, at least five monogenic forms determined by factors other than genes was associated with expecting to have been recognized, which should help to understand the pathological continue bowel screening despite a negative result on genetic testing. This mechanisms. Studies on the alpha-synuclein and Parkin genes have beenConcurrent Symposia 71 very fruitful. S36.Molecular Genetics of Body Weight Regulation The alpha-synuclein gene has been implicated in a small number of fami- R. L. Leibel lies with autosomal dominant Parkinsons disease with Lewy bodies. Sub- Division of Molecular Genetics and The Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, sequently, alpha-synuclein turned out to be a major component of Lewy Columbia University; New York, NYUnited States bodies and Lewy neurites. The familial mutations increase oligomerisation RL232@columbia.edu of alpha-synuclein into fibrillar structures, which are found in Lewy bodies. Three metabolic/behavioral phenotypes determine the body weight and Animal models over expressing normal and mutated alpha-synuclein composition of an organism; energy intake, energy expenditure, and the reproduce some features of Parkinsons disease. partitioning of stored calories among glycogen, protein and fat. The recent Awide variety of Parkin mutations are associated with autosomal reces- molecular cloning of rodent single gene obesity mutations, and the disrup- sive Parkinsons disease. They account for half of the early onset familial tion of other genes by transgenic techniques, has identified some of the cases and a significant proportion of patients without family history but with important molecular substrates for these processes. Avariety of physio- early onset. In addition to early onset, Parkin cases are characterized by logical and neurophysiological experiments indicate that the hypothlala- frequent dystonia at onset, excellent and sustained response to levodopa mus receives humoral signals reporting the mass of adipocytes in the with frequent levodopa induced dyskinesias, and slow progression of the body, and uses this information to generate efferent neural signals that disease. It was recently shown that Parkin, which is expressed ubiquitous- have coordinate effects on intake, expenditure and partitioning. An impor- ly in the central nervous system, functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase. There- tant afferent signal is the hormone leptin, produced and secreted primarily fore, Parkin is expected to ubiquitinate specific substrates targeted for by adipocytes. This gene is mutant in the Lepob (obese) mouse, and its degradation by the proteasome. Interestingly, Parkin patients present cognate receptor is mutant in the Leprdb (diabetes) mouse. Deficiency of severe nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuronal loss without Lewy bodies. This the ligand or receptor is perceived physiologically as a deficiency of ener- particularity might be related to the function of Parkin for which it is now gy stores for which the organism compensates by coordinate increases in crucial to identify the substrates. energy intake and reductions in energy expenditure. The model of leptin as It will also be necessary understand the relevance of these observations to a molecular signal of sufficiency of energy stores (for reproduction and sur- idiopathic Parkinsons disease. vival of prolonged caloric restriction) is compatible with evolutionary argu- ments regarding the characteristics of a system designed to optimize sur- S34.Yeast genetics and human biology vival/reproductive efficiency in hostile environments. Among the hypothal- P. Hieter amic neuropeptides whose expression is altered by leptin are NPY, POMC, UBC Biotechnology Laboratory and Department of Medical Genetics, Uni- CART, HCRT/OREXIN, MCH, CRH, AGRP. The recently described chem- versity of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada ical neuroanatomy of the neurons expressing these peptides is consistent hieter@cmmt.ubc.ca with the long-standing observations that ablations of the ventromedial and Yeast is arguably the most powerful experimental organism for learning lateral hypothalamic regions result, respectively, in hyper- and hypophagia. about the basic function of genes involved in intracellular eukaryotic The precise roles of these neurons and neuropeptides in controlling body processes. The combination of classical genetics, recombinant genetics, composition are not yet known. Obese humans with mutations in LEP, and biochemistry offers a definitive approach to understanding protein LEPR, LEPR (processed to ?-MSH) and mc4r (receptor for msh) have function in cells. Furthermore, the availability of the entire yeast genomic been reported. In some populations, up to 5% of severe obesity can be sequence has spawned the development of genome-wide or system-wide accounted for by haploinsufficiency of MC4R. However, in most instances, approaches to the analysis of gene function in yeast. These functional susceptibility to obesity is probably conveyed by the interactions among genomic methods are of great value to yeast genetics research and also several of these (and other) genes and environmental circumstance. place yeast as a critical testbed for these emerging technologies. Links These gene-gene interactions may, in the aggregate, set the functional between human disease genes and yeast genes provide immediate pro- threshold for leptins ability to provide a signal of energy sufficiency. Sub- tein functional data and an experimental paradigm for further analysis of tle coding and regulatory sequence variants may act additively and epista- disease relevant biology. They can also be used to accelerate the identifi- tically to alter this threshold. cation of disease genes. It is important to emphasize that the link to a yeast gene often provides connection to an entire genetic pathway, a multi-pro- S37.Clinical Genetics: The future tein complex, or interacting gene products. These additional links can be J. Burn key to an understanding of disease mechanism or development of a ther- School of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Newcastle; Newcastle apeutic strategy. upon Tyne, United Kingdom The discovery of a relationship between a human disease gene and a John.Burn@newcastle.ac.uk gene found in yeast is clearly advantageous, but how can these connec- Genetics has become established in the popular view as exciting and tions be established in a systematic fashion? Three general paradigms threatening in equal measure. Its impact on future medicine is taken as a have emerged; 1) Human/yeast similarity searching, 2) Genome cross- fact. Most commentators fail to distinguish between genetic technologies referencing, 3) Homology probing. The worm and fly genome sequences which will become incorporated in to general diagnostics, just as blood make multi-organismal approaches for understanding human biology even groups did in past years, and the application of genetics to inherited dis- more powerful. These organisms provide complementing experimental ease. The latter includes diagnosis, and assistance in reproductive choice approaches and aspects of eukaryotic biology not approachable in yeast. and predictive testing. As a medical specialty, clinical genetics has followed Given the unique experimental advantages of the yeast system, yeast two paths. The first involves clinical geneticists in small numbers acting as genetics/genomics approaches will continue to be a crucial component in an academic focus with most applications dispersed to individual speciali- medical genetics research for the foreseeable future. ties. The second, as seen for example in the UK and the Netherlands, involves a large cohort of clinical geneticists supported by genetic nurses S35. RNA intereference and transposon silencing in C. ele- and counsellors acting as a focus for large scale application of genetic gans knowledge in medical practice. Chance, history, religion and money all play R. H. A. Plasterk a part in determining which pathway is followed. The question is whether Hubrecht Laboratory; Utrecht, The Netherlands they can or should converge and if not, which will become the dominant plasterk@niob.knaw.nl model in the health services of tomorrow. Genomes, like all other databases that are linked to other databases, are potentially in danger of infection by parasitic elements, viruses and trans- S38.Organization of Genetic Services in the Republic of Cuba posons. The human genome consists for approximately 50% of trans- L. Heredero posons. Networked computers need to be protected against computer National Center of Medical Genetics. Medical University of Havana; viruses by virus protection software. Likewise genomes are protected by a Havana, Cuba mechanism of transposon silencing. We have analysed this in the nema- lhere@infomed.sld.cu tode C. elegans. The surprise finding is that the mechanism of transposon The Island of Cuba with 11 million inhabitants, an infant mortality about silencing in C. elegans is esentially the same in animals, plants and fungi. 7/1000, life expectancy in 75 years, with a free national health system Thus we are beginning to understand an ancient mechanism that organ- based in a well developed primary health care (more than 90% of popula- isms use to protect themselves against invading selfish DNA. The current tion covered by family doctors) started a National Program for the Diagno- status of our understanding of the mechanism will be described. sis and Prevention of Genetic Diseases in 1982, and all the island was covered by this service ten years later. After delineation of the most fre- quent genetic disorders and birth defects (2.2/live births with NTDs, 3-7% of the populaqtion is a carrier of hemoglobinopathies (Hb S or Hb C), 4%72 Concurrent Symposia of pregnant women over 38 years old, 3% of the population is a carrier for which play a role in tumor pathomechanisms, CF) the development of appropriate local technologies and organizational II. generate profiles of copy number changes of known oncogenes and clinical evaluation together with the Mother and Child Department of the tumor suppressor genes uncovering biochemical pathways affected in a Ministry of Health have permitted to offer a genetic service for all the pop- given tumor entity, and ulation. III. design dedicated chips, by which all relevant imbalances of a given Starting by detection increased genetic risk using prenatal serum bio- neoplasia type are detected, supporting diagnostic efforts to subclassify chemical markers in close connection with the family health care and later tumor patients. over 500 family doctors were trained in the detection of increased genetic Comprehensive expression profiling by DNA chip technology has the risk asking the family history at the community and its referral to every potential to uncover previously unknown pathogenic pathways and to pos- provincial medical Genetic center. sibly define new therapeutic interference points. We have performed Anet of Medical Genetic Centers was built all over the country with facili- genomic and expression profiling of human leukemias in order to elucidate ties for Hb electrophoresis, MSAFP determination, US fetal monitoring, disease pathomechanisms. Furthermore, applying statistical analysis and amniocentesis, Chromosome analysis, and clinical genetics. The National data mining approaches, these data were utilized for classification analy- Reference Center also offer DNAanalysis. Enzymatic determination and ses within the investigated entities. Recent results will be presented, the neonatal screening for PKU and is engaged with postdoctoral medical different approaches will be compared and future perspectives will be dis- training in medical genetics and evaluation of the procedures. cussed. Some research about ethical aspects and evaluation of the services result in a positive acceptation of the population about this services. Still me need S41. Multi Colour COBRA-FISH; Applications in Clinical and to be better in some branches and to increase more diagnostics options Tumour Cytogenetics when the economical situation become better. H. J. Tanke, V. Bezrookove, K. Szuhai, H. Engels, J. Wiegant, M. de Wind- van de Burg, C. Rosenberg, A. K. Raap S39.Development of a Primary Health Care Genetic Services Laboratory for Cytochemistry and Cytometry; Department of Molecular Cell for Rural Southern African Communities; The Road to Equity Biology, Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands and Equality? H.J.Tanke@lumc.nl P. A. Venter1, A. L. Christianson2, J. Modiba3, N. Raphahlelo3, R. Shi- Present FISH karyotyping is based on the so-called combinatorial use of mange3, M. Sithole3, C. Hutamo3, N. Ramatumbu3, O. Tshivhase3 probes labelled with 5 distinct fluorophores. For such combinatorial 1Department of Health Sciences, University of the North; Sovenga, South labelling it has been shown that the number of targets (n) recognizable by Africa; 2Department of Human Genetics, University of Pretoria; Pretoria, FISH using (k) different fluorophores results in n= 2k-1 colours. South Africa; 3Genetic Clinics, Department of Health and Welfare; North- The principle of COBRA-FISH is based on the simultaneous use of combi- ern Province, South Africa natorial labelling and so-called ratiolabelling, which allows for simultane- philipv@unin.unorth.ac.za ous staining of many more targets than reported so-far. Three spectrally In 1990 genetic service were not considered to be part of Primary Health well-separated fluorophores are used pair wise for ratiolabelling, allowing Care (PHC) in South Africa, specifically not in the underdeveloped poor a total of 12 colours to be distinguished. Asecond set of 12 probes, rec- rural African areas where very little epidemiological information/data exist- ognizing different targets are labelled exactly the same, but in addition are ed on the incidence/prevalence of genetic disorders and birth defects. The given a fourth label, resulting in a total of 24 colours. The fifth label is sub- general perception was that congenital disorders were not a health prob- sequently used to repeat this principle once again, to accomplish full stain- lem of significance in rural South Africa. This concept that a clinical genet- ing of p and q arms, using arm specific probes. The fifth label may also be ic service was an inappropriate luxury in these developing countries obfus- used to label any probe of interest to identify and locate a defined cated the fact that in such countries the incidence of congenital disorders sequence in a FISH karyogram. was as high, and in certain circumstances higher, than in industrialized Multi-colour COBRAFISH was applied to detect cryptic translocations and countries. abnormalities in patients with abnormal phenotype but normal Giemsa The Northern Province, South Africa is one of the poorest and most under- karyotype, to study HPV 16 integration sites in cervical cancer cell lines developed vast rural areas of South Africa, inhabited by 5, 2 million people and to perform 48 colour staining in complex rearrangements karyograms of which 95% are indigenous black people from the Venda, Pedi, and from human solid tumours. Other work relates to the application of the Shangaan tribes while approximately 50% are still illiterate. Most house- same methodology for mouse paints to study mouse tumour models, and holds are still without electricity, running water, and sanitation, while public a full set of sub-telomeric probes for clinical diagnostic use. transport is almost non-existing with very poor rail and road infrastructure, even though most 1st World technology is on its doorstep but not accessi- S42. Chromosome Segregation one hundred years after ble. Mendels Rediscovery In 1989 a research project; Screening Programme To Diagnose Congen- K. Nasmyth ital/Genetic Abnormalities Among New Born Babies At Mankweng Hospi- Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Vienna; Vienna, Austria tal was started and is still continuing at several Hospitals in the Province. BILIONI@imp.univie.ac.at From this small beginning this project developed into a multiphase com- In eukaryotic cells, replicated DNAstrands remain physically connected munity-based PHC genetic/disability program that led to numerous devel- until their segregation to opposite poles of the cell during anaphase. This opments and activities in many Hospitals, Institutions and Schools for the sister chromatid cohesion is essential for the alignment of chromosomes physical, visual, auditory and intellectually disabled. on the mitotic spindle during metaphase. Cohesion depends on a multi- The numerous facets of developments and activities will be discussed, subunit protein complex called cohesin, which possibly forms the physical including training of PHC workers, screening projects, research, coun- bridges that connect sisters. Proteolytic cleavage of cohesins Scc1 sub- selling, service provision and establishment of parent support groups unit at the metaphase to anaphase transition is essential for sister chro- among the rural disadvantaged communities. It also provided for the first matid separation and depends on a conserved protein called separin. We time information from rural South Africa on the incidence and frequency of show here that separin is a cysteine protease related to caspases and that congenital disorders in general and of specific common syndromes includ- it alone can cleave Scc1 in vitro. By replacing one of Scc1s cleavage sites ing Down syndrome, Albinism, and NTDs. by that for a different site specific protease, we show that cleavage of Scc1 in metaphase arrested cells is sufficient to trigger the separation of sister S40. Genomic and expression profiling of tumor genomes chromatids and their segregation to opposite cell poles. using DNA P. Lichter S43.Is Disease Hereditary? Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg; Germany K. M. Weiss p.lichter@dkfz-heidelberg.de Depts of Anthropology and Biology, Penn State University; University Park, Comparative genomic hybridization to microarrayed DNAfragments, an PAUnited States approach termed matrix-CGH, provides a powerful tool for the detection of kmw4@psu.edu genomic imbalances at a high resolution. Matrix-CGH allows the profiling There is widespread enthusiasm for mapping genes associated with and fine mapping of genomic imbalances in cell populations from patients almost any human trait. The hope is that the identification of common with constitutional as well as somatic genetic diseases. Following the genetic variation with substantial effect will transform biomedicine, and dra- development and automation of matrix-CGH, we have applied this method matic claims have been about this to the public. But studies of complex to analyze human neoplasias in order to traits have been frustrated by problems of genetic inference in the face of I. fine map altered genomic regions facilitating the identification of genes, causal complexity. Some of these problems are fundamental, rather thanConcurrent Symposia 73 reflecting limitations on sample size, sample design, or biotechnology. The ry, putting our results in context of the field in general, including the uncon- issues are understandable when considered from an evolutionary, popula- ventional myosin VI and Snells waltzer mouse, the POU4F3 transcription tion point of view. Etiologic heterogeneity is to be expected and probably is factor and DFNA15 human deafness locus, and inherited connexin 26 inherent in complex traits like chronic disease, for reasons that are well- mutations associated with human non-syndromic hearing loss. Emphasis known and supported by a wealth of existing data. I will talk about the his- will be placed on the advantages offered by the mouse as a model for tory of ideas on the nature of heredity with regard to disease, the relevance human deafness. of a population-evolutionary perspective on the problem, and some of the societal issues that arise in the study of the genetics of complex traits. S48.The genetics of inherited ocular disorders. G. C. M. Black S44.Exploring the Genetic Structure of Isolated Populations Departments of Ophthalmology and Medical Genetics, University of Man- L. Jin chester; Manchester, United Kingdom Institute of Genetics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; National Genome gblack@fs1.cmht.nwest.nhs.uk Center at Shanghai, China; Human Genetics Center, University of Texas  Genetic factors contribute to a wide range of the disorders that cause Houston, Texas, United States blindness and visual disability. Inherited ocular diseases comprise the sin- LJin@sph.uth.tmc.edu gle most common group amongst those of childhood onset. Recent dis- Isolated populations that are founded recently by a small number of coveries have underlined the complexity of genetic ophthalmic disease; founders have been considered ideal populations for mapping genes currently over 135 genes and loci are defined causing retinal disease underlying complex diseases. Among many other advantages such popu- alone. lation may have, higher level of linkage disequilibrium, compared with Locus heterogeneity is common, as illustrated by disorders of both anteri- those more outbred populations, is ideal for a genome-wide association or (e.g. anterior segment dysgenesis, autosomal dominant cataract) and study. In the last several years, we studied six putative isolated populations posterior segments (e.g. retinal and macular dystrophies). The major steps in China by typing microsatellites and single nucleotide polymorphisms for taken to define the exact genetic basis of many of these conditions may X and Ychromosomes, trying to understand the genetic structure of those now be used for diagnosis and counseling. In some cases this may be isolated populations. We also conducted genome-wide scan on three of helpful in directing management and treatment of affected patients. This those populations which allows us to look into the fine detail of the popu- possibility has been demonstrated both in man as well as in animal mod- lations. Those analyses will be reported in this presentation. els and will be illustrated with reference to the corneal dystrophies (honey- comb, Ries-Bucklers, granular and lattice dystrophies) anterior segment S45.Origins and evolution of the European gene pool dysgenesis syndromes (aniridia, goniodysgeneses and Rieger syndrome) G. Barbujani as well macular dystrophies (Stargardt disease). Department of Biology, University of Ferrara; Ferrara, Italy Many multisystemic conditions (e.g. Phakomatoses, Norrie disease, Vitre- bjg@unife.it oretinopathies) have an ocular component. The biochemical pathways Patterns of genetic diversity in todays populations contain information involved in their aetiology are crucial to the development and maintenance about past demographic processes. Archaeological evidence suggests (1) of different organ systems. Combining the advantages of detailed ocular that Europe has been first colonised in Upper Paleolithic times by people phenotypic definition with an expanding understanding of their molecular coming from the Levant; (2) that these populations contracted and then basis sheds light on molecular mechanisms of general significance. This reexpanded in response to climate changes in Mesolithic times; and (3) will be illustrated with reference to the role of the hedgehog (Shh) path- that a new wave of immigrants came in from the Levant with the Neolithic ways in vitreoretinal/neurodevelopment, as well as disorders of extracellu- spread of early farmers. It is not clear to what extent each of these three lar matrix construction. phenomena affected the current European gene pool. Establishing it is Many of the commonest causes of blindness (cataract, glaucoma and interesting per se, but it would also facilitate our understanding of the dis- macular degeneration) have important genetic components in their aetiol- tributions of disease alleles. ogy yet these remain unknown. Addressing this area remains a major chal- Spatial autocorrelation analysis of both protein and nuclear DNA data lenge for the future. shows that broad clines encompassing much of Europe are the rule. At the mitochondrial level, conversely, a gradient is evident only in the Mediter- S49.Sifting Sequence for Function: Exploiting the Mouse ranean region, but not in northern Europe. Analyses based on admixture E. Rubin models identify the contributions of two founding populations, one Western Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California; Berkeley, and one Eastern, which one would be tempted to equate, respectively, with CAUnited States the descendants of Paleolithic hunter-gatherers and of the early Neolithic emrubin@lbl.gov farmers. However, especially at the Y-chromosome level, there is also evi- One of the major challenges in the post genomic era will be the identifica- dence of gene flow from Northern Asia into Europe. tion of sequences participating in the regulatory circuitry controlling gene The parallel clines observed at most loci studied, and the estimated admix- expression. For the analysis of genomic DNA, algorithms and databases ture rates, suggest that much of the current European diversity has been are available facilitating the identification of those sequences encoding shaped by a directional expansion from one extreme of the continent. That genes. While these sorts of computational aids are largely not available for result, and the recent separation of the European gene pools estimated the identification of noncoding sequences participating in gene regulation, from microsatellite data, do not suggest that phenomena of Mesolithic cross-species sequence comparisons provide a robust means for identify- reexpansion from glacial refugia have played a crucial role in determining ing putative gene regulatory sequences. Using this approach to identify the overall patterns and levels of diversity in the European gene pool. gene regulatory sequences we have examined orthologous regions of human 5q31 and mouse chromosome 11, DNAof biomedical importance S46.The Genetics of Deafness; AModel for Genomic and Bio- due to the clustering of a several interleukin genes. The functional proper- logical Complexity ties of the largest noncoding element (401 BP>85% conserved between K. B. Avraham humans and mice) located in the IL4, IL13 intergenic interval were exam- Department of Human Genetics & Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of ined in depth. To identify its function, knockout mice lacking this 401 BP Medicine, Tel Aviv University; Tel Aviv, Israel element as well as YAC transgenics with and without the element were karena@post.tau.ac.il examined. Analysis of the animals revealed that this noncoding sequence Advanced genomic technologies has led to the isolation of many genes plays a prominent role in the regulation of IL4, IL13 and IL5 genes that are involved in human disease and the study of the human genome is now spread over 120KB. The comparative genomic strategy used here for iden- moving towards understanding the function of the proteins these genes tifying noncoding sequence of biological import has led to the discovery of encode (functional genomics). The intricate structure and multiple cell a regulatory element that acts over significant genomic distance to coordi- types of the inner ear requires a range of proteins with different functions, nate the expression of several genes involved in the inflammatory including maintenance of structural integrity, neuronal innervation, and response. We have carried out similar studies in other regions of the mechanoelectrical transduction. There has been remarkable progress in genome that further illustrate the power of cross-species sequence analy- the field of hereditary hearing loss over the past five years in elucidating sis coupled with functional studies in mice to investigate the gene regula- the molecular basis of hearing loss. This has been no easy task, as human tory circuitry of mammals. deafness is extremely heterogeneous. Not only is there great variability in the clinical features of human hearing loss (HL), but mutations in the same genes can contribute to syndromic, nonsyndromic, prelingual, and pro- gressive deafness. I will discuss research being done in my own laborato-74 Concurrent Symposia S50.The Rise and Fall of the Mammalian YChromosome mals a deeper understanding of the gross architecture and evolution of the J. A. Marshall Graves human genome can be obtained. Research School of Biological Sciences, The Australian National Universi- ty; Canberra, Australia S52. Gene dosage, development, and disease; The unstable J.Graves@latrobe.edu.au foundation of a robust response In mammals, sex is determined by an XYmale; XX female system in which S. J. Tapscott a male-dominant gene on the Y(SRY) determines sex. Sex chromosomes Division of Human Biology Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; evidently evolved from an original autosome pair as the Ychromosome Seattle, WAUnited States was progressively degraded. This view of a wimp Y is supported by our stapscot@fred.fhcrc.org findings that even genes that are testis-specific, and have important func- There is increasing recognition that stochastic processes underlie the high- tions in male determination or differentiation, have partners on the X from ly predictable patterns of gene expression in developing organisms. In which they ultimately evolved. In particular, the SRYgene, which deter- many systems, the response of a gene to intermediate levels of an induc- mines sex in humans and mice, has a partner (SOX3) on the X in all ther- er has been shown to be a stochastic all-or-none response. Experimental ian mammals from which it is thought to have been derived. data and inferential reasoning demonstrate that the balance between gene The mammalian Ychromosome must have arisen after the divergence of activation and de-activation rates is a critical variable for achieving speci- mammals from other vertebrates more than 300 million years ago, since fied levels of gene activity. Models of intermittent gene expression have birds and reptiles subscribe to completely non-homologous sex determin- implications for understanding human disease; gene dosage can protect ing systems. To explore the origins of the mammalian Ychromosome and against intermittent lapses in gene expression and increase the pre- SRY, we compared the Ychromosomes of the three major mammal groups dictability of a response to a graded stimulus. Therefore, some haploinsuf- (eutherians, marsupials and monotremes). We find that some genes ficiency syndromes might result from an increased susceptibility to sto- shared by the human X and Ychromosomes are also on the sex chromo- chastic delays of gene initiation or interruptions of gene expression. somes in marsupials and monotremes, implying that part of the mam- Although little is known regarding the relative on-rates and off-rates of malian Y chromosome is at least 170 million years old. However, most gene expression, highly unstable gene expression provides a selective human X-Yshared genes are located in autosomal clusters in marsupials advantage both for signal discrimination and as a mechanism of limiting and monotremes, implying that the human Y chromosome is largely the prevalance of mutations in a population. derived from a region added to sex chromosomes recently in the eutherian lineage. Thus most of the original Yhas degraded. In two rodent species S54. Molecular Genetics of 22Q11 Deletion Syndromes  A (mole voles), the Yhas completely disappeared. Review The genes on the Ychromosome evolved from genes on the X, and those P. J. Scambler remaining have been retained because they evolved a vital male-specific Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health; London, United Kingdom function. In particular, the SRYgene, which determines sex in humans and p.scambler@ich.ucl.ac.uk mice, evolved from the brain-specific SOX3. However, SRYwas not the Deletions of human chromosome 22q11 occur in approximately 1;4000 live original mammalian sex determining gene, since we now find that in births and are associated with a number of haploinsufficiency syndromes, monotremes there is no SRYand SOX3 is autosomal. Another sex deter- including DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes. The deleted region  mining gene must have pre-dated SRY. Nor is the SRYgene a permanent or DiGeorge Chromosomal Region (DGCR)  is entirely cloned and fixture in mammals, for the two species of mole voles with no Ychromo- sequenced. Despite this, human genetic techniques in isolation have so far some have lost SRYin favour of an as yet unknown new sex determining failed to unequivocally demonstrate that haploinsufficiency of any specific gene. Thus SRYevolved in therian mammals less than 170 million years gene is required to produce this syndrome. As many genes at 22q11 show ago, and may be readily supplanted. conservation of synteny in the mouse, several laboratories have Thus the Ychromosome, and the SRYgene it bears, evolved relatively addressed the role of single genes and groups of genes using mouse mod- recently and its useful life is already running out. els. Direct deletion, and Cre-lox mediated deletion and duplication have been used to create a shortest region of deletion overlap for a murine S51. The Dynamics of Genome Evolution in Placental Mam- Dgcr. 1n 1999 Baldinis group demonstrated that embryos hemizygous for mals the Dgcr have hypo/aplasia of the 4th pharyngeal arch artery at E10.5, J. Wienberg1, L. Frnicke1, R. Stanyon1, S. Mller2, M. Neusser2 which gives variably penetrant great artery and heart defects in live born 1National Cancer Institute Frederick, Division of Basic Sciences; Frederick, mice. Recently, further deletion mapping, transgenic rescue and gene tar- MD United States; 2Institut fr Anthropologie und Humangenetik, Univer- geting experiments have identified the transcription factor Tbx1as vital for sitt Mnchen; Munich, Germany pharyngeal arch artery morphogenesis/remodelling. Asecond region con- wienbergj@ncifcrf.gov tains a locus determining behavioural variation. The variable penetrance Many years ago S. Ohno postulated that the placental mammalian X- and expressivity of the murine deletion syndrome reflects the situation chromosome was evolutionarily conserved. He postulated that this con- seen in man, yet the models are, unsurprisingly, an imperfect phenocopy. servation was due to the dosage compensation mechanism for X-linked While cellular and animal models will undoubtedly be vital in understand- genes that rely on the functional inactivation of X-chromosomes in somat- ing the developmental pathways affected by Tbx1haploinsufficiency and ic cells. Now it seems that most autosomes are also extensively con- the role of other DGCR genes during embryogenesis, further human served. This conclusion is supported by both comparative gene mapping genetic investigations are required to assess the role of DGCR genes in and more recently by molecular cytogenetics showing, that huge tracts of the behavioural and cognitive deficits observed in this disorder. the human genome are found in large syntenic blocks across different mammalian orders for tens of millions of years. Chromosome painting data with human chromosome specific probes are available for a good number of primates, tree shrew, various carnivores, artiodactyls, dolphin, whales, S55.AAV-Mediated Gene Transfer for Hemophilia horse, bat, rabbit, squirrel, and the common shrew. Although one half of K. High the about 19 placental mammalian orders have not yet been analyzed by Abramson Research Center, Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia; Philadel- molecular cytogenetic techniques it is probable that the ancestral placen- phia, PAUnited States tal mammalian karyotype had about 50 chromosomes. Many of these chro- HIGH@email.chop.edu mosome syntenies are still conserved in humans or differ only by simple The goal of our work has been to establish an experimental basis for gene reciprocal translocations. Since chromosome translocations are generally transfer as a method of treating hemophilia, an inherited bleeding disorder very rare events (about one translocation every ten million years in most that results from the absence of functional Factor VIII or Factor IX. Using phylogenies) they are useful markers to help establish phylogenies. Here, an adeno-associated viral vector derived from AAV serotype 2, we have this will be demonstrated for New World primates were chromosome paint- shown in mice and in hemophilic dogs that we can achieve long-term ing was especially helpful. The dynamics of chromosome rearrangements, expression (>3 years) of clotting factor at levels that would result in an however, is not linear over time in different orders. In some phylogenies we improvement of clinical symptoms of the disease. Aphase I trial of intra- can observe sudden outbreaks of chromosome reshuffling. This will be muscular injection of AAV-F.IX has been initiated to evaluate the safety of shown for some primates, artiodactyls and carnivores. Chromosome paint- this procedure in patients with severe hemophilia B. To date, eight subjects ing can help in the understanding of these reshufflings that are often far have been enrolled at three doses, ranging from 2 x 1011 vg/kg to 2 x 1012 beyond the resolution of classical banding patterns. With more chromo- vg/kg. There has been no evidence of local or systemic toxicity in any of some painting data available from other mammalian orders and including the subjects, including no evidence for inhibitor formation or for inadvertent the huge data set available from chromosome banding studies in mam- germline transmission of vector sequences. Muscle biopsies have shownConcurrent Symposia 75 unequivocal evidence for gene transfer and expression by PCR, Southern hope of therapeutic application of these cells in the future. blot, and immunohistochemistry. In recent pre-clinical experiments, we The current knowledge regarding therapeutic liver repopulation and the have shown in mice that vectors derived from alternate serotypes AAV-1 hopeful implications for treatment of liver diseases will be discussed. and AAV-6 result in 10-20 fold higher levels of expression of F.IX compared to vectors derived from AAV-2, and we are currently investigating the per- S58.Molecular Mechanisms in Sphingolipidoses formance of these vectors in hemophilic dogs. We have also shown that K. Sandhoff AAV-2 can be delivered to skeletal muscle via an intravascular approach, Kekul-Institut fr Organische Chemie und Biochemie der Universitt making transduction of large muscle groups much more feasible. Finally, Bonn; Bonn, Germany we have administered AAV-F.IX into the portal veins of hemophilic dogs sandhoff@uni-bonn.de and shown that this results in high circulating levels of Factor IX, on the Sphingolipids are components of plasma membranes of mammalian cells. order of 5-14%, whereas delivery of similar doses to skeletal muscle Inherited defects in their lysosomal catabolism often result in fatal storage results in factor levels of only 1-2%. Based on these results a trial of AAV- diseases. The molecular analysis of these neurodegenerative and dermal mediated liver-directed gene transfer for hemophilia B has been proposed. disorders and their respective mouse models lead to the discovery of prin- ciples of membrane digestion (Kolter T. and Sandhoff K., Angew.Chem. Int. S56.Ribozymes for Retinal Gene Therapy and Genomics Ed. 1999, 38, 1532-1568; Linke et al, J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 5760- W. W. Hauswirth1, Q. Li1, J. Liu1, M. LaVail2, J. Flannery3, A. S. Lewin3 5768). Components of plasma membranes reach the lysosomal compart- 1Molecular Genetics and Ophthalmology, and Gene Therapy Center, Uni- ment for degradation on intralysosomal vesicles and membrane structures. versity of Florida; Gainesville, FLUnited States; 2Beckman Vision Center, The catabolism of the membrane-bound sphingolipids by water-soluble UC San Francisco; San Francisco, CA United States; 3Optometry and lysosomal exohydrolases is synergistically stimulated by two additional Neuroscience, UC Berkeley; Berkeley, CAUnited States components, sphingolipid activator proteins (SAPs) and anionic phospho- hauswrth@eye1.EYE.UFL.EDU lipids such as BMP (bis(mono-acylglycero)phosphate) (Wilkening et al, We tested two hypotheses; 1. AAV-delivered ribozymes against an auto- J.Biol. Chem. 273, 30271-30278 (1998)). The latter occurs only in inner somal dominant mutant allele in a somatic retinal tissue can reduce the membranes of the acidic components of the cell. Due to its physiochemi- corresponding mRNAlevel sufficiently to rescue visual function in an ani- cal properties, the GM2-activator protein attacks the inner vesicle struc- mal model for autosomal dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa in which rod cells tures but apparently not the limiting lysosomal membranes (Giehl et al, progressively die over an 8-12 month period after birth. 2. A similarly Eur. J. Biochem. 261, 650-658, 1999). These observations may help to designed and delivered ribozyme against a wild type allele can create a explain why intralysosomal membranes are digested and the limiting lyso- somatic knockdown and lead to a retinal disease phenotype. Recombi- somal membrane survives. nant AAV-vectored ribozymes against a mutant P23H rod opsin gene in The analysis of the skin phenotype of SAP-knock-out mice indicates the transgenic rats preserved 30-80% of the photoreceptors that would have importance of activator proteins for the formation of the epidermal water been lost at 8 and 3 months respectively. Rescue was confirmed function- permeability barrier of land dwelling mammals. Ceramides, the main com- ally by electroretinographic (ERG) analysis, cellularly by preservation of ponents of this extracellular lipid barier, derive in large part from hydrolysis photoreceptor morphology and molecularly by specific reduction in mutant of glucosylceramides mediated by the lysosomal enzyme -glucocere- mRNAlevels. To test the converse idea, that ribozymes targeted against brosidase. In -glucocerebrosidase- and SAP- deficient mice the epider- wild type alleles might also createretinal disease, we attempted to produce mal permeability barrier is abnormal. Their epidermis accumulates various Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP)-like rod cell loss in rd/+ mice (heterozygous complex glucosylceramides as well as complex -hydroxylated glucosyl- bPDE null mutation). Rd/+ mice have an apparently normal retina at all ceramides covalently linked to the cornified cell envelope of corneocytes in ages in contrast to the homozygous rd/rdmouse that loses all rods within the stratum corneum. Their identification and metabolism will be dis- about one month. Ribozyme genes against wt bPDE mRNAwere pack- cussed. aged into an AAV vector downstream of a proximal rod opsin promoter and injected into one eye of rd/+ mice. At 4 and 8 months postinjection, we S60. Genetic defects in sterol metabolism found 50%-80% fewer rod photoreceptors in ribozyme treated eyes rela- F. F. Moebius tive to PBS treated contralateral control eyes. Ribozyme-treated rods die Institute for Biochemical Pharmacology, University of Innsbruck; Innsbruck, via an apoptotic pathway as they do in RP. ERG analysis in ribozyme treat- Austria ed and PBS injected control eyes confirmed that a profound functional Fabian.Moebius@uibk.ac.at vision deficit had also been created that paralleled the loss of rod cells in Genetic defects in sterol metabolizing enzymes have recently emerged as the treated eye. Extension of this knockdown strategy to normal +/+ mice important causes of dysmorphogenetic syndromes. They affect enzymes showed a qualitatively identical effect, although at a lower level. This AAV- required for the removal of methyl groups at C4(NSHDL), the shift of the ribozyme technology can now be applied to a broad range of therapeutic double bond from C8-9 to C7-8 (3-sterol D8,D7 isomerase/EBP, E.C. and functional genomic questions in the retina and elsewhere. 5.3.3.5) and the removal of the double bond at C7-8 (D7-sterol reduc- tase/DHCR7, E.C. 1.3.1.21). Missense and nonsense mutations in NSHDL S57.Multipotent Stem Cells for the Treatment of Genetic Dis- on Xq28 cause X-chromosomal dominant CHILD syndrome (congenital eases hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects, M. Grompe1, X. Wang1, M. Al-Dhalimy1, M. Finegold2, E. Lagasse3 MIM308050), a rare inborn disorder which affects bone and skin in females 1Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR United States; 2Baylor and is presumably lethal in males. NSHDL is involved in C4 sterol College of Medicine, Houston, TX United States; 3Stem Cells Inc., Sunny- demethylation but its precise biochemical function remains to be clarified. vale CAUnited States Nonsense and missense mutations in the same gene (Nshdl) underly the grompem@ohsu.edu Bare patches and Striated mutations in mice. Recurrent missense and Orthotopic liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for several inborn nonsense mutations in EBP (Emopamil binding protein) on Xp11.22 are errors of metabolism. Unfortunately, the supply of donor organs is limiting found in patients with X-chromosomal dominant chondrodysplasia puncta- and therefore many patients cannot benefit from this therapy. In contrast, ta (Conradi-Hnermann-syndrome, CDPX2, MIM302960). CDPX2 is char- hepatocyte transplantation could potentially overcome the shortage in acterized by skeletal (epiphyseal stippling, limb shortening, short stature) donor livers by use of cells from a single donor for multiple recipients. In and epidermal (atrophy, ichthyosis, hyperkeratosis) manifestations as well classic hepatocyte transplantation, however, only <1% of the liver mass or as occasional sectorial cataracts. The mouse mutant Tattered carries a less can be replaced by donor cells. Recently though, it has been shown missense mutation in Ebp. The clinical differentiation between CHILD syn- in animal models that >90% of host hepatocytes can be replaced by a drome and CDPX2 is controversial. The morphological phenotypes of Bare small number of transplanted donor cells in a process we term therapeu- patches and Tattered are similar to each other and ressemble CHILD syn- tic liver repopulation. This phenomenon is analogous to repopulation of drome as well as CDPX2 including lethality in male embryos. Cholesterol the hematopoietic system after bone marrow transplantation. Liver repop- crossfeeding between cell patches in which either the X-chromosome car- ulation occurs when transplanted cells have a growth advantage in the set- rying the wildtype or the mutant allele are active possibly explains why nei- ting of damage to recipient liver cells. ther in CHILD syndrome nor in CDPX2 total cholesterol levels are reduced. For human therapeutic application, cadaveric donors are the most likely In contrast substantially reduced total sterol concentrations are a hallmark source transplantable hepatocytes. This presents problems for the acqui- of the more frequent autosomal-recessive Smith-Lemli-Opitz/RSH syn- sition, distribution and quality control of these cells. Very recently it has drome (SLOS, MIM270400) due to mutations in DHCR7 in 11q13. SLOS is been discovered that transplanted cells from extrahepatic sources such as characterized by dysmorphogenesis (e.g. syndactyly, heart and lung the adult pancreas or bone marrow can also be used for liver repopulation. defects), failure to thrive and mental retardation or autism. A recently Because bone marrow donors are widely available, this finding raises the described induced mouse mutant in Dhcr7had the biochemical character-76 Concurrent Sessions istics of the SLOS and most surprisingly symptoms of severe neurological and protein-protein interaction studies. These approaches aim to find deficits such as reduced physical activity and uncoordinated swallowing. molecular explanations for these distinct disorders and hence establish a Our work is supported by grants from the FWF and the sterreichische phenotype-genotype correlation for p63 gene mutations. Nationalbank C003.Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in human GLI3 disor- Concurrent Sessions ders L. G. Biesecker C001. Thrombocytopenia-Absent Radius Syndrome (TAR); A NIH-NHGRI; Bethesda, MD United States clinical genetic study. leslieb@helix.nih.gov K. L. Greenhalgh1, R. T. Howell2, P. Ancliffe3, A. Bottani4, R. A. Newbury- Mutations in GLI3 have been associated with two malformation syndromes Ecob5 (Pallister-Hall and Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndromes (PHS & 1Department of Clincial Genetics; Bristol, United Kingdom; 2South West GCPS)) and several types of polydactyly. Controversy persists regarding Regional Cytogenetic Laboratorys; Bristol, United Kingdom; 3Great potential correlation of specfic mutation types, with some results suggest- Ormond Street Hopsital for Sick Children NHS Trust; London, United King- ing there is no correlation of mutation type and phenotype. Here we show dom; 4Division of Medical Genetics, CMU; Geneva, Switzerland; 5Depart- new results that strongly suggest that a correlation exists. The data com- ment of Clinical Genetics; Bristol, United Kingdom prise 19 families with PHS and 5 families with GCPS whose GLI3 gene lynn.greenhalgh@ubht.swest.nhs.uk mutation has been determined. We combine these data with published Information regarding the phenotype of TAR syndrome is largely based on cases of PHS & GCPS where mutations have been determined. There are single case reports. In order to delineate the phenotype, 32 patients diag- now more than 50 cases of known GLI3 mutations. In GCPS there are nosed with TAR syndrome underwent clinical and cytogenetic analysis. All more than 10 large deletions, 5 translocations, 7 frameshifts 5 of the zinc cases except 1 had bilateral radial aplasia. The thumbs were present in all fingers, 2 missense, 3 splice mutations, and 3 frameshifts 3 of the zinc fin- cases but morphology and function were abnormal. Lower limb defects ger. In PHS, 21 of 21 patients have frameshifts 3 of the zinc fingers. This occurred in 47%, cardiac anomalies (e.g. tetralogy of Fallot) in 16%. is a non-random distribution of mutations that supports the hypothesis that Thrombocytopenia may be as aymptomatic and remain undetected until GCPS is caused by functional haploinsufficiency of GLI3 and PHS is later life. Early detection is associated with low morbidity, highlighting the caused by 3 truncations. We will propose a hypothesis to account for the value of haematological investigation in patients with radial aplasia. Previ- unusual 3 frameshift mutations in GCPS and review relevant animal model ous reports of urogenital abnormalities were rare, however in this study data. anomalies were found in 25% of cases. The association of TAR syndrome and cows milk intolerance is well described, in this study 43% of cases C004. Acheiropodia is caused by a genomic deletion in showed cows milk intolerance and 25% had experienced prolonged bouts C7orf2 the human orthologue of the Lmbr1 gene. of gastroenteritis. Three atypical cases were found. Two showed features P. Tsipouras1, P. Ianakiev1, M. J. van Baren2, M. J. Daly3, S. P. A. Toledo4, of Roberts syndrome and the third had mental retardation and genitouri- M. G. Cavalcanti4, J. Correa Neto5, E. Lemos Silveira6, A. Freire-Maia7, P. nary anomalies suggestive of DK phocomelia. Four sib pairs were found. Heutink2, M. W. Kilpatrick1 Afemale excess (23 female; 8 male; one case unknown) was observed. 1University of Connecticut Health Center; Farmington, CT United States; Chromosome breakage studies were normal in all cases tested. Two fur- 2Erasmus University; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 3Whitehead Institute; ther cytogenetic abnormalities are under investigation and have provided Cambridge, MAUnited States; 4University of Sao Paulo; Sao Paulo, Brazil; useful candidate genes for further study based on role in limb development 5Private Practice; Sao Paulo, Brazil; 6Private Practice; Porto Alegre, Brazil; and haematopoiesis. This study suggests that the phenotype for TAR syn- 7Universidade Estadual Paulista; Botucatu, Brazil drome is wider than previously reported. The condition may be heteroge- ianakiev@neuron.uchc.edu neous with implications for genetic counselling and gene identification. Acheiropodia is a unique condition presenting with bilateral congenital amputations of the upper and lower extremities and aplasia of the hands C002. Heterozygous p63 mutations in LMS, EEC, Hay-Wells, and feet. This severely handicapping developmental disorder appears to ADULT syndromes, and in Split Hand/Foot Malformation affect only the extremities with no other systemic manifestations reported. reveal a genotype-phenotype correlation With the exception of two affected siblings in Puerto Rico the reported P. H. G. Duijf1, J. A. McGrath2, V. Doetsch3, J. Celli1, R. de Waal4, A. cases are of Brazilian origin. The incidence of acheiropodia in Brazil has Yang5, F. McKeon5, K. Vanmolkot1, P. Propping6, F. Gurrieri7, G. Neri7, M. been estimated to be approximately 1/250,000 births. Acheiropodia is Bamshad8, B. C. J. Hamel1, H. G. Brunner1, H. van Bokhoven1 inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and the heterozygotes are phe- 1Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre; Nijmegen, notypically normal. The vast majority of affected individuals are the off- The Netherlands; 2St. Johns Institute of Dermatology, St Thomas Hospi- spring of consanguineous matings. A locus for Acheiropodia has been tal; London, United Kingdom; 3Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, mapped to chromosome 7q36. To facilitate the identification of the gene UCSF; San Francisco, CAUnited States; 4Department of Pathology, Uni- responsible for this disorder, we first refined the acheiropodia critical region versity Medical Centre; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 5Department of Cell by haplotype analysis and subsequently identified a common mutation in Biology, Harvard Medical School; Boston, MAUnited States; 6Institute of C7orf2, the human orthologue of the mouse Lmbr1 gene, responsible for Human Genetics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 7Institute of Medical the disease. Analysis of a panel of five Acheiropodia families with fifteen Genetics; Rome, Italy; 8University of Utah; Salt Lake City, UT United States polymorphic markers, narrowed the critical region to 1.3 cM, based on p.duijf@antrg.azn.nl identity by descent, and to less than 0.5 Mb by physical mapping. Analysis EEC syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by Ectrodactyly, of C7orf2, the human orthologue of the mouse Lmbr1 gene that has been Ectodermal dysplasia, and facial Clefting. We recently demonstrated that implicated in mouse mutant Hemimelic extra-toes, identified a deletion in mutations in the p63 gene, a homolog of the tumor suppressor gene p53, all five families thus identifying a common Acheiropodia mutation. The cause EEC syndrome. An extended analysis revealed heterozygous p63 deletion was identified at both the genomic DNAand mRNAlevel. It leads mutations in 34 of 37 unrelated EEC families, indicating that p63 is the to the production of a C7orf2 transcript lacking exon 4 and introduces a major if not the only gene involved in EEC syndrome. EEC syndrome premature stop codon downstream of exon 3. Given the nature of the shows some overlap with several distinct syndromes, including Hay- Acheiropodia phenotype, it appears likely that the Lmbr1 gene plays an Wells/AEC syndrome, Limb-Mammary Syndrome (LMS), ADULT syn- important role in limb development. drome, and Split Hand/Foot Malformation (SHFM). Mutation analysis of the p63 gene was performed to investigate the possibility of allelism for these C005. Deletions of the homeobox gene SHOX are an impor- disorders. Causative mutations were identified in AEC syndrome (8 muta- tant cause of growth failure in patients with idiopathic short tions), ADULT syndrome (1 mutation), LMS (1 mutation), and SHFM (4 stature mutations). For EEC and AEC syndrome, the position and predicted effect G. A. Rappold1, M. Fukami1, S. Schiller1, B. Niesler1, W. Zumkeller2, M. of the mutations is clearly different. The majority of mutations in EEC syn- Bettendorf3, U. Heinrich3, C. Francomano4, T. Ogata5 drome are amino acid substitutions in the DNAbinding domain and affect 1University of Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Poliklinik fr Kinder- transactivational properties of p63. AEC syndrome is consistently caused heilkunde; Halle, Germany; 3Department of Paediatrics; Heidelberg, Ger- by amino acid substitutions in the SAM domain and are predicted to affect many; 4Department of Developmental Endocrinology; Bethesda, United protein-protein interactions. The effect of the mutations in SHFM, LMS and States; 5Department of Paediatrics; Tokyo, Japan ADULTis less straightforward. To gain more insight in the functional con- gudrun_rappold@med.uni-heidelberg.de sequences of the p63 mutations we are studying the characteristics of nor- With an incidence of 3 in 100, idiopathic short stature is a fairly frequent mal and mutant p63 proteins in transactivation assays, immunolocalization diagnosis in children. Idiopathic short stature refers to a heterogenousConcurrent Sessions 77 group of patients which are short due to different reasons. Mutations of a origin of mt-mutations. Somatic cells have hundreds to thousands of human homeobox gene, SHOX, have been recently shown to underlie the mtDNAmolecules with a very high rate of spontaneous mutations. Accord- short stature phenotype in patients with Turner syndrome and most ingly, most somatic cells probably have a low frequency of randomly mutat- patients with Lri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. Here, we address the question ed mtDNAmolecules. Most cancers are of monoclonal origin. Hence, to on the incidence and type of SHOX mutations seen in children with short explain the appearance of mtGI in tumors we have to explain why a given stature of unknown aetiology, termed idiopathic. We have analysed the variant mt-haplotype expands and replaces part of (heteroplasmy) or all SHOX gene for intragenic mutations by single strand conformation poly- (homoplasmy) wild mt-haplotypes in cancer cells. Selective and/or replica- morphism (SSCP) and for complete gene deletion by flourescence in situ tive advantage of some mutations combined with a severe bottleneck dur- hybridisation (FISH) in 820 and 150 patients, respectively. We have identi- ing the mitochondrial segregation accompanying mitosis are the mecha- fied nonsense, missense and a small deletion in the coding region of nisms probably involved in the origin of mtGI. SHOX ( 8/820). In 150 patients we were able to also carry out FISH analy- sis and detected 4 complete gene deletions ( 4/150). At least seven muta- C008. Meta-analysis of losses of heterozygosity in breast, tions (7/12) could be shown to be truly functional by comparing with the lung and colorectal cancer genotype and phenotype of the parents. Consequently, SHOX mutations R. J. Osborne, M. Hamshere have been detected in more than 2 % of children with idiopathic short University of Nottingham; Nottingham, United Kingdom stature. The spectrum of SHOX mutations is biased with the vast majority sbxrjo@nottingham.ac.uk leading to complete gene deletions. Children with SHOX mutations have We have devised a novel technique that integrates data from more than been shown in retrospect to often derive from families where older affect- 750 studies on the loss of heterozygosity in breast, lung and colorectal ed family members show mild skeletal features reminescent of the Turner cancers. By comparing the data, and integrating this with the newly skeletal features. Short patients with a normal karyotype and the presence released sequence from the Human Genome Project, we have been able of any of the Turner-characteristic dysmorphic skeletal features such as to identify many new regions of the genome that probably contain candi- high-arched palate, short neck, abnormal auricular development, cubitus date genes involved in tumor formation. This technique also allows us to valgus, genu valgum, short 4th metacarpals and Madelung deformity or identify regions of the genome that are tumor-type specific as well as find- with frequent otitis media are therefore likely candidates for a SHOX gene ing regions that are lost in multiple tumor types. In addition, we appear to disorder. be able to identify regions of the genome that are essential for tumor growth in certain cancers, but which can be lost in others. Finally, this C006. Familial Combined Pituitary Hormone Deficiency method also provides an insight into the pattern of background rates of caused by a Mutation in PROP-1 Gene losses of heterozygosity on each chromosome - this enables us to deter- J. Crone1, R. Pfaeffle2, D. Prayer3, I. Gomez4, H. Frisch5 mine whether a particular locus, or region, is consistently lost compared to 1Paediatric Deartment, University Hospital; Vienna, Austria; 2Paediatric its local level. Data will be presented in the form of a new set of loss of Department, RWTH; Aachen, Germany; 3Radiologic Department, Universi- heterozygosity maps and graphs, which will also be made available at the ty Hospital; Vienna, Austria; 4General Hospital; Klagenfurt, Austria; 5Pae- University of Nottingham LOH database diatric Department, University Hospital; Vienna, Austria (http;//www.nottingham.ac.uk/~pdzmgh/lohdb). herwig.frisch@akh-wien.ac.at Mutations of PROP-1, a paired-like homeodomain transcriptionfactor C009. Development of a molecular signature for ovarian which is responsible for early embryonic pituitary development have been epithelial cancer recently reported as a cause of combined pituitary hormone deficiency. We D. I. Smith1, V. Shridhar1, L. Hartmann1, J. Chien1, J. Lillie2 report the phenotype, long-term auxological data and MRI findings in two 1Mayo Foundation; Rochester, MN United States; 2Millenium Predictive families with 4 affected members. All patients had a complete deficiency Medicine; Cambridge, MAUnited States GH, TSH, PRL, LH and FSH. ACTH deficiency was diagnosed in two smith.david@mayo.edu probands only during the 3rd and 4th decade of life. Pituitary MRI showed Ovarian epithelial cancer is the most lethal of the cancers unique to hypoplastic adenohypophysis in 3 subjects, but an unspecific tissue accu- women. Seventy percent of women present with advanced disease, with a mulation which presented like a pituitary mass lesion in another patient. five-year survival in the 15-20% range even with aggressive treatment. In The affected boy from family 2 was continuously treated with all hormons contrast, those women who present with Stage I disease (confined to the required and reached the familial target height. However, the 3 subjects in ovary) have a five year survival in the 80-90% range. Unfortunately, very family 1 were treated only sporadically (GH-treatment between 1-3 years little is know about the molecular events underlying the development of this resp.); despite this insufficient therapy they reached a final height in the lethal disease. We have used the technique of transcriptional profiling to lower normal range. Longitudinal growth continued up to the age of 40 begin to develop comprehensive molecular signatures for ovarian epithe- years in these subjects. lial cancers. Twenty primary ovarian tumors, 7 ovarian cancer cell lines and a variety of cultured and non-cultured normal ovarian epithelium were ana- C007.Mitochondrial Genome Instability In Human Cancers lyzed for the expression of 25,000 genes on nitrocellulose membranes. To N. O. Bianchi, M. S. Bianchi, S. M. Richard complement this, we also constructed subtraction suppression hybridiza- IMBICE; La Plata, Argentina tion cDNAlibraries from many of the same tumors that were analyzed on imbice@satlink.com microarrays. We detected many more down-regulated than up-regulated Malfunction of mismatch repair (MMR) genes produces nuclear genome genes in the ovarian tumors. Many of the consistently down-regulated instability (NGI) and plays an important role in the origin of some heredi- genes were found to reside within common fragile site regions providing tary and sporadic human cancers. The appearance of non-inherited further support that these regions play an important role in cancer devel- microsatellite alleles in tumor cells (microsatellite instability, MSI) is one of opment. Most of the same genes were aberrantly regulated in both early the expressions of NGI. We present here data showing mitochondrial (stage I/II) and late (stage III/IV), but our results do support a model where genome instability (mtGI) in most of the human cancers analysed so far. later stage tumors have additional alterations generally not present in the The mt-DNAmarkers used were point mutations, length-tract instability of early stage tumors. To complement the transcriptional profiling, we also mono- or dinucleotide repeats, mono- or dinucleotide insertions or dele- performed comparative genomic hybridization to analyze the gross chro- tions, and long deletions. Comparison of normal and tumoral tissues from mosomal structure of the profiled ovarian tumors. This analysis revealed the same individual reveals that mt-mutations may show as homoplasmic that chromosomal regions that were deleted appeared almost identical (all tumor cells have the same variant haplotype) or as heteroplasmic between early and late stage tumors. However, amplification events were (tumor cells are a mosaic of inherited and acquired variant haplotypes). almost never observed in the early stage tumors, but were frequently Breast, colorectal, gastric and kidney cancers exhibit mtGI with a pattern observed in the late stage tumors. Acomparison between gene expression of mt-mutations specific for each tumor. No correlation between NGI and patterns and regions of chromosomal deletion or amplification has delin- mtGI was found in breast, colorectal or kidney cancers, while a positive eated several interesting chromosomal regions. Interestingly, several of correlation was found in gastric cancer. Conversely, germ cell testicular these regions are bordered by common fragile sites, again implicating cancers lack mtGI. Damage by reactive oxygen species (ROS), slipped- these regions in important events occuring during cancer development. We strand mispairing (SSM) and deficient repair are the causes explaining the have used a number of techniques to validate the expression levels of appearance of mtGI. The replication and repair of mtDNAare controlled by genes that appear to be aberrantly regulated in the ovarian tumors. This nuclear genes. So far, there is no clear evidence linking MMR gene mal- includes Northern analysis of ovarian cancer cell lines, and RT-PCR analy- function with mtGI. Polymerase g (POLg) carries out the mtDNAsynthe- sis of primary ovarian tumors. Our most specific is the use of RNAin situ sis. Since this process is error-prone due to a deficiency in the proofread- to analyze histologically characterized ovarian tumor specimens. We are ing activity of POLg, this enzyme has been assumed to be involved in the therefore working on the generation of a comprehensive molecular signa-78 Concurrent Sessions ture for ovarian epithelial cancers. In addition, we are working to identify Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare, highly metastatic skin tumor of neu- markers for the early detection of ovarian cancer, as well as markers that roectodermal origin. Little is known about the genetic background of MCC. can differentiate chemosensitive versus chemoresistant ovarian tumors. In previous studies we observed nonrandom losses for 1p, 3p, 9p, 10q, Finally, we hope to better understand the biology of this poorly understood and 13q by LOH analysis and by comparative genomic hybridization tumor through the comprehensive analysis of gene expression. (CGH) of a large panel of MCC samples. Mutation analysis of candidate TSG genes in these regions provided no evidence for a pivotal role of C010.Identification of novel overexpressed genes in the Her- these genes in MCC development. Interestingly, the resulting CGH pattern 2 amplicon at 17q12 using CGH and cDNAmicroarrays of MCC closely resembled that observed in small cell lung carcinoma P. Kauraniemi1, O. Monni2, M. Brlund1, A. Kallioniemi2 (SCLC). Both are small cell tumor types sharing several clinical and 1Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, Universi- immunophenotypical characteristics. Until now, the mechanisms of car- ty of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 2Can- cinogenesis in both tumors types and the basis of their therapeutic respon- cer Genetics Branch, Human Genome Research Institute, National Insti- siveness remains poorly understood. In order to study the possible rela- tutes of Health; Bethesda, MD United States tionship between MCC and SCLC expression profiling of 8 MCC cell lines lopakau@uta.fi and 4 SCLC cell lines were performed on Clontech cDNA expression DNAamplifications have often been attributed to the effects of a single tar- arrays representing a total of 1891 different genes. In a preliminary analy- get gene, such as HER-2 at 17q12 or MYC at 8q24. However, many genes sis, the mean of all normalized MCC cell lines was compared to that of the have been implicated in some amplicons, such as AIB1, BTAK, ZNF217, SCLCs using 2-D scatter plots. Atotal of 138 genes encoding several tyro- NABC1 genes at 20q12-q13, or S6 kinase, PAT, RAD51C, TBX2 genes sine kinase, interleukin and other receptor associated-proteins, growth fac- (Cancer Res 60;5340-5344, 2000) at 17q23. Here, we used CGH and tors and cytoskeleton proteins were at least 5-fold higher differentially cDNAmicroarray technologies to undertake a comprehensive survey of expressed in MCC. In addition, 46 genes were at least 5-fold higher differ- genes involved in the 17q12 amplification in 11 breast cancer cell lines. We entially expressed in SCLC. Detailed data mining including hierarchical constructed a chromosomal region-specific cDNA microarray containing clustering and principal component analysis and verification of differential over 200 EST clones from the 17q12 region genes using real-time quantitative RT-PCR will be presented. (http;//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genemap99/). These cDNAmicroarrays were used in the analysis of both gene expression as well as copy number (CGH C013. A genome-wide screen in families from the Colorado microarrays) which enabled direct detection of amplified and overex- twin study of reading disability, with evidence that a quantita- pressed genes at 17q12. Comparison with actual copy numbers deter- tive trait locus on chromosome 2p influences multiple meas- mined by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) indicated >90% concor- ures of developmental dyslexia. dance with the CGH microarray data. Altogether, there were 23 transcripts C. Francks1, S. E. Fisher1, A. J. Marlow1, L. R. Cardon1, Y. Ishikawa- that showed both an increased copy number and expression in four or Brush2, I. L. MacPhie1, D. F. Williams1, J. Gayn3, R. K. Olson3, B. F. Pen- more cell lines. These included the HER-2, GRB7, MLN64, and MLN62 nington4, S. D. Smith5, J. C. DeFries3, A. P. Monaco1 genes that all have been previously implicated in such amplifications. In 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford; Oxford, addition, 6 other genes and 13 novel ESTs were also found to be involved. United Kingdom; 2Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health These results were verified using Northern and FISH analysis. In conclu- Science Center; San Antonio, TX United States; 3Institute for Behavioral sion, parallel analysis of gene copy number and expression levels by Genetics, University of Colorado; Boulder, CO United States; 4Department microarray analysis can be used to quickly identify all candidate target of Psychology, University of Denver; Denver, CO United States; 5Center for genes involved in a high-level genomic amplification. Human Molecular Genetics, Munroe Meyer Institute, University of Nebras- ka Medical Center; Omaha, NE United States C011.Lack of MSH2 and MSH6 characterizes endometrial but clyde@well.ox.ac.uk not colon carcinomas in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal Recent advances in high-throughput genotyping technology and quantita- cancer tive statistical methods have made possible a new flexible approach for R. Vierumki1, P. Schweizer2, A. L. Moisio1, S. A. Kuismanen1, J. Jiricny2, mapping genes involved in complex multivariate disorders. This involves P. Peltomki3, M. Nystrm-Lahti1 using marker data to infer genetic similarity of many sibling-pairs along the 1University of Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; 2University of Zrich; Zrich, lengths of their chromosomes and correlating this similarity with that of Switzerland; 3the Ohio State University; Columbus, OH United States their phenotypic scores, via approaches such as Haseman-Elston regres- reetta.vierumaki@helsinki.fi sion (HE) or partitioning of variance components (VC). We performed a Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome is charac- genome-wide search for loci that influence quantitative measures of terized by susceptibility to colorectal cancer (CRC) as well as a variety of dyslexia in a sample of 119 nuclear dizygotic twin-based families ascer- extracolonic cancers, notably endometrial cancer (EC). The incidence of tained through at least one reading-disabled proband. Our strongest evi- EC even exceeds that of CRC (60% and 54%, respectively) in female dence for linkage was to a locus on chromosome 2p13-16, influencing mutation carriers. The syndrome is linked to germline mutations in DNA phoneme awareness (p=0.0016 VC; p=0.0053 HE), word recognition mismatch repair genes, mainly MLH1 (~50%) or MSH2 (~40%). Moreover, (p=0.0069 VC; p=0.0006 HE) and orthographic coding (p=0.0058 VC; approximately 10% of mutations affect MSH6, and these families often dis- p=0.0221 HE). Suggestive evidence was also found for loci on chromo- play atypical hyperplastic lesions and carcinomas of the endometrium. somes 4, 13 and 18. The whole-genome approach enables us to judge the However, the biological basis of the organ involvement remains unknown. significance of individual loci against the broader genetic background of To clarify the role of MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 protein expression as pos- dyslexia susceptibility in our sample, in contrast to the majority of genetic sible factors contributing to the HNPCC tumor spectrum, we used immuno- studies of reading disability which have investigated individual loci in iso- histochemistry to compare the expression patterns of these proteins in 42 lation. Intriguingly, our chromosome 2p locus overlaps with the region ECs and 35 CRCs derived from either the same HNPCC patients or close showing the strongest evidence for linkage in a genome-wide screen of a relatives carrying the same mutations. Among MSH2 mutation carriers, single large Norwegian pedigree segregating a qualitatively defined MLH1 was expressed in both tumor types whereas MSH2 and in many dyslexic phenotype in an autosomal dominant fashion. Therefore the 2p cases also MSH6 were absent. Remarkably, among MLH1 mutation carri- locus influences dyslexia susceptibility in a manner which may be robust to ers, 54% of ECs (21/39) but none of CRCs (0/32) lacked the MSH2 and/or the major differences in ascertainment strategy, phenotypic testing and MSH6 protein, in addition to the lack of MLH1 protein expression. These statistical analysis that can exist between behavioural genetic studies. results demonstrate a marked difference between HNPCC related col- orectal and endometrial cancers, and suggest that the development of the C014. Systematic search for LD identifies a common haplo- latter tumors is selectively associated with the MSH2/MSH6 protein com- type conferring risk to Crohns disease. plex deficiency. J. D. Rioux1, M. J. Daly1, K. Lindblad-Toh1, M. S. Silverberg2, T. Del- monte1, K. Kocher1, E. J. Kulbokas1, K. Miller1, S. OLeary1, E. Winches- C012.Comparative Gene Expression Profiling Of Merkel Cell ter1, A. Bitton3, A. H. Steinhart2, R. S. McLeod2, Z. Cohen2, E. S. Lander1, Carcinoma And Small Cell Lung Carcinoma T. J. Hudson1,3, K. Siminovitch2 M. Van Gele1, H. Leonard2, A. Cook2, J. Vandesompele1, K. De Preter1, N. 1Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for Genome Research; Cambridge, MA Van Roy1, A. De Paepe1, P. Parsons3, G. Boyle3, F. Speleman1 United States; 2University of Toronto, Mount Sinai Hospital; Toronto, ON 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent; Ghent, Belgium; Canada; 3McGill University Health Center; Montreal, PQ Canada 2Queensland Radium Institute Laboratory; Brisbane, Australia; 3Queens- rioux@genome.wi.mit.edu land Institute of Medical Research; Brisbane, Australia Crohns disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are chronic inflammatory mireille.vangele@rug.ac.be bowel diseases (IBD) of unknown etiology. Our previous linkage studyConcurrent Sessions 79 identified two loci of genomewide significance; 5q31-q33 (IBD5) and 19p13 the complex phenomenon of imbalance. We used the Epistatic circler (IBD6) conferring susceptibility to CD and IBD, respectively. The IBD5 mouse as a model for vestibular dysfunction. This mutant exists in a pro- locus was of particular interest since the region contained a cluster of well- portion of the F2-generation from the cross between C57L/J and SWR/J characterized immunoregulatory cytokine genes including IL4, IL13, IL5, mice and shows circling behaviour. The results of our genome search indi- IL3, and CSF2. Traditionally, the pursuit of linkage results to identify causal cated that circling behaviour is caused by a single recessive gene derived genes for common disease has been faced with many challenges and has from SWR/J (the Ecs-gene, localised at chromosome 14) in combination met with limited success. This can be explained by the fact that, unlike with at least 3 different dominant genes derived from C57L/J (the Ecl- mendelian diseases, narrowing down the critical region will likely have to genes localised at chromosome 3, 4 and 13). This is the first dichotomous rely on a probabilistic linkage disequilibrium approach since recombinants genetic defect known to be caused by simultaneous mutations in 4 differ- are unreliable in the context of a complex trait - underlying mutations will ent genes. Morphological examination of the inner ears of circling animals be neither necessary nor sufficient to cause disease. Therefore, in pursu- revealed a bilateral malformation of the lateral semicircular canal. Since ing the evidence of linkage to IBD5, we adopted a systematic LD approach the absence of the semicircular canals is the most specific change in that would take full advantage of the resources made available by the patients with CHARGE association we hypothesised that the same genes Human Genome Project. Specifically, we examined the 18 cM under the may be responsible for the inner ear defect in the Epistatic circler as well IBD5 linkage peak with 64 microsatellite markers and identified a 5-mark- as in these patients. Mutation analysis of Otx2, a candidate gene localised er haplotype, extending over a region of approximately 500 kb, that is at mouse chromosome 14, is ongoing in Ecl-mice and in patients with associated with CD. We then performed single nucleotide polymorphism CHARGE association. (SNP) discovery throughout this region, and have genotyped over 200 of these SNPs. At least a dozen of these SNPs are shown to have significant C017. Two-locus inheritance of multiple sclerosis in a large TDTresults (pvalue < 0.0005 - 0.00001) and uniquely identify a common American pedigree. haplotype that confers susceptibility to CD. E. Vitale1, M. Devoto2, R. Sun1, C. Specchia3, K. Subramaian1, M. Roc- chi4, M. Schwalb1, D. Nathanson5, C. Rohowsky-Kochan1, S. Cook1 C015.Genome scan for quantitative traits involved in cardio- 1UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School; Newark, NJ United States; 2AI vascular disease in three independent populations. duPont Hospital for Children; Wilmington, DE United States; 3University of M. Beekman1,2, B. T. Heijmans3, N. Lakenberg3, E. Suchiman3, G. P. Genoa; Genoa, Italy; 4University of Bari; Bari, Italy; 5Sacred Heart Hospi- Vogler4, N. G. Martin5, J. B. Whitfield6, N. L. Pedersen7, C. Kluft1, G. J. B. tal; Allentown, PAUnited States van Ommen2, R. R. Frants2, P. de Knijff2, E. Slagboom3, D. I. Boomsma8 vitaleem@umdnj.edu 1TNO Prevention and Health, Gaubius Laboratories, Dept of Vascular and Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease of Connective Tissue Research; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Dept of Human the central nervous system with a probable immune mediated pathogene- Genetics Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands; sis. There is good evidence supporting the hypothesis that MS is deter- 3Dept of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The mined by both genetic and environmental factors, but these factors remain Netherlands; 4Center for Special Populations and Health, Pennsylvania largely undefined. The presence of a genetic component is strongly sup- State University; Pennsylvania, PA United States; 5Queensland Institute ported by the high rate of concordance in monozygotic (28%) versus dizy- for Medical Research; Brisbane, Australia; 6Royal Prince Alfred Hospital; gotic (5%) twins as well as familial recurrence risk. Linkage analysis and Sydney, Australia; 7Karolinska Institute, Institute of Environmental Medi- association studies have shown that susceptibility to MS is associated with cine, Division of Epidemiology; Stockholm, Sweden; 8Dept of Psychology, the human histocompatibility leukocyte antigens (HLA) class II region. In Free University of Amsterdam; Amsterdam, The Netherlands particular HLA-DR15 shows linkage disequilibrium with MS. There is how- M.Beekman@PG.TNO.nl ever as yet no convincing evidence of a common susceptibility locus. We The genetic basis of cardiovascular disease (CVD) is highly complex. One have identified a unique large pedigree of Pennsylvania Dutch extraction, strategy to dissect this is to study less complex intermediate phenotypes segregating MS and showing a dominant inheritance pattern compatible instead of clinical endpoints. For CVD, such intermediate phenotypes with an autosomal mode of inheritance. In addition MS in this family include blood pressure, plasma levels of cholesterol, apolipoproteins and appears to be fully penetrant. We have collected and phenotypically char- triglycerides, of which more than 50% of the variation is attributable to acterized 16 members from this family, seven of whom show the typical genetic factors. The aim of our study is to map and identify genes with a signs of MS using clinical and magnetic resonance scanning (MRI) criteria. major effect on these intermediate phenotypes in the general population. We have performed a wide-genome scan and found strong suggestive We are performing a genome-wide scan in population-based samples of linkage to 12p12 with a maximum LOD score of 2.71 conditional on pres- healthy Dutch, Swedish and Australian twin pairs. We designed 80 multi- ence of the HLA-DR15 haplotype. Our data are the first to suggest a two- plex PCR reactions randomly typing markers, with an average spacing of locus inheritance model for MS, requiring both the HLA-DR15 haplotype 18 cM, in sets of 3 to 5 chromosomes, thereby enabling statistical analy- and the additional disease locus on chromosome 12. ses of chromosomes during the search. Intermediate phenotypes for CVD were determined in all the twin pairs. We calculated multipoint maximum- C018. A voltage-gated ion channel is a major susceptibility likelihood scores using GENEHUNTER 2.0 on the data of the first scanned gene in genetically complex epilepsies chromosomes. Suggestive linkage was found with total cholesterol with a K. Haug1, A. Ramirez1, T. Sander2, J. Rebstock3, S. Horvath4, K. Hall- maximum LOD score of 2.8 in the Dutch twin population (N=199 pairs). In mann1, J. Dullinger1, B. Rau1, F. Haverkamp5, S. Beyenburg3, H. Schulz2, the Swedish (N=53 pairs) and Australian (N=263 pairs) twin populations C. Kubisch1, D. Janz2, C. E. Elger3, P. Propping1, A. Heils3 maximum LOD scores of respectively 1.6 and 1.0 were found in the same 1University Department of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany; 2University chromosomal region. These linkage results provide support for the pres- Hospital Charit; Berlin, Germany; 3University Department of Epileptology; ence of one locus contributing to variation of total cholesterol levels in Bonn, Germany; 4University of California; Los Angeles, CAUnited States; three independent populations. It is explored how the power and QTL 5University Department of Pediatrics; Bonn, Germany localisation are influenced by simultaneously analysing the populations k.haug@uni-bonn.de and by genotyping parents and additional markers. Human epilepsy is a common brain disorder, which affects about 2-3% of the population worldwide. Idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) accounts C016.Amouse model as a tool for the complex genetics of for 40% of all epilepsies and comprises seven clinically defined syn- vestibular dysfunction dromes, which are characterized by recurrent unprovoked seizures without K. Cryns1, M. Van Spaendonck2, K. Flothmann1, G. Mortier3, S. Lyonnet4, any detectable brain lesion. It is well established that common IGE sub- P. Van de Heyning2, J. Timmermans5, G. Van Camp1 types including childhood absence epilepsy (CAE), juvenile absence 1University of Antwerp (UIA); Antwerp, Belgium; 2University of Antwerp epilepsy (JAE), juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME), and generalized tonic- (UZA); Antwerp, Belgium; 3University Hospital Ghent; Ghent, Belgium; clonic seizures on awakening are inherited as genetically complex traits. 4Hopital Necker-Enfants-Malades; Paris, France; 5University of Antwerp Based on the results of a recent genome scan we identified a voltage (RUCA); Antwerp, Belgium gated ion channel as a major susceptibility gene for IGE. We found three kcryns@uia.ua.ac.be different mutations, which co-segregate with the disease status in three Vestibular dysfunction is commonly encountered in otological practice. In IGE-multiplex families. Furthermore, we detected a novel common coding most cases the aetiology remains obscure but the importance of genetic polymorphism, which is associated with IGE as shown by the highly signif- factors has been suggested on many occasions. Aproblem in the study of icant results of a case-control study (OR=3.49; 95% CI; 1.88-6.49) and a human genetic vestibular defects is the lack of large monogenic pedigrees family-based study. According to Khoury et al. (1993), we calculated an that contain a sufficient number of affected family members to perform link- attributable risk of 33% for the risk-variant. Thus, we identified the first age analysis. The use of animal models is an alternative to get insight in gene, in which both, rare mutations and a common sequence variation,80 Concurrent Sessions confer a range of varying susceptibility effects to genetically complex C021. The gene product underlying Opitz syndrome, MID1, epilepsies. Reference; Khoury, M.J., Beaty, T.H., Cohen, B.H. Fundamen- triggers ubiquitin-dependent degradation of phosphatase 2A tals of Genetic Epidemiology (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993). via binding to its regulatory alpha4 subunit S. Schweiger1, A. Trockenbacher2, V. Suckow1, J. Foerster3, J. Winter1, S. C019.Order of intron removal is a determinant of outcome of Krauss1, H. Ropers1, R. Schneider2 splice site mutations 1Max- Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2Institute P. H. Byers, C. D. Kuslich, U. Schwarze, E. Valiente for Biochemistry; Innsbruck, Austria; 3Department of Dermatologie, University of Washington; Seattle, WAUnited States Charite; Berlin, Germany pbyers@u.washington.edu schweige@molgen.mpg.de Mutations at splice sites account for up to 30% of identified mutations in Opitz syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by some human genes. Surprisingly, identical mutations in adjacent introns abnormal closure of ventral midline structures. We previously identified the [e.g., in the fibrillar collagen gene COL1A1, IVS47+1G->Aand IVS48+1G- gene responsible for X-linked Opitz syndrome, MID1, and showed that it >A produce a mild and a lethal form of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), codes for a microtubule-associated protein. We now describe a specific respectively] can have phenotypic outcomes at the opposite ends of the interaction of the MID1 protein with the a4 protein, a regulatory B-subunit spectrum. To understand some of the factors that determine the outcome of microtubule-associated phosphatase 2A. Disruption of the PP2A- of splice site mutations, we examined the role of intron splice order in a4/MID1 interaction, as seen in OS patients, results in a deficient ubiqui- almost a dozen splice site mutations in the COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, tin-conjugation and a consecutive accumulation of microtubule-associated and COL5A1 fibrillar collagen genes. We used intron-exon primer pairs to PP2A. We further show that the increased level of microtubule-associated amplify cDNAsynthesized from nuclear RNAfollowing treatment of cells PP2Acauses a marked imbalance of the phosphorylation/dephoposphory- for 5 to 40 minutes with Actinomycin D to stop new transcription, and lation pattern of microtubule-associated proteins. In summary, our data examined the products by gel electrophoresis (32P-end labeled) or after show that MID1 functions as a regulator of microtubule-associated protein separation on the ABI310 (end-labeled with fluorescent nucleotides) to phosphorylation and document that PP2A is regulated by ubiquitin- identify splice intermediates and to determine the relative splice order of up dependent degradation. In line with other microtubule-associated phos- to 6 introns surrounding a region of known mutation. We found that, in gen- phoproteins that play a role in genetic disorders, such as lissencephaly eral, if a donor site mutation occurred in an intron that was removed rapid- Type I and Morbus Alzheimer, increased dephosphorylation of micro- ly with respect to its upstream neighbor or an acceptor site mutation tubules associated proteins seems to be the key event in the pathogene- occurred in an intron that was removed rapidly with respect to a down- sis of Opitz BBB/G syndrome. stream neighbor, the outcome was an exon-skip. In contrast, if the same mutations occurred in introns that were spliced late with respect to their C022.Transcription of the FMR1 gene in Fragile X syndrome neighbors then cryptic splice sites were used or the intron remained. In F. Tassone1, R. J. Hagerman2, P. J. Hagerman3 some regions an intron was spliced along two pathways and the outcome 1UCHSC; Denver, CO United States; 2The Children Hospital; Denver, CO of mutations appeared to reflect the relative frequency of the use of the United States; 3UCHSC; Denevr, CO United States alternatives. Furthermore, unexpected stability of mRNAspecies that con- Flora.Tassone@uchsc.edu tained premature termination codons could be explained by removal of Fragile X syndrome is nearly always due to a large expansion of a CGG downstream introns prior to splicing of the intron that generated the new trinucleotide repeat in the CG-rich promoter region of the fragile X mental termination codon. These results indicate that splice order is an important retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Expansion into the full mutation range (> 200 factor in predicting outcome of splice site mutations. Collagen genes tend repeats) is often associated with hypermethylation and transcriptional to have relatively small introns and the role of splice order in predicting out- silencing of the FMR1 gene. In the conventional model for fragile X, clini- come of mutations in other genes is uncertain but warrants close investi- cal involvement arises as a consequence of silencing of the FMR1 gene, gation. with the attendant loss of FMR1 protein (FMRP). However, it has recently been demonstrated that most males with premutation alleles, or with C020. Human L1 retrotransposition in germ cells of trans- unmethylated full mutation alleles, have FMR1 mRNAlevels that are high- genic mice er than normal, despite reduced levels of FMRP. Here we present an E. M. Ostertag1, R. J. DeBerardinis1, G. Gerton2, H. H. Kazazian, Jr.1 extension of these observations using quantitative (fluorescent) RT-PCR 1Dept. of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; on larger sample populations. We also demonstrate that the levels of Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 2Dept. of Ob.-Gyn., University of Pennsyl- FMR1 mRNAare elevated in females with premutation alleles although vania School of Medicine; Philadelphia, PAUnited States more varied than in the males, and are attenuated in a manner that is con- ostertag@mail.med.upenn.edu sistent with the fraction of normal alleles that are active in any given indi- L1 retrotransposons are mobile DNAelements that can cause human dis- vidual. Finally, we also observed that a fraction of males with full mutation ease by inserting into genes. We created a transgenic mouse model of alleles that are resistant to cleavage by methylation-sensitive enzymes retrotransposition to elucidate L1 biology and to estimate the frequency of produce FMR1 mRNA, with some mRNAlevels approaching those found L1-induced mutagenesis. Our transgenes contain an active human L1 ele- in normal individuals suggesting that the assumed relationship between ment tagged with an EGFPretrotransposition cassette that is under the enzyme-resistance and FMR1 gene silencing may not be generally valid. control of either the endogenous human L1 promoter or the endogenous Although the mechanisms leading to increased FMR1 mRNAlevels are not promoter plus the mouse RNA polymerase II large subunit promoter yet understood, the presence of FMRPdeficits of varying extents, in the (pPolII). Our negative control transgenic lines contain an L1 with two mis- presence of elevated mRNAlevels, strongly suggests that reduced effi- sense mutations known to abolish retrotransposition. Using RT-PCR to ciency of translation is mechanistically important. Adefect in translation detect EGFP-tagged L1 transcripts, we demonstrated that the human L1 had been observed in the full mutation range and our own observations transgene driven by its endogenous promoter was expressed at a high imply that a translational impairment may occur within the premutation level in the mouse testis and ovary but at a very low or undetectable level range; thus the high levels of FMR1 mRNAcould represent a response to in several somatic tissues, while addition of pPolII resulted in higher the protein deficit. Although models in which FMRPlevel (or level of func- expression levels in somatic tissues. RT-PCR performed on pachytene tion) modulates transcriptional activity remain viable, other explanations for spermatocytes, round spermatids, and condensing spermatids demon- the elevated message levels, including direct (cis) effects of the CGG ele- strated expression from both promoters in these cells. Importantly, we ment on transcription, must also be considered. observed retrotransposition in the fractionated male germ cells of several lines by RT-PCR and PCR analysis. The data suggest a rate of retrotrans- C023.Amouse model for primary ciliary dyskinesia position of up to 1 in 1000 sperm. We also detected individual sperm that J. Neesen1, M. Ochs2, A. Schmiedl2, C. Mller1, T. Nlein3, I. Adham1, W. contained a retrotransposition event by visualization of the EGFPmarker. Engel1 We did not detect retrotransposition in negative control lines by any 1Institute of Human Genetics; Gttingen, Germany; 2Centre of Anatomy; means. Future work to select and isolate sperm containing new retrotrans- Gttingen, Germany; 3Childrens Hospital; Bochum, Germany position events may offer a novel random mutagenesis system in mouse, jneesen@gwdg.de obviating the requirement for ES cell-based strategies. Impaired ciliary and flagellar functions resulting in male infertility and recur- rent respiratory tract infections are found in patients suffering from primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). In most cases, axonemal defects were present, i.e. PCD patients often lack inner and/or outer dynein arms in their sperm tails and cilia, supporting the hypothesis that mutations in dynein genes may cause PCD. However, until now it is unclear if mutations in dyneinConcurrent Sessions 81 heavy chain genes are responsible for impaired flagellar and ciliary motili- tivation. This did not differ from the frequency in a population of control ty in mammals. To elucidate the role of the Mouse Dynein Heavy Chain 7 females of similar age (21%). Females with a skewed X inactivation pat- (MDHC7) gene which encodes a component of the inner dynein arm, we tern may be more susceptible to develop breast cancer due to an X-linked have generated mice lacking this dynein heavy chain isoform. Both low penetrance susceptibility allele that is affected by the X inactivation MDHC7+/- and MDHC7-/- mice are viable and show no malformations, pattern. however, homozygous males produce no offspring. In comparison to MDHC7+/- mice the spermatozoa of MDHC7-/- mice revealed a dramatic C026.Agenome-wide scan for linkage in Finnish hereditary reduced straight line velocity and straight forward movement, resulting in prostate cancer families identifies chromosome 11 and other the inability of MDHC7 deficient sperm to move from the uterus into the putative regions of interest oviduct. Additionally, we measured the beat frequency of tracheal cilia and J. Schleutker1, E. Gillanders2, A. Baffoe-Bonnie3, T. Kainu2, M. Jones2, C. observed a decrease of the beat frequency of approximately 50% in Markey2, M. Matikainen1, P. Koivisto1, T. Tammela4, J. Bailey-Wilson5, J. MDHC7-/- mice. The reduction in both ciliary and flagellar motility is not Trent2, O. Kallioniemi2 correlated with any gross defects in the axonemal structure. The pheno- 1Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, University of Tampere and Tampere Uni- type of MDHC7-/- mice is similar to that observed in some patients suffer- versity Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 2Cancer Genetics Branch, NHGRI, ing from primary ciliary dyskinesia, and our data strongly suggest that this NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; 3IDRB, NHGRI, NIH and Fox Chase disease could in some patients be due to mutations in the homologous Cancer Center; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 4Division of Urology, Tam- human gene DNAH1 (HDHC7). pere University Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 5Inherited Disease Research Branch, NHGRI, NIH; Baltimore, MD United States C024.Molecular dissection of the contribution of single gene johanna.schleutker@uta.fi overexpression to the change in gene expression profile in Several predisposition loci for hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) have been the mouse model of Down syndrome. suggested (Smith et al., 1996, Berthon et al., 1998, Xu et al., 1998, Gibbs R. Chrast1, R. Lyle1, C. Gehrig1, H. Scott2, S. E. Antonarakis1 et al. 1999, Berry et al., 2000). Homogeneous populations, such as that of 1Division of Medical Genetics, CMU; Geneva, Switzerland; 2The Walter Finland, may help to reduce genetic heterogeneity that usually complicates and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Melbourne, Australia linkage analysis of complex diseases. Here, we report results of a genome- chrast@pop.salk.edu wide linkage scan in 13 multiplex Finnish HPC families, selected on the Down Syndrome (DS) or trisomy 21 is the most common autosomal aneu- basis of linkage informativeness from a total of 292 Finnish families ploidy with a complex clinical phenotype affecting many organs and tis- (Schleutker et al. 2000). On average, 4 affecteds were genotyped per fam- sues, the only invariant phenotype being mental retardation. Most DS phe- ily (range 2-6), with a mean age of 68.9 years (range 44-99 years) at diag- notypes are probably due to an extra copy of a set of normal but dosage- nosis. Altogether, 413 markers were analyzed with an ABI377 capillary sensitive genes on human chromosome 21 (HC21). The recently complet- sequencer. Two-point and multipoint LOD scores were calculated for all ed sequencing of HC21 revealed that it contains ~225 genes, however, it autosomes with FASTLINK, Genehunter and Genehunter-Plus. The results remains to be defined which are dosage sensitive. HC21 is largely syntenic showed three chromosomal sites with two-point LOD scores greater than with a region of mouse chromosome 16 and thus a partial trisomy 16, 1.5. The most promising area was at 11q, with a peak two-point LOD score Ts65Dn, acts as a model of DS and shares many of the DS phenotypes. of 2.85 (theta = 0.0), Genehunter HLOD of 3.28 (theta = 0.0) and NPL We have used Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) and filter arrays HLOD of 2.06 (p-value = 0.0098), all based on affected only analyses. Lit- containing ~25,000 mouse genes and ESTs to analyse changes in gene tle, if any evidence for linkage was found for previously discovered candi- expression in whole brains of Ts65Dn mice. Both analyses revealed com- date HPC-loci, such as HPC1, PCAP, CAPB and HPC20. The results sug- plex changes in gene expression. Several lines of evidence suggest that gest a novel chromosomal region at 11q with suggestive evidence of link- disregulation of the signal transduction cascades of Sim2 and Dyrk age in Finnish HPC families, and a few other regions that also deserve fur- (Mnbh), a transcription factor and kinase respectively, are likely to be ther study. Chromosome 11 linkage has previously been reported in involved in development of DS phenotypes. To help dissect the contribu- prostate cancer (Gibbs et al., 2000), but not at 11q as found in this study. tion of the Sim2 and Dyrk to the Ts65Dn expression pattern, we have over- expressed their cDNAs in cell culture using adenoviral infection and C027. Functional analysis of pathogenic exon skipping in analysed induced changes in gene expression using mouse filter arrays. A MLH1 gene unmask phenocopies in HNPCC combination of these in vivo (Ts65Dn) and in vitro (Sim2 and Dyrk aden- A. Stella1, N. Resta1, S. M. Lipkin2, H. T. Lynch3, P. Watson3, Q. Wang4, F. oviruses) data compared to controls should allow us to begin to decipher Susca1, I. Miccolis1, B. Liu4, G. Guanti1 the molecular cascades leading from gene triplication to the complex DS 1Sez. Genetica Medica DIMIMPPoliclinico Universit di Bari; Bari, Italy; phenotype. 2Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch-NIH; Bethesda, DC United States; 3Department of Preventive Medicine, Creighton University School C025. High Frequency Of Skewed X Inactivation In Young of Medicine; Omaha, NE United States; 4Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Uni- Breast Cancer Patients versity of Pittsburgh; Pittsburgh, PAUnited States M. Kristiansen1, A. Langerd2, G. P. Knudsen3, K. Calzone4, B. L. alexst@medgene.uniba.it Weber4, A. L. Brresen-Dale5, K. H. rstavik3 Germline mutations in mismatch repair genes MSH2and MLH1occur in 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo; Oslo, Norway; 2Depart- the majority of HNPCC families. One of the common mechanisms of these ment of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium mutations disrupt splicing of MLH1and MSH2mRNA. The disruption cre- Hospital; Oslo, Norway; 3Department of Medical Genetics, National Hospi- ates aberrant mRNAs lacking specific coding exons (referred to here as tal; Oslo, Norway; 4Cancer Centre, University of Pennsylvania; Philadel- exon skipping). Analysis of exon skipping in these genes is complicated by phia, United States; 5Institute for Laboratory Medicine, University of Oslo; the fact that the identical aberrant mRNAtranscripts also occur with low Oslo, Norway frequency in genotipically normal subjects. These observations make it dif- marianne.kristiansen@ioks.uio.no ficult to interpret putative MLH1and MSH2splicing mutations in members In females one of the two X chromosomes is inactivated in early embryon- of HNPCC families with the high specificity necessary for molecular diag- ic life, thus making females mosaics for two cell lines. Askewed X inacti- nosis. Here, we report a causative exon skipping of MLH1that underlies vation is a deviation from a 50;50 distribution of these two cell lines. the pathogenesis in three unrelated HNPCC families. Sequencing studies Patients with invasive ovarian cancer were recently shown to have a high- of RT-PCR products showed an aberrant MLH1mRNAtranscript lacking er frequency of skewed X inactivation pattern compared to patients with exon 12 in all but two of the affected family members. The aberrant tran- borderline cancer and healthy controls, indicating that skewed X inactiva- script produced a truncated MLH1protein of 353 amino acids as result of tion is a predisposing factor for the development of invasive ovarian can- frame shift and premature termination. When tumor samples from the two cer. We have analysed X inactivation pattern in peripheral blood from 181 affected individuals without exon skipping were examined for genomic patients with sporadic breast cancer aged 27-90 years. X inactivation was instability and protein expression, they showed a RER- phenotype and nor- classified as skewed when 90% or more of the peripheral blood cells pref- mal MLH1 expression. In addition linkage analysis which previously erentially used one X-chromosome. Ten per cent of the patients had a demonstrated no linkage with chromosome 3, showed a lod score above 3 skewed X inactivation. Since older females have a higher frequency of when these two individuals were excluded from the analysis. Therefore a skewed X inactivation in peripheral blood cells than young females, young SSCP analysis of the genomic region including exon 12 and proximal and old patients were analysed separately. The frequency of skewed X intronic sequences was performed on PCR amplified products. All of the inactivation in 34 young patients (27-45 years) was significantly higher patients with exon 12 skipping presented a variant conformer . The same than in blood donors of the same age group (12% and 2% respectively, PCR products were cloned in pSPL3 plasmid and used in an in vitro splic- p=0.03). Among 34 old patients (73-90 years), 15% had a skewed X inac- ing system. Introduction of exon 12 genomic sequences from the mutant,82 Concurrent Sessions but not the wildtype allele of MLH1, disrupted normal exon splicing in an in by the model fit observed incidence among first-degree relatives. When the vitro exon trapping system. The sequencing of both the PCR products restriction of Mendelian transmission was lifted, transmission probabilities showing variant conformers and clones generating abnormal splicing still took Mendelian values, suggesting the recessive model is robust. Het- demonstrated the presence of an AAG to TAG nonsense mutation at codon erogeneity was detected between the study families and 120 BRCA1/2 461 of exon 12. These results showed beyond any reasonable doubt that; families from the same community-based cohort, implying that the a) exon skipping observed in the three HNPCC families is pathogenic and observed recessive effect is not due to undetected BRCA1/2 mutations. is the consequence of a nonsense genomic mutation in the exon 12; b) The relatively small family sizes and large number of cancers in relatives phenocopies in HNPCC are possible and molecular typing of the tumors may bias allele frequency and penetrance estimates upwards. To evaluate arising in these families should be performed in order to correctly evaluate this, re-analysis will be undertaken on families of all 4,700 probands who the genetic risk for each family member. tested negative for BRCAfounder mutations. If the recessive model is val- This work was supported by grants from AIRC and MURST Cofin98 idated in the larger data set, it can serve as the basis for parametric link- age studies to identify such a gene. C028. Association of two missense substitutions in HPC2/ELAC2 gene with prostate cancer C030. Linkage disequilibrium in chromosome 22q13 in east- A. Rkman1, N. Mononen1, T. Ikonen2, P. A. Koivisto1, M. P. Matikainen1, ern Finnish breast cancer cases T. L. J. Tammela3, O. P. Kallioniemi1, J. Schleutker1 J. M. Hartikainen1,2, H. Kujala2, V. Kataja3, V. Kosma4, M. Eskelinen5, A. 1Lab. Cancer Genetics, Inst. Medical Technology, University of Tampere Mannermaa2 and Tampere University Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 2Lab.Cancer Genet- 1Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, United ics, Inst. Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere Univer- Kingdom; 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Kuopio University Hospital; sity Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 3Division of Urology, Tampere University Kuopio, Finland; 3Deparment of Oncology, University of Kuopio; Kuopio, Hospital; Tampere, Finland Finland; 4Department of Pathology, University of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; loanro@uta.fi 5Department of Surgery, University of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland Several susceptibility loci, but few genes, have been reported for human jaana@srl.cam.ac.uk prostate cancer. Recently, Rebbeck et al. (AJHG, 67;1014, 2000) reported About 5 % of all cases of breast cancer are thought to be due to high-risk an association of two missense variants (S217L and A541T) in the susceptibility genes (BRCA1/2). However, these genes explain only about HPC2/ELAC2 gene (at 17p) with prostate cancer. They showed an 15 % of the familial risk of breast cancer. Other loci for breast cancer sus- increased risk of prostate cancer for carriers of the Leu217/Thr541 geno- ceptibility have been identified, but these are not important causes of famil- type (OR 2.37, CI 95% 1.06-5.29) as compared with the Ser217/Ala541 ial breast cancer. Therefore, it is likely that low-penetrance genes for genotype. Here, we explored the significance of HPC2/ELAC2 gene in breast cancer susceptibility in the general population remain to be identi- prostate cancer causation in the genetically homogenous Finnish popula- fied. In several studies chromosome 22q has been suggested as a possi- tion. The frequency of HPC2/ELAC2 gene missense variants was deter- ble location for a tumour suppressor gene. We are studying chromosome mined by RFLPin 154 unselected prostate cancer patients from the Tam- 22 to find further evidence for a breast cancer susceptibility/risk gene and pere University Hospital. The results were compared with population allele therefore screened it for linkage disequilibrium (LD) using 18 polymorphic frequencies determined from 169 blood donors from the same hospital. microsatellites spaced by 0.1-2 Mb. We used a set of 49 cases and 50 con- The results showed no increased risk of prostate cancer among the trols from the late-settlement area of eastern Finland. The cases and con- Leu217/Thr541 genotype carriers (OR 0.52, CI 95% 0.23-1.18, p=0.15). trols were matched for age and long-term area-of-residence and they did The same was true for the two variants analyzed separately. The highest not have evident family history of cancer. Significance levels for compar- risk seen was for the genotype S217/L217, which had a tendency towards isons between the allele frequencies of the cases and controls were com- increased risk as compared to genotype S217/S217 (OR=1.15, CI 95% puted by performing chi-squared tests using SPSS (Fishers exact test). A 0.72-1.82, p=0.64). In conclusion, current evidence does not support a significant (<0.05) p-value was detected with 4 markers within a region of prominent role for the two variants of the HPC2/ELAC2 in prostate cancer 1.1 Mb in 22q13. Our results support the possible location of a breast can- causation in the Finnish population. Extension of these studies to include cer risk gene in chromosome 22q13, although suggesting a slightly more up to 430 unselected prostate cancer cases, 100 familial cases, 230 centromeric region than previous studies. benign prostatic hyperplasia cases and 500 population controls are in progress. C031.FISH; quality control in diagnostic laboratories. O. Bartsch1,2 C029.Segregation Analysis of 236 Families of Breast Cancer 1Institut fr Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultt, Technische Univer- Cases without BRCA1/2 Mutations Provides Statistical Evi- sitt Dresden; Dresden, Germany; 2Sektion Molekulare Zytogenetik, Kom- dence for a Recessive Breast Cancer Susceptibility Gene with mission fr zytogenetische Qualittssicherung, Berufsverband Medizinis- High Penetrance. che Genetik; Dresden, Germany D. J. Kaufman1, J. P. Struewing2, T. H. Beaty3 obartsch@rcs.urz.tu-dresden.de 1National Cancer Institute, NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; 2National More than 90 private, university-based or other cytogenetic laboratories in Cancer Institute, NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; 3Johns Hopkins Uni- Germany, Austria and Switzerland (some 80% of institutions) have includ- versity School of Public Health; Baltimore, MD United States ed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) into their diagnostic services. kaufmand@mail.nih.gov To evaluate the quality of cytogenetic testing by FISH, 27, 31, 35 and 29 Between 5 and 10 percent of breast cancer is due to inherited cancer sus- laboratories from Germany, Austria and Switzerland participated in quality ceptibility genes. Mutations in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for assessment (QA) trials in April 1998, February 1999, September 1999 and two-thirds of these hereditary breast cancer cases leaving one-third May 2000, respectively. One or two samples (metaphase spreads from unlinked. Apositive family history remains a risk factor for the disease in blood, amniotic fluid or bone marrow) carrying either a normal karyotype, women without BRCA1/2 mutations, suggesting that additional susceptibil- a deletion (22q11, 7q11.23 or 15q11-q12) or a supernumerary marker chro- ity genes exist. Using segregation analysis, families of cases without mosome were sent with the request to test them using routine protocols. BRCA1/2 mutations were studied for statistical evidence of another major Results were reviewed by committees of experts from participating labora- breast cancer gene. Three founder mutations account for 85% of BRCA1/2 tories. Reviewing a diagnostic FISH test is a complex process - the test mutations in Ashkenazi Jews. Age-of-onset of breast cancer was analyzed includes the generation of raw data, correct interpretation of data, the time- in 236 families of Jewish cases from an earlier, community-based study ly delivery of a concise written report, and should be done only with genet- who do not carry the founder mutations. Of 602 female first-degree rela- ic counselling available. In each trial large numbers of mistakes ranging tives, 78 had breast cancer. Pedigrees with any ovarian cancer cases from inconsistencies in nomenclature (ISCN 1995) to unacceptable errors (n=17) were excluded because they are more likely to carry undetected which could have serious consequences were identified. As a positive con- BRCA1 mutations. In the segregation analysis, extended logistic regres- sequence of the QAscheme, many laboratories improved their procedures sion evaluated the likelihood of various genetic and non-genetic models. and reports over the study period. To improve the feed-back to laborato- Sporadic (p=.004), environmental (p=.04), arbitrary and decreasing ries, reviews were last performed using an assessment sheet and scoring Mendelian genetic models (p=.0004 and 0.04 respectively) fit the family points. Some participants requested specimens of rare aberrations (e.g. data poorly and were rejected. A Mendelian recessive model fit better deletion of the CBPgene on 16p). Results demonstrate that FISH QAcon- (p=0.16) than dominant (p=.06) and co-dominant models (p=.08) though tributes to the efficacy and safety of cytogenetic testing and increases the these three could not be rejected. The recessive model predicted that 4% awareness for good laboratory practice. AEuropean concerted action for of women would carry the high-risk genotype, and 85% of them would quality improvement in FISH diagnosis may further benefit services. develop breast cancer by age 70. Cumulative incidence curves predictedConcurrent Sessions 83 C032.Asubmicroscopic chromosome inversion as the basis extremely useful investigation as it appears to be one of the most common for two macroscopic chromosome rearrangements. causes of idiopathic mental retardation. The new MAPH telomeric assay S. Giglio1, V. Calvari1, G. Gimelli2, T. Neumann3, L. Voullaire4, K. W. Bro- offers a new, fast and cost effective diagnostic tool for the investigation of man5, D. H. Ledbetter6, O. Zuffardi7 mental retardation, the characterization of known chromosomal abnormal- 1University; Pavia, Italy; 2Ospedale Gaslini; Genova, Italy; 3University; ities, spontaneous recurrent miscarriages, infertility, hematological malig- Muenster, Germany; 4Murdoch Children Research Institute; Parkville, Aus- nancies, preimplantation genetic diagnosis, and other fields of clinical and tralia; 5J. Hopkins School of Public Health; Baltimore, MD United States; research interests. 6University of Chicago; Chicago, IL United States; 7University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy C034.Loss of the Ychromosomal PAR2-region in four famil- giglios@unipv.it ial cases of satellited Ychromosomes (Yqs) Occurrence of de novo chromosome rearrangements has been considered S. Rttger1, H. Khl1, H. Heilbronner2, H. Enders3, W. Schempp1 a stochastic event. Alternatively, one could postulate that specific genomic 1Institut fr Humangenetik und Anthropologie; Freiburg, Germany; characteristics might predispose normal chromosomes to undergo unequal 2Frauenklinik Berg, Institut fr Klinische Genetik; Stuttgart, Germany; crossovers leading to chromosome structural abnormalities. This hypothe- 3Institut fr Humangenetik und Anthropologie; Tbingen, Germany sis is supported by the finding that the Xp/Yp translocation responsible for roettger@ukl.uni-freiburg.de XX males and XY females preferentially occurs on the Y chromosomes Applying flourescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of various Ychromoso- having the Yp submicroscopic inversion that was considered a neutral mal DNAprobes to four familial cases of human Yqs we could demonstrate polymorphism (Jobling et al, Current Biology 1998, 8;1391-1394). The that the formation of Yqs must have occured via reciprocal translocation inversion, placing the PRKYgene in the same orientation as the homolo- involving the short arm of an acrocentric autosome and the heterochro- gous PRKX gene in Xp23.3, allows the occurrence of PRKY/PRKX recom- matin of the long arm of the Ychromosome (Yqh). Breakpoints map within bination and, thus, to the transposition of SRYfrom the Yto the X chro- Yqh and the proximal short arm of an acrocentric autosome resulting in the mosome. In fact, it has been demonstrated that the PRKY/PRKX recombi- gain of a nucleolus organizer region (NOR) including the telomere repeat nation accounts for the most common class of XX males and a portion of (TTAGGG)n and the loss of the pseudoautosomal region 2 (PAR2) at the XYfemales. Due to the frequency of submicroscopic genomic inversions long arm of the recipient Ychromosome. In no case the reciprocal product and duplications, it seems likely that other chromosome rearrangements of an acrocentric autosome with loss of the NOR and gain of PAR2 could arise in similar way. We demonstrate, by experimental and in silico data, be detected. Using the 15p-specific classical satellite-III probe D15Z1 only that unequal crossovers between two olfactory receptors (OR) gene clus- for two of our four Yqs probands it could be shown that the satellited mate- ters located in 8p23 at a distance of about 5 Mb, are responsible for the rial originated from the short arm of chromosome 15. In contrast to the loss formation of two recurrent chromosome abnormalities. The first is the of PAR2 in Yqs chromosomes, another Y chromosomal variant (Yqh-) inverted duplication of 8p, inv dup(8p), associated with a distinct pheno- showing deletion of long-arm heterochromatin in Yq12 has retained PAR2 type and severe mental retardation. The second is a supernumerary mark- referring to an interstitial deletion of Yq heterochromatin in such deleted Y er neocentromeric chromosome, +der(8)(8p23.1pter), that is also a recur- chromosomes. rent rearrangement and is associated with minor anomalies. We demon- strate that it is the reciprocal product of the inv dup(8p), thus being always C035. Interphase-FISH for detection of translocations affect- mediated by the two 8p-OR gene clusters. Since these rearrangements ing the HOX11/TCL3-locus in 10q24 originate consistently in maternal meiosis (Floridia et al, Am J Hum Genet S. Gesk1, C. Kahl1, L. Harder1, J. Harbott2, L. French3, P. Deloukas3, W. 1996, 58; 785-796; Giglio et al, submitted), we investigated the maternal Grote1, B. Schlegelberger1, R. Siebert1 chromosomes 8 in nine inv dup(8p) mothers and in one +der(8) mother 1Department of Human Genetics; Kiel, Germany; 2Department of Pedi- with probes included between the two 8p-OR gene clusters. We found that atrics; Gieen, Germany; 3Sanger Centre; Hinxton, United Kingdom all the mothers were heterozygous for an 8p submicroscopic inversion. In gesk@medgen.uni-kiel.de a population of European descent, the inversion was found in 19 of 72 con- The translocation t(10;14)(q24;q11) and its variant t(7;10)(q35;q24), which trols (26%) in a heterozygous state and 9 (12.5%) in a homozygous state. are recurrent in acute T-cell leukemia, lead to activation of the This inversion may cause susceptibility to unequal recombination leading HOX11/TCL3-gene in chromosomal region 10q24 by juxtaposing this gene to the formation of the inv dup(8p) or to its reciprocal product, the +der(8p). to one of the T-cell-receptor loci. In the present study, we established a Two observations suggest that heterozygous females have only a low risk diagnostic assay for detecting these translocations by interphase fluores- to have children with inv dup(8p); 1) heterozygotes are common in the pop- cence in situ hybridization (FISH). BAC clones flanking the HOX11/TCL3- ulation whereas the rearrangement is rare and 2) none of the more then 50 locus were obtained from a fingerprinted BAC-contig of chromosomal inv dup(8p) subjects reported to date have sibs with the same rearrange- region 10q24. BAC clones located proximal and distal of the HOX11/TCL3- ment. These data demonstrate that occurrence of de novo chromosome locus were differently labeled and applied to interphase-FISH in seven nor- rearrangements may not be a stochastic event but is rather due to specif- mal controls and eight T-cell neoplasms with t(10;14)(q24;q11) or ic genomic polymorphisms and indicate the possibility to develop a profile t(7;10)(q35;q24). In over 1600 nuclei of controls, a considerable split of the individual risk for having children with chromosome rearrangements. defined as separation of each one signal for the proximal and distal probe by more than three times the signal diameter was observed in only one C033.Screening for subtelomeric chromosome abnormalities cell. In contrast, all T-cell neoplasms with t(10;14) or t(7;10) contained at in children with idiopathic mental retardation using the multi- least 47% of nuclei with a signal split indicating a breakpoint in the probe telomere FISH and the new MAPH telomeric assays HOX11/TCL3-locus. Thus, the established double-color FISH approach P. C. Patsalis1, J. A. L. Armour2, J. Flint3, C. A. Sismani1 provides a new reliable and routinely applicable tool for diagnosing break- 1Department of Cytogenetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and points in the HOX11/TCL3-locus. Supported by Deutsche Krebshilfe Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham; Nottingham, United Kingdom; 3Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Rad- C036. Chromosomal Aberrations In Early Stage-bilharzial cliffe Hospital; Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom Bladder Cancer As Detected By Fluorescence In Situ patsalis@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy Hybridization Subtelomeric chromosomal abnormalities are emerging as an important M. S. Aly1, H. M. Khaled2 cause of human genetic diseases. The scopes of this investigation were to 1Faculty of Science, Cairo University (Beni Suef branch); Cairo, Egypt; screen a selected group of children with idiopathic mental retardation for 2National Cancer Institute, Cairo University; Cairo, Egypt subtelomeric anomalies using the multiprobe telomeric FISH method and magdyaly@yahoo.com to develop and test in the same group of patients a new assay, the MAPH In several developing nations in Africa and the Middle East, most predom- telomeric assay. The new MAPH telomeric assay used the recently pub- inantly in Egypt, bladder cancer is one of the most common types of malig- lished MAPH methodology that permits the measurement of locus copy nancy in both men and women. It has several unique clinical, epidemio- number by hybridization and a specifically designed set of probes located logical, and histological characteristics that suggest that it is a distinct enti- at the end of human chromosomes. This study showed that subtle chro- ty from bladder cancer in western countries. Genetic alterations in bil- mosomal abnormalities occurred with a frequency of 1.43% (1 out of 70; harzial related bladder cancer have been studied infrequently, and spe- 95% confidence interval 0.5-6.6%) in the selected group of patients using cially in the advanced sittings i.e. T3 and T4 stages. The objective of this the multiprobe telomeric FISH method. The new MAPH telomeric assay study is to extend establishing the base line cytogentic profile of this type confirmed the same results in all normal and abnormal samples. Even of malignancy to early T1 and T2 stages. For this purpose fluorescence in though the prevalence of 1.43% is among the lowest found, this study situ hybridization was applied to interphase nuclei of frozen-stored sam- demonstrated that screening for subtelomeric rearrangements is an ples with biotinylated repetitive DNAprobes specific for all chromosomes84 Concurrent Sessions to detect numerical chromosome changes. Thirty-five Egyptian patients C038.The Disclosure of Genetic Information to Family Mem- with bladder cancer were included in this study. Eleven cases had squa- bers mous cell carcinoma, 24 with transitional cell carcinoma. Their median age A. J. Clarke1, K. Featherstone2, P. Atkinson3 was 56 years (range 20 - 82 years). They were 27 males and 8 females 1University of Wales College of Medicine; Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom; with a male-female ratio of 3.3;1. Grade I tumors were diagnosed in 11 2Cardiff University; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 3Cardiff University; Cardiff, cases, whereas 21 and 3 cases had grade II and III lesions, respectively. Wales, United Kingdom Data on pathologic disease stage were available for 34 cases. P1 lesions clarkeaj@cardiff.ac.uk were encountered in 24 and P2 for 10 cases. Fluorescence in situ Genetic information about one individual may be of interest to other family hybridization was successful in all cases studied. Most of the probes dis- members. When such information is relevant and important, genetic coun- played a diploid spot distribution. Six out of 24 TCC cases had diploid chro- selling clients are encouraged to make it available to these others. If pro- mosome count with all the probes. Numerical chromosome aberrations fessionals identify blocks to communication within families, they may be were detected in 18 cases (75%). In 12 cases, a loss of chromosome 9 able to help individuals overcome them. Anumber of national professional was observed. In three cases, an additional loss of chromosome 17 was bodies and ethics panels have announced that professionals should be detected. One case demonstrated a loss of chromosome 10, whereas willing to provide family members with such information if their relatives another two cases showed a gain of chromosome 7, next to a loss of chro- persist in refusing to do so and if the possible harm resulting from non-dis- mosome 9. Loss of chromosome Ywas observed in 9 of the 27 male cases closure is thought to outweigh the harm of forced disclosure, i.e. of break- studied (33.3%), from which one case as the only abnormality observed ing confidentiality. We wish to challenge the framework within which such whereas 4 cases were detected next to loss of chromosome 9, one case arguments are presented on several grounds. First, the concept of genet- with gain of chromosome 7. Five cases showed loss of chromosome 19 ic harm depends upon an inadequate conception of individual autonomy. whereas gain of chromosome 4 was detected in 2 cases. Two out of 11 Secondly, the debate must be set within the context of family relationships, samples of SCC had normal diploid chromosome count with all the probes including who counts as family, patterns of communication, and under- used. In 4 out of 11 cases (36.4%) underrepresentation of chromosome 9, standings of inheritance and of practical kinship obligations. Our work on compared with the other chromosomes, were detected. An additional loss communication practices with families in South Wales demonstrates that of chromosome 17 and gain of chromosome 7, next to loss of chromosome the understanding of disclosure can be contested, and issues of disclo- 9, was detected in three cases. One case showed loss chromosome 17 as sure may be influenced by ideas of the personal vulnerability of particular the only numerical aberration. Loss of the Ychromosome was detected in individuals. Both gender differences and practical barriers may also oper- 3 cases of which one case was with gain of chromosome 7 and one case ate. We conclude that public policies or professional guidelines that pro- with loss of chromosome 19. mote the breaking of confidentiality or forced disclosure should be avoid- ed. We need a much clearer understanding of current disclosure practices C037.Patients Views on Ethical Issues; Surveys in USA, Ger- within families before deciding upon such policy questions. many, France D. C. Wertz1, I. Nippert2, G. Wolff3, S. Ayme4 C039. Knowledge Of Genetics And Genetic Tests Among 1University of Massachusetts Medical School,; Waltham, MA United Dutch General Practitioners. States; 2University of Muenster; Muenster, Germany; 3Institut fr Human- M. J. H. Baars, M. W. Langendam, L. P. ten Kate Genetik und Anthropologie, Albert-Ludwigs Universitt Freiburg; Freiburg, VU Medical Center; Amsterdam, The Netherlands Germany; 4INSERM; Villejuif, France mjh.baars@azvu.nl dwertz@shriver.org Objective To investigate knowledge of genetics and genetic tests among We surveyed patients ethical views at 12 genetics clinics in USA,2 in Ger- Dutch General Practitioners (GPs) and to determine factors influencing this many,5 in France. 476(67%)in USA, 593(65%)in Germany,394(51%)in knowledge. Methods The questionnaire of Hofman et al (Acad.Med 1993; France returned anonymous questionnaires.Over 9/10 in USAand Ger- 68 (8); 625-632) was translated in Dutch and adapted to the situation of the many were women, mostly married. Major findings; A. Family relations. health care system in the Netherlands. The questionnaire was mailed to Majorities (US 75%, Germany 76%, France 88% ) thought warning rela- 200 GPs randomly selected by the Netherlands Institute of Primary Care tives at genetic risk takes precedence over patient confidentiality. About Research (NIVEL) and for validation to 58 Clinical Geneticists (CGs). Next half (53%,42%,55%) thought spouses had automatic rights to genetic to questions about personal and practice issues the questionnaire covered information,without consent; 44%,32%, 41% favored automatic access for knowledge of genetics concepts and facts, and awareness of the avail- blood relatives. 61%,34%,45% would test children for genetic predisposi- ability of genetic tests. Assigning one point for each correct answer to the tion to Alzheimer. B. Autonomy. 60%,48%, 45% said patients had a right to 26 knowledge questions made a total knowledge score. Multiple linear any service they could pay for out of pocket; 69%, 46%, 48% thought regression was used to identify significant and independent predictors of refusal was denial of rights. Most believed (86-88%) in rights to referral total knowledge score. Results The response rate of GPs was 64% within their country, but fewer (50%, 29%,33%)favored it outside the coun- (124/195) and of CGs 84% (49/58). The total knowledge score could be try. Most (87%,82%,70%) approved prenatal paternity testing on request computed for 122 GPs with a mean of 16.58 (64% correct answers), SD for a woman with 2 male friends. C. Privacy. There was universal distrust 3.62 and range 7.50-25.00 and for 49 CGs with a mean of 24.58 (95% cor- of insurers and employers, but most (US 96%, France 92%) would tell a rect answers), SD 1.06 and range 21.00-26.00. Alower GPs knowledge school system a diagnosis of XYY. Few (20%,11%,6%) would protect con- score was related to a higher age, not having taken an elective course in fidentiality of a bus driver at high genetic risk for heart attack. Most favored genetics during the study and a higher degree of urbanization. Comment DNAfingerprinting for people convicted of (83-97%)or charged with (71- The negative relation between the knowledge score and a higher degree 82%) serious crimes, armed forces (60-86%), but not passport applicants of urbanization needs further assessment. (50%,10%,12%) or newborns (73%,31%,47%). D. Prevention. Majorities (64%,49%,70%) thought people should know their genetic status before C040.Genetic discrimination experienced by Australian fami- marriage, but fewer (31%,5%,29%) thought states should require carrier lies tests. Most (80-93%) thought women at high risk should have PND, but K. K. Barlow-Stewart1, D. Keays2 fewer (21%,43%,67%) thought they should abort if tests were positive. D. 1Genetics Education Program of NSW; Sydney, Australia; 2University of Disability. Most (78-90%) would respects parents wishes to refuse a life- Melbourne; Melbourne, Australia saving operation on a handicapped newborn. 44%,48%,77% said bringing kbarlow@med.usyd.edu.au a child with a disability into the world was unfair to the child, if the birth Discrimination in insurance and employment on the basis of a genetic test could be prevented; 26%, 27%, 56% said it was socially irresponsible. 21% result for a range of genetic disorders has been reported in the USAand in US and 18% in France said laws should require sterilization for a blind UK. Until recently no evidence was available of genetic discrimination in woman on welfare. About 30% fewer in US would abort for each of 24 Australia. In May 2000 an anonymous survey was sent by Barlow-Stewart genetic conditions than in Germany. E. Preconception sex selection. to genetic support groups (643), registrants on the NSW and ACTHeredi- 26%,10%,20% would use it; 15%,9%, 19% thought insurance should pay. tary Bowel Cancer Register (310) and individuals (337) to determine their On most issues, patients views differed from geneticists in their own coun- needs and experiences following a diagnosis or genetic testing; one of try. It is time to examine reasons for these differences. these experiences included documentation of any instances of genetic dis- crimination. Of the 715 respondents, 43 reported discrimination in the areas of insurance, and employment. In addition Keays identified 5 addi- tional cases through an independent survey of clinical genetics services in Australia. Discrimination reportedly occurred with different insurance pack- ages; some respondents reported being discriminated in a number ofConcurrent Sessions 85 areas including refusal of life insurance, denial of an increase in life insur- C043.Upregulation of WNT-4 Signaling; ANew Mechanism for ance for a pre-existing policy, refusal of income protection insurance, Dosage-Sensitive Sex Reversal in Humans refusal of trauma insurance, reduction in superannuation and loading on B. K. Jordan1, M. Mohammed1, S. T. Ching1, E. Delot1, X. Chen1,2, P. the premiums for travel insurance. Two people reported that their applica- Dewing1, A. Swain3, P. N. Rao1, B. R. Elejalde4, E. Vilain1 tions for positions in the Public Service and the Armed Forces respective- 1UCLA; Los Angeles, CAUnited States; 2Cedars-Sinai Medical Center; Los ly were subject to a negative test result. In 3 other cases the employment Angeles, CAUnited States; 3Chester Beatty Laboratories; London, United was terminated or the subjects submitted their resignation following demo- Kingdom; 4University of Wisconsin MCC; Milwaukee, WI United States tion of duties. Following public release of this evidence of genetic discrim- bjordan1@ucla.edu ination, the Australian Government has initiated several enquiries to deter- WNT-4, a member of the Wnt family of locally-acting secreted growth fac- mine the direction for law or policy development. tors, is the first signaling molecule shown to influence the sex determina- tion cascade. In mice, a targeted deletion of Wnt-4 causes the masculin- C041.What Are The Economic Stakes Of Gene Patents? Illus- ization of XX pups. Therefore, WNT-4, the human homologue of Wnt-4, is tration Through ACost-effectiveness Study (brca1 & 2) a strong candidate for sex reversal in humans. Recently, we have shown C. S. Sevilla1,2, C. M. Julian-Reynier1, F. Eisinger1,3,4, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet5, that in testicular Sertoli and Leydig cells, Wnt-4 upregulates expression of B. Bressac-de Paillerets6, J. P. Moatti1,7, H. Sobol3,4 Dax1, a gene antagonizing the testis-determining factor Sry. Furthermore, 1INSERM U379; Marseille, France; 2Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences this finding has elucidated the mechanism responsible for the human XY Sociales; Paris, France; 3INSERM E9939; Marseille, France; 4Institut sex reversal associated with a duplication of 1p31-p35 encompassing the Paoli-Calmettes; Marseille, France; 5Institut Curie; Paris, France; 6Institut WNT-4 locus. Overexpression of WNT-4 leads to upregulation of DAX1, Gustave Roussy; Villejuif, France; 7Facult des Sciences Economiques, which redirects the fate of the developing gonad resulting in an XYfemale Universit de la Mditerrane; Marseille, France phenotype. Thus, WNT-4, a novel sex-determining gene, and DAX1 play a sevilla@marseille.inserm.fr concerted role in controlling female development and in preventing male- Genetic testing for breast cancer predisposition has been increasingly ness. Presently, transgenic studies are underway to evaluate the effects of used on individuals with a high family risk since the identification of BRCA1 WNT-4 dosage on the fate of the bipotential gonad. Taken together, these and BRCA2. Recognition of property rights by the United States Patent observations suggest that mammalian sex determination is sensitive to and Trademark Office on those genes has generated the creation of a dosage at multiple steps in its pathway. monopoly position for BRCA1/2 testing on the whole US market. The European application for these same commercial rights is still pending C044. Complex human Y-chromosomal HERV sequence (december 2000). The objective of our study was to compare the cost- structure in the AZFa region; new candidate genes for the effectiveness of technically available alternative strategies for BRCA1 control of early germ cell proliferation? mutation research to Direct DNASequencing (DS) of the entire gene which C. Kamp, H. Ditton, K. Huellen, P. H. Vogt is currently used by the patent owner. The cost evaluation was based on a Institute of Human Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany detailed observation of the different stages of each available strategy in christine_kamp@med.uni-heidelberg.de three French laboratories. Twenty strategies, representing all the available In humans, deletions of the AZFa region in the Ychromosome (proximal combinations of techniques for the mutation research on BRCA1, were Yq11, D3-D6) are associated with a complete germ cell aplasia (Sertoli- evaluated. The techniques considered were; DS, DHPLC, SSCP, DGGE, cell-only syndrome; SCO) i.e. males with this interstitial Ydeletion have no HA, PTTand FAMA. The cost-effectiveness analysis was undertaken in a germ cells in their testes tubules (Vogt et al. 1996). Therefore, genes func- theoretical population of 10,000 with a 15% prevalence of deleterious tional for early germ cell proliferation are expected in this Yregion. Up to mutation for BRCA1. Five strategies were found to be simultaneously less now, two AZFa candidate genes were isolated; USP9Y/DFFRYand DBY, expensive and more cost/effective than DS of the entire gene. Though because they were found to be completely deleted in each AZFa patient gene patents are aimed at stimulating research, extensive patent coverage (Vogt, 1998). Interestingly however, a point mutation in USP9Y/DFFRY of all potential applications of an identified gene makes possible that an resulting in a truncated protein, does not result in germ cell aplasia but only inefficient screening procedure becomes the unique standard of DNAtest- severe oligozoospermia (Sun et al., 1999) and mature germ cells could be ing practices. also found in a patient with deletion of the complete USP9Y/DFFRYgene (Sargent et al. 1999). Similarily, deletions of the complete DBYgene were C042.Influence of media on understanding and interpretation shown to be associated with different infertility phenotypes including of prenatal diagnosis severe oligozoospermia although also the SCO syndrome (Foresta et al., P. Klein, J. Pelz 2000). This suggests that deletion of only one of the two AZFa candidate Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany genes is NOTsufficient to cause the severe SCO phenotype and the ques- science2000uk@yahoo.co.uk tion is raised as to whether at least both genes or even the whole AZFa Articles in newspapers often report new findings in medicine and their actu- region must be deleted to cause in men the SCO syndrome?. We were al or possible applications for the general audience. Prenatal diagnosis able to map the exact breakpoints of the AZFa region in six patients with (pd) is an important application of human genetics. In a preliminary analy- the SCO syndrome and estimated a length of 792 kb for the deleted Y-DNA sis we found that the information on the methods of pd in German news- (Kamp et al. 2000). The breakpoints were found in the structure of a papers is basically correct and thus may help people to understand the Human Endogenous Retrovirus (HERV15) present with two copies at the various procedures of pd. Therefore popular mass media may influence borders of the AZFa region (HERV15yq1, HERV15yq2). This strongly indi- public opinion on the various procedures and on the conditions being cated that the AZFa deletion originates from an intrachromosomal recom- screened for. In an interventional study more than 800 subjects were asked bination event between these two retroviral elements (Kamp et al. 2000). what they know and what they think about pd before and after reading a These data were confirmed by Sun et al. (2000) and Blanco et al. (2000). text, written in the format of a newspapers article dealing with the various HERV15yq1 is part of a complex retroviral sequence structure (DYS11) pd methods. This text existed in 4 different versions. Two favouring abor- expressed in human testis tissue (Leroy et al. 1987). We therefore cur- tion of the foetus after a positive prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome was rently analyse whether its deletion in all AZFa patients points to a causal made, two in which a woman chose to continue pregnancy. For both alter- relationship with the observed pathological AZFa phenotype. References natives the prevalences mentioned in the article were given either as per- 1. Vogt P.H. et al. (1996) Human Y chromosome azoospermia factors centages or as natural numbers. We found that the article influenced the (AZF) mapped to different subregions in Yq11. Hum. Mol. Genet., 5, 933- readers attitude towards the use of pd and that the different presentations 943. 2. Vogt, P.H. (1998) Human chromosome deletion in Yq11 AZF candi- of the prevalences had an impact on the readers understanding. Among date genes and male infertility; history and update. Mol. Hum. Reprod., 4, other aspects we found that before reading the text subjects made a (hypo- 739-744. 3. Sun C. et al. (1999) An azoospermic man with a de novo point thetical) choice of the methods of pd rather by default; 25% of them want- mutation in the Ychromosomal gene USP9Y. Nature Genet., 23, 429-432. ed all women to make use of all the available diagnostic techniques. After 4. Sargent N. et al. (1999) The critical region of overlap defining the AZFa reading the text, this sub-group also decided against certain techniques male infertility interval of proximal Yq contains three transcribed that are not necessary in all cases (e.g. amniocentesis). This study might sequences. J. Med. Genet., 36, 670-677. 5. Foresta C.et al. (2000) Dele- serve as a model for further research of the public understanding of genet- tion and expression analysis of AZFa genes on the human Ychromosome ic testing. revealed a major role for DBYin male infertility. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 1161- 1169. 6. Kamp C. et al. (2000) Two long retroviral sequence blocks in prox- imal Yq11 cause AZFa microdeletions as a result of intrachromosomal recombination events. Hum. Mol. Genet.9, 2563-2572 7. Sun C. et al.. (2000) Deletion of azoospermia factor a (AZFa) region of human Ychro-86 Concurrent Sessions mosome caused by recombination between HERV15 proviruses. Hum. C047.Anovel MSP/DHPLC method for the investigation of the Mol. Genet. 9, 2291-2296 8. Blanco P. et al. (2000) Divergent outcomes of methylation status of imprinted genes enables the molecular intrachromosomal recombination on the human Y chromosome; male detection of low cell mosaicisms. infertility and recurrent polymorphism. J. Med. Genet. 37, 752-758 9. Leroy A. Baumer, U. Wiedmann, M. Hergersberg, A. Schinzel P .et al. (1987) Testis-specific transcripts detected by a human Y-DNA- Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich; Zurich, Switzerland derived probe. Development, 101, (Suppl.), 177-183. baumer@medgen.unizh.ch We describe a new procedure for the analysis of the methlyation status of C045.ELOVL4, a novel protein involved in elongation of fatty imprinted genes based on methylation specific PCR followed by DHPLC acids, is truncated in two related forms of autosomal domi- (MSP/DHPLC). The method offers a rapid and very reliable alternative to nant macular dystrophy conventional methods such as Southern blots and methylation specific K. Zhang1, Z. Yang1, Y. Li1, Z. Yu1, D. Figueroa2, W. Li2, R. Allikmets3, P. PCR (allele-specific MSP). The efficient resolution of the differentially Wong4, P. Sieving5, M. Metzker2, M. Kniazeva6, D. Zack7, L. Kakuk8, P. methylated alleles is demonstrated for two human imprinted genes, name- Lagali4, I. MacDonald9, M. Han10, C. Austin2, R. Gould2, R. Ayyagari8, K. ly SNRPN and LIT1. Abnormal imprinting of the two genes is associated Petrukhin2 with the Angelman / Prader-Willi syndromes and the Beckwith-Wiedemann 1Cole Eye Institute; Cleveland, OH United States; 2Merck Research Labs; syndrome, respectively. The MSP/DHPLC method is based on PCR ampli- West Point, PAUnited States; 3Columbia University; New York, NYUnited fication of gene segments which show parent-of-origin specific methyla- States; 4University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada; 5University of Michi- tion. Genomic DNAis subjected to an in vitro bisulfite treatment prior to gan; An Arbor, MI United States; 6University of Colorado; Boulder, CO Unit- PCR amplifications using primers specific for modified DNA. Both alleles ed States; 7Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD United States; 8Uni- (theoretically amplified with equal efficiency) are represented by identical- versity of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI United States; 9Unversity of Alberta; ly sized PCR products; they differ, however, at a number of positions with- Edmonton, AB Canada; 10Unversity of Colorado; Boulder, CO United in the amplified DNAsegment. The DHPLC analysis allows a very efficient States resolution of the two populations of PCR products. The high sensitivity and zhangk@ccf.org quantitative properties of the MSP/DHPLC method are illustrated based on Purpose; Stargardt-like macular dystrophy (STGD3, MIM 600110) and its ability to reveal a low cell mosaicism in an infant with a maternal UPD15 autosomal dominant macular dystrophy (adMD) are two inherited forms of (i.e. Prader-Willi syndrome patient). The minor cell line (approximately 8% macular degeneration characterized by decreased visual acuity, macular in blood) was not detectable with conventional molecular analysis. Whilst atrophy, and extensive flecks. We conducted molecular genetic study to the detection of low cell mosaicisms of structurally abnormal chromosomes identify the disease gene. Methods; Genetic linkage mapping and posi- usually relies on cytogenetic studies, the MSP/DHPLC method described tional cloning approaches were employed. Results; Linkage and haplotype here not only offers an alternative at the molecular level but may also analyses revealed that all affected members in four independent STGD3 reveal mosaicisms concerning structurally intact chromosomes. families and one adMD family shared a common founder haplotype. We limited the minimum genetic region (MGR) for STGD3 and adMD to a 0.6 C048. Truncating mutations in the glomulin gene cause glo- cM interval and constructed a physical map. We characterized ESTclus- muvenous malformations ters and identified a novel cone and rod photoreceptor-specific gene called M. Vikkula1, P. Brouillard1, L. M. Boon2, J. B. Mulliken3, O. Enjolras4, M. L. ElOVL4 within the MGR. ELOVL4 encodes a putative transmembrane pro- Warman5, O. Tan6, B. R. Olsen3 tein with similarities to the ELO family of proteins involved in elongation of 1Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology; Brussels, Belgium; 2Uni- very long chain fatty acids. We found a single five base-pair deletion in the versit catholique de Louvain; Brussels, Belgium; 3Harvard Medical coding region of ELOVL4 which was present in every affected member of School; Boston, MA United States; 4Hpital Lariboisire; Paris, France; either STGD3 or adMD family (a total of 76 affected individuals) but absent 5Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine; Cleveland, OH in unaffected siblings or 300 normal controls. Conclusions; We have iden- United States; 6Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine; Boston, MA tified the gene for STGD3/adMD. Biosynthesis of polyunsaturated, long United States chain fatty acids (PUFA) in photoreceptors requires dietary consumption of vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be the essential a-linolenic acid and a subsequent series of three elongation Venous malformations (VMs), localized defects of vascular morphogene- steps. We hypothesize that ELOVL4 may be involved in one or all of the sis, are single or multiple bluish-purple lesions that occur mainly in skin and three elongation steps required for PUFAbiosynthesis. Our results are the mucosa. They can be dominantly inherited and are among the most fre- first to implicate the biosynthesis of PUFAin the pathogenesis of at least quent lesions in centers that specialize in treatment of vascular anomalies two related forms of macular degeneration. (Vikkula et al., 1998). We previously identified the endothelial-specific angiopoietin receptor TIE2/TEK, located on 9p21, as the cause of muco- C046. Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus, the spectrum of cutaneous venous malformations (VMCM, MIM 600195) (Vikkula et al., mutations in a cohort of 67 patients. 1996). We have also shown that GVMs (MIM 138000), cutaneous venous D. O. Robinson1, H. Cave2, D. Mackay1, A. Coupe1, J. Shield3, M. Polak2, malformations with smooth muscle-like glomus cells, are linked to 1p21-22 I. Temple4 (Boon et al., 1994). In this 4-6 cM VMGLOM locus, we identified linkage 1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory; Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, United King- disequilibrium and narrowed the region to 1.48 Mbp (Irrthum et al., 2001, dom; 2Hopital Robert Debre; Paris, France; 3Institute of Child Health; Bris- in press). Herein, we report on the identification of the mutated gene, glo- tol, United Kingdom; 4Wessex Clinical Genetics Unit; Southampton, United mulin, localized on the basis of our YAC and PAC maps (Brouillard et al., Kingdom 2000). We report the complete cDNAsequence, the genomic structure of d.robinson@dial.pipex.com the gene, and 13 different mutations identified in 19 families. As all but two Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM) is a rare form of diabetes of the mutations cause premature stop codons, GVMs are likely to be occurring in 1 in 400,000 births. It presents in growth retarded neonates caused by loss-of-function of glomulin. These data suggest that glomulin is within 6 weeks of birth with persistent hyperglycaemia. Endogenous insulin important for the differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells, and thus levels are extremely low or undetectable and patients usually require for vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be exogenous insulin therapy for a median period of 3 months. The condition is transient with recovery occurring by 18 months of age. Patients do not C049.Routes of expansion and founder effects in the evolu- have islet cell antibodies or diabetes susceptible HLAhaplotypes, which tionary history of modern humans. suggests a form of diabetes more akin to type 2 than to the classical D. Labuda1,2, E. Zietkiewicz1, V. Yotova1, I. Arrieta3, M. Batzer4, D. E. C. autoimmune type 1 diabetes. Although the condition is transient in early Cole5, J. Jaruzelska6, D. Modiano7, J. Moisan8, R. Michalski9 life, about 40% of patients are known to relapse and develop type 2 dia- 1Centre de Recherche, Hpital Sainte-Justine; Montreal, PQ Canada; betes later in life usually in the teenage years. Asignificant proportion of 2Dpartement de Pdiatrie, Universit de Montral; Montral, PQ Canada; TNDM cases are known to be caused by abnormalities of chromosome 6 3UPV; Bilbao, Spain; 4LSU; New Orleans, LAUnited States; 5UT; Toronto, involving an imprinted locus at 6q24. We have analysed DNA from 67 ON Canada; 6Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, Poland; 7ULS; Rome, patients. 15(22%) have paternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 6, Italy; 8Centre Hospitalier Rgional et Universitaire; Nantes, France; 9Victo- 16(24%)have duplications of part of chromosome 6 including 6q24 and ria Hospital; Prince Albert, SK Canada 5(7%) have abnormal methylation of an imprinted CpG island at 6q24 damian.labuda@umontreal.ca which forms part of the candidate TNDM gene ZAC. In a further 31(46%) Our analysis of haplotypes consisting of 35 polymorphisms from an 8kb cases no abnormality of chromosome 6 has yet been identified. segment of the dystrophin gene on Xp22 indicates that African chromo- somes descend from at least two lineages that have been evolving sepa- rately for a period of time. One of them underwent range expansion colo-Concurrent Sessions 87 nizing different continents, including Africa where it mixed with the other sive multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation snydrome caused by one represented today by a large fraction of African-specific haplotypes. mutations in the D7-sterol reductase (DHCR7, E.C.1.3.1.21) gene. Analy- While explaining the general observation of the greater diversity of sub- sis of the DHCR7 gene in 59 SLOS patients from Poland, Austria, Ger- Saharan populations this reveals a novel aspect of early human evolution, many, and Great Britain revealed 35 different mutations some of which before expansion. The routes of expansion outside Africa can be retraced were common. Mutational spectra were significantly different across popu- through the analysis of geographic distribution of the six most frequent lations with each of the common mutations showing an east-west gradient haplotypes (representing more than 80% of the studied sample of 1815 (W151X, V326L) or vice versa (IVS8-1G>C). We have started to analyse worldwide chromosomes). The most ubiquitous haplotype B001 is found at the ages and origins of SLOS mutations in Europe. Using eight polymor- the highest frequency in Eurasia and Americas. Haplotype B002 frequen- phic sites localised in translated DHCR7 exons 12 different haplotypes cy distribution follows the southern route, linking Africa, South-East Asia, were identified among 52 SLOS chromosomes. The 10 SLOS chromo- Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. In contrast, haplotypes B003 and B006 somes carrying the most common mutation IVS8-1G>C shared the same indicate northern route connecting Europe, Asia and Americas. Adra- haplotype suggesting a founder effect. This haplotype was also the most matic increase in B004 frequency in Amerindians from South and Central frequent on normal chromosomes suggesting that it is the original Euro- America and the absence of B005 from all Paleoindian and NaDene pop- pean haplotype. Mutations T93M and R404C which involve CpG islands ulations can be associated with the colonization of Americas. Our diversity were found on 4 and 3 different haplotypes respectively suggesting that data indicate that the dispersal of the expanding lineage was relatively they are recurrent. Surprisingly W151X which is the second most frequent recent (presumably in the Upper Paleolithic). They show as well that the mutation in Europe and the most frequent in Polish SLOS patients was peopling of the World by modern humans occurred through a series of detected on 4 different haplotypes including the most frequent one. The founder effects. (Supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research) three other haplotypes could be derived from the original one by only three base substitutions. This may suggest that W151X is older than the muta- C050. Microsatellite/RFLP haplotype analysis at the G6PD tions used for haplotype constructions and is the oldest SLOS causing locus; Implications for the origin of G6PD A- and Med defi- mutation in Europeans. The data suggest an intriguing heterogeneity of the ciency mutations ages and origins of common DHCR7 mutations in Europe. S. Tishkoff1, S. Abbes2, G. Argyropolous3, G. Destro-Bisol4, A. Drousiotou5, T. Jenkins6, G. Lefranc7, J. Loiselet8, A. Piro9, M. Stoneking10, C052. Evaluation of Linkage Disequilibrium in Densely- A. Tagarelli9, G. Tagarelli9, E. Touma8, S. Williams11, A. Clark12 Mapped Genomic Regions. 1University of Maryland; College Park, MD United States; 2Pasteur Insti- M. C. Karnoub, M. J. Wagner, D. V. Zaykin, M. G. Ehm, Q. Nguyen, S. tute; Tunis, Tunisia; 3Med. Univ. of South Carolina; Charleston, NC United Chissoe, E. H. Lai, D. K. Burns States; 4University La Sapienza; Rome, Italy; 5Cyprus Institute of Neurol- Glaxo Wellcome, Inc.; RTP, NC United States ogy and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 6S.A.I.M.R., University of the Witwa- mac31876@glaxowellcome.com tersrand; Johannesburg, South Africa; 7Univ. of Sciences and CNRS; Linkage analysis in family collections has resulted in identification of multi- Montpellier, France; 8Univ. St. Joseph; Beirut, Lebanon; 9Institute of Exper- ple potential susceptibility loci for a number of complex diseases. Resolu- imental Medicine and Biotechnology; Cosenza, Italy; 10Max Planck Insti- tion of linkage mapping is low, with the confidence interval for location of tute for Evolutionary Anthro.; Leipzig, Germany; 11Meharry Medical Col- the susceptibility gene within a linkage peak extending over regions 10 lege; Nashville, TN United States; 12Penn State Univ.; University Park, PA Mbp or more. Association analysis using SNPmarkers distributed across United States these regions has the potential for refining the disease susceptibility locus st130@umail.umd.edu to a region encompassing only one or a small number of genes. To employ During the course of human evolution in regions where malaria is preva- this approach, we need high-density maps of SNPs across the chromoso- lent, naturally occurring genetic defense mechanisms have evolved which mal regions of interest, high-throughput genotyping methods and an provide resistance against infection by the Plasmodium parasite. Glucose- understanding of the linkage disequilibrium between the SNPmarkers. We 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, resulting from mutations have identified, mapped and genotyped 450 markers in a 12 Mbp region within the G6PD gene on Xq28, is the most common enzymopathy of having shown linkage to type 2 diabetes. The samples used for the analy- humans and is thought to confer resistance against malarial infection. ses include 92 unrelated unaffected Caucasians. We have evaluated the Three novel, highly variable microsatellite polymorphisms have been iden- pair-wise linkage disequilibrium between these markers. We have com- tified within 19 kb of the G6PD gene. These microsatellites have been ana- pared the results across different sections of this region. We concluded lyzed as RFLP/microsatellite haplotypes on G6PD A, A-, and Med that for this region, a marker spacing of 30 Kb is needed. Moreover, a sig- deficiency as well as non-deficiency chromosomes from Africa (n = 425), nificance level of p<0.001 identified markers in LD due to close proximity. the Middle East (n = 135), the Mediterranean (n = 119), Europe (n = 15) These data allow us to begin to understand the extent of linkage disequi- and New Guinea (n = 25) in order to reconstruct the evolutionary history of librium in an outbred Caucasian sample. They also help us define criteria the G6PD locus. The A/A- and Med deficiency variants exist on distinct by which to assess the significance of results that we obtain in our associ- haplotype backgrounds and are in very strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) ation studies for diabetes. with flanking markers out to 24 kb. The pattern of haplotype variability and LD is strikingly different on chromosomes with different deficiency variants. C053. A linkage disequilibrium map of human chromosome Analysis of microsatellite diversity on A- and Med chromosomes indicates 22 that these G6PD deficiency mutations arose within the past 20,000 years, A. Metspalu1,2,3, J. Zernant2, T. Puurand2, E. Lhmussaar1,2, N. Tnis- consistent with the hypothesis that malaria has had a major impact on son2, I. Valvas2, H. Pavel2, G. Slavin2, R. Andreson1,2, J. Vilo4, A. Kurg1, D. humans since the introduction of agriculture. Funded by NSF Sloan post- Cox3, F. Canzian3, E. Dawson5, S. Kirby5, D. Bentley5, I. Dunham5 doctoral and Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award fellowships to ST. 1University of Tartu, IMCB/Estonian Biocentre; Tartu, Estonia; 2Asper Ltd; Tartu, Estonia; 3IARC; Lyon, France; 4EBI; Hinxton, United Kingdom; 5The C051. Haplotype Analysis In European Smith-Lemli-Opitz Sanger Centre; Hinxton, United Kingdom Syndrome Patients Reveals Different Origins And Ages Of andres@ebc.ee Common DHCR7 Mutations Sequence variants in the human genome are responsible for the genetic M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, J. Lffler1, U. Seedorf2, J. Burn3, G. Gillessen- component of disease, individuality and drug response. In order to find Kaesbach4, G. F. Hoffmann5, P. Clayton6, R. I. Kelley7, M. Krajewska- associations between SNPs and phenotype, large sample sets need to be Walasek8, G. Utermann1 genotyped with high-density markers. Large-scale, population-based case- 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria; control studies have been limited because neither SNPmaps nor geno- 2Institute for Arteriosclerosis Research; Mnster, Germany; 3University of typing technology have been adequate to fulfill these needs yet. With chro- Newcastle upon Tyne, School of Biochemistry and Genetics; Newcastle mosome 22 fully sequenced and an SNPmap constructed, we have per- upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 4Institute of Human Genetics; Essen, Ger- formed genotyping on two population samples (CEPH families and Estoni- many; 5Department of Neuropediatrics and Metabolic Disease, University ans) with 1396 SNPmarkers. The mean spacing of the SNPs used to con- of Marburg; Marburg, Germany; 6Institute of Child Health and Great struct this map is 22kb. An oligonucleotide array with 5600 oligonucleotides Ormond Street Hospital; London, United Kingdom; 7Kennedy Krieger Insti- was constructed to genotype each SNP twice from both DNA strands tute and Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of simultaneously using APEX technology. Allele frequencies, Hardy-Wein- Medicine; Baltimore, United States; 8Department of Medical Genetics, The berg equilibrium and heterozygosities were calculated for each typed Childrens Memorial Health Institute; Warsaw, Poland marker. Software based on the EM algorithm (Arlequin) was used to cal- witsch-baumgartner@uibk.ac.at culate the standardized disequilibrium coefficient (D), and GOLD (Graphi- Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS [MIM 270400]) is an autosomal reces- cal overview linkage disequilibrium) plots were constructed. Preliminary88 Concurrent Sessions results demonstrate that LD is not continuous, and there are islands with Williams Beuren Syndrome (WBS) is a complex developmental disorder high LD separated by low LD spots. Also, the extent of significant linkage with multisystemic manifestations including e.g. supravalvular aortic steno- is highly dependent upon the allele frequencies of the two markers in ques- sis (SVAS) and a characteristic cognitive phenotype. Most WBS patients tion. In principle, this approach can be extended to the whole genome, have a common microdeletion of the chromosomal region 7q11.23 but with which makes genome-wide association studies feasible. the exception of the elastin (ELN) gene the contribution of other genes in the deleted region to the phenotype is unclear. One strategy to dissect the C054. Linkage disequilibrium in 50 candidate genes for car- genetic causes of WBS is to investigate individuals with small deletions diovascular diseases and translocations within the common deleted WBS region. We here L. Tiret, O. Poirier, V. Nicaud, S. Barbaux, C. Perret, S. Herrmann, F. Cam- describe a family with a cytogenetically balanced translocation bien t(7;16)(q11.23,q12.1) and an extremely variable phenotype. One female INSERM U525; Paris, France presented the full clinical spectrum of WBS, one male needed surgical tiret@idf.inserm.fr treatment for severe SVAS and three members of the family presented In studies of complex diseases, the ability to detect association between only with distinct features of WBS. Molecular cytogenetic, molecular and marker alleles and disease depends critically on the extent of linkage dis- DNAsequence analyses of the cloned translocation breakpoints showed equilibrium (LD) between disease alleles and surrounding markers. Limit- that the cytogenetic rearrangements disrupted the ELN gene locus within ed information is available about LD in candidate genes. We performed a intron 5 and the TM7XN1 gene locus on chromosome 16 within intron 1 in systematic molecular screening of the coding, 5 and 3 regions of 50 can- exactly the same manner in all translocation carriers. Disruption of didate genes for cardiovascular diseases. The total length explored TM7XN1 seems to have no obvious phenotype in heterozygotes. It is obvi- spanned 170 kb and 228 polymorphisms were identified. Most of them ous that ELN - as it is deleted in all hitherto reported WBS individuals - (87%) were single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). All polymorphisms takes a central position in the pathogenesis of WBS. The most likely expla- were genotyped in 750 European subjects. The average minor allele fre- nation for the highly variable clinical phenotype in translocation carriers is quency was 0.19  0.16, not different between coding and non-coding a position variegation effect of the translocation breakpoint on neighbour- regions. However, rare polymorphisms (frequency < 0.10) were more fre- ing genes. (HCD, AD, KHG and GU contributed equally). quently seen among non-synonymous SNPs than among silent ones (54% vs 26%, p=0.02) and among nondegenerate sites than among fourfold or C057.MECP2 Mutations in Sporadic Cases of Rett Syndrome twofold degenerate sites (57% vs 29%, p<0.05). The average pairwise are of Exclusively Paternal Origin standardized LD was 0.78  0.31. The mean within-gene LD varied from R. Trappe1, J. Cobilanschi1, M. Meins1, P. Huppke2, F. Hahnefeld2, W. 0.44 to 1. Across the 50 genes, LD was inversely correlated with the Engel1, F. Laccone1 scanned length (r = -0.51). LD was higher between alleles of low frequen- 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Universitt Gttingen; Gttingen, Germany; cy than between common alleles (0.84 vs 0.74, p<.001). Among coding 2Abteilung Kinderheilkunde - Schwerpunkt Neuropdiatrie, Universitt Gt- polymorphisms, LD tended to be lower when both SNPs were silent than tingen; Gttingen, Germany when at least one of them was non-synonymous (0.78 vs 0.86, p=0.06). rtrappe@gwdg.de The variability of LD between genes and according to the type of polymor- Rett syndrome (RTT) is known to be an X-linked neurodevelopmental dis- phism suggests that LD mapping of complex diseases may require a order apparently lethal in male embryos. RTTalmost exclusively affects detailed study of the overall sequence variation of candidate genes. girls and is in 99.5% of all cases sporadic due to de novo mutations in the MECP2 gene. Familial cases of RTTare rare and due to X-chromosomal C055.Partial features of Williams-Beuren syndrome in a fam- inheritance from a carrier mother. We analysed the parental origin of ily with a novel 700 kb 7q11.23 deletion MECP2 mutations in sporadic cases of RTTby linkage analysis between M. Del Campo1, L. F. Magano1, J. Martinez Iglesias2, L. A. Perez Jurado1 the mutation in the MECP2 gene and intronic polymorphisms in 27 families 1Genetics Unit, Dept of Experimental Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra; with 15 different mutations and found a high predominance of paternal ori- Barcelona, Spain; 2Centro de Salud Occidente; Cordoba, Spain gin of mutations in 26 out of 27 cases (p<0.001). The paternal origin was migueldelcampo@airtel.net independent of the type of mutation and was found for single base Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with exchanges as well as for deletions. Parental ages were not significantly multisystemic manifestations characterised by distinctive facial features, increased in theses cases of RTT. We conclude that de novo mutations in mental disability with unique cognitive and personality profiles, supravalvu- RTT occur almost exclusively on the paternally derived X-chromosome lar aortic stenosis and other vascular stenoses, growth retardation and and this is most probably the cause for the observed high female;male sex occasional infantile hypercalcemia, caused by haploinsufficiency for genes ratio in RTTpatients. Affected males have been recently described in a few deleted in chromosome band 7q11.23. The great majority of patients show cases of familial inheritance. We recommend that RTTshould be consid- a very similar ~1,6 Mb deletion that arises as a consequence of unequal ered as a possible diagnosis in boys with an appropriate phenotype. Iden- crossing-over between highly homologous low-copy repeat elements, and tification of parental origin can be useful to distinguish the sporadic form of includes a number of identified genes. However, with the exception of vas- RTTfrom a potentially familial form. This will allow geneticists to offer a cular stenoses caused by haploinsufficiency for the elastin gene (ELN), the more specific counselling and to discriminate between high (maternal ori- other features of WBS have not been clearly attributed to specific genes. gin) and low recurrence risk (paternal origin). A phenotypic map for some clinical manifestations has been proposed based on a few atypical patients with smaller deletions and either a full C058.Afounder mutation in the dysferlin gene is associated phenotype (deletion including ELN to GTF2I) or partial phenotypes (sever- with three different phenotypes of muscular dystrophies al deletions surrounding ELN). We have characterised clinically and mole- A. Lasa1, J. Vilchez2, R. Rojas-Garca1, E. Gallardo1, M. J. Rodriguez1, E. cularly a three generation family with partial features of WBS who were del Rio1, M. Baiget1, I. Illa1, P. Gallano1 ascertained due to supravalvular aortic stenosis. In addition, they present- 1Hospital Sant Pau; Barcelona, Spain; 2Hospital La Fe; Valencia, Spain ed with borderline mental functioning, gregarious personality, minor facial alasa@hsp.santpau.es WBS features and absence of visual/spatial deficits. Molecular analysis Dysferlin gene (DYSF), located on chromosome 2p13, has been identified has shown a previously unreported deletion of ~700 kb that includes all as the gene responsible for limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B genes from ELN to GTF2IRD1. We are currently trying to precisely define (LGMD2B) and Miyoshi myopathy (MM). Recently, our group has the proximal deletion breakpoint. Along with previously reported atypical described a new muscular dystrophy phenotype, distal anterior compart- cases, our data indicate specific genes that are relevant for the cognitive ment myopathy (DACM), caused by mutations in the same gene. LGMD2B profile and several physical features of the WBS phenotype. begins proximally in scapular and pelvic girdles, by contrast with MM in which the disorder begins distally in gastrocnemius muscles and with C056.The elastin gene is disrupted in a family with a cytoge- DACM, characterised by onset in the anterior tibial muscles. Here we netically balanced t(7;16)(q11.23,q12.1) associated with report six dysferlinopathy patients; two of them were sporadic cases. All Williams-Beuren syndrome the patients came from the same village, Sueca (Valencia, Spain) and, H. C. Duba1, A. Doll2, M. Neyer1, M. Erdel1, C. Mann3, I. Hammerer3, K. H. apparently, they do not present consanguinity. The study of the dysferlin Grzeschik2, G. Utermann1 gene was performed using the SSCPtechnique and automated sequenc- 1Institut f. Medizinische Biologie und Humangenetik der Universitt; Inns- ing. All the patients were homozygous for the same mutation; a C to Ttran- bruck, Austria; 2Medizinisches Zentrum f. Humangenetik der Universitt; sition at 6086 position of the cDNAsequence (R1905X). The mutated chro- Marburg, Germany; 3Universittsklinik f. Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde; mosomes shared the same 2p13 haplotype, suggesting a founder effect of Innsbruck, Austria the R1905X mutation in that region. Immunocytochemical analysis of dys- hans-christoph.duba@uibk.ac.at ferlin expression was undertaken in patients with the homozygous non-Concurrent Sessions 89 sense mutation that would cause premature termination of traslation. All of pharmacological trial by administrating idebenone, a lipid-soluble antioxi- them showed total absence of dysferlin. The immunohistochemical studies dant (a coenzyme Q) already used in preliminary human clinical trials, to using antibodies to dystrophin and dystrophin-associated glycoproteins the striated-muscle deficient mutant mouse line. We are following the clin- showed a normal pattern. The three phenotypes, LGMD2B, MM and ical course and physiology of the treated and untreated mice, as well as DACM were observed in this group of patients, confirming the clinical vari- assessing the effect of idebenone at different time point during the devel- ability of dysferlinopathies. These results also support the hypothesis that opment of the disease in order to determine its prevention efficacy. the DYSF gene itself is not responsible for the variability but additional fac- tors must interact. C061.The Study Of Gene-environment Interactions Using The Alspac Cohort. C059.AMouse Model For X-linked Myotubular Myopathy M. E. Pembrey1, R. Jones2, S. Ring3, R. Hamvas1, L. Tyfield3, J. Golding2, A. Buj-Bello, V. Laugel, N. Messaddeq, J. Laporte, F. Blondeau, J. Man- -. Alspac Study Team2 del 1Institute of Child Health, UCL; London, United Kingdom; 2Institute of Child IGBMC; Illkirch, France Health, University of Bristol; Bristol, United Kingdom; 3Department of Mol- abb@titus.u-strasbg.fr ecular Genetics, Southmead Hospital; Bristol, United Kingdom X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) is a severe congenital muscular mpembrey@picketts.u-net.com disorder characterized by generalized muscle weakness leading in most ALSPAC (Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, formerly Avon cases to early postnatal death. Muscle biopsy reveals small rounded fibers Longitudinal Study of Pregnancy and Childhood) was designed to study with centrally located nuclei resembling fetal myotubes, suggesting that the the ways in which the physical and social environment interact, over time, disease results from an arrest in late myogenesis. We and others have with genetic variation to affect development, health and behaviour in chil- recently shown that the MTM1 gene, mutated in the disorder, encodes a dren and the adults they become. 13,900 pregnant women reaching 20 lipid phosphatase implicated in the metabolism of phosphoinositides. In weeks gestation (EDD 1.4.91  31.12.92) were enrolled, representing order to understand the pathogenesis of XLMTM, we have generated a about 85% of the eligible population around Bristol. The cohort has been mouse model by deleting exon 4 in the MTM1 gene. Male knockout mice followed in great detail, including extensive hands-on assessment and clin- are viable and show no apparent phenotype at birth. However, they mani- ical testing in special clinics (www.ich.bris.ac.uk/external/html). DNA is fest a growth defect starting at around 4 weeks of age. Concominantly, a banked on the children, mothers and some fathers, and cell lines on muscular deficit appears in the hindlimbs and progressively generalises to ~10,000 children and 15,000 parents will be generated over the next 5 the forelimbs at around 5-6 weeks of age. KO mice present ciphosis and years. The central tenet of the ALSPAC approach is the hypothesis that become paralysed from the hindlimbs. Death occurs at about 2-3 months most genetic influences in common disorders are conditional on the envi- of age, probably from respiratory failure and cachexia. No clinical pheno- ronment and many gene variants will exert their main effect at particular type has been observed in heterozygous females so far. We will present developmental stages. Early results from ALSPAC pilot studies (10% sub- data on the histopathological analysis of the skeletal muscle in KO mice, set) support this view. Of the first 10 candidate gene studies with collabo- which contains small fibers with centrally located nuclei. This model gives rators on early growth, allergy and infection, results support a prior hypoth- insights into the pathophysiology of the disease and shows that despite its esis in 5. These include associations of size at birth/early growth with INS ubiquitous expression, the MTM1 gene has a muscle specific function. VNTR, mt16189v and ACE, and between eczema and IL4R depending on early infection or not. We believe the high hit rate with candidate gene C060. Mouse models for Friedreich ataxia exhibit cardiomy- association studies on just 10% of the sample reflects the precision and opathy, sensory nerve defect and Fe-S enzyme deficiency fol- detail of longitudinal outcome data and the substantial information on envi- lowed by intramitochondrial iron deposits ronmental variables. Approaches about collaborations are welcome (see H. M. Puccio1, D. Simon1, P. Criqui-Filipe1, N. Lagarde1, L. Reutenauer1, web site). P. Rustin2, J. L. Mandel1, M. Koenig1 1IGBMC/ INSERM; Illkirch, France; 2Hpital Necker; Paris, France C062.Association between ancestral haplotypes and multiple hpuccio@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr sclerosis in Central Sardinia Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common autosomal recessive ataxia, L. Bernardinelli1, P. Bitti2, C. Montomoli1, B. S. Murgia3, A. Ticca3, R. Fer- associates degeneration of the large sensory neurons and spinocerebellar rai3, M. Piras3, L. Musu3, A. P. Mander4 tracts, cardiomyopathy and increased incidence in diabetes. FRDA is 1Dep. Applied Health Sciences, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 2Centro caused by severely reduced levels of frataxin, a mitochondrial protein of Tipizzazione Tissutale, Ospedale San Francesco; Nuoro, Italy; 3Divisione unknown function. Yeast knock-out models, and histological and biochem- di Neurologia, Ospedale San Francesco; Nuoro, Italy; 4Medical Research ical data from patient heart biopsies or autopsies indicate that the frataxin Council Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health; Cambridge, United defect causes a specific iron-sulfur protein deficiency and mitochondrial Kingdom iron accumulation leading to the pathological changes. These results sug- luisa@fisher.unipv.it gest that frataxin has a role in controlling mitochondrial iron homeostasis Association and linkage studies have established the importance of the and that FRDAmight be caused by oxidative damage. Akey tool for under- Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) in the susceptibility for Multiple standing Friedreichs ataxia pathology and for testing Friedreichs ataxia Sclerosis (MS). In particular, association with HLA-A3, B7 and DR15 was therapeutic protocols is the availability of a mouse model that most close- first reported in patients of Northern European ancestry, while an associa- ly mimics the human disease. Through a conditional gene-targeting tion with DR3 and DR4 was reported in Sardinians. Recent genome scans approach, we have generated in parallel a striated muscle frataxin-defi- confirmed the importance of the MHC region, highlighting the role of TNFa cient line and neuron/cardiac muscle frataxin-deficient line, which together and of the DR region. Our work investigates the association between the reproduce important progressive pathophysiological and biochemical fea- A30B18DR3 ancestral haplotype and MS in the population of Central Sar- tures of the human disease, including cardiac hypertrophy without skeletal dinia, where malaria was endemic since pre-historical times in low laying muscle involvement, large sensory neuron dysfunction without alteration of areas. This is an isolated population, genetically distinct from others popu- the small sensory and motor neurons, and deficient activities of complex- lations in the Mediterranean basin and characterized by high genetic es I-III of the respiratory chain and of the aconitases. To better understand homogeneity, high level of inbreeding, low migration, high prevalence of the pathophysiology of the disease, we have performed detailed ultra- MS and high frequency of the A30B18DR3 haplotype. We carried out a structure and biochemical studies of the cardiac phenotype. Time course case-control study, cases being MS patients and controls bone marrow experiments show an initial abnormal abundancy of variable size lipid donors from the bone marrow register covering the area. Cases and con- droplets in the cardiac myofibrils with the presence of giant disorganized trols were serologically typed for the currently recognized HLAA, B and DR mitochondria. These lipid droplets disappear as the cardiac hypertrophy antigens. We used a log-linear approach to fit a wide class of models. We increases, and a compensatory proliferation of mitochondria occurs fol- overcame the complication due to the unknown gametic phase using an lowed by a progressive intra-mitochondrial iron accumulation. Biochemical Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm as estimation method. We found experiments reveal that the Fe-S enzymes deficiencies begin in the initial that (1) the ancestral haplotype A30B18DR3 was associated to MS after phase of the pathology, at around the time of lipid droplets accumulation, allowing for a possible genetic stratification in cases and controls; (2) DR3 with a gradual decrease in their activities over the course of the disease. was conditionally independent on disease status, given the A30B18 haplo- Our models, therefore, allow to demonstrate time-dependent intramito- type; (3) there was a tendency for Odds Ratios of the high-risk haplotypes chondrial iron accumulation in a frataxin deficient mammal, which occurs to be higher in individuals originating from high past malaria prevalence after onset of the pathology and after inactivation of the Fe-S-dependent areas. Results on other ancestral haplotypes will be also presented. enzymes. These mutant mice represent the first mammalian models to evaluate treatment strategies for the human disease. We have initiated a90 Concurrent Sessions C063. A Polymorphism in the Gene for Insulin-like Growth C065. DNA variants in the NQO1, MPO, and CYP2E1 genes Factor-I; Functional Properties and Risk for Atherosclerosis and the susceptibility to childhood acute lymphoblastic and Myocardial Infarction leukemia. N. Vaessen1, A. F. C. Schut1, J. C. M. Witteman1, P. Heutink1, J. A. M. Krajinovic, D. Labuda, D. Sinnett Janssen2, L. Testers1, A. Hofman1, S. W. J. Lamberts2, B. A. Oostra1, H. A. Ste-Justine Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada P. Pols2, C. M. van Duijn1 sinnettd@ere.umontreal.ca 1Erasmus medical centre, genetic epidemiology unit; Rotterdam, The Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is the most common paediatric can- Netherlands; 2Erasmus medical centre, dept. of internal medicine; Rotter- cer. Little is known about the genetic factors underlying the susceptibility to dam, The Netherlands this disease. The enzymes CYP2E1, MPO and NQO1 are involved in the vaessen@epib.fgg.eur.nl biotransformation of a variety of xenobiotics present in organic solvents, Evidence is accumulating that low levels of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF- tobacco smoke, drugs, plastic derivatives and pesticides. They also control I) play a role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. We examined the level of the oxidative stress by catalysing formation of free radicals or the role of a genetic polymorphism in the promoter region of the IGF-I gene by protecting the cells from their deleterious effect. DNAvariants in these in relation to circulating IGF-I levels and body height, and we studied the genes have been associated with an increase susceptibility to different relationship of this polymorphism with atherosclerosis and myocardial adult cancers, including haematological malignancies. To investigate the infarction. The relation between the IGF-I polymorphism, circulating IGF-I role of these loci and in particular their genetic variants as risk modifying levels, body height and atherosclerosis was assessed in population-based factors in childhood ALL, we conducted a case-control study on 181 ALL sample of 900 subjects. Atherosclerosis was measured as rontgenograph- patients and 337 healthy controls, both of French-Canadian origin. We ic detectable aortic calcifications, atherosclerotic plaques or increased inti- found that the carriers of the CYP2E1*5 variant were found at 2.8 fold ma-media thickness of the common carotid artery or a decreased ankle- (95% CI, 1.2-6.6) higher risk of ALL, and that NQO1 alleles *2 and *3 con- arm index. To assess the risk of myocardial infarction, 477 patients with tributed as well to the risk of ALL(OR=1.7, 95%CI, 1.2-2.5). No such asso- evidence for myocardial infarction at ECG and 808 controls were studied. ciation was found with MPO alone. However, when the wild-type MPO A192-bp allele was present in 88% of the population. Body height was on allele was considered together with the CYP2E1 and NQO1 risk-elevating average 2.7 cm lower (p = 0.004) and serum IGF-I concentrations were genotypes, the risk of ALLwas increased further (OR=5.4, 95%CI, 1.2- 18% lower (p = 0.003) in subjects who did not carry the 192-bp allele. 23.4) suggesting a combined effect. These findings suggest that xenobi- Although no significant association was found between the IGF-I polymor- otics metabolized by these three enzymes might be implicated in the etiol- phism and atherosclerosis, non-carriers of the 192-bp allele had an ogy of childhood ALL. increased risk for myocardial infarction (RR 1.7 [95% CI 1.1-2.5]). Further analysis demonstrated that the risk for myocardial infarction associated C066. DNArepair gene variants as candidate genes for low- with the absence of the 192-bp allele was almost exclusively restricted to penetrance breast cancer susceptibility subjects with atherosclerosis (RR 3.4 [95 % CI 2.9- 5.6). Our study sug- B. Kuschel1, A. Auranen1, K. Thorpe1, S. McBride1, P. D. P. Pharoah1, D. gests that genetically determined exposure to relatively low IGF-I concen- F. Easton2, B. A. J. Ponder1, A. M. Dunning1 trations in subjects without the 192-bp allele, results in an increased risk 1CRC Human Cancer Genetic Group; Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2CRC for myocardial infarction, especially in subjects with profound atheroscle- Epidemiology Group; Cambridge, United Kingdom rosis. bettina.kuschel@srl.cam.ac.uk Carcinogens such as ionizing radiation frequently generate DNA-double C064.Genetic determinants of calcium metabolism; Compar- strand breaks (DSB). Two pathways are involved in their repair; The ison of calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) and vitamin D homologous recombination (HR) and the non-homologous end-joining receptor (VDR) polymorphisms. (NHEJ) pathways. HR is thought to be the major pathway for repairing D. E. C. Cole1, A. B. Scillitani2, R. Vieth3, B. Y. L. Wong4, H. Trang1, G. N. severe damage in mammals. In a British population-based breast cancer Hendy5, L. A. Rubin6 case-control series (~2000 cases and ~1000 controls) we are performing 1Banting Institute; Toronto, ON Canada; 2Casa Sollievo Sofferenza; San association studies by identifying and analysing polymorphisms of poten- Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 3Mount Sinai Hospital; Toronto, ON Canada; 4Uni- tial functional significance in genes involved in HR (NBS1, Rad52, Rad51, versity Health Network; Toronto, ON Canada; 5McGill University; Montreal, Rad54, XRCC2 and XRCC3) and NHEJ (Mre11, Rad50, Ku70/80, Ligase PQ Canada; 6St Michaels Hospital; Toronto, ON Canada IV, XRCC4). In HR we have identified a polymorphism in XRCC3 (T241M) davidec.cole@utoronto.ca which appears to contribute to an increased risk of breast cancer [OR Serum calcium concentration is a continuous trait, maintained in a narrow (MMvs.TT); 1.3; 95%CI; 1.0-1.7; OR (MTvs.TT); 1.1; 95%CI; 0.9-1.3]. This range for each individual. Genetic factors are thought to account for more polymorphism is close to an ATPase activity domain and might have func- than half of the between-person variability, but biochemical covariates such tional significance. Other polymorphisms in XRCC3 [A4541G (OR; 1.1; as serum albumin are also important. Recently, we demonstrated that in a 95%CI; 0.7-1.7), A17893G (OR; 0.8; 95%CI; 0.6-1.1)] are not associated sample of young, caucasian healthy women, the calcium-sensing receptor with a significantly increased risk. Nor are Rad51 variants [G135C (OR; (CASR) variant, A986S, exhibits a significant association with the free cal- 0.9; 95%CI; 0.3-2.5) and G172T (OR; 0.9; 95%CI; 0.7-1.2)] or C2259T cium fraction. Since vitamin D is involved in calcium homeostasis, we (3UTR) of Rad52 (OR 0.9; 95%CI; 0.7-1.1). In the NHEJ pathway Mre11, asked whether vitamin D receptor (VDR) polymorphisms might be co-con- Rad50, XRCC4 and Ligase IV have been studied so far and non of these tributing to the genetic variance of serum calcium levels. In 419 healthy variants have a significant effect on breast cancer risk. We aim to define Toronto women 18 to 35 years old, we characterized the silent Taq1 poly- which genes in these pathways are most important in breast cancer risk morphism in exon9 of the VDR gene [frequency of the variant t allele (ft) = and how they interact. 0.39] and the translation initiation codon polymorphism detected by Fok1 digestion (ff= 0.40). We also characterized three CASR polymorphisms C067. Physical and transcript map of the hereditary sensory A986S (fS= 0.15), R990G (fG= 0.08), and IVS5 T-88C (fC= 0.31). Partial neuropathy type 1 locus on chromosome 9q22. correlation coefficients (corrected for age, weight, height, serum phos- K. Bejaoui1, C. Wu2, P. de Jong2, R. H. Brown, Jr.1 phate, serum creatinine, serum albumin, and serum total globulins) show 1Massachusetts General Hospital; Charlestown, MAUnited States; 2Pfizer significant association of serum calcium with all three CASR polymor- Laboratory for Molecular Genetics; Alameda, CAUnited States phisms; A986S (r = 0.291, p = 0.0001), IVS5 T-88C (r = -0.11, p = 0.032), bejaoui@helix.mgh.harvard.edu and R990G (r = -0.10, p = 0.050). No correlation was observed with either Objective; Positional cloning of the hereditary sensory neuropathy type1. of the VDR polymorphisms; Fok1 (p = 0.77) or Taq1 (p = 0.57). These Background; Hereditary sensory neuropathy type 1 (HSN-1) is a familial results confirm that variations in extracellular calcium concentrations may peripheral neuropathy characterized by loss of temperature sensation, be determined in part by CASR, but there is no apparent contribution of the ulceration and osteomyelitis of the digits and slight distal motor involve- VDR polymorphisms examined here. Since other studies have suggested ment. HSN-1 is associated with severe loss of ganglion cells in the sacral that urinary calcium excretion is determined in part by VDR (Bone and lumbar dorsal root ganglia, as well as degeneration of the sensory 1998;5;S248), it seems likely that multiple loci contribute co-ordinately to fibers in the dorsal roots. The mode of inheritance of HSN-1 is autosomal the genetic variability of calcium metabolism in humans. dominant with onset typically in the second or third decade. HSN-1 is a het- erogeneous disease that involves at least three loci. We and others have previously mapped one of the defective genes to human chromosome 9q22 in large informative HSN-1 families of diverse ethnic groups. We sub- sequently constructed a 2.5-Mb yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) contig that spans the HSN-1 locus. Haplotype analysis of various HSN-1 familiesConcurrent Sessions 91 identified the markers D9S1941, D9S197 as flanking markers of the HSN- parison against the chromosome 22 reference sequence (1). The most 1 locus. To help our search for the gene defect, we have cloned the affect- common genotypes were defined for each gene from a set of SNPs select- ed part of chromosome 9 in bacterial and P1-derived artificial chromo- ed from the most variable SNPs, accounting for 80% of the total SNPvari- somes Design/Methods; To isolate genomic clones that span the HSN-1 ability, since these are the most informative of the major genotypes. locus, we screened three genomic PAC libraries and one BAC library with Accordingly, the number of SNPs used to define genotypes varies by gene 45 markers that have been roughly mapped within our region of interest on and by population. An average of 11 distinct genotypes were observed for chromosome 9. Information for all markers were obtained from the web each gene. The strength of association between the genotypes for each pages (http;//www.genome.wi.mit.edu/; pair of genes was evaluated primarily by the uncertainty coefficient, U, http;//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genemap/; based on Information theory. The value of U ranges from 0 (no association) http;//www.shgc.stanford.edu/Mapping/rh/). to 1 (complete association). Of the 18624 comparisons, 27 were deter- We labeled DNAmarkers either by random oligonucleotide-primer synthe- mined by Freeman-Halton-Fishers exact test to be significant with p < sis or overgo labeling (http;//informa.bio.caltech.edu/). We analyzed the 0.001. Of these significant associations, the average U is 0.71, indicating expression profile of the putative transcripts by two complementary that knowledge of the genotype of one of the genes is highly informative of approaches; northern blot analysis of a set of 15 adult human tissues and the genotype of the other gene. Possible functional mechanisms for these amplification of the 5end sequences by SMARTRACE-PCR from a selec- strong associations are discussed. The strength of association between tion of mRNAtissues, including rat dorsal root ganglia. To prioritize our the different genes has also been compared with the known physical dis- search toward the transcripts expressed in the DRG neurons we also tances between them. Mapping data from different sources have been screened all candidate transcripts for expression in a rat DRG cDNA integrated, enabling the assignment of unique chromosomal locations to library. Clones that both map within the HSN-1 contig and are expressed each SNP. 1. Dunham, I., Shimizu, N., Roe, B.A., Chissoe, S. et al. 1999. in DRG were the first to be analyzed for mutations. To identify overlapping The DNAsequence of human chromosome 22. Nature 402, 489-495. cDNAclones that cover the entire transcripts, we used the ESTassembly machine at Tigem (http;//hercules.tigem.it). We determined the genomic C070.High-throughput SNPgenotyping by MALDI-TOF MS structure of novel genes by using both the unfinished and the finished M. Kostrzewa1, T. Frhlich1, T. Wenzel1, C. Franke1, W. Pusch2, K. O. Human Genome Sequences databases at the NCBI Kruter2, Y. Stalgies2 (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast). We scrutinized the candidate genes for 1Bruker Saxonia Analytik GmbH, Bioanalytics; Leipzig, Germany; 2Bruker mutations using SSCPanalysis and cycle sequencing, either from genom- Daltonik GmbH; Bremen, Germany ic DNAor RNAusing RT-PCR. Results; We have established a bacterial AKR@bdal.de contig flanked by markers D9S1841 and D9S197. This contig spans 1.6 One of the great challenges of the upcoming postgenomic era is the deter- Mb. It consists of 112 clones (32 PACs and 80 BACs) and 51 markers. We mination of sequence variations, in particular single nucleotide polymor- have identified within this contig a total of 26 transcriptional units, including phisms (SNPs). These polymorphisms which occur with a frequency of four that are expressed in the DRG. Among these four, three are novel more than 1/1000 in the human genome are believed to have an enormous genes. We have determined the sequence of the full-length transcripts, impact in diagnosis of diseases, improvement of drugs, and forensic analy- determined the exon-intron boundaries and analyzed the exons in our sis in future. In contrast to the increasing demand for SNP genotyping, HSN-1 patiens in these four genes. Our preliminary data suggest that one there is still a lack of highly reliable high-throughput SNP typing tech- may be defective in some HSN-1 families. Conclusions; Using various niques. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of flight mass resources available through the human genome project, and informative spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) is a powerful advanced technology capa- HSN-1 families of various ethnic groups we were able to; 1) map one HSN- ble of the accurate and cost-effective typing of many thousands of SNPs 1 gene to human chromosome 9q22, 2) establish a physical and transcript per day. The GOOD assay, a novel sample preparation procedure for map of the candidate region, 3) precisely map 26 genes in this region, MALDI-TOF typing of SNPs was recently presented (Sauer et al., Nucleic including four expressed in the DRG. Preliminary screening analyses sug- Acids Research, methods online, 2000, 28, e13). This preparation uses gest that one of these may be mutated in some HSN-1 families. sensitivity enhancing, chemical modifications of the allele specific prod- ucts. Main advantage of the GOOD assay over other SNP genotyping C068.Molecular Profiling Of Cells From Carriers Of The ATM preparation methods with MALDI detection is that this protocol does not Mutations. require solid phase purification of the products prior MALDI analysis. SNP J. Watts, J. Burdick, R. S. Spielman, V. G. Cheung typing starts with a PCR encompassing a region containing a known SNP. University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States Thereafter dNTPs are digested with shrimp alkaline phosphatase. In the vcheung@mail.med.upenn.edu following primer extension reaction using a charge tag containing exten- Patients with ataxia telangiectasia (AT) have two mutated copies of the sion primer, a conditioned set of ddNTPs and a DNApolymerase of allele gene ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and occur approximately 1 in specific products are generated. The 5 part of the extension primer is 40,000 births. In contrast, heterozygous carriers for mutations in the ATM removed by an exonuclease. By alkylation the backbone phosphate gene constitute about 1-2% of the general population. ATM protein plays a groups are neutralised. This results in small singly charged product mole- key role in cellular response to DNAdamage caused by ionizing radiation cules which are transferred onto non-protonating matrix on the MALDI tar- (IR) and the maintenance of genomic integrity. Studies show ATcarriers get. Due to the lack of mass and charge tagged nucleotides, flexibility of are more sensitive to IR and have increased risk for cancer, compared to the GOOD assay was limited. Therefore, we synthezised a set of propar- normal controls. At present, there is no diagnostic tool for identification of gylamine-linked nucleosides which allow the charge-tagging of each of the ATcarriers. Our goal is to determine a set of genes differentially expressed four different nucleobases. In addition, we introduced charge tag mole- in normal and AT carrier cells. This molecular fingerprint could then be cules of different masses. Thereby we significantly increased flexibility and used to determine ATcarrier status. We have used cDNAmicroarrays to multiplexing capability of the GOOD assay. Mass spectra of 384 samples determine the mRNAexpression level of several thousand genes in 12 AT can be acquired in less than one hour. Allele calling is performed automat- carrier and 12 normal lymphoblastoid cell lines. Expression profiles were ically by the novel genotools SNPmanager software, online during spec- generated for cells at baseline and after treatment with 3-Gy gamma radi- tra acquisition or offline, after measurement of a set of samples. The result- ation. There were marked, statistically significant differences in the expres- ing genotypes are stored in a table in the ASCII formate together with a sion level of genes at baseline and at subsequent timepoints post-IR treat- quality assessment. ment. We will present our work in determining a molecular fingerprint, a set of differentially-expressed genes, from ATcarriers and normal controls. C071.Comparison of Human Genetic and Physical Maps J. L. Weber1, K. W. Broman2, A. Yu1, C. Zhao1, Y. Fan1, W. Jang3, N. Ghe- C069. Correlations among DNA sequence variants in 97 branious1, A. J. Mungall4, P. Deloukas4, N. A. Doggett5, A. Olsen6 genes on human Chromosome 22 1Marshfield Medical Research Foundation; Marshfield, WI United States; W. R. Newell, T. Acharya, R. Jiang, T. Kalbfleisch, C. Nicholson, J. Schnei- 2Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD United States; 3National Insti- der, S. Stanley, G. F. Vovis, J. C. Stephens tutes of Health; Bethesda, MD United States; 4Sanger Centre; Cambridge, Genaissance Pharmaceuticals; New Haven, CT United States United Kingdom; 5Los Alamos National Laboratory; Los Alamos, NM Unit- w.newell@genaissance.com ed States; 6Joint Genome Institute; Walnut Creek, CAUnited States 3509 SNPs were discovered and genotyped in 97 genes on Chromosome weberj@cmg.mfldclin.edu 22 in 93 individuals from four broadly defined ethnic populations (African- Completion of the draft human genomic sequence offered the best oppor- Americans, Asians, European-Americans and Hispanic-Latinos). The tunity to date to compare genetic and physical maps. Using computer sequences comprise exons and flanking intronic sequences on 22q. They searches we identified BAC sequences which encompassed about 75% of were assigned unique locations on the chromosome by sequence com- the 8000 short tandem repeat polymorphisms (STRPs) on our most recent92 Concurrent Sessions comprehensive genetic maps (Broman et al. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63;861- ment levels compared with 62.8% (p<0.001) at 52 weeks. Modest further 869, 1998). Physical distances between STRPs were obtained from the improvement in shoulder range of motion was observed relative to 52 Golden Path draft sequence assemblies, Sept. 5, 2000 version weeks of therapy. Improved NYHeart Association cardiac function scores (http;//genome.cse.ucsc.edu). Genetic distances were obtained from new were maintained at 104 weeks compared to 52 weeks, and no significant maps rebuilt using CEPH family genotyping data and marker order from changes were observed on echocardiograms. In prepubertal patients, the draft sequence assemblies. Recombination rates were found to vary height and weight increased 8.0% and 35.3%, respectively, over the 2 greatly along each chromosome ranging from 0 to at least 9 cM/mb. Mean years of treatment with similar growth rates at weeks 52 and 104. Hyper- recombination rates were 0.92, 1.30 and 1.68 cM/mb for males, sex-aver- sensitivity reactions were the most common adverse events, and urticaria age, and females, respectively. In general, female and male recombination was most frequent. Reactions were managed with increased premedica- rates varied independently of each other. Among several sequence and tions and slower infusion rates. Antibodies to the product declined with time marker parameters tested including G + C content, density of SINEs and and clinical reactions resolved. One patient died just prior to the 104 week LINEs, density of various STRs, and marker heterozygosity, only relative evaluations due to an illness not directly related to therapy. The two year marker position along the metacentric chromosomes in males correlated follow-up data suggest that treatment of MPS I patients with recombinant strongly with recombination rate. We identified several chromosomal human ?-L-iduronidase continues to be beneficial and appears safe. regions up to 6 mb in length which were especially low (deserts) or high (jungles) in recombination rate. Because only 184 meioses (92 in each C074. Enzyme Replacement Therapy Reverses the Car- sex) were used to construct the genetic maps, confidence intervals for both diomyopathy of Fabry Disease; Results of a Randomized, genetic distances and recombination rates were relatively broad. Never- Double Blind, Placebo Controlled Trial theless, linkage disequilibrium was much more common and extended to K. MacDermot, A. Brown, Y. Jones, J. Zuckerman greater distances in the deserts compared to the jungles. Estimates of Royal Free Clinical Trial Centre, Royal Free and UniversityCollege Med- recombination rates for individual STRPs along with accession numbers ical School; London, United Kingdom for overlapping BACs are available from the Marshfield web site tschuetz@tktx.com (http;//research.marshfieldclinic.org/genetics). Purpose; Fabry Disease is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by defi- ciency of the enzyme a-galactosidase A. Globotriaosylceramide (Gb3), the C072. Comparative gene and genome mapping in pufferfish glycosphingolipid substrate of the enzyme, accumulates within multiple cell and humans types. Deposition occurs within cardiac myocytes, neurons, and renal F. Gruetzner1, H. Roest Crollius2, J. Weissenbach2, G. Ltjens1, H. H. glomerular and tubular epithelial cells. Patients suffer from serious debili- Ropers1, T. Haaf1 tating pain, progressive cardiomyopathy and renal failure leading to pre- 1Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2Geno- mature mortality in the fourth or fifth decade of life. Methods and Materials; scope; Evry, France Fifteen patients with left ventricular hypertrophy and classic Fabry Disease gruetzne@molgen.mpg.de were randomised to receive 12 biweekly infusions of 0.2 mg/kg of Repla- Because of its highly compact genome, the pufferfish has become an gal (human a-galactosidase A) or placebo. Outcome measures focused on important animal model in genome research. Although the small chromo- the cardiomyopathy of Fabry Disease and Gb3 levels. Results; There was some size renders chromosome analysis difficult, we have established a statistically significant decrease in cardiac mass in the Replagal treated both classical and molecular cytogenetics in the freshwater pufferfish patients and an increase in cardiac mass in the placebo patients. Replagal Tetraodon nigroviridis (TNI), which is relatively easy to obtain and to keep effected a 4.2% decrease in cardiac mass, but placebo was associated in aquaria. TNI, as well as the Japanese pufferfish, Fugu rubripes (FRU), with an 8.8% increase in cardiac mass (p=0.041). Replagal corrected the serve as models for large-scale genomic sequencing and other genome metabolic defect of Fabry Disease as measured by a 50% decrease in Gb3 projects. The comparative mapping of 49 TNI specific BAC clones, which storage in plasma (p<0.001) and urine sediment (p=0.047). Enzyme infu- have orthologous genes on human X chromosome and chromosome 9 on sions were extremely well tolerated. Two of 7 patients (29%) developed a TNI chromosomes, revealed remarkable differences in conservation of low titre IgG antibody response to Replagal, and 1 of these patients devel- chromosomal synteny in the pufferfish. 24 of 31 BACs derived from human oped immunological tolerance. Conclusion; Therapy with Replagal was X chromosomal genes were distributed on only 4 different TNI chromo- demonstrated to be extremely well tolerated. Therapy with Replagal has somes, delineating 4 large segments of conserved chromosomal synteny. been demonstrated to reverse the cardiomyopathy and correct the meta- In contrast, only 4 of 18 BACs isolated with genes from human chromo- bolic defect of Fabry Disease. some 9 were linked in TNI. Therefore, the extraordinary conservation of the X chromosome, can now be extended to lower vertebrate species like C075. Substrate Reduction Therapy in Type 1 Gaucher Dis- pufferfish and hence seems not only due to mammalian X inactivation. In ease with OGT918 addition, we have generated chromosome-specific DNAlibraries of puffer- C. Moyses fish chromosomes by microdissection. Southern hybridization of these Oxford GlycoSciences; Abingdon, United Kingdom libraries to gridded filters was used to identify chromosome-specific genes chris.moyses@ogs.co.uk and genomic clones to improve our first-generation homology map. Since Gaucher disease is a rare inherited deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme TNI and FRU diverged only about 18 million years ago, probes from one glucocerebrosidase, which results in glucocerebroside storage in the liver species can easily be hybridized on chromosomes or filters of the other and spleen, haematological abnormalities and accompanying bone com- species. plications. Current treatment involves giving recombinant macrophage tar- geted beta-glucocerebrosidase by repeated intravenous infusion. N- C073.Two Year Experience of Enzyme Replacement Therapy butyldeoxnojirimycin (OGT918, Vevesca), an imino sugar which partially for Mucopolysaccharidosis I inhibits the ceramide-specific glucosyltransferase, the enzyme which initi- J. Muenzer1, G. Tiller2, L. Waber3, J. Belmont4, M. Passage5, B. Izykows- ates the glycosphingolipid biosynthetic pathway and catalyses the forma- ki5, J. Phillips5, R. Doroshow5, I. Walot5, R. Hoft5, K. Ti Yu5, S. Okazaki5, tion of glucocerebroside, is currently being tested in the clinic as a poten- D. Lewis5, R. Lachman5, J. Thompson6, E. Neufeld7 tial oral therapy for this disorder. Results from the first clinical study of 1University of North Carolina; Chapel Hill, NC United States; 2Vanderbilt OGT918 in 28 patients with type 1 Gaucher disease have shown signifi- University; Nashville, TN United States; 3University of Texas Southwestern cant improvements in liver and spleen organ volumes, hematological Medical Center; Dallas, TX United States; 4Baylor College of Medicine; parameters and other markers of disease activity.1,2. Trials are ongoing to Houston, TX United States; 5Harbor-UCLAMedical Center; Torrance, CA investigate further OGT918 as a therapy for type 1 Gaucher disease United States; 6University of Alabama at Birmingham; Birmingham, AL including a monotherapy study to assess dose effect in an additional 18 United States; 7UCLASchool of Medicine; Los Angeles, CAUnited States patients, plus a randomised study of patients who have received enzyme muenzer@css.unc.edu replacement therapy (ERT) for a minimum of 2 years. In this study, 36 Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS I) is caused by a deficiency of the lysosos- patients were randomised to remain on their existing ERT(N=12), switch mal enzyme, ?-L-iduronidase. Recombinant human ?-L-iduronidase has to OGT918 (N=12), or add OGT918 to their current ERT(N=12). These been studied as an enzyme replacement therapy with follow-up data avail- studies are complete and comparative efficacy and clinical safety meas- able for the first 2 years. Ten MPS I patients representing a spectrum of urements between treatment arms will be presented. 1. Cox Tet al. The severity were treated weekly with intravenous infusions of ?-L-iduronidase. Lancet 2000; 355; 1481-1485 2. Zimran Aet al. Fourth European Working Liver volumes after 104 weeks of treatment were reduced 24.0% (p<0.001) Group on Gaucher Disease, Jerusalem; September 2000 from pretreatment with a range of 17.2 to 33.2%. Spleen volumes were reduced 22.1% (p<0.05) from pretreatment. At 104 weeks, urinary gly- cosaminoglycan excretion was decreased 72.1% (p<0.001) from pretreat-Concurrent Sessions 93 C076.Tissue specific inducible expression of the human acid deutekom@lumc.nl alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene in GAAknockout mice; impli- Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal muscle disease usually cations for therapy. caused by frame-shifting mutations in the DMD gene. Amilder allelic form, N. Raben1, N. Lu1, Y. Rivera1, K. Nagaraju1, J. Hopwood2, K. Umapa- Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD), exists in which despite a deletion or thysivam2, P. Meikle2, P. Plotz1 duplication of one or more exons, the translational reading frame is main- 1National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, MD United States; 2Womens and tained and a largely functional dystrophin protein is generated. We have Childrens Hospital; North Adelaide, Australia explored an alternative strategy towards DMD gene therapy based on cor- rabenn@arb.niams.nih.gov rection of the reading frame through targeted modulation of dystrophin Deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GSDII, Pompe disease) results in RNAsplicing. Using antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) directed at puta- generalized deposition of lysosomal glycogen and manifests as car- tive splicing regulatory sequences, we aim to induce the specific skipping diomegaly and muscular weakness fatal in infancy. We have used a tetra- of target exons from the transcript. Recently, we were able to induce exon cycline-controllable system to rescue the phenotype of the GAAko mice by 46 skipping in mouse and human myotubes in vitro, confirmed through RT- expressing hGAAcDNA-IRES-EGFPeither in their skeletal muscle (mck- PCR and sequence analysis. In muscle cells from two unrelated DMD GAA/-/-) or liver (albGAA/-/-). In the two mck lines, the levels of GAAactiv- patients carrying one of the most frequent DMD mutations, i.e. a deletion ity in muscle were increased ~5-fold (low) and ~100-fold (high) compared of exon 45, exon 46 skipping would restore the reading frame and induce to the GAA+/- controls. These levels were sufficient to provide phenotypic the synthesis of a BMD-like dystrophin lacking both exons 45 and 46. To correction locally  no glycogen accumulation was observed in muscle. verify this, we performed immunohistochemical analyses on transfected However, systemic correction was observed only in the high expresser patient-derived myotubes. Dystrophin expression was detected at almost line. Northern, RT-PCR, and immunoblot with anti-EGFPantibody demon- normal levels in at least 75% of cells, and was sustained for several days. strated that the GAAactivity detected in distant organs reflects the uptake Moreover, the dystrophin signals were found at the myotube membranes, of the enzyme. Although the levels of GAAexpression in the low express- suggesting a functional role of the truncated protein. Our results under- er line exceeded the levels in the wt mice, the secreted protein was not score the therapeutic potential of AONs to restore dystrophin production in detected in circulation, and glycogen accumulation in the heart was similar cells from DMD patients. This strategy may be applicable not only to a vari- to that in the ko mice. No enzyme was detected in the brain in either of the ety of DMD mutations, but also many other genetic diseases. two lines. The data indicate that intramuscular gene transfer as a treatment for GSDII is doubtful because of the high level of expression required for C079. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for -thalassemia cross-correction. GAAexpression in liver (~100-fold increase) resulted in a major and sickle cell thalassemia in Greece; two years clini- significant amount of secreted GAAand a metabolic correction of muscle cal experience and heart. Doxycycline abolished GAAexpression in all the lines. Turning J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, G. Palmer2, M. Mas- the gene on at different stages of the disease will reveal if and when the trominas2, E. Kanavakis1 disease is reversible. 1Athens University, Medical Genetics; Athens, Greece; 2IVFunit Embryo- genesis; Athens, Greece C077.Prevention and reversal of muscular dystrophy in mdx jtraeger@cc.uoa.gr mice About 10% of the Greek population are heterozygous for -thalassemia or J. S. Chamberlain, D. Hartigan-OConnor, S. Harper, C. DelloRusso, G. HbS, and prevention programmes involving prenatal diagnosis (PND) are Crawford, J. Scott well established. However, couples with an unsuccessful reproductive his- University of Washington; Seattle, WAUnited States tory may prefer to avoid terminating an ongoing pregnancy. Preimplanta- jsc5@u.washington.edu tion genetic diagnosis (PGD) allows selection of unaffected IVF embryos Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is an inherited, X-linked disorder for transfer. To accomplish PGD for the wide spectrum of -thalassemia characterized by progressive muscle degeneration and weakness. The major genotypes in Greece, we applied an accurate, reliable strategy disease is caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene, which encodes a involving nested PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) 427 kDa protein that links the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. analysis. DGGE is an advantageous method since it allows simultaneous We have been exploring the feasibility of gene therapy for DMD by devel- detection of both alleles that contribute to the genotype, minimizing risk of oping viral shuttle vectors that can deliver dystrophin expression cassettes midiagnosis. Thirty-two couples were counselled, of whom 26 initiated 36 to muscle. Two key limitations to this strategy have been the size of the PGD cycles. PGD was discontinued in ten cycles with <4 IVF embryos. In dystrophin cDNA(14 kb) and the immune response elicited against many 26 completed PGD cycles, 184 embryos developed to cleavage stage and viral vectors with large cloning capacities. As a result, we have developed were biopsied, 72 embryos were diagnosed as unaffected, and 61 were a gutted adenoviral vector system that has a 30 kb cloning capacity and a transferred (2.31.0 per cycle). From the 26 complete cycles, 13 pregnan- significantly diminished propensity to trigger a host immune response. We cies were established, (50% success per cycle), including 11 singletons, 1 have also developed a series of mini and micro dystrophin clones that we twin and 1 triplet (26% implantation rate for embryos transferred). The mul- show display a surprisingly high functional capacity. The gutted Ad vector tiple pregnancies await CVS PND. Of the singleton pregnancies, 3 await have no viral genes and are grown in packaging cell lines that express the CVS, 2 were selectively terminated (1 ectopic and 1 misdiagnosis detect- Ad proteins DNApolymerase and terminal protein. This cell line (C7) sup- ed by CVS PND), 1 miscarried in the first trimester and 5 were confirmed ports robust growth of gutted Ad vectors using helper viruses deleted for as unaffected with CVS PND, and have resulted in the birth of full-term the POLand TPgenes, further minimizing the immunogenicity of this sys- healthy babies. For couples with an unsuccessful reproductive history and tem. We show that gutted Ad vectors that express human dystrophin still high risk of transmitting a (severe) genetic disease, PGD is a valuable and elicit a detectable CTLresponse, but one that does not lead to an obvious highly worthwhile procedure. diminution of dystrophin expression. Vectors expressing mouse dys- trophin, in contrast, do not display adverse consequences. Injection of the C080. Flow-Cytometric Sperm Separation in Preimplantation mouse dystrophin gutted virus leads to a significant reduction and reversal Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) of X-Linked Disease. of dystrophic pathology in dystrophic mdx mice, even those more than one D. P. Bick, G. L. Harton, H. J. Stern, L. A. Fallon, K. L. Blauer, K. Keyvan- year old. We have also developed a series of small dystrophins by com- far, E. F. Fugger bining deletions in the C-terminal domain of dystrophin with deletions of the Genetics & IVFInstitute; Fairfax, VAUnited States rod domain. Removal of the dystrophin C-terminal domain, or 16 of 24 dbick@givf.com spectrin-like repeats, has no detectable functional deficit in transgenic To improve the ratio of female to male embryos in PGD for the prevention mice. Furthermore, expression cassettes made by removal of 20 of 24 of X-linked disorders, we have used flow-cytometric sperm separation repeats lead to near normal functional capacity in some clones, but not in (MicroSort) to enrich samples for X-bearing sperm. Embryos created by others, suggesting that not all the spectrin repeats function in a similar IVF are tested for the presence of X- and Y- chromosome specific DNAand manner. These microdystrophin clones are approximately 4 kb in size, only embryos determined to be female are transferred to the mothers enabling their delivery with other genes and regulatory cassettes in gutted uterus. We have performed 14 IVF cycles for 12 patients with 6 different X- Ad vectors, or by themselves in adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors. linked disorders. Enriched X-bearing sperm fractions with an average purity of 85.5%, as C078. Restoration of dystrophin synthesis in muscle cells determined by dual color X and Yfluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), from DMD patients through induced exon skipping in vitro. were used to fertilize oocytes from patients. Multiplex nested polymerase J. C. T. van Deutekom, M. Bremmer-Bout, A. A. M. Janson, H. B. Ginjaar, chain reaction (PCR) using multiple genetic markers was used to deter- J. T. den Dunnen, G. B. van Ommen mine the sex of each embryo. Of 118 embryos biopsied, 94 were deter- Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands mined to be female, 7 were determined to be male, and 17 were of unde-94 Concurrent Sessions termined gender. Rome, Italy; 6Department of Neurology; Athens, Greece; 7Clinical Genet- Among embryos where a gender assignment was possible, 93% (94/101) ics; Aberdeen, United Kingdom were female. Without sperm separation, one would expect roughly 50% of Gerry.Kiebooms@med.kuleuven.ac.be embryos to be female and available for transfer. MicroSort increases the The paper, based on a multidisciplinary European study, is aimed at proportion of X-bearing sperm, as reflected in the number of embryos analysing differences in post predictive test reproductive decision making determined to be female after blastomere biopsy. This method allows cou- of carriers and non-carriers and uptake for prenatal testing for HD in the ples undergoing PGD for X-linked disease significantly more female carrier group in six European countries. The study group consisted of 451 embryos available on the day of transfer, and may also result in one or persons (40% carriers and 60% non-carriers) at reproductive age when the more frozen transfer cycles without the need for additional IVF cycles. We predictive test result was given (period 1993-1998) and counseled in one believe this data demonstrates the advantage of the use of MicroSort in of the participating genetic centers. The testees mean age at the commu- PGD for X-linked disorders. nication of the test result was 31.5 years and half of the group had one or more pregnancies before the predictive test. Overall significantly more C081. First trimester fetal sex determination in maternal non-carriers than carriers had subsequent pregnancies (p<0.001). In the serum using real-time PCR carrier group refraining from further pregnancies was the most frequently J. Costa1, A. Benachi2, P. Ernault1, J. Jouannic2, E. Gautier1, Y. Dumez2 chosen option; prenatal testing occurred in about two thirds of the preg- 1Hpital Amricain de Paris; Neuilly, France; 2Hpital Necker Enfants nancies. Amore refined analysis in the subgroup who expressed repro- Malades; Paris, France ductive motives in the pretest period and for whom at least three years jean-marc.costa@ahp-paris.com elapsed between the communication of the predictive test result and the BACKGROUND Fetal sex prediction is achievable using PCR targeted at last follow-up contact, 39% of the carriers had subsequent pregnancies the SRYgene by analysing cell-free fetal DNAin maternal blood. The PCR versus 69% of the non-carriers. An analysis of covariance, controlling for method is a useful non-invasive approach in the management of pregnant age and number of pretest pregnancies, revealed a significant impact of carriers of X-linked genetic disorders. Unfortunately, this procedure has, to the predictive test result upon subsequent pregnancies (p<0.01). The sex date, lacked sensitivity and reliability during the first trimester of pregnan- of the prospective parent did not play a significant role in the carrier group. cy. Thus, it can not replace chorionic villus sampling. METHODS Anew It will be concisely discussed to what extent the considerable differences highly sensitive real-time PCR was developped to detect SRY gene between countries may be due to variability in counseling approach, cul- sequences in maternal serum. Analysis was performed on 101 pregnant tural differences, legislation and other factors. women during their first trimester of pregnancy. Results of this prospective study were compared with those obtained later for fetal sex. RESULTS C084. Reproduction and multiple sclerosis; A counselling Among the 101 pregnant women, 51 were bearing a male fetus and 50 a paradigm female fetus. SRYPCR analysis of maternal serum was in complete con- D. Sadovnick, E. Dwosh, C. Guimond cordance with fetal sex. No false negative results were observed. Further- University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada more, no false positive results occurred although twenty-seven women sadovnik@infinet.net carried female fetus during the current pregnancy, had at least one previ- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common neurological disorder (1/500 ous male-bearing pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS This study demonstrates lifetime risk) affecting Caucasian young adults. Females are affected that a reliable, non-invasive sex determination can be achieved through an approximately twice as often as males. The etiology of MS is still some- analysis of maternal serum during the first trimester of pregnancy in place what of a mystery but genetic factors are recognized to be important in of invasive CVS procedure. It has great implications for the managment of both susceptibility to and the familial aggregation of the disease. There pregnant women who are carriers of X-linked genetic disorders. New is no cure for MS. Current treatments are categorized either as symptom strategies are being developed for the prenatal diagnosis of these genetic specific (e.g. high dose steroids) or disease modifying (e.g. interferons). diseases. The possible impact of MS treatments on a developing fetus is of concern to potential parents as well as to health care practitioners. Increasingly, C082. Dystrophin expression in cultured non-muscle fetal clinical geneticists and genetic counsellors are asked to provide genetic cells; possible applications for prenatal diagnosis and reproductive counselling for women (and men) who have MS and wish F. Leturcq1, U. Nudel2, O. Fuchs2, N. Deburgrave1, M. Zabot3, D. Rcan1, to have children. The purpose of this presentation is to provide a paradigm F. Niel1, J. Kaplan1, D. Yaffe2 for such counselling, based on the experience at the Vancouver Multiple 1Hopital Cochin-Maternits; Paris, France; 2Weizmann Institute; Rehovot, Sclerosis Clinic. Topics to be discussed include; (i) MS risks to offspring; Israel; 3Hopital Debrousse; Lyon, France (ii) Overall pregnancy outcome - do women with MS have a higher risk of leturcq@icgm.cochin.inserm.fr stillbirths, spontaneous abortions, etc. compared to age matched women Reliable prenatal diagnosis of Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), by without MS; (iii) Teratogenetic concerns with special emphasis on MS ther- analysis of the dystrophin gene in fetal DNAfrom amniotic or chorion villi, apies; (iv) The impact of gestation and delivery on maternal MS; (v) The can be currently proposed in only 2/3 of the cases. In the remaining, help- longterm implications of MS on parenting. There are many factors such as less, cases a direct dystrophin analysis in fetal sample would be highly MS clinical course in the woman prior to pregnancy, age of MS onset, etc. warranted, but this protein is supposed to be exclusively expressed in mus- which can alter the information provided during a counselling session. The cle and nerve cells, and early in utero fetal muscle sampling is not feasi- information presented will provide guidelines on the adaption of coun- ble. In 1993 Prigojin et al (FEBS Letters, 1993, 335, 223-230), using a very selling to specific family situations. sensitive method of immuno-precipitation followed by western-blot analy- sis, found that minute amounts of dystrophin are detected in cultured cells C085. Genomic overview of meiotic recombination in the from control amniotic fluid (AF) and chorionic villus samples (CVS), where- human female as dystrophin is not found in DMD fetuses. Using this technique in a dou- M. A. Hulten, C. Tease, G. Hartshorne ble blind study, we examined cultured CVS and AF cells obtained from MRI, University of Warwick; Coventry, United Kingdom pregnant women from high risk families in which the defect in the dys- MHulten@bio.warwick.ac.uk trophin gene was already known. All 16 DMD affected fetuses were dys- We have exploited the remarkable behaviour of the DNAmismatch repair trophin-negative, and 28 out of 31 control fetal samples were positive. The protein MLH1 to pinpoint recombination events along the length of chro- proportion of false negatives (3 out of 31) complicates the use of this mosomes to obtain a genome-wide overview of meiotic recombination method for prenatal diagnosis. We currently investigate the molecular and (crossing-over) in human females. We determined the time of appearance cellular basis for the unexpected expression of dystrophin in non-muscle of the meiosis-specific pairing structures, the Synaptonemal Complexes fetal cells, and for the phenomenon of false negative cells, in order to make (SCs), and MLH1 foci (which we have termed RFs for recombination foci) the method applicable to diagnosis. in fetal oocytes. It was evident that such RFs are not randomly distributed along the length of individual SCs. In addition, in SCs with more than one C083. The impact of the predictive test result upon subse- RF, the RFs were spaced out along chromosomes, indicating positive inter- quent reproductive decision making in families with Hunting- ference. This pattern of RF distribution in oocytes differed from that previ- tons disease; a European collaborative study ously described for human spermatocytes. In particular, there is a more G. Evers-Kiebooms1, K. Nys1, P. Harper2, M. Zoeteweij3, A. Drr4, G. regular near-terminal positioning of RFs in spermatocytes. Counts of RFs Jacopini5, C. Yapijakis6, S. Simpson7 were performed in 95 oocytes at the pachytene stage from one fetus. The 1Center for Human Genetics; Leuven, Belgium; 2Institute of Medical mean per oocyte was 70.3 (n=95, stdev=10.5, range=42-105) = 3,5151 Genetics; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 3Clinical Genetics Center; Leiden, The cM, while the value for spermatocytes is 50.9 (n=46,stdev=4.4, range=41- Netherlands; 4INSERM-Unit 298; Paris, France; 5Istituto di Psicologia; 59) = 2,545 cM.- RFs appeared to be more closely spaced at earlyConcurrent Sessions 95 zygotene in comparison to pachytene. This suggests the occurrence of an C088.The assignment of HMGIYretrospeudogenes correlates editing machinery, operating during the process of maturation of with breakpoints of clonal aberrations observed in benign exchanges, which precludes close spacing. In other words, there is an idi- solid tumors cation that cross-over interference is established during the progression of C. Blank, J. Bullerdiek, P. Rogalla oocytes from early zygotene to pachytene. Further detailed investigations, Center for Human Genetics; Bremen, Germany including observation on in vitro maturing oocytes, should help to elucidate coblank@uni-bremen.de the still enigmatic mechanism underlying cross-over interference. Recently, we have described a mechanism by which after retrotransposi- tion a processed gene, i.e., HMG1L3 becomes an exon of a pre-existing C086.The origin of abnormalities in recurrent aneuploidy active gene. Similar mechanisms can easily explain as to how processed W. P. Robinson, D. E. McFadden, M. D. Stephenson genes derived from tumor-associated genes may be activated by chromo- University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada somal rearrangements in neoplasms. Because genes of the high mobility wendyr@interchange.ubc.ca group protein family HMGI(Y) are known to be involved in the development Recurrent pregnancy loss as a consequence of sporadic aneuploidies may of a variety of benign solid tumors we have analysed breakpoints of clon- simply be a consequence of the dramatic increase of trisomic conceptions al chromosome abnormalities in that group of benign tumors for a possible with maternal age. However, it is also possible that some couples are at correlation with retropseudogenes of the HMGIY gene. Whereas the increased risk of aneuploidy as a result of gonadal mosaicism, factors HMGIYL1 retrospeudogene has recently been mapped to Xp22.1, we affecting chromosome structure and segregation, or increased sperm ane- assigned a further retropseudogene by FISH to 4q13 and database uploidy in the male partner. We report cytogenetic and molecular findings research revealed the assignment of a third retropseudogene to 12q24.1. for 90 spontaneous abortions (SAs) from 40 couples ascertained as hav- Sequence analyses of these retropseudogenes showed high identity ing two or more documented aneuploid or polyploid SAs. The mean num- indices to the HMGIY gene and no frame shifts. Breakpoint information ber of SAs was 4.1 per couple and mean maternal age at time of aneu- was obtained from cytogenetic aberrations in uterine leiomyomas, lipomas, ploid/polyploid loss was 38 years. Overall the distribution of abnormalities pleomorphic adenomas, and pulmonary chondroid hamartomas because is similar to that expected for older women, with 84% due to autosomal in all of these tumor entities cytogenetic subgroups involving genes of the trisomy. The most common abnormalities observed were trisomy15 HMGI(Y) family exist. Statistical tests revealed that the chromosomal (N=17), trisomy 16 (N=9), triploidy (N=9) and double trisomy (N=8). Mole- bands harbouring HMGIYretropseudogenes were affected with a signifi- cular analysis to determine origin of trisomy is so far complete for 24 SAs, cantly higher frequency than expected under the assumption of purely ran- all of which were attributable to an error at maternal meiosis except a domly occurring breakages. These results further allow us to hypothesize paternal meiotic trisomy 7 and a maternal somatic trisomy 5. These pre- that HMGIY-related retropseudogenes can be affected by chromosomal liminary results exclude a major paternal contribution to recurrent aneu- rearrangements in benign human tumors. ploidy and confirm that most is related to age-related changes in the maternal ovary. However, further analysis and follow-up is needed to deter- C089. Single Copy Hybridization Probes For Detection Of mine if these women have an increased predisposition to trisomy as com- Chromosomal Rearrangements Derived By Genomic pared to age-matched controls and if some specific trisomies (e.g. trisomy Sequence Analysis 15) are over-represented. P. K. Rogan, P. M. Cazcarro, J. H. M. Knoll Childrens Mercy Hospital and Clinics; Kansas City, MO United States C087. XRCC2 and XRCC3 homologous recombination repair progan@cmh.edu genes maintain chromosome stability and correct chromo- Commercial probes currently exist for the most common translocations in some segregation hematopoietic malignancies. However, these probes often do not permit C. S. Griffin, B. Deans, J. Thacker analysis of rare breakpoints or less common aneuploidies. We developed Radiation and Genome Stability Unit,MRC,Harwell; Didcot, United King- a technique that customizes and rapidly generates single copy probes for dom chromosomal in situ hybridization (denoted scFISH). The locations of sin- c.griffin@har.mrc.ac.uk gle copy sequences are inferred from sequence analysis of final or draft Chromosome instability and loss or gain of chromosomes are changes genomic sequences in specific disease intervals. Target sequence inter- characteristic of many tumour cells and human disorders. However, the vals are identified by comparing the genomic sequence with a compre- mechanism of these changes has not yet been fully determined. We have hensive database of repetitive sequence families. DNAfragments suitable recently shown that hamster cell lines deficient in homologous recombina- as hybridization probes are generated by long PCR amplification of the tion repair genes XRCC2 and XRCC3 have an elevated frequency of ane- adjacent single copy sequences, purified, labeled and hybridized to uploidy compared with wild type cells and mutant cells transfected with the genomic sequences. Suppression of repetitive DNAhybridization in the human genes. In addition XRCC2 and XRCC3 deficient hamster cell lines probes was unnecessary due to their single copy composition. Single or have a high frequency of mitotic cells with abnormal centrosomes and multiple fragments were developed from each region and utilized to detect spindle formation (1). We have now examined chromosomal changes in sequences in either metaphase or interphase cells. Probes were designed mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Xrcc2-/- knock out mice. Dis- to detect hemizygous deletions in DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial, Prader-Willi, ruption of the Xrcc2 gene in mice gives early embryonic lethality with only Angelman, and monosomy 1p36 syndromes, translocations in AML M2 29% survival by day 12.5 (2). Metaphases 2hrs after tissue dissociation [8;21], ALL[12;21], CML[9;22]; inversion in AMLM4 [16], and aneuploidy showed a high frequency of chromatid breaks and exchanges in Xrcc2 for chromosomes 5 and 7. Probes to detect other rearrangements are MEFs compared with MEFs from heterozygote and wild-type litter-mates. being developed. Currently, a single, 2.3 kb labeled fragment has been Using 3-colour FISH chromosome type aberrations were observed in adequately and reliably visualized by scFISH. Mixed combinations of DNA Xrcc2-/- MEFs and these included both simple and complex types. Aneu- fragments from the same contig often had but more intense hybridization ploidy was not detected in early passage Xrcc2-/- MEF cells but sponta- signals on metaphase chromosomes than the same fragments hybridized neously transformed Xrcc2-/- MEFs, at low passage, were found to have a individually. To demonstrate the feasibility of using such probes in high-res- very high frequency of aneuploidy. Abnormal fragmented centrosomes and olution FISH studies, we examined the distribution of 2.3 kb single copy multiple spindles were seen at high frequency in mitotic cells from trans- sequences on the completely-sequenced chromosome 22. The minimum formed Xrcc2-/- MEFs compared to transformed Xrcc2+/+ MEFs. This sug- separation between single copy intervals is 35 bp and the maximum is 284 gests that disruption of the mitotic apparatus in Xrcc2 deficient cells leads kb, with an average spacing of 22 kb. Thus, it will be feasible to develop to cell death in p53 competent cells but in the presence of aberrant p53 the custom probes, covering most of the chromosome 22 euchromatic region. cells rapidly become polyploid. These results demonstrate the importance If single copy sequences are similarly distributed on other chromosomes, of the XRCC2 gene in preventing chromosome rearrangements and chro- scFISH will enable more precise delineation of common or rare chromo- mosome mis-segregation, and reinforce the possibility that XRCC2 is a some rearrangement breakpoints, distinction of multigene family members, tumour suppressor gene. 1.C.C.Griffin,P.J.Simpson,C.R.Wilson and and identification of marker chromosomes. J.Thacker. Nature Cell Biology,Vol.2,p757-761,(2000). 2.B.Deans,C.S.Griffin,M.Maconochie and J. Thacker.EMBO in press. 96 Concurrent Sessions C090. Deletion analysis of 98 cases with the 5p- syndromes CNGB3, v) one particular frameshift mutation, 1148delC, accounts for ~ by genomic DNAmicroarrays (GenoChips) 75% of all CNGB3 disease alleles, vi) haplotype reconstructions indicate X. Zhang1,2,3, E. Niebuhr4, R. Segraves2, G. Hamilton2, A. Snijders2, S. founder effects for the most frequent CNGA3 and CNGB3 mutations and Blackwood2, K. Hindle2, N. Brown2, A. Niebuhr4, H. Yang3, D. Albertson2, vii) mutations in CNGA3 and CNGB3 does not necessarily lead to Total L. Bolund1, D. Pinkel2 Colorblindness but can also be found in patients with incomplete achro- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Aarhus University; Aarhus, Denmark; 2UCSF matopsia showing residual cone photoreceptor function and color discrim- Cancer Center; San Francisco, CAUnited States; 3Human Genome Cen- ination capabilities. Supported by grants of the Deutsche Forschungsge- ter, Institute of Genetics; Beijing, China; 4IMBG, Panum Institute, Copen- meinschaft and the BMBF/IZKF Tbingen Medical Faculty. hagen University; Copenhagen, Denmark xxzhang@humgen.au.dk C093. Identification of the Gene Responsible for Hereditary Agenomic DNAmicroarray, or GenoChip, system has developed based on Lymphedema-Distichiasis Syndrome the concept of the comparative genome hybridization (CGH) on a high- T. W. Glover1, R. P. Erickson2, S. L. Dagenais1, J. Fang1, M. F. Arlt1, M. W. density microarray with around 2300 human genomic BAC clones giving Glynn1 an averaged resolution of about 1.5 Mb, and a higher density for the short 1University of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI United States; 2University of Ari- arm of chromosome 5 in this experiment. The sensitivity, resolution and zona; Tucson, AZ United States reliability of the GenoChip have fully been demonstrated when applied to glover@umich.edu the analysis of 98 cases of the 5p- syndrome with cytogenetically known We have identified the gene responsible for the autosomal dominant dis- deletion breakpoints. Deletions, either terminal or interstitial, and duplica- order lymphedema-distichiasis (MIM 153400). Lymphedema-distichiasis tion can be identified with high accuracy in consistence with the data given syndrome classically presents as lymphedema of the limbs with variable by conventional methods. The measurement precision indicates the poten- age of onset and distichiasis, or double rows of eyelashes. Other compli- tial application of the GenoChip that could replace most, if not all, of the cations, exhibiting variable expressivity, include cardiac defects and cleft cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic methodologies and provide a high- palate, suggesting a defect in a developmental gene with pleiotrophic throughput and high-resolution diagnostic capability for all chromosomal effects. We had previously mapped a translocation breakpoint in a male abnormalities except for balanced translocations. with congenital lymphedema to 16q24.3. Lymphedema-distichiasis was subsequently reported to map to this region by linkage studies. By analy- C091. Usher Syndrome 1D and Nonsyndromic Autosomal sis of genes flanking our translocation breakpoint, we identified nonsense Recessive Deafness DFNB12 Are Caused by Allelic Mutations and frameshift mutations in the FOXC2 (MFH-1) gene in three of three of the Novel Cadherin-Like Gene CDH23 families studied with lymphedema-distichiasis. The translocation lies 120 J. M. Bork1, L. M. Peters1, S. Riazuddin1, X. Liu2, R. J. H. Smith3, A. J. kb distal to FOXC2 and is believed to inactivate it by position effect. Addi- Griffith1, E. R. Wilcox1, T. B. Friedman1, R. J. Morell1 tional families are currently being studied for mutations and correlation to 1National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH; phenotypic features. FOXC2 is a member of the forkhead/winged helix Rockville, MD United States; 2Medical College of Virginia; Richmond, MD family of transcription factors, whose members are involved in diverse United States; 3University of Iowa; Iowa City, IAUnited States developmental pathways. FOXC2 knockout mice display cardiovascular, borkj@nidcd.nih.gov craniofacial, and vertebral abnormalities similar to those seen in lym- Usher syndrome type 1 is a recessive neurosensory disorder character- phedema-distichiasis syndrome. Our findings show that FOXC2 haploin- ized by congenital profound deafness, vestibular dysfunction, and early sufficiency results in lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome. FOXC2 is the onset retinitis pigmentosa. The USH1D locus, one of six known Usher syn- second known gene, along with VEGFR-3, to result in a form of hereditary drome type 1 loci, was mapped to chromosome 10q21-q22 (Wayne S. et lymphedema. Interestingly, lymphedema-distichiasis is only the second al., Hum Mol Genet 5;1689, 1996). This genetic linkage interval overlapped hereditary disorder known to be caused by a mutation in the forkhead gene the previously mapped nonsyndromic recessive deafness locus, DFNB12 family whose members play pivotal roles in mammalian development. Lit- (Chaib H. et al., Hum Mol Genet 5;1061, 1996). We have refined the tle is known about development of the lymphatic system, and our findings DFNB12 locus by linkage analysis of seven consanguineous families seg- provide a novel insight into this process. regating non-syndromic autosomal recessive deafness. Markers D10S1694 and D10S1737 defined a critical interval of approximately 0.55 C094. Genotype/phenotype comparisions in Axenfeld-Rieger cM in a single Pakistani family. Analysis of genomic sequence from this patients with PITX2 and FOXC1 missense mutations. interval revealed a novel cadherin-like gene. Mutations in this cadherin-like M. A. Walter, R. Saleem, K. Kozlowski, F. B. Berry gene, CDH23, were found in families with USH1D and in families with University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada DFNB12. We have shown CDH23 expression in the retina, by northern blot mwalter@ualberta.ca analysis, and in the cochlea, by polymerase chain reaction amplification. Purpose; To compare the effects of missense mutations of PITX2 or Families with USH1D had nonsense or frameshift mutations, whereas fam- FOXC1 with the phenotypes of Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) patients. Methods; ilies with DFNB12 had missense mutations, suggesting a genotype/phe- Five missense mutations of FOXC1 found in AR patients were introduced notype correlation. We have demonstrated that allelic mutations of the into the FOXC1 gene by site-directed mutagenesis. Recombinant wildtype CDH23 gene cause both nonsyndromic hearing loss and Usher syndrome (wt) and mutant FOXC1 proteins were expressed in COS-7 cells and type 1D (Bork J.M. et al., Amer J Hum Genet, in press). assayed for their abilities to localize to the cell nucleus by immunofloures- cence. Electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) were used to compare the C092.The Molecular Genetic Basis of Total Colorblindness DNAbinding abilities of wt and mutant FOXC1 proteins. Activation of a B. Wissinger1, H. Jgle2, E. Zrenner3, L. T. Sharpe2, S. Kohl1 luciferase reporter gene was used to test the transactivation abilities of wt 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, University Eye Hospital; Tbingen, Ger- and mutant FOXC1 proteins. Analogous studies had previously been com- many; 2Laboratory of Psychophysics, University Eye Hospital; Tbingen, pleted for PITX2 (Kozlowski and Walter, Hum Mol Genet 9; 2131-9, 2000). Germany; 3University Eye Hospital; Tbingen, Germany Results; We had previously found that the amounts of residual PITX2 func- wissinger@uni-tuebingen.de tion (as determined by nuclear localization, EMSA, and reporter gene Total Colorblindness (syn.; Rod Monochromacy, Achromatopsia) is an transactivation) correlated with the severity of the patient phenotype in autosomal recessively inherited condition characterized by the complete which the PITX2 missense mutation was found. One FOXC1 missense absence of color discrimination, reduced visual acuity, photophobia and mutation (I87M) reduced the stability of FOXC1. Two missense mutations congenital nystagmus. By linkage analysis two genetic loci for Total Color- (S82T and S131L) reduced FOXC1 DNAbinding ability, while two mis- blindness (ACHM2 on chromosome 2q11 and ACHM3 on chromosome sense mutations (F112S and I126M) did not. The latter two mutations, 8q21) have been identified. As part of a longstanding effort we have cloned however, decreased the transactivation ability of FOXC1. Interestingly, the the corresponding genes, CNGA3 and CNGB3, which encode the a- and phenotypes in patients with the S82Tmissense mutation (with almost 60% b-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel (Kohl et of wt FOXC1 transactivation ability) were indistinguishable from those of al. 1998, Nature Genet 19;257-259; Kohl et al. 2000, Hum Mol Genet patients with the I87M mutation (producing less than 5% of wt FOXC1 pro- 9;2107-2116). Molecular analysis of more than 300 independent patients tein amounts). Conclusions; Unlike the finding in patients with PITX2 muta- now allows us to draw some principle conclusions on the genetic basis of tions, the amount of residual FOXC1 function did not correlate with the Total Colorblindness; i) detectable mutations in CNGA3 and CNGB3 severity of patient phenotypes. Aberrant ocular development arising from account for ~75% of all cases, ii) exclusion of known loci by linkage analy- PITX2 mutations appears to follow a different mechanism than that arising sis support further genetic heterogeneity, iii) CNGB3 mutations are about from FOXC1 mutations. twice as frequent as CNGA3 mutations, iv) missense mutations predomi- nate in CNGA3 in contrast to the preponderance of nonsense mutations inConcurrent Sessions 97 C095. A Pathological mutation in a chromosome 19 gene high blood cholesterol levels. Better understanding of the factors involved causes a new dominant basal ganglia degeneration which in cholesterol homeostasis can lead to new targets for therapy. Here we can mimic Huntingtons Disease describe a Syrian, Druze family in which three children have high LDLlev- J. Burn1, A. R. J. Curtis1, C. Fey1, C. M. Morris2, P. Ince3, L. A. Bindoff4, els of 515, 474, and 332 /dl respectively. The other three siblings and the M. Jackson5, A. Coulthard5, A. Curtis1 parents all have LDL < 175 mg/dl, suggesting an autosomal-recessive 1Institute of Human Genetics; Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; mode of inheritance. Alocus (ARH1) has been described earlier. The large 2MRC Neurobiology Unit; Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 3Univer- extended pedigree permitted us to study 66 additional persons, most of sity of Sheffield; Sheffield, United Kingdom; 4Haukeland Sykehus; Bergen, whom have normal LDLvalues. Linkage to the LDLR, APOB, APOE and Norway; 5Newcastle Hospitals NHS Trust; Newcastle upon Tyne, United ARH1 was excluded. We performed a genome-wide scan in the core fam- Kingdom ily and found linkage to chromosomes 15 and 1. The linkage on chromo- john.burn@ncl.ac.uk some 15 was not significant; however, markers on chromosome 1 revealed An extensive pedigree in North West England contains multiple individuals a multipoint LOD score of 3.05 between 1p36.1-p35.3. We have as yet affected by a dominant fully penetrant but highly variable late onset degen- found no obvious candidate gene in the region of interest. We suggest that eration of the basal ganglia which can mimic Huntingtons disease (HD) but this locus contains a second gene responsible for autosomal recessive is not asociated with significant dementia. Chorea,athetosis, hypercholesterolemia, namely ARH2. spasticity,rigidity and bulbar dysfunction are described in different individu- als. There is late characteristic cavitation of the basal ganglia, neuroaxon- C098.Asecond gene for otosclerosis (OTSC2) maps to chro- al spheroids and iron accumulation. Having linked the disorder to a 2cM mosome 7q34-36 region on chromosome 19 we found, in a candidate gene,a single base K. Van Den Bogaert1, P. J. Govaerts2, I. Schatteman2, M. R. Brown3, G. insertion resulting in an out of frame extension predicting protein elonga- Caethoven1, F. E. Offeciers2, T. Somers2, F. Declau4, P. Coucke1, P. Van tion.Immunohistochemistry confirms massive accumulation of the gene de Heyning4, R. J. H. Smith3, G. Van Camp1 product. Asearch through other local query HD cases revealed 5 further 1University of Antwerp (UIA); Antwerp, Belgium; 2St-Augustinus Hospital; apparently unrelated cases. We have traced the family back to the 18th Antwerp, Belgium; 3University of Iowa; Iowa City, IAUnited States; 4Uni- century Fletchers, a border clan. There was extensive emigration in the versity of Antwerp (UZA); Antwerp, Belgium past. One member of that family, Fletcher Christian, achieved fame as kvdbogae@uia.ua.ac.be leader of the Mutiny on the Bounty and founded a settlement in the Pacif- Otosclerosis is a frequent cause of hearing loss in adults, caused by ic. Mutation searching this gene will be important in atypical neurodegen- abnormal bone homeostasis of the otic capsule. Usually, the hearing loss erative disorders. is conductive, due to a fixation of the stapes footplate thereby preventing normal ossicular vibration in response to sound. An additional sen- C096. Novel mutations in the somitogenesis gene, DLL3, sorineural hearing loss may be caused by otosclerotic damage to the cause a consistent pattern of abnormal vertebral segmenta- cochlea. The etiology of the disease is unknown and environmental as well tion in spondylocostal dysostosis as genetic factors have been implicated. Autosomal dominant inheritance P. D. Turnpenny1, J. Duncan2, M. P. Bulman2, C. McKeown3, C. G. with reduced penetrance has been put forward, but large families are Woods4, K. Kusumi5, S. Ellard2 extremely rare. To elucidate the pathogenesis of the disease, identification 1Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital; Exeter, United Kingdom; 2Institute of Clin- of the responsible genes is essential. We completed linkage analysis over ical Science, University of Exeter; Exeter, United Kingdom; 3Clinical Genet- the complete genome in a Belgian family in which otosclerosis segregates ics Unit; Birmingham, United Kingdom; 4Dept. Clinical Genetics; Leeds, as an autosomal dominant disease. We excluded linkage to a known locus United Kingdom; 5National Institute for Medical Research; London, United on chromosome 15 (OTSC1), and found linkage on chromosome 7q with Kingdom a multipoint lod score of 3.54. Analysis of key recombinants maps this oto- turnpenn@eurobell.co.uk sclerosis locus (OTSC2) to a 16 cM interval on chromosome 7q34-36 The spondylocostal dysostoses (SD) are a heterogeneous group of disor- between markers D7S495 and D7S2426. To investigate the importance of ders characterised principally by vertebral malsegmentation and OTSC1and OTSC2in autosomal dominant otosclerosis, we recruited and malaligned ribs. We have identified mutations in the Delta-like3 (DLL3) analyzed 9 additional families. These families were too small to individual- somitogenesis gene in 7 families, all showing a consistent radiological phe- ly reach a significant lod score of +3, but in 2 of them suggestive linkage notype of vertebral segmentation defects throughout the spinal column to OTSC2was obtained. In the 7 remaining families, OTSC1and OTSC2 with rib fusions and deletions. In 5 consanguineous families there is were completely excluded, providing evidence for one or more additional homozygosity for DLL3 mutations. In 4 of these premature protein trunca- (currently unknown) otosclerosis loci. In parallel with sensorineural hered- tion is predicted from frameshift mutations 593ins5, 945delAT(2 families), itary hearing impairment, otosclerosis is a genetically heterogeneous con- and 1365del17 in exons 5,7 and 8 respectively. The two 945delATmuta- dition. tion families are of Pakistani origin but geographically separated within the UK. The other consanguineous family demonstrate the missense mutation C099.Anovel locus for Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2 neuropa- G385D in exon 8, substituting a highly conserved glycine residue within thy maps to chromosome 7q11-q21 in an extended Russian epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat 5. The non-consanguineous families family demonstrate; 1) compound heterozygosity for mutations C207X and S. M. Ismailov1, V. P. Fedotov2, E. L. Dadali1,3, A. V. Polyakov3, V. I. 1418delC in exons 5 and 8 respectively; 2) heterozygosity for 593ins5 with Ivanov1,3, A. Lfgren4, E. De Vriendt4, V. Van Gerwen4, P. De Jonghe4, V. the second mutation yet to be identified. The geographical origins of the Timmerman4, C. Van Broeckhoven4, O. V. Evgrafov3 two 593ins5 mutation families are distinct and they may be independently 1Russian State Medical University; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Genetic occurring mutations since this lies within a repetitive tract. We have there- Counselling Department of Voronezh Diagnostic Centre; Voronezh, Russ- fore identified 6 mutations in DLL3, including 3 novel mutations ian Federation; 3Research Centre for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian (1365del17, C207X and 1418delC). All 6 mutations are located within con- Federation; 4Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Uni- served extracellular domains, affecting the EGF repeats. The SD pheno- versity of Antwerp (UIA); Antwerpen, Belgium type is very consistent but of interest is the presence of arthrogryposis and shoukhrat_ismail@mail.ru neurological abnormalities in the 1365del17 mutation family. It is not yet Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited motor known if this is a separate recessive disorder in this family. and sensory peripheral neuropathy. The axonal form of CMT, or CMTtype 2 (CMT2), is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with assigned auto- C097. A New Locus for Recessive Familial Hypercholes- somal dominant loci on chromosomes 1p35-p36 (CMT2A), 3q13-q22 terolemia maps to Chromosome 1p36.3-p35 (CMT2B), 7p14 (CMT2D), 8p21 (CMT2E). CMT2C is characterised by H. A. Al-Kateb1,2,3, K. Hoffmann1, A. Vergopoulos1, G. Nrnberg1, A. vocal cord paralysis, but the locus is unknown. Only in CMT2E, disease Aydin1, A. Dresel2, E. K. F. Bautz2, M. Jouma3, S. Bhring1, F. C. Luft1 causing mutations were identified in the neurofilament-light gene (NEFL). 1Franz Volhard Clinic and Max-Delbrck-Center for Molecular Medicine; We performed clinical, electrophysiological and genetic linkage studies in Berlin, Germany; 2Institute of Molecular Genetics and Faculty of Medicine, a single large family with autosomal dominant CMT2 from Voronezh Heidelberg University; Heidelberg, Germany; 3Department of Biochem- province of Russia. All patients in this family have similar clinical phenotype istry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Damascus University; Damascus, Syrian Arab typical for CMT. The electrophysiological findings are characteristic for Republic axonal neuropathy and support the diagnosis of CMT2. Linkage to the hussam-alkateb@usa.com known CMT2, CMT1 and other CMT-related loci was significantly exclud- High low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) levels are a major risk factor ed. Agenome scan was performed using a Weber set (version 6, Isogen for coronary heart diseases (CHD). Genetic factors contribute greatly to Bioscience BV, The Netherlands) of short tandem repeat (STR) markers98 Concurrent Sessions with a mean spacing 10.52 cM. Significant linkage to the long arm of chro- severe form of X-linked myopia. Analysis of the remaining genes in the mosome 7 was observed, with a maximum two-point LOD score of 5.72 PAR region is in progress. with STR marker D7S2204 in the absence of recombinations. Haplotype analysis demonstrates that the disease gene maps at chromosome 7q11- C102. Location of the first predisposing gene locus for q21 within a 15 cM region between the flanking markers D7S2435 and Asperger syndrome on chromosome 1q21-22 D7S806. Our results indicate that the CMT2 neuropathy in this Russian I. E. Jarvela1, T. Ylisaukko-oja2, T. Nieminen3, E. Kempas1, M. Auranen1, family is genetically different from the known CMT1 and CMT2 loci. The L. Peltonen1 axonal type of CMTin this family represents a novel genetic entity that we 1National Public Health Institute; Helsinki, Finland; 2National Public Health designate as CMT2F. Insitute; Helsinki, Finland; 3University of Helsinki, Dept of Child Neurology; Helsinki, Finland C100. A locus for autosomal dominant form of hemochro- irma.jarvela@hus.fi matosis on chromosome 2q. Asperger syndrome (AS) was first described in 1944 by a Viennese physi- O. T. Njajou, N. Vaessen, B. Berghuis, M. H. Breuning, W. P. T. Rutten, P. cian Hans Asperger who reported a group of boys with autistic psychopa- J. L. Snijders, J. Houwing-Duistermaat, A. Hofman, B. A. Oostra, L. A. thy whose clinical features resembled autism with some modifications. It Sandkuijl, C. M. Van Duijn, P. Heutink is characterised by difficulties in social interaction and stereotyped behav- Erasmus University Medical Center; Rotterdam, The Netherlands iour but in contrast to infantile autism by normal intelligence and usually njajou@mailcity.com normal language skills. In the pediatric age group the prevalence of Hemochromatosis is a common recessive disorder in populations of cau- Asperger syndrome is around 4-7/1000 whereas the corresponding figure casian origin. The disease is characterised by iron accumulation through- for the infantile autism is 4/10000. Etiopathogenesis is unknown but there out the body leading to widespread pathology including diabetes, cardio- is evidence for a strong genetic component. Based on clinical observations vascular diseases, stroke and cancer. Alocus for juvenile hemochromato- AS is inherited in the same families as infantile autism but also as a sepa- sis on chromosome 1q, mutations in HFE gene (6p22.1) and a locus on rate entity often transmitted from male to male. We report the analysis of 7q22 have been described. Still, not all hemochromatosis patients carry 13 candidate gene loci associated with autism and schizophrenia in 17 these mutations. This suggests that other genes are involved. To localise Finnish AS-families with autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Linkage other genes involved in hemochromatosis, we performed a genome search to the previously reported predisposing loci for autism could not be repli- in an extended pedigree (96 subjects) with multiple affected individuals (12 cated with Finnish AS families. By contrast, evidence for linkage was patients). Affected individuals in this family did not have a known mutation. obtained on 1q21-22 the region that has previously been linked to schizo- In this pedigree, hemochromatosis segragates as an autosomal dominant phrenia (Brzustowicz et al., 2000) with the maximum two-point lod score of disease. 47 subjects (10 affected and 37 unaffected) were selected for a 2.70 with marker D1S484. Two families shared a common haplotype with- genome wide search and linkage analysis. Simulation studies were per- in an 8.6 cM region between markers D1S2721 and D1S484. Our results formed as described by Ott J (1989) and Weeks et al, (1990); yielding a suggest that AS and schizophrenia may have common genetic back- maximum lod score of 3.24. Agenome screen was performed using 400 ground. polymorphic markers. Two point linkage analysis was performed using dis- ease frequency of 0.001 and an age dependent penetrance of 2%, 60% C103. Glutamate Receptor Dysfunction in a Genetic and 80%. Evidence for linkage to chromosome 2q was found with a lod RSH/Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome Mouse Model score of 3.1 at theta = 0. Haplotype sharing showed that patients share a F. D. Porter1, P. Zhu2, R. Stewart2, C. A. Wassif1 10 cM region which include several iron metabolism genes. Fine mapping 1National Institute of Child Health and Human Development; Bethesda, and sequencing is in progress and will indubitably leads to other gene(s) MD United States; 2National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; involved in hemochromatosis. Bethesda, MD United States fdporter@helix.nih.gov C101.Mapping of a severe form of X-linked myopia locus to Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a MCA/MR syndrome due to muta- the pseudoautosomal region (PAR) of Xq28 and exclusion of tion of the 3-hydroxysterol 7-reductase gene (DHCR7) which causes SYBL1 and HSPRY3 genes for their involvement. impaired reduction of 7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC) to cholesterol. We pro- U. Radhakrishna1,2, R. Rawal3, M. A. Morris4, A. Paoloni-Giacobino2, L. duced a mouse model of SLOS by disruption of Dhcr7in mouse embryon- Bartoloni2, J. L. Blouin5, R. Singh6, V. Abay6, J. V. Solanki7, S. E. ic stem cells. Similar to infants with SLOS, Dhcr -/- pups, demonstrated Antonarakis2,4 growth failure, dysmorphic craniofacial features, decreased movement, 1Green Cross Blood Bank and RIALaboratory; Ahmedabad, India; 2Divi- and feeding problems. Craniofacial anomalies included cleft palate (9%) sion of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School; Geneva, and nasal plug retention (39%). Mutant pups also appear to have Switzerland; 3Department of Biochemistry, Gujarat Cancer and Research decreased mineralization of bone. Mutant pups did not spontaneously Institute, Civil Hospital,; Ahmedabad, India; 4Cantonal Hospital; Geneva, feed, had an uncoordinated suck, and aspirated formula when hand fed. Switzerland; 5Cantonal Hospital, Geneva; Geneva, Switzerland; 6Iladevi Biochemically, this mouse model is similar to the human syndrome. 3- Cataract and IOLResearch Centre, Raghudeep Eye Clinic; Ahmedabad, hydroxysterol 7-reductase activity in mutant fibroblasts was 0.30.15% of India; 7Department of Animal Genetics & Breeding, veterinary College; control levels. Tissue sterol profiles showed decreased cholesterol and Anand, India increased 7DHC levels in Dhcr -/-pups. In brain tissue, Dhcr -/-embryos uppal@medecine.unige.ch also had decreased levels of desmosterol and increased levels of 7-dehy- Myopia is a common eye disease partly influenced by hereditary factors. It drodesmosterol (7DHD). Neurophysiological testing showed that cortical may occur as an isolated genetic anomaly or associated with other syn- neurons from Dhcr -/-pups exhibited a normal sodium current, were able dromes. We have studied a large six generation Indian pedigree with iso- to generate an action potential in response to a depolarizing current, and lated, non-syndromic X-linked recessive form of Myopia (OMIM 310460). responded to GABA. In contrast Dhcr -/-cortical neurons showed minimal The degree of myopia was variable, ranging from -6 to -16.5D (mean - (- 4.9 pA) or no response to glutamate stimulation (0 pA25%, 11 pA75%). 13.33D). Fundus examination revealed myopic degeneration of all the The control glutamate response was - 39 pA(-21 pA25%, -67 pA75%, examined affected patients; the average anterior chamber depth was p<0.001). Both Western Blot and RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression 3.28mm. In order to study the responsible gene, linkage analysis followed of glutamate receptor subunits in cortex from Dhcr -/-pups. Thus, we pos- by candidate region mutation screening were performed on 26 individuals tulate that this impaired glutamate response is due to receptor dysfunction including 9 affected and 17 normals. We genotyped multiple microsatellite as a consequence of the substitution of 7DHC and 7DHD for cholesterol markers covering the entire X-chromosome. Marker DXYS154, which is and desmosterol in neuronal plasma membranes. Glutamate receptor dys- located in the PAR in distal Xq28, showed no recombination with the phe- function is associated with impaired suckling, thus potentially explaining notype with a maximum LOD score of 3.99 at theta=0 under an autosomal this aspect of the mutant phenotype. Neurological dysfunction including recessive model. Other Xq28 markers outside of the PAR that showed no hypotonia, mental retardation, and behavioral problems are frequent clini- recombination with the phenotype included DXS1108, DXS8087 and cal findings in SLOS. Perturbation of neurotransmitter function may under- F8i13. We have subsequently decided to follow a systematic candidate lie these problems. This mouse model will be useful in determining the bio- gene approach in the linkage interval in order to identify the myopia-caus- chemical and neurophysiological basis of the behavioral and learning prob- ing gene. Four genes (HSPRY3, SYBL1, IL9R and CXYorf1) have been lems seen in this MCA/MR syndrome as well as testing therapeutic inter- identified in the PAR (which spans <500kb). We have screened the SYBL1 ventions. and HSPRY3 for mutations by amplification and sequencing of coding exons and flanking intronic sequences. No significant variants were found in patients implying that these two genes are not associated with theConcurrent Sessions 99 C104. Mice with a Targeted Disruption of Dhcr7 Explain why Human Nutrition, University of Illinois; Urbana, ILUnited States; 4Clinical Cholesterol (CH) Metabolism is Abnormal in Children with Research Institute of Montreal; Montreal, PQ Canada Smith-Lemli-Opitz/RSH Syndrome (SLOS) bernd.schwahn@sympatico.ca G. S. Tint1, H. Asaoka2, G. Xu2, K. K. Sulik3, N. Maeda3, S. B. Patel4, G. Homocystinuria can be caused by deficiency of 5,10-methylenetetrahydro- C. Ness5, F. F. Moebius6, B. U. Fitzsky6 folate reductase (MTHFR), which is required for folate-dependent homo- 1VAMedical Center; East Orange, NJ United States; 2UMDNJ-New Jersey cysteine remethylation. We recently generated MTHFR-deficient mice Medical School; Newark, NJ United States; 3University of North Carolina at (mthfr -/-), which are a good model for homocystinuria. To address thera- Chapel Hill; Chapel Hill, NC United States; 4University of South Carolina; py, we placed female mthfr +/- mice on oral betaine before mating to mthfr Charleston, SC United States; 5University of South Florida College of Med- +/- males, until weaning of offspring. Betaine is an alternate methyl donor icine; Tampa, FLUnited States; 6Institute of Biochemical Pharmacology; for homocysteine remethylation, through betaine homocysteine methyl- Innsbruck, Austria transferase (BHMT). Survival and growth of pups were monitored and tintgs@umdnj.edu compared to a control group. We also performed studies in adult mice of SLOS is a severe birth defect-mental retardation syndrome characterized the three mthfr genotypes. An unsupplemented diet or diets supplemented by a recognizable facies, multiple organ abnormalities, failure to thrive and with betaine or dimethylsulfoniumpropionate (DMSP, a betaine analogue) reduced survival caused by a defect in 7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC) delta were administered for 14 days. Plasma metabolites and liver BHMTactiv- 7-reductase (DHCR7), the final enzyme in CH biosynthesis. As a result ity were determined. Liver histology was evaluated in mthfr -/- mice. plasma and tissue cholesterol levels are abnormally reduced while 7DHC RESULTS; Survival rate (14.9%) and weight gain of mthfr -/- pups from concentrations are increased 1000-fold. Using stem cell gene targeting we untreated mothers were significantly lower than those from betaine-sup- mutated Dhcr7 in the mouse and created an animal without enzyme activ- plemented mothers (70.2% survival). In the study of adult mice, betaine ity (11, 14244 and 206120 pmol/min/mg protein, respectively, in -/-, +/- and DMSPlowered homocysteine levels significantly, by >50% in all geno- and +/+ mice). Though we noted no prenatal lethality, newborn homozy- type groups. Mthfr -/- mice on control and DMSP diets had fatty livers; gotes barely moved, did not suckle, breathed with difficulty, appeared those with betaine did not. Plasma betaine levels increased with betaine, blueish in color, exhibited markedly immature lungs, distended bladders but not DMSP supplementation. BHMT activity was unchanged. CON- and cleft palates and died within 18 hours. Biochemical abnormalities in - CLUSION; In mthfr -/- mice, betaine significantly improves survival, growth, /- mice recapitulated the abnormalities in SLOS; sterol levels in 6 -/- vs. 14 and hepatic morphology. Betaine and DMSPreduce homocysteine in mice pooled +/+ and +/- mice were abnormal (p<0.002) with reduced CH of all three genotypes, but DMSP supplementation is associated with (0.60.5 vs.3.20.8 mg/g in liver and 0.50.1 vs. 3.40.5 mg/g in brain) and betaine depletion and fatty liver. In summary, betaine is a reasonable total sterols (1.00.7 vs. 3.20.9 mg/g in liver and 2.51.1 vs. 4.20.6 mg/g methyl donor when folate-dependent remethylation is compromised. in brain) and markedly elevated 7DHC levels (0.30.2 vs. 0.010.02 mg/g in liver and 1.20.2 vs. 0.03  0.02 mg/g in brain). Sterol levels were low C107.3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoAsynthase deficiency is because activity of the rate controlling enzyme for sterol biosynthesis, caused by mutations in the HMGCS2 gene microsomal 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme-A reductase (HMGR), J. Zschocke1,2, F. G. Hegardt3, N. Casals4, J. M. Penzien5, R. Aledo4, J. was reduced 10-fold in liver (108 vs. 10175 pmol/min/mg protein, p Pi 3, G. F. Hoffmann1, E. Mayatepek1 <0.02) and 3-fold in brain (16992 vs. 500230 pmol/min/mg, p<0.05) in - 1Univ. Childrens Hospital; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Institute of Human /- compared to +/+ mice. The reasons for low HMGR activity were two-fold. Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany; 3Dept. of Biochemistry, Univ. of High concentrations of 7DHC in microsomal membranes (1) prevented Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; 4International University of Catalonia; increased expression of HMGR and other genes important for CH metab- Barcelona, Spain; 5Childrens Hospital, Zentralklinikum; Augsburg, Ger- olism that is usually triggered by low CH levels and (2) increased the rate many of HMGR protein degradation 3-fold. We propose that inhibition of total johannes_zschocke@med.uni-heidelberg.de sterol synthesis in SLOS may exacerbate developmental abnormalities, Hepatic production of ketone bodies during fasting periods requires mito- especially in children with mutations which leave some DHCR7 activity, chondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-(HMG-)CoAsynthase. Agenetic defi- and suggest that prenatal therapy which raises maternal plasma CH levels ciency of this enzyme has been previously reported in two children with might be useful in such cases. hypoketotic hypoglycaemic coma, but enzymatic confirmation was not pos- sible, and molecular studies were not performed. We report the clinical, C105. Cathepsin B and L-deficient mice develop a CNS-spe- biochemical and molecular findings in two other children with HMG-CoA cific neurodegeneration synthase deficiency. Both suffered from acute hypoketotic hypoglycaemic U. Felbor1, B. Kessler2, R. T. Bronson2, H. L. Ploegh2, B. R. Olsen3 coma during a febrile infection with prolonged fasting in infancy. There was 1Institut fr Humangenetik; D-97074 Wrzburg, Germany; 2Department of no other specific organ dysfunction. Urinary organic acids showed a char- Pathology, Harvard Medical School; Boston, MAUnited States; 3Depart- acteristic metabolite pattern, reflecting a fasting state but without evidence ment of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School; Boston, MAUnited States of ketogenesis. Acylcarnitines were consistently normal, an important diag- ute_felbor@hms.harvard.edu and nostic feature that distinguishes the disorder from beta oxidation defects. felbor@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de Molecular studies in the first patient revealed compound heterozygosity for Cathepsins B and Lare ubiquitously expressed cysteine proteases impli- mutations G212R and R500H in the HMGCS2 gene; G212R was also cated in intracellular proteolysis and extracellular matrix remodeling by in identified in the second patient. Neither mutation was detected on 200 con- vitro studies. Gene targeting has not yet validated these functions in vivo. trol chromosomes. Further analyses including expression studies are in Cathepsin B null mice show no overt phenotype. Cathepsin L-deficient progress. With avoidance of prolonged fasting periods the children are mice present with mild abnormalities in the Tcell compartment and recur- developing normally. HMG-CoAsynthase deficiency is the only known dis- rent hair loss. In striking contrast, we here show that the combined defi- order that exclusively affects mitochondrial ketogenesis, explaining both ciency of cathepsins B and Lleads to death at the end of the second week the clinical features as well as the characteristic biochemical findings. of life. Only double mutant mice develop a dramatic brain pathology includ- ing massive neuron death and brain atrophy thus far unprecedented in C108.Differential utilization of systemic vs. enteral sources of mice. This neurodegeneration is preceded by the occurrence of various nitrogen for urea synthesis in control subjects and ornithine variants of autophagic abnormalities in neuronal cell bodies, dendrites and transcarbamylase deficiency females axons. Biochemical analyses of the vacuolar system suggest a defect in B. Lee1, W. OBrien1, J. Henry2, J. Rosenberger2, P. Reeds2, F. Scaglia1 vesicle maturation in cathepsin B-/-L-/- mice. Since the role of the 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medi- autophagosomal/endosomal-lysosomal system in neurodegeneration and cine; Houston, TX United States; 2Childrens Nutrition Research Center aging is not well understood, cathepsin B-/-L-/- mice provide an exciting and Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX model to study the basic pathogenetic mechanisms. United States blee@bcm.tmc.edu C106. Effects of Methyl Donor Supplementation on Survival We have observed that while many ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and Metabolism in a murine Model of 5,10-Methylenetetrahy- (OTCD) females exhibit little dietary protein sensitivity, they may be more drofolate Reductase Deficiency sensitive to intercurrent stress including fasting, trauma, or infection. Our B. C. Schwahn1, Z. Chen1, M. D. Laryea2, C. Castro3, U. Wendel2, S. previous observation that OTCD females maintain a relatively normal rate Lussier-Cacan4, T. Garrow3, R. Rozen1 of total urea synthesis but derive less of this urea from glutamine implies 1Depts. of Human Genetics and Pediatrics, McGill University - Montreal that other sources of nitrogen are more important to nitrogen homeostasis Childrens Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Metabolic Unit, University Chil- in these individuals (Lee et al, 2000). We hypothesize that nitrogen con- drens Hospital; Duesseldorf, Germany; 3Dept. of Food Science and taining compounds generated from the intestinal catabolism of dietary100 Posters: Cancer Genetics amino acids are the most important source of ureagenesis in OTCD (LTRs) of the viral sequence. Assessment of HERV-K sequences females. We have previously used stable isotopes to correlate in vivourea expressed in the presence of testosterone is currently being investigated. cycle activity with clinical severity in null and partial activity urea cycle patients and controls. Using these methods we have now tested whether P0003. Cyclin genes expression in human acute leukemia intestinally generated ammonia is a more effective precursor for urea syn- cells. thesis than peripherally generated glutamine. By administering 15N-ammo- D. Szczesniak1, J. Kocki1, M. Cioch2, A. Dmoszynska2, B. Marzec1, I. nium chloride (15NH4Cl) either intravenously or enterally with a simultane- Pielecka-Korszen1, J. Wojcierowski1 ous I.V. infusion of 18O/13C-urea, we measured the efficiency of 15N trans- 1Medical Academy, Department of Medical Genetics; Lublin, Poland; 2Med- fer from a nitrogen source into urea in 6 OTCD females and 6 controls. ical Academy, Department of Hematology; Lublin, Poland Interestingly, the utilization of enteral 15NH4Cl was similar between OTCD szczes@poczta.wp.pl and control subjects. In contrast, OTCD females utilized peripheral The cell cycle alteration may cause tumor cells resistance to therapy. Such 15NH4Cl less efficiently at a rate of 46% that of controls, suggesting that genetic instability, arising from mutations in cell cycle checkpoint or DNA OTCD females rely more on enteral precursors as the most improtant repair genes, enables the cells uncontrolled proliferation. The past several source of ureagenesis. These approaches represent an important tool to years research has resulted in defining new agents participating in cell pro- optimize the nutritional management of urea cycle patients especially dur- liferation and contributed to the fact that we have started to understand the ing critical illness or catabolic states. cell cycle machinery. Molecules involves in basic pathway of cell division are cyclins, the positive regulators of cell cycle, which overexpression is Posters associated with uncontrolled cell growth and cancer. In our research we examined the level of cyclin genes expression in bone marrow samples P0001. Differential expression of a novel small intronless from patients with acute leukemia before the therapy. For the detection of gene in sporadic breast cancer cyclin mRNAwe used The Multi-Probe RNase Protection Assay System S. Singh1, E. Preddie2 (RiboQuant). We analyzed the expression of cyclin of G0/G1, G1, G1/S 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg,UKEH; Hamburg, cell cycle phases. The results we obtained shows the leukemic cells reveal Germany; 2Altgen; Wilmington, DE United States significantly high levels of cyclin D3 and cyclin I mRNAas well as slightly singh@uke.uni-hamburg.de higher cyclin G1 gene expression than other cyclins. The correlation We have discovered an unique intronless gene located at 17q21 in the between the clinical data and a level of expression of different cyclin gene region of BRCA1 gene encompassing a protein of only 30 amino acids. in hematological malignancies may be a prognostic factor the relapse or Mutation analysis of this gene was preformed in blood and tumor tissue of poor prognosis This research is supported by Polish Committee of Scien- 50 patients with sporadic breast cancer by employing SSCP and direct tific Research  grant No PO5B 134 19. sequencing. No mutations were found. The expression of this gene was looked at mRNAand protein level. The gene is normally not expressed or P0005.Areal-time PCR system for the differential quantifica- expressed at a very low level in serum, cultured fibroblasts and breast tis- tion of the alpha- and beta-transcript of the CDKN2Agene sue of normal females. Acomparatively three to four times higher expres- F. von Eggeling, C. Hoppe, U. Claussen, G. Ernst sion of mRNAwas noted in the tumor tissue of the patient by northern and Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany RTPCR techniques . ELISAtests were developed to monitor the expres- fegg@mti-n.uni-jena.de sion of this protein and presence of an antibody to it in sera and other tis- Since the tumor suppressor gene p16INK4A(CDKN2A/MTS1) was first sues including fibroblast and tumor tissue cell cultures . An investigation of described in 1993, it was found to be frequently inactivated in various can- a large sample of the patient sera has revealed that this protein is cer types and, thus, seems to play a crucial role in carcinogenesis. From expressed at considerable level in sera of patients and also antibody CDKN2Atwo distinct transcripts with common used exon 2 and 3, but a dif- against this protein can be traced in the sera of patients with breast can- ferent promotor and exon 1 are described as alpha (p16INK4A)- and beta cer. In about 7% of normal controls the values in range of the affected (p14ARF)-form. P16INK4Ainteracts over cyclin D/CDK4 with pRB, where- patients were also observed. This assay promises a good potential hope as p14ARF interacts with the p53 regulator MDM2 by blocking p53 degra- to develop a preclinical test and therapeutics for sporadic breast cancer. dation. Both transcripts could be independently inactivated by homozy- This protein contains a strong homology to BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene and gous deletion, methylation of the promotor region or point mutation. Inter- can be predicted to block the sulfatation of BRCA1 protein and glycosyla- action of both transcripts are postulated, but until now the relative expres- tion of BRCA2 protein and thus prevent their proper maturation and func- sion of both transcripts was not simultaneously determined. Consequently, tioning. we investigated this expression ratio by real-time quantitative PCR. There- fore a primer system was established on the LightCycler with two different P0002. Significant expression of Human Endogenous Retro- forward primers (exon 1) and one common reverse primer (exon 3). Iso- virus (HERV-K) sequences in prostate cancer lated RNAwas used from three tumor cell lines (Colo 320, Colo 620, Sk- R. D. Smith1,2, B. Khoubehi1, J. D. Beatty1, C. W. Ogden2, M. A. Penny1 Mel), one normal cell line (G292) and one primary cell culture (AC) as con- 1Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine; London, United trol. In Colo 320 and 620 the alpha-transcript could not be detected, where- Kingdom; 2Department of Urology, Northwick Park Hospital; Harrow, Unit- as the beta-form was expressed at a normal level. The remaining cell types ed Kingdom (Sk-Mel, G292, AC) showed similar expression for the beta-form, but the daron.smith@ic.ac.uk alpha transcript was equally or minute less expressed. In conclusion this The ability of human endogenous retroviruses to retrotranspose has led to newly established system for the differential quantification of both CDKN2A the hypothesis that their expression may have a role in carcinogenesis; 1 transcripts offers the opportunity to analyse the inactivation in the progres- person in 8 may carry an endogenous insertional mutation due to a new sion of tumors in more detail. retrotransposition event. HERV expression has been identified in a num- ber of malignancies including breast and colon cancer. Transcription of P0006.Prognostic significance of p53 mutations and expres- HERV-K, the biologically most active HERV family, can be up-regulated by sion of PAX5 and Shb in superficial bladder cancer steroid hormones in the breast cancer cell line T47D. Prostate cancer, like J. Mares, M. Babjuk, M. Trkova, J. Duskova, Z. Sedlacek breast cancer, is sensitive to its hormonal environment, raising the possi- Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic bility of similar regulation of HERV-K expression. RNAwas extracted from jaroslav.mares@lfmotol.cuni.cz prostate cancer cell lines DU-145, PC3 and LNCaP, 16 prostate cancer Bladder cancer is the most common urologic cancer and 75 % bladder and 9 benign prostatic hyperplasia specimens and subjected to RT-PCR. tumours are classified as noninvasive superficial transitional cell carcino- A modified RT-PCR technique was developed to specifically amplify mas. Recent research of the prognostic potential of p53 mutations expressed HERV-K without amplifying genomic HERV sequences. South- revealed contradictory results. The aim of our study was to define new ern hybridisation and DNA sequencing confirmed the results. HERV-K combinations od markers reflecting biological behaviour of individual envelope expression was identified in the cell lines. Statistically significant tumours in order to identify patients at risk for tumour progression. We HERV-K expression was detected in prostate cancer [10/16 (63%) cancer investigated 35 patients with the superficial bladder cancer, 18 ones of the specimens compared to 1/9 (11%) benign specimens (p=0.03, 2-tailed invasive type and 20 controls for p53 mutations in exons 5-9 and adjacent Fishers exact test)]. These results suggest that HERV-K expression is intronic sequences by the SSCPand following direct genomic sequencing. generally silenced in benign tissue but does occur in prostate cancer. Point mutations were detected in 11% (4/36). The correlation of mutation Expressed HERVs may act as mobile genetic elements with the potential analysis and expression of two genes PAX 5 and Shb, both localized on to disrupt the function of tumour suppressor genes or enhance expression the 9p21-23, with patient clinical and histopatological data was evaluated. of proto-oncogenes via promoter activity in the Long Terminal Repeats In conclusion, our results indicate that the p53 mutation analysis combinedPosters: Cancer Genetics 101 with expression data might be used as a marker for superficial bladder on the onset of angiogenesis and invasion in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. cancer. Supported by the grant IGANC/5961-3. Using adenoviral mediated transfer, the expression of these genes were restored in pancreatic cancer cells. Moreover, p53 transfection in these P0007.nm23-H1 and Colon Adenocarcinoma cells induced BAI1 expression. While no significant in vitro antiproliferative S. Kapitanovic1, T. Cacev1, S. Radosevic2, M. Berkovic1, K. Pavelic1, R. effect could be achieved, the in vivo growth of these cells in NK-depleted Spaventi2 SCID mice was strongly inhibited due to the antiangiogenic properties of 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine; Zagreb, Croat- these genes, both subcutaneously and in dorsal skin chamber. It was ia; 2PLIVAd.d., Research & Development; Zagreb, Croatia found that the effect was related at least in part to the implication of these kapitan@rudjer.irb.hr genes in the regulation of the proteolytic balance, namely the matrix met- Nm23 gene was originally identified by differential hybridisation of K-1735 alloproteinases expression. The expression of endothelial cell mitogens melanoma cell line clones of varying metastatic potential. Atumor metas- VEGF and bFGF was not significantly changed by restoring the presence tases-suppressor function was implicated by the reduced expression of of these genes and is generally low in the pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell nm23 in highly metastatic sublines compared with non-metastatic sublines lines that were used. It was rather the down-regulation of ETS-1, a tran- derived from the same K-1735 clone. The purpose of this study was to scription factor largely involved in angiogenesis, by the SMAD4 gene that evaluate whether the expression of the nm23-H1 protein or loss of het- appear to account for the reduced vascularity and invasiveness of the erozygosity (LOH) of the nm23-H1 gene is associated with tumor stage transfected tumor cells. Gaining molecular understanding of the processes and grade of tumor differentiation. We also investigated the correlation of associated with growth, invasion, and metastasis in pancreatic malignan- nm23-H1 expression with 5-year survival. Paraffin tissue sections were cies is crucial, as their poor prognosis emphasizes the need for new analyzed immunohistochemically using monoclonal antibody NM301 to approaches among which the antiangiogenic therapy is highly promising. human nm23-H1 protein. DNAs (normal and tumor) isolated from microdis- sections of parafin sections were used for LOH analysis. Of 102 adeno- P0010.Prune and NM23-H1 and H2 (NDP-Kinase) Human Pro- carcinomas that were examined, 41% showed a weak positive immunos- tein Interaction; Involvement in Human Cancer. taining for nm23-H1 protein. The most nm23-H1 positive tumors were in M. Zollo1, A. Forus2, A. DAngelo3, V. Aglio3, S. Olivieri3, G. Merla3, A. Rey- Dukes B (67%) and in the well differentiated tumors (65%). Statistical mond3, F. Sanvito4, G. Arrigoni4, O. Myklebost5, A. Ballabio3 analysis showed that there was no statistically significant difference in sur- 1Telethon Institute of Gentics and Medicine; Naples, Italy; 2Department of vival between the patients with nm23-H1 positive tumors and patients with Tumour Biology, The Norwegian Radium; Oslo, Norway; 3TIGEM; Naples, tumors that were not stained for nm23-H1 protein. To analyze LOH at the Italy; 4Department of Pathology, HSR; Milan, Italy; 5Department of Tumour nm23-H1 gene we used VNTR marker located in untranslated 5 region of Biology, The Norwegian Radium Hospital; Oslo, Norway the nm23-H1 gene. At this nm23-H1 locus 60% of samples were informa- zollo@tigem.it tive and 33% of them demonstrated LOH. The nm23-H1 LOH was more We have isolated a human and murine homolog of the Drosophila prune frequent in tumors that were larger than 5 cm than in smaller ones. Posi- gene through dbESTsearches 1,4. PRUNE protein retains the four char- tive correlation was found between the nm23-H1 LOH and histological acteristic domains of DHH phosphoesterases 2. The homo- or hemizygous grade as well as between the nm23-H1 LOH and Dukes stage of tumor prune mutant is lethal in the presence of just a single copy of a gain-of- samples. function mutation in the abnormal wing disc gene (awd), dubbed Killer-of- Prune (awdK-pn) which dies at the third larval instar stage developing P0008. Inhibition Of The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor melanotic tumors. By using interaction-mating and in vitro and in vivo (EGFR) Expression By The Promyelocytic Leukemia Tumor co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we show the ability of human Suppressor PRUNE to interact with the human homolog of awd protein (nm23-H1) 3,4 S. Vallian1, K. Chang2 and nm23-H2 and demonstrated that it is impaired with nm-23-H1-S120G 1Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Science, Isfahan University; Isfahan, Islamic mutant, a gain-of-function mutation associated with advanced neuroblas- Republic of Iran; 2University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center; Hous- toma. PRUNE is a new phospodiesterase (PDE) specific for cAMPsub- ton, TX United States strate and is amplified (3-6 copies) in 89% of Sarcoma tumors analysed. svallian@altavista.com Furthermore, we have found a dominant negative PRUNE mutation (with a The promyelocytic leukemia protein, PML, was first identified in the break- partial loss of function) affecting mice skin hair follicle cellular proliferation. point region of the t(15q;17q) translocation in acute promyelocytic Our working hypothesis is that PRUNE is negative regulating the anti- leukemia (APL). We and others have previously reported that PMLcould metastatic function of nm23 protein. Results will be presented. function as a tumor suppressor. Its introduction into a number of cancer REFERENCES 1. Banfi, S., et al. Nature Genetics 13, 167-174 (1996). 2. cell lines including the breast and prostate, resulted in the inhibition of their Aravind, L. & Koonin, E.V. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 23, 17-19 growth in vitro, and their tumorigenicity in nude mice. When brought to the (1998). 3. Hartsough, M.T. & Steeg, P.S. Am J Hum Genet 63, 6-10 (1998). promoter by a DNA-binding domain, the PMLprotein was found to function 4. Reymond, A., et al. Oncogene 18, 7244-52 (1999). as transcription inhibitor. Anumber of natural promoters including the epi- dermal growth factor receptor(EGFR) gene promoter and the dihydrofolate P0011.Alternative splice products of HMGIC may play a major reuductase (DHFR) promoter, which both are involved in cellular growth, role in tumorigenesis were found to respond to the PMLs inhibitory effects. Here we have S. Hauke, A. M. Flohr, J. Bullerdiek analysed the effects of PMLon the EGFR gene promoter and expression. Center for Human Genetics; Bremen, Germany Our data show that PMLs repression of the EGFR promoter is caused by shauke@uni-bremen.de inhibition of the Sp1-dependent activity of the promoter. On functional Aberrations affecting the gene encoding the high mobility group protein analysis, the repressive effect of PMLwas mapped to a 150-bp element HMGIC have been found in a variety of human tumors as e.g. uterine (relative to the ATG initiation site) of the EGFR promoter. In vitro and in vivo leiomyomas, lipomas, and pulmonary chondroid hamartomas. These aber- anylsis by means of the glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay, rations lead either to fusion genes, transcriptional up-regulation, or aber- coimmunoperecipitation and transient transfection assays demonstrated rant transcripts of HMGIC. In the latter cases truncated transcripts consist- that PMLand Sp1 are associated. Furthermore, overexpression of PMLin ing of exon 1 to 3 of HMGIC encoding the three DNA-binding domains and A431 cells, which express high level of EGFR protein, resulted in signifi- ectopic sequences derived from chromosome 12 were frequently cant repression of EGFR expression. Together, these data show that PML detectable as determined by CASH (chromosome assignment using inhibits the expression of the EGFR by affecting its promoter. Since EGFR somatic cell hybrids) analyses. There are several lines of evidence indi- is overexpressed in a number of malignancies such as the breast cancer cating that the biological and tumorigenic features of truncated HMGIC and head and neck carcinomas, PMLcould be considered as a potential derivatives, i.e., those composed of the DNA-binding domains and a short- agent in gene therapy of these cancers. ened acidic tail clearly differ from those of the normal protein consisting of three DNA-binding domains and one large acidic tail. By sequencing the P0009.Shifting toward an angiogenic phenotype after inacti- complete 112 kb third intron of HMGIC we were able to detect several of vation of suppressor genes in pancreatic cancer the ectopic sequences, known as fused to HMGIC. Expression studies M. Sunamura, D. G. Duda, T. Furukawa, A. Horii, S. Matsuno revealed co-expression of these transcripts with the normal transcript in Tohoku University Hospital; Sendai, Japan tumors with 12q14-15 aberrations as well as in other tumors, and in nor- msun-thk@umin.ac.jp mal tissues. Therefore, for the most part, truncated HMGIC transcripts pre- Recent evidence points toward the involvement of genetic alterations, such viously thought to be aberrant transcripts seem to result from alternative as p16 or p53 in the switching on of angiogenic phenotypes in the tumor splicing. Due to the loss of the part encoding the acidic tail the expression tissue. This study examines the inhibitory effect of BAI1 and SMAD4 genes of the alternatively spliced HMGIC may have more striking effects than the102 Posters: Cancer Genetics wild type HMGIC in terms of tumorigenesis. als, multiple urinary BLPdeterminations were made; subtype reproducibil- ity was 95%. Analysis of 25 sib pairs demonstrated a heritability of approx- P0012. Targeted expression of SV40 large T antigen in sper- imately 80%, based on an intraclass correlation of 0.42. This suggests that matocytes it should be feasible to map the locus responsible for variation in BLP S. Tascou1, A. Meinhardt2, M. Schweier3, K. Nayernia1, T. Kang1, W. excretion in humans using standard linkage strategies. Elevated levels of Engel1, P. Burfeind1 another growth factor, IGF1, have been associated with increased risk for 1Institute of Human Genetics; Gttingen, Germany; 2Institute of Anatomy breast, prostate and lung cancer; however, the contribution of genetic vari- and Cell Biology; Marburg, Germany; 3Department of Pathology; Gttin- ation to IGF1 levels is not known. Genetic variation in urinary BLPexcre- gen, Germany tion may contribute to susceptibility to the tobacco induced lung diseases stascou@gwdg.de chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer and may affect Abstract In an attempt to determine the susceptibility of spermatocytes to alterations in body weight associated with tobacco smoking. malignant transformation by simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumor antigen (TAg), transgenic mice harboring a chimeric gene composed of the SV40 P0014.Aclinical genetics and cancer registry database with TAg gene fused to the 1.4 kb promoter sequence of the human phospho- single server, multiple clients, and choice of client interface. glycerate kinase 2 (PGK2) gene were generated. Previously, it was shown G. K. Suthers that this regulatory sequence is able to direct the expression of a CAT Womens & Childrens Hospital; North Adelaide, Australia reporter gene in male germ cells with the onset of expression in sperma- suthersg@mail.wch.sa.gov.au tocytes of transgenic mice. Northern blot analysis of RNAfrom different tis- The SAClinical Genetics Service provides a general genetic counselling sues indicated a specific transcription of TAg in testis of PGK2-TAg trans- service, a Familial Cancer Service, and hosts the Familial Cancer Registry genic mice. RT-PCR analysis on RNAs and Western blot analysis on pro- and research studies. We need prompt access to the records of over teins isolated from testis at different stages of development revealed that 30,000 clients and relatives. The overlapping roles within the Service transcription and translation of the TAg gene starts in 12-day-old testis, demand that we have a single database, but the diversity of roles dictates which is in accordance with the onset of endogenous Pgk2 expression and that one interface cannot meet the needs of all users. The core of our data- coincides with the appearance of preleptotene spermatocytes. PGK2-TAg base is the client-server implementation of Progeny Enterprise, a com- transgenic mice are fertile and show no tendency toward transformation. bined database and pedigree-drawing program. The flexible nature of However, prepubertal 18-day-old transgenic male mice exhibited a signifi- Progeny allowed us to develop and readily modify the database and the cant increase in spermatocyte number but no differences in number of Ser- pedigree interface has been invaluable in reviewing families. However, toli cells as compared to wildtype mice. With proceeding age the increased Progenys flexibility means that the interface is not very user-friendly, and amount of spermatocytes in prepubertal transgenic mice assimilates to the lack of a tight database structure limits the data export and reporting that of wildtype mice. Tunel assays revealed a higher rate of apoptosis in formats. We have developed a non-graphical interface, KinTrakDB, that testis of prepubertal transgenic mice compared to that of wildtype mice. accesses a standard sub-set of the Progeny fields. This meets our require- This indicates that the excessive spermatocytes in prepubertal transgenic ments for clinic and record management. KinTrakDB also supports cancer mice undergo apoptosis during spermatogenesis. registry functions. Other database fields can be readily defined and accessed using the Progeny interface. The combination of different client P0013. Genetic Determination of Variation in Urinary interfaces represents a cost-effective means of providing tailored inter- Bombesin Like Peptide Levels faces to the one database. The principle could be readily applied in other Y. E. Miller1,2, S. M. Aguayo3, E. Pugh4, J. Bailey-Wilson4, A. J. Cohen5, P. clinical settings. Fain6 1University of Colorado Health Sciences Center; Denver, CO United P0015. New Challenges Face Medical Geneticists in the States; 2Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Denver, CO United Tumor Case Conference Setting States; 3Emory University, Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center; Atlanta, R. Young1, K. Brooks2 GAUnited States; 4NHGRI; Bethesda, MD United States; 5University of 1University of South Carolina School of Medicine; Columbia, SC United Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Cen- States; 2University of South of Carolina School of Medicine; Columbia, SC ter; Denver, CO United States; 6Barbara Davis Diabetes Center, Universi- United States ty of Colorado Health Sciences Center; Denver, CO United States byoung@richmed.medpark.sc.edu york.miller@uchsc.edu As the study of cancer genes, DNAmarkers, and molecular technologies The bombesin like peptides (BLP) have a variety of properties, including worked their way from the research laboratories to the clinic many geneti- appetite suppression and growth promotion of respiratory epithelial cells cists now find themselves attending tumor conferences. This brings the and lung cancer, that are relevant to tobacco addiction and carcinogene- opportunity and challenges of offering new technologies to help solve long- sis. Several studies in humans and experimental animals have demon- standing clinical dilemmas. Following are just two examples of many situ- strated that tobacco smoking or nicotine treatment is correlated with ations. A40-year old male, heavy smoker with tongue cancer diagnosed increases in levels of BLP. Furthermore, tobacco smoking is associated two years previously. The aggressive malignancy was seemingly treated with expression of one bombesin receptor subtype, the gastrin releasing successfully with extensive surgery. After two years of remission, a med- peptide receptor, especially in females. We have found that longterm ical examination showed a lung lesion. If the lung lesion was a metastasis, smokers with elevated urinary BLPlevels are significantly more likely to the prognosis would be poor. If the lung lesion was a new primary, a sur- have either chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or lung cancer than are gical cure would be possible. The geneticist present at the conference sug- longterm smokers with low urinary BLPlevels. In addition, there is a neg- gested that molecular studies might assist this differential. FISH study of ative correlation between urinary BLPand body weight. However, the large HER-2/neu, c-myc, cyclin D, centromeres 8, 11, and 17 showed complete degree of variation in urinary BLPlevels that is found in either smokers or concurrence suggesting a metastasis. A53-year old women was present- nonsmokers makes correlation with susceptibility to tobacco induced lung ed regarding planned lumpectomy to remove a small breast lesion. During disease difficult. In order to determine whether variation in urinary BLPlev- the presentation the surgeon casually added that a sister had breast can- els is partly genetically determined, we measured urinary BLP(expressed cer at age 42 and that the patient was Ashkenazi Jewish. The geneticist as fmol/mg creatinine) in a population selected for lack of environmental suggested gene predisposition testing, citing that recent studies favor con- factors, particularly tobacco smoke exposure, that might influence levels. sideration of less conservative surgery in the presence of BRCA1/2 muta- We studied 105 healthy individuals from 80 families, taking no medica- tions. Molecular genetics is proving to be of great value in the basic under- tions, between 18-45 years of age, with less than 100 cigarettes/lifetime, standing of the etiology, progression, and prognosis of certain cancers. We and with no history of parental smoking or exposure to passive smoke at are now finding that this technology will have an important use in assisting home or in the workplace. Data were analyzed using the S.A.G.E. REGC in the surgical and medical management decisions. and NOCOM programs. Atrimodal distribution is the best fit for the data, with a bimodal distribution marginally less likely (p < 0.03) and a unimodal P0016.The Carrier Clinic-a new model for oncological genet- distribution highly unlikley (p < 0.00001). Thus, the data are most consis- ic practice? tent with genetic determination of variability in BLPexcretion, most likely A. T. Ardern-Jones1, G. Mitchell2, R. A. Eeles2 as a result of variation in a codominant fashion at a single locus. In this two 1Royal Marsden Hospital, Department of Cancer Genetics; Sutton, United allele model, three subtypes (LL, mean 188 fm/mg creat; HL, mean 383 Kingdom; 2Institute of Cancer Research; Sutton, United Kingdom fm/mg creat; HH mean 635 fm/mg creat) would occur, with gene frequen- Audrey.Ardern-Jones@rmh.nthames.nhs.uk cies of 0.866 for Land 0.134 for H. Observed genotype frequencies agree Patients with germ line mutations in cancer predisposition genes are at well with those predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg equation. In 20 individu- markedly increased risk of developing cancer. Furthermore, having devel-Posters: Cancer Genetics 103 oped cancer once does not preclude the development of further primaries. in relation to the 17 centromere probe was detected. In summary, the early The early symptoms of cancer may be subtle or masquerade as benign events in chemical tumorigenesis by FB1 leads to increased survival, dis- disease. It is essential for nurses caring for such patients to have an under- ruption of the cell cycle G1, G2/M restriction point and single strand DNA standing of cancer in order to realise the significance of symptoms that breaks that produce p53 gene lost. Supported by FONDECYT# 1990212 may seem non threatening to the patient. This paper describes three dif- ferent case scenarios of families where urgent referral was expedited fol- P0019.Normal tissue radiosensitivity of cancer patients is not lowing incidental reported symptoms during telephone follow-up calls from commonly associated with a constitutional dysfunction of the the nurse counsellor. Currently with the changing knowledge related to p53- or mre11/rad50/nibrin-mediated pathways in DNAdouble gene carriers and their risks of other primaries, other health professionals strand break repair are not necessarily aware of the implications for such cases. At the Royal M. Bigalke1, R. Bendix1, M. Stumm2, J. Dahm-Daphi3, M. Rave-Frnk4, D. Marsden Hospital in London, UK an annual follow up gene carrier clinic Schindler5, M. Bremer1, D. Rades1, J. H. Karstens1, T. Drk1 has been set up and this clinic acts as a gate keeping clinic for such fam- 1Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2Otto-von-Guericke-Uni- ilies. This is staffed by a multidisciplinary team and both the nursing and versitt; Magdeburg, Germany; 3Universittsklinikum Eppendorf; Ham- medical staff have in-depth oncological as well as genetic training. The burg, Germany; 4Georg-August-Universitt; Gttingen, Germany; 5Biozen- clinic has an open-door policy via the clinical nurse specialist who is avail- trum, Universitt; Wrzburg, Germany able by telephone to answer patients queries. The clinic team liases close- doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de ly with other practice specialists, tailoring these contacts to the patients Clinical radiosensitivity is manifested as acute or late normal tissue toxici- needs. We propose that gene carriers are followed up in such Carrier Clin- ty in about 0.5 - 1 % of cancer patients receiving conventional radiothera- ics to provide up-to-date information and recommendations for manage- py. Because clinical radiosensitivity and radiation-induced chromosomal ment of these high risk individuals. instability are associated in patients with ataxia telagiectasia (A-T) and the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), we have investigated lymphoblast P0017.The prevalence of familial cancers in our Department cells lines from 15 radiosensitive cancer patients (10 with breast cancer, 5 of Medical Oncology with head and neck cancer) for molecular defects in DNAdouble-strand I. Sandovici1, A. Buiuc2, M. Covic1, E. Bild2 break repair pathways. Western blotting revealed apparently normal levels 1University of Medicine; Iasi, Romania; 2St. Spiridon Hospital; Iasi, of the mre11, rad50 and nibrin proteins, components of the radiation- Romania induced nuclear repair foci. ATM-dependent phosphorylation of p53 at ser- isandovici@yahoo.com ine-15 appeared to occur normally after irradiation with a single dosis of 6 The positive familial history is a major risk factor for common cancer. We Gy in all patient lymphoblasts, independent of whether they carried the Arg present preliminary results of the first clinical trial on familial cancer aimed or Pro variant of p53 at codon 72. Similarly, the phosphorylation of nibrin at building a familial cancer register and introducing genetic testing and proceeded normally after irradiation in all investigated cell lines. We also counseling in the affected families. In 1999 the 2045 new patients with performed an additional mutation scanning of the entire coding regions of cancer, regardless the localization, received a questionnaire on family his- the Mre11, Rad50 and DNA-ligase-IV genes. Only in the DNA-ligase-IV tory. The family history was considered as positive for the patients with at gene of one patient a heterozygous sequence alteration was detected, a least one affected first degree relative. The overall prevalence of positive cytidine deletion three nucleotides downstream of the stop codon, which family history was 8.06% (165 patients). Family history was positive espe- was also present at low abundance in the general population (allele fre- cially for the common types of cancers; 12.98% for breast cancer, 18.49% quency 0.02) and thus is unlikely to be of functional significance. We con- for colorectal cancer, 19.04% for endometrial cancer and 10.76% for ovar- clude that normal tissue radiation toxicity of cancer patients, apart from the ian cancer. We found families with clinical criteria suggestive for some classical radiosensitivity syndromes A-Tand NBS, is not commonly asso- hereditary cancer syndromes; 6 families with HNPCC (Amsterdam II crite- ciated with a constitutional dysfunction of p53- or nibrin-mediated path- ria), 5 families suggestive for Li-Fraumeni syndrome and 6 families with ways in DNAdouble strand break repair. strong arguments for breast-ovarian cancer syndrome. Also, we found 16 families with strong history but without any pattern suggesting one specif- P0020.Dominant Negative Effect Of Novel Mutations On Pyru- ic entity. Moreover, we have recorded 7.81% lung cancer patients with pos- vate Kinase-m2 Activity In Bloom Syndrome Cells itive family history, frequently nonsmokers and 7.98% positive history for M. Anitha, R. Bamezai cervical cancer patients. In conclusion, the overall prevalence of positive Jawaharlal Nehru University; Delhi, India family history we have found is similar with the data in the literature. These anitha52@hotmail.com high prevalence underlines the necessity of the set up of genetic testing in The present study reports for the first time natural mutations in Pyruvate familial cancer in Romania. Future investigations are necessary for lung kinase (PK)-M2 isozymic form, responsible for the regulation of the and cervical cancer due to the possibility of a special genetic risk factor. enzyme activity. The PK enzyme activity showed down regulation, in the B- lymphoblastoid cells established from two Bloom syndrome patients, BS1, P0018. Involvement of G1, G2/M phase checkpoints gene BS3 by; 50% and 90%, respectively; and by 75% in the freshly obtained alterations in tumorigenesis. PHAstimulated lymphocytes of a BS patient diagnosed for the first time in M. Aranda, J. Carrasco, J. Toro India. An analysis of the critical domains of the PK-M gene in BS cells, University of Santiago de Chile; Santiago, Chile resulted in the observation of different mutations in exon-10 which codes maranda@lauca.usach.cl for the inter sub-unit contact domain (ISCD) region of the PK-M2 protein. Alterations in genes involved in cell cycle regulation are common in many Apart from these mutations, few single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) tumor types. Abnormalities in the CDK4 and p53 genes, which regulate were observed in this region of the gene both in normal and BS cells which transition through G1 phase of the cell cycle, have been implicated in the did not affect the enzyme activity. Modelling studies of each of the PK-M2 progression of diverse types of cancer. The general goal of p53 appears to protein with a mutation was suggestive of a changed interaction between be the prevention of cell propagation if mutations are present. The p53 pro- two domains within a sub-unit in BS1, a gross structural change in BS3 and tein acts as a transcription factor by binding to certain specific genes and a changed interaction between two sub-units of the tetramer in the BS regulating their expression. The function of p53 can be suppressed by patient. The presence of mutations in PK-M2 ISCD region and its correla- another gene, MDM2, which is overexpressed in certain tumorigenic cells tion with the downregulated enzyme activity in the Bloom syndrome cells and binds to p53 protein, thus inhibiting its transcriptional activation func- has opened the possibility of looking at this gene in more details in future tion. Since in different tumours MDM2 amplification involves amplicons in the background of a variety of pleiotropic phenotypic features observed encompassing flanking genes, such as CDK4, this gene could act as an in this syndrome. alternative or additional gene involved in the transformation mechanism. To evaluate the involvement of G1, G2/M alterations in the chemical tumori- P0021.Receptore Tyrosine Kinases Signaling In Spleen Lym- genesis, the status of these genes or gene products and cell cycle phases phocytes Under The Influence Of X-ray Irradiation In Low were examined. The genetic alterations were analysed by mutation analy- Doses. sis, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and single-cell gel elec- T. Kirpenko1, L. Ostapchenko1, I. Kondrichin2 trophoresis (comet assay). Analysis of flow cytometry showed changes in 1Kiev National Taras Shevchenko University; Kiev, Ukraine; 2R.E. Kavetsky both the G0/G1 phase and G2/M phase checkpoints. We detected G2/M Institute of Experemental Oncology, Pathology and Radiobiology; Kiev, arrest and apoptosis, in Hep-2 cell line in response to the treatment with Ukraine the mycotoxin FB1. However, the maximal rate of apoptosis was rather tanyakirpenko@yahoo.com small. Single strand DNAbreaks were shown and repair diminished when The Receptor Tyrosine Protein Kinases (RTPK) have been shown to play BrdU incorporation was utilized. Furthermore, the loss of p53 gene probe a crucial role in radio-induced signaling response in rat spleen lympho-104 Posters: Cancer Genetics cytes. The 2-fold increase of its tyrosine kinase domain activity under the showed telomerase activity in both, tumor tissue and RMs. In 9 of 69 (13%) influence of X-ray irradiation in dose of 1 Gy has been established. How- cases enzyme activity was found in RMs but not in the corresponding ever, we have also determined a partial reduction of cytokine stimulating tumor tissues. 17/60 (28%) telomerase-positive tumors showed telom- action on RTPK activity in conditions of irradiation. To clarify a reason of erase-negative RMs. Enzyme activity in the RMs were observed in 75 % RTPK hyper-activation we have carried out partial purification procedures of the hypopharyngeal carcinomas, 61% of the laryngeal carcinomas, 54% with using the antiphosphotyrosine antibodies and then valued the of the oral carcinomas and 44% of the oropharyngeal carcinomas. The autophosphorylation rate of this enzyme by autoradiography and kinetic occurence of local recurrences was not influenced by the telomerase actic- analysis. These data reveal the significant increase of RTPK autophos- ity of the tumors itself, but patients with telomerase-positive RMs devel- phorylation degree under the influence of X-ray irradiation in dose of 1 Gy. oped fewer (18.4%) local recurrences than patients with telomerase-nega- Furthermore, the studies performed by us earlier testify to disruptions on tive margins (25.8%). In 58% of the tumors with and 45% of the tumors the level of enzyme-substrate association under the influence of X-ray irra- without enzyme activity regional lymph node metastases were found. In diation. Obviously, the above mentioned disruptions could result in alter- 63% of the patients with telomerase activity in the RMs lymph node metas- ation of downstream signaling pathways, which include activation of dis- tases are present at first diagnosis of the tumor in contrast to 48% of the tinct Protein kinases. As a result of examination of intracellular Protein patients without telomerase activity in the RMs. Regional recurrences kinases activities (cAMP-, cGMP-, Ca2+/phoshpolipid- and Calmodulin- occurred in 18% of the patients with telomerase activity in the tumors and dependent Protein kinases) after spleenocytes stimulation by cytokine we in 15% of the patients without telomerase activity. Patients with telomerase have observed a significant increase of cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity in the RMs tend to have a higher rate of regional recurrences (27%) activity in control conditions, while it has been reduced under the influence than patients without telomerase activity (16%). Telomerase activity in the of X-ray irradiation in 1 Gy. After performed researches we suggest that RMs may have no influence on the tumor-dependent survival of the cytosolic cAMP-dependent Protein kinase participates in radio-induced patients. Although the obtained values achieved no statistical significance signal transduction pathways through RTPK in rat spleen lymphocytes and we conclude that the detection of telomerase activity in HNSCCs and RMs it is accompanied by tyrosine kinase domain hyperautophosphorylation. correlated to the clinical data can be helpful for identification of a subset of Thus, RTPK are involved in radiation-induced response of immune com- patients with higher risk for regional lymph node metastasis and regional petent spleen cells and mediate the effects of cytokines signal transduction recurrences. in these cells in 12 hours after rats irradiation in dose of 1 Gy. Our researches suggest that X-ray induced disorders of RTPK functioning are P0024.Detection of telomerase activity by PRINS; An alterna- caused by qualitative alteration of this enzyme and in the future need to be tive to in situ TRAP proved by checking of RTPK expression level in spleen lymphocytes as J. Mey1, J. Koch2, S. Michel1, F. von Eggeling1, U. Claussen1, G. Ernst1 well as gene targeting which will show important clues about the function 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute of RTPKs. of Human Genetics; Aarhus, Denmark b6meja@mti-n.uni-jena.de P0022.Quantification of the hTR and hTERT telomerase sub- Over the last years numerous protocols for detecting telomerase activity units using real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction have been described as modifications and refinements of the PCR-based R. Bauer, U. Claussen, G. Ernst, F. von Eggeling TRAPassay (Telomeric Repeat Amplification Protocol, Kim et al., 1994). Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany However, only a few reports concern determining telomerase in situ. This gruenowski@yahoo.com could be due to difficulties associated with in situ PCR, e.g. the amplifica- Telomerase, a ribonucleoprotein complex, plays an important role in the tion of non-specific sequences. In this work we tried to circumvent such maintenance of telomeres in eucaryotic cells. The telomerase is found in problems by replacing in situ PCR with a PRINS (Primed In Situ Labeling)- normal somatic cells during the entire embryogenesis but later on only in based detection method. For the establishment of this new approach all stem cells, germ cells and activated lymphocytes. An abnormal activation reactions were performed using the telomerase positive cell-line COLO of the enzyme can result in an indefinite proliferation and immortalization 320. First, the cells were incubated with a primer (TS) for telomerase-medi- of the cell. In more than 80% of malignant tumours telomerase activity has ated primer extension. Elongated oligonucleotides were then detected with been shown. Till now, the TRAP assay (Telomeric Repeat Amplification a PRINS reaction including incorporation of indirectly labeled nucleotides. Protocol) has been a common tool for activation analysis, but it is not suit- After immunostaining, the cells were assayed under a fluorescence micro- able for quantification. This problem can be overcome by quantification of scope. Control reactions comprised RNase-treatment, heat-treatment telomerase specific RNAs using real-time PCR. Therefore, we quantified before telomerase reaction, and omission of the TS primer. With the the functional RNA (human telomerase associated RNA, hTR) and the PRINS approach we obtained specific signals which seemed to be telom- mRNAof the catalytic subunit (human telomerase reverse transkriptase, erase-dependent. The advantage of this new method over in situ TRAP hTERT) of telomerase using real-time PCR. For wich a new primer system mainly relates to the stability of cell structure and specificity gained by elim- for the detection of both telomerase units was established. Isolated RNA inating cyclic denaturation and amplification. Moreover, the use of ddGTP was used from tumour cell lines (COLO 230, SK-MEL), normal cell line (G- at the PRINS-reaction prevents elongation of unspecific genomic 292) and blood as control. By comparing hTR and hTERTit was possible sequences. The further development of our method will focus on the reduc- to detect differences in the expression between normal and tumour cells. tion of background staining, testing of reproducibility, and the analysis of In all the cell lines and the blood the functional RNAof telomerase was more cell lines prior to application on tissue sections. constitutively expressed at least on a low level. Ahigh level of hTERTwas only detected in COLO320, whereas in SK-MELand the normal cell line P0025. Expression analysis of telomerase subunits (hTR, the expression was low. In the blood sample we found no hTERTat all. We hTERT, TP1) in cells from the urine of bladder cancer patients conclude that this newly established system for differential quantification of A. Bleichert1, W. Fiedler2, J. Mey1, F. von Eggeling1, R. Dahse1, K. hTR and hTERToffers the opportunity to distinguish between expression Junker3 profiles of normal and tumour cells and to define a cut off value for cellular 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Friedrich-Schiller Univer- malignity. sity; Jena, Germany; 2KIM 1 - Molecular Gastro. Oncology, Martin-Luther- University; Halle-Wittenberg, Germany; 3Department of Urology, Friedrich- P0023. Occurence and clinical significance of telomerase Schiller University; Jena, Germany activity in tumor tissue and resection margins of head and able@mti-n.uni-jena.de neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) Recent investigations have demonstrated that telomerase, a ribonucleo- G. Ernst1, W. Fiedler2, F. von Eggeling1, R. Dahse1, S. Koscielny3 protein complex linked to cellular immortalization, is activated in a variety 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Molecu- of malignant human tumors. Until now most investigations deal with activ- lar Gastroenterological Oncology, MLU Halle-Wittenberg; Halle, Germany; ity analysis using the telomeric repeat amplification protocol (TRAP). Some 3ENT-Department; Jena, Germany reports show that, although the tumor is telomerase negative, the expres- gernst@mti-n.uni-jena.de sion of telomerase subunits is of diagnostic significance. Therefore, we Using Telomeric Repeat Amplification Protocol (TRAP) we have analyzed combined three existing RT-PCR assays to determine the telomerase sub- telomerase activity in tissue samples from HNSCCs (n=80) and in the cor- units (hTR, hTERTand TP1) at the RNA-level in cells from urine samples responding pathohistological tumor-free resection margins (RMs) (n=69). of patients with bladder cancer and in healthy subjects as control. Of the The results were correlated with the clinical data and the disease course 50 bladder cell carcinoma specimens almost all cases showed an expres- of the patients (median postoperative follow up time=37.3 month) by sta- sion of hTR, whereas hTERTand TP1 were not detectable. In patients with tistical means. In 60 of 80 (75%) carcinomas and in 38 of 69 (55%) benign bladder disease (n = 10) and healthy subjects (n = 10) hTR was matched RMs telomerase activity was detected. 33 of 69 (48%) cases also found to be expressed, but not the hTERTand the TP1 subunits. ThePosters: Cancer Genetics 105 expression pattern of the 3 telomerase subunits seems to be identical irre- multiplex prostate cancer (CaP) sibships and matched controls. Two mis- spective whether the cells were obtained from healthy individuals or from sense variants have been reported to be associated with CaP; S217Land patients with bladder cancer. The results suggest that the expression of the A540Tin a sample of 359 CaPcases and 266 matched controls (Rebbeck telomerase subunits is not significant higher in cells of urine samples from et al., 2000). The association was due to a significant increase of the 540T bladder cancer patients compared to healthy persons. Therefore, the variant in the CaPcases compared to controls. The 540Tvariant was in analysis of the telomerase activity in exfoliated urothelial cells from voided complete linkage disequilibrium with the 217Lvariant. urine samples seems not to be a reliable method for differentiation We genotyped these polymorphisms in 257 multiplex CaP sibships and between benign and malignant bladder carcinomas. 355 matched controls. The control subjects have been followed for years as part of a large PSAstudy. All are free of CaPand none have ever reg- P0026. Semi-quantitative evaluation of telomerase activity istered a PSAlevel >2.5 ng/ml. All subjects in this study are of European and expression as a tumour marker in gastric and colon can- ancestry. cer The frequency of the 540Tallele in our CaPcases is significantly greater J. S. Nowak1, K. Lewandowski1, K. Nowicka-Kujawska1, M. Pernak1, D. than in the control series (0.051 vs. 0.021; p < 0.01). We also observe com- Januszkiewicz2 plete linkage disequilibrium between these two variants. Among the 281 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, multiplex sibships, 40 were found to contain at least one sibling carrying Poland; 2Academy of Medical Sciences, Institute of Human Genetics Pol- the 540Tallele. All were heterozygous. The Table reports a nonsignificant ish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, Poland difference in the observed and expected distribution of affected sib pairs nowakjs@man.poznan.pl (ASP) and affected trios with respect to 540T. Reactivation of telomerase is believed to play an important role in immor- Sibship configuration Observed Expected talization and carcinogenesis. Despite criticism on etiopathological signifi- ASP; T/A, T/A 10 11.55 cance of telomerase in carcinogenesis, evaluation of telomerase expres- T/A, A/A 23 21.45 sion and activity may be considered to be a potentially useful diagnostic Trios; T/A, T/A, A/A 3 3.52 marker.Telomerase expression has been studied by RT-PCR using specif- T/A, A/A, A/A 4 3.48 ic primers for telomerase reverse trancriptase. Telomerase repeat amplifi- cation protocol-TRAP(qualitative TRAPEZE telomerase detection kit,Inter- Additionally, the 540Tcarriers did not differ from noncarriers in their mean gen and quantitative TeloTAGGG telomerase PCR ELISA, Roche) was Gleason score (p=0.84) nor in their mean age-of-onset (p=0.45). used for analysis telomerase activity.In a preliminary study high expression of telomerase in gastric and colon cancer has been found. Lymphocytes P0029.Genetic variants of the prostate carcinoma tumor anti- stimulated by PHAalso showed high telomerase expression. Low telom- gen-1 (PCTA-1) in hereditary and sporadic prostate cancer erase expression has been found only in some cases of non-cancerous C. Maier1, J. Haeussler1, K. Roesch1, S. Bochum1, T. Paiss2, G. Cancel- mucosa from corresponding patients with gastric and colorectal cancer Tassin3, W. Vogel1 and peripheral blood lymphocytes. Telomerase activity in 10 000 cells has 1Abteilung Humangenetik, Universittsklinikum Ulm; Ulm, Germany; been observed in all studied samples. 300-cells lysate of all cancer cells, 2Abteilung Urologie, Universittsklinikum Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 3CeRePP; as well as PHAstimulated lymphocytes showed telomerase activity in con- Evry, France trary to normal cells. On the basis of obtained results it can be concluded christiane.maier@medizin.uni-ulm.de that all cancer cells tested have higher telomerase expression, as com- Prostate cancer is a complex disease with an estimated portion of 10 % pared to normal cells. Taking into account clear-cut relationship of telom- familial cases caused by rarely mutated susceptibility genes. Recent link- erase activity and cell number, it can be postulated, that quantitative or age analyses have revealed at least five loci expected to harbour high risk semiquantitative evaluation of telomerase activity and expression should alleles. In a candidate gene approach concerning the susceptibility locus allow to distinguish cancer from normal tissue. PCaP(1q42.2-43) which was identified in a French and German popula- tion, we focused on the PCTA-1 gene encoding a member of the tumor P0027.Mismatch repair defects and tumour predisposition associated galectin family. Selected on the base of cosegregation, 36 Ger- R. M. W. Hofstra1, Y. Wu1, M. J. W. Berends2, R. G. J. Mensink1, C. man and French prostate cancer sibships were examined by Enzymatic Kempinga3, R. H. Sijmons4, A. G. J. van der Zee5, H. Hollema3, J. H. Mutation Detection (EMD). In 77 affected men no mutations were found Kleibeuker6, C. H. C. Buys1 within the coding sequence of the PCTA-1 gene, while in three affected 1Dept. Medical Genetics; Groningen, The Netherlands; 2Dept. Gastroen- brothers an intronic insertion upstream exon 6 was observed. In vitro terology; Groningen, The Netherlands; 3Dept. Pathology; Groningen, The investigations have been worked out to address a putative influence on Netherlands; 4Dept. Medical Genetics; Groningen, The Netherlands; splicing. In addition, the detection of three amino acid alterations (19Y/F, 5Dept. Gynaecology; Groningen, The Netherlands; 6Dept. Gastroenterolo- 36C/R and 184S/R) tempted us to evaluate frequent PCTA-1 alleles as gy; Groningen, The Netherlands putative low penetrance factors to predispose for prostate cancer. In an r.m.w.hofstra@medgen.azg.nl association analysis of 73 German sporadic cases versus 73 controls a Defects in mismatch repair (MMR) genes result in an accumulation of heterozygous state with the haplotype 19F-36R-184S was found signifi- mutations, in tumours reflected as microsatellite instability (MSI). Germline cantly overrepresented in sporadics and became even more prominent mutations in MMR genes predispose to hereditary cancer and have been after stratification according Gleason scores higher than 6 (odds ratio = found first and in particular in families with (non-polyposis) colorectal can- 5.3; p=0.022). However, in comparable French cases and controls these cer (HNPCC). Occurrence of MSI is used as a criterion for mutation analy- phenomena have not been recovered. Since general implications of PCTA- sis of MMR genes. The tighter the definition of familial CRC, the higher the 1 in malignancy and metastasis have been suggested but not yet assessed probability to find mutations, in particular in MSH2 and MLH1. With a loos- in detail, we started to search for interacting proteins using the two hybrid er definition, there is a relative increase of cases with tumour types other system. than CRC, mostly endometrial cancer (EC). Different MSI frequencies are observed in CRC and EC, dependent on the type of microsatellite marker P0030. Molecular genetic analysis of colorectal cancers analysed, indicating tissue-specificity with respect to the relative amounts demands a commitment to service delivery in developing of MMR proteins. Because mismatch preferences of MMR proteins are dif- countries. ferent, we argued that absence of tumour MSI in families with CRC or relat- R. Felix1, U. Algar2, P. Goldberg2, R. S. Ramesar3 ed types of tumour cannot imply non-involvement of MMR genes. Indeed, 1University Of Cape Town; Cape Town, South Africa; 2GIT Unit, Groote MSH6, involved in repairing single nucleotide mismatches that do not show Schuur Hospital; Cape Town, South Africa; 3Department of Human Genet- up as MSI, is mutated in a substantial proportion of families. We also iden- ics, University of Cape Town; Cape Town, South Africa tified germline mutations in MLH3 and EXO1. In some cases, different rf@anat.uct.ac.za mutant genes may need to occur in combination in order to predispose to Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is a syndrome char- tumour development acterised by familial predisposition to colorectal carcinoma and extra- colonic cancers. This dominant disorder is caused by germline mutations P0028.HPC2/ELAC2 is a marker for prostate cancer. in one of at least five mismatch repair genes, viz. hMLH1, hMSH2, hPMS1, D. S. Gerhard, B. K. Suarez, L. T. Nguyen, N. K. Kesterson, J. Lin, B. hPMS2 and hMSH6. Mutations in the hMLH1 and hMSH2 genes account Haberer, W. J. Catalona for 80-90% of HNPCC cases. The frequency of HNPCC among South Washington University School of Medicine; St. Louis, MO United States African colorectal cancer subjects has not yet been determined. The pur- gerhard@genetics.wustl.edu pose of this report is to estimate the frequency of HNPCC amongst indi- We report an analysis of two polymorphisms in the HPC2/ELAC2 gene in viduals diagnosed with generic colorectal cancer, excluding FAP, under the106 Posters: Cancer Genetics age of 45 years. In this study the entire coding region of the hMLH1 and cer patients. This association may reflect the influence of genetic factors hMSH2 genes were screened using single stranded conformational poly- predisposing to both tumor types. Germline mutations of the CDH1 gene morphism analysis and DNAsequencing in 100 subjects. Ten biologically at 16q have recently been associated with familial gastric cancer. Further- significant mutations were detected. These mutations were not detected in more, two genome-wide linkage studies of prostate cancer recently report- 50 unrelated, unaffected control individuals tested. Genetic tests facilitate ed positivity at 16q. We therefore identified families and individual patients the molecular diagnosis of the disorder in sporadic cases and this aids in with both gastric and prostate cancer and investigated, whether the CDH1 the identification of other asymptomatic family members. The results gene mutations would be involved in cancer predisposition in these cases. obtained in this study will allow us to determine the frequency of colorectal Fifteen of the 180 Finnish hereditary prostate cancer families (8.3%) had cancer due to HNPCC in South Africa. Ethically there is a commitment to one or more gastric cancer cases. No truncating or splice-site CDH1 muta- genealogical tracings and investigation of familiality of HNPCC mutation tions were identified by PCR-SSCPin these families, or in eight individual carriers. Ideally, recruitment of family members for genetic testing and patients who had both prostate and gastric cancer. However, a novel counselling, where appropriate, amounts to commitment of vast human S270Amissense mutation in exon 6 of the CDH1 gene was seen in a sin- and other resources for this purpose. The capacity to do this in a develop- gle family with 4 prostate and 2 gastric cancers. Alarge-scale population- ing country on a sustainable basis may be used as an indicator for estab- based survey indicated a higher prevalence of S270Aamong both familial lishing other gene-based diagnoses. prostate cancer cases (3.3%, n=120, p=0.01) as well as in unselected prostate cancer patients (1.5%, n=472, p=0.12) as compared with blood P0031.Genetic Analysis of a Nova Scotia Kindred with Essen- donors serving as population controls (0.5%, n=923). We conclude that tial Thrombocythemia individual rare mutations and polymorphisms in the CDH1 gene, such as J. R. Higgs, I. Sadek, P. E. Neumann, V. W. Ing, E. Z. Zayed, W. L. Greer the S270A, may contribute to the onset of prostate cancer and warrant fur- Dalhousie University; Halifax, NS Canada ther investigations in other populations. CDH1 gene does not, however, jillianhiggs@hotmail.com appear to explain the link between prostate and gastric cancer. Essential Thrombocythemia (ET) is a chronic myleoproliferative disorder characterized by increased proliferation of megakaryocytes and elevated P0034. Mutational Analyses Of The Ret Proto-oncogene In platelet counts. While ETusually occurs sporadically, we have identified a Slovenian Men2 Families rare family with at least 5 affected individuals in two generations. Since B. Korosec, S. Caserman, D. Bergant, M. Ravnik-Glavac, D. Glavac platelet production is regulated by thrombopoetin (THPO) through its Medical faculty; Ljubljana, Slovenia receptor, MPL, the respective genes were considered likely candidates for LMG@mf.uni-lj.si the underlying genetic defect segregating in this family. The pedigree was Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is an autosomal dominantly consistent with linkage to THPO; but MPLwas excluded by linkage analy- inherited cancer syndrome that appears in different subtypes MEN2A, sis. Elevated levels of THPO in affected individuals strongly supported the MEN2B and FMTC. MEN2Ais characterized by the combined occurrence possibility of a mutation in the THPO gene that resulted in increased of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma (PCC) and expression. Three similar families have been reported to have mutations parathyroid hyperplasia (PH). In FMTC the only manifestations of the syn- in the 5 untranslated region of the full length THPO mRNAthat were asso- drome are MTCs which usually develop at more advanced age. The ciated with loss of translational inhibition of THPO mRNA. Therefore, we MEN2B syndrome is the most severe form of the MEN2 phenotypes, char- are sequencing the corresponding genomic region in affected family mem- acterized by an early onset of MTC and PCC, rapid progression to the bers. metastatic MTC. The loci for MEN2 have been mapped to the centromeric region of chromosome 10q11.2. This region encompasses the RETproto- P0032.Cancer Risk in NBS Heterozygotes oncogene, a receptor-type tyrosine kinase. DNAwas isolated from blood. E. Seemanova1, J. Pelz2, R. Varon2, P. Jarolim2, K. Sperling2 Exons 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of RETproto-oncogene were ampli- 1Institute of Biology & Medical Genetics, Charles University; Prague, fied in PCR and were analysed by single stranded conformational analysis Czech Republic; 2Institute of Human Genetics, Humboldt University; (SSCA) on polyacrylamide gels. Mutations were determined by the direct Berlin, Germany sequencing method. To confirm the mutations restriction enzyme Cfo I, karl.sperling@charite.de Fnu4H1, Rsa I, and Fok I were used. In MEN2Afamilies C634R, C643S, Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder C634Y, C611R and L790F mutations were detected. In MEN2B families associated with high susceptibility to lymphoid malignancies. More than only mutation C918R mutation was identified. The mutation in FMTC fam- 90% of all patients known so far are of slavic origin and carry the same ily was C618R. Molecular genetic analysis of RETpoint mutations is a reli- founder mutation. Its population frequency was estimated at 1;130 in the able method to detect asymptomatic gene carriers of MEN2. The early Czech Republic. The aim of the present study was to calculate the poten- identification of gene carriers among members of MEN2 families will help tial cancer risk of NBS heterozygotes. In a cohort study histories were to improve the planning of clinical management of affected individuals and taken of 181 persons from 18 pedigrees in a personal interview using a to define the optimal point for preventative thyroidectxomy to reduce the structured questionnaire covering reproductive history, X-ray history, work- risk of metastatic MTC. ing place history and current and former health status as well as possible confounding factors of life style. For 176 participants the genotype has P0035.Genetic analysis of ret proto-oncogene in 124 Spanish been determined (85 heterozygotes and 91 normal homozygotes). Among patients with at least Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma (MTC) or the homozygous probands 2 cases of cancer were found, while 8 carcino- only pheochromocytoma. mas were detected in the heterozygous (all 8 were of different type, aver- A. Cebrin, S. Ruz-Llorente, M. Urioste, J. J. Dez, A. Barroso, M. Roble- age age of onset 62 years). This elevated risk of malignancies in the het- do erozygotes is also obvious in the pedigrees for those members, for which Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncolgicas; Madrid, Spain the probability of heterozygosity has been estimated by conventional cal- acebrian@cnio.es culations only. Already in 1990 an increased incidence of cancer amongst Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A(MEN 2A) is a syndrome character- relatives of NBS patients has been noted (E. Seemanova, Mutat Res. 238, ized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and pheochromocytoma, 321). Here, we present the first direct evidence for this assumption. sometimes combined with parathyroid adenomas. Penetrance is almost complete, but gene expression is variable. We have available DNAfrom P0033. Association of E-Cadherin germline alterations with 124 unselected, consecutively patientes submitted to reject or confirm the prostate and gastric cancer familial character of the disease. These patients were divided in two T. Ikonen1, M. Matikainen1, N. Mononen1, E. Hyytinen2, H. Helin3, S. groups. The first, included 105 patients with al least MTC, with or without Tommola3, T. Tammela1, E. Pukkala4, J. Schleutker1, O. Kallioniemi5, P. familiar history. In the second group we included 19 patients with only Koivisto2, P. Koivisto2 phaeochromocytoma. By sequencing analysis, we studied, in all patients, 1Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, Universi- the 6 mainly involved exons of the ret protooncogen, independently of age ty of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital; Tampere, Finland; of onset. From 105 patients with at least MTC, 30 had familial history of the 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Tampere University Hospital; Tampere, disease, and 93.3% of them presented germline mutations in ret. Among Finland; 3Department of Pathology, Tampere University Hospital; Tampere, the 75 non-familial cases, only 7% showed germline mutations. In patients Finland; 4Finnish Cancer Registry; Helsinki, Finland; 5Cancer Genetics with only pheochromocytoma, 21% of cases presented germline mutations Branch, NHGRI, NIH, Bethesda,; Maryland 20892, United States either in ret or in vhl gene. We were looking in both groups for a correla- lotaik@uta.fi tion between mutation, the patients age and the clinical variables. With In our recent cancer registry-based study, the incidence of gastric carcino- regard to patients who presented germline mutations in ret, the most strik- ma was increased up to 5-fold in male relatives of early-onset prostate can- ing result was the wide age distribution of non-symptomatic carriers of non-Posters: Cancer Genetics 107 634 mutation, versus the clustering noted within the 634 mutation carriers. tugal; 6Surgery Department, University of Porto; Porto, Portugal; 7Dept. of On the other hand, in patients with only pheochromocytoma, there was no Pediatrics, Haifa Hospital; Haifa, Israel; 8Division of Medical Genetics, Uni- clear association between the presence or absence of germline mutation versity of Geneva Medical School; Geneva, Switzerland and the factors that we considered (bilateral or unilateral character, and mehenni@medecine.unige.ch familial history of the disease). Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by mucocunateous pigmentation, hamartomatous polyps and an increased P0036.p53, hCHK1, and hCHK2 genes in Finnish families with risk of associated malignancies. Colon and breast cancers are the most Li-Fraumeni syndrome; further evidence of hCHK2 in inherit- frequent malignancies, but also genital, and small intestine cancers are ed cancer predisposition found. The LKB1/STK11 serine/threonine kinase is mutated in Peutz- P. Vahteristo1, A. Tamminen1, P. Karvinen1, H. Eerola2,1, C. Blomqvist2, K. Jeghers syndrome and functions as a tumour suppressor. There are, how- Aittomki3, H. Nevanlinna1 ever, many families with PJS without mutations in LKB1, suggesting locus 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Helsinki University Central heterogeneity in this disorder. We have studied the molecular etiology in 20 Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 2Department of Oncology, Helsinki University PJS families, and identified 10 independent LKB1 mutations (a different Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 3Department of Clinical Genetics, one in each family). The spectrum of mutation includes missense and non- Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland sense amino acid substitutions, deletions, insertions, a complex pia.vahteristo@helsinki.fi deletion/insertion and splice site mutations. Most of the LKB1 mutations Germline mutations in the p53 gene account for 70% of Li-Fraumeni fami- result in truncated protein and/or disrupt the protein kinase catalytic lies and 30% of families with Li-Fraumeni-like (LFL) cancer syndrome. The domain leading to inactivation or a dramatic decrease of the kinase activi- cell cycle check point kinases Chk1 and Chk2 act upstream of p53 in DNA ty. The clinical features of affected individuals (N=105) of the 10 PJS fam- damage responses. Recently, a germline mutation in hCHK2 gene was ilies without a LKB1 mutations do not differ from PJS patients (N=204) with reported in a LFS family (Bell et al, Science 286;2528, 1999). We have such mutations. Affected individuals from 5 out of 10 families with LKB1 analyzed p53, hCHK1 and hCHK2 genes for mutations in 45 Finnish fam- mutations had developed cancers. Similarly, affecteds from 4 out of 10 PJS ilies with LFS, LFLor phenotypically suggestive of LFS with conformation families without recognizable LKB1 mutations developed cancers. Finally, sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). Genomic sequence comparisons there was no significant correlation between the different mutations in were carried out to ensure specificity in the analysis of hCHK2 exons 10- LKB1 and the presence or absence of cancer, although the sample size is 14 with multiple homologous sequencies in the genome. Five different dis- small for meaningful conclusions. ease causing mutations were observed in seven families (15.6%); five in the p53 (11.1%) and two in the hCHK2 gene (4.4%). No mutations in the P0039. STK11/LKB1 gene; identification of alternative tran- hCHK1 gene were identified. The p53 mutations (Pro151Thr, Arg196Stop, scripts and new germline mutations Arg 213Stop, Arg248Gln in two families) were found in the conserved, N. Resta1, A. Stella1, F. Susca1, M. Di Giacomo1, M. Genuardi2, W. Lat- mutation rich exons 5-7. Two p53-families had a LFS phenotype (total 3 tanzi1, C. Simone1, F. P. Rossini3, G. Guanti1 LFS families) and two LFLphenotype, and one was a family history-nega- 1DIMIMP-Sezione di Genetica Medica-Universit di Bari; Bari, Italy; 2Istitu- tive patient with both childhood sarcoma and early onset breast cancer. In to di Genetica Medica-Universit Cattolica; Rome, Italy; 3Servizio di Gas- the hCHK2 gene, a frameshift mutation in exon ten (1100delC) was found troenterologia Endoscopia Ospedale San Giovanni; Torino, Italy in two families, final analysis of two other sequence variants is currently resusc@medgene.uniba.it underway. The cancer phenotype in the1100delC-families was not typical- STK11/LKB1 codifies for a ser-thr kinase whose function is still unknown. ly LFS or LFL, and may indicate variable phenotypic expression in the rare Germline STK11/LKB1 mutations can be found in about 50% of Peutz- families with hCHK2 mutations. Still other genes may account for the Jeghers(PJ) patients. Somatic STK11/LKB1 mutations have be found in a remaining LFS/LFLfamilies. small number of sporadic tumors of lung, ovary, skin, colon. The wild-type STK11/LKB1 protein shows a nuclear as well as cytoplasmic localization P0037.Characterisation of a neurofibromatosis NF1 mutation and an autocatalitic activity. Linkage studies in PJ families seem indicate which results in the skipping of both exons 11 and 12a. the existence of an other locus on the long arm of the chromosome 19. In J. Thirion1, L. Fang1, M. Simard1, D. Vidaud2, B. Assouline2, B. Chabot1, the last three years we collected 18 cases of PJS. At least another affect- M. Vidaud2 ed member was present in the family of 6 patients, the remaining 12 cases 1Facult de Mdecine; Sherbrooke, PQ Canada; 2Univ. Paris V; Paris, were sporadic. Germline mutations of STK11/LKB1 gene were found in 4 France sporadic and 4 familial cases; in addition several different exonic an intron- jpthir@courrier.usherb.ca ic polymorphisms were identified. Of relevant interest are a Neurofibromatosis type1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder mutation(IVS2+1A>G) involving the non canonic consensus sequence affecting neural crest-cell derivatives and resulting in cutaneous manifes- lying in the splicing junction of the exon 2 and a change (IVS5+5A>G) in tations of caf-au-lait patches and neurofibromas. It is characterised by a the intron 5 . The splicing effects of these two changes have been evalu- wide variety of phenotypes, even in the same family. In order to correlate ated in COS-7 cells transfected with a pSPL3 plasmid in which the exonic the genotypes with their phenotypes and to find the functions of neurofi- sequences and the flanking intronic regions were cloned. In addition we bromin, we have characterised a number of mutations from NF1 patients have identified several mRNAisoforms, products of alternative splicing. by Southern blots and a protein truncation test. Anew mutation consisting The sequencing of two of these isoforms revealed the presence of two dif- of a G to Atransition at position +1 of the 5 splice site of exon 12a causes ferent out of frame deletions from the exon 2 to 7. This work was partially the loss of both exons 11 and 12a without affecting the reading frame of supported by AIRC and MURST-COFIN 98. the mutant mRNA. Transfection of HeLa cells with portion of the mutant and the wild type genes cloned in DUP4-1 vector derivatives and in vitro P0040.Exclusion of several genes mapped in 19q13.3-13.4 as splicing assays using chimeric mutant or wild type adenovirus/NF1 pre- candidates for a second locus in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome mRNAs indicate the mutation prevents the definition of exon 12a, a K. Buchet, H. Mehenni, C. Rossier, S. E. Antonarakis process that is normally required to activate the weak 3splice site of exon Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Medical School; Geneva, 12a. Because the mutation affects exon 12a definition, exon11/exon 12a Switzerland splicing is also compromised leading to the exclusion of both exons 11 and buchet@cmu.unige.ch 12a. Thus these results provide strong support for the 1995 model of exon Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS; OMIM 175200) is an autosomal dominant definition as proposed by Berget and suggest an important role for exons disease characterized by hamartomatous polyps and mucocutaneous pig- 11 and 12a in the activity of neurofibromin. mentation. There is an increased risk for developing various neoplasms with predisposition to benign and malignant tumors of the gastrointestinal P0038.Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype analyses tract, breast, ovary, uterine, cervix, and testis. Mutations in the serine/thre- in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome onine kinase STK11 / LKB1 cause Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in most of H. Mehenni1, C. Rossier2, R. Chergui3, K. F. Richards4, L. Mota-Vieira5, A. affected individuals. However, a number of PJS-patients show no muta- S. Leal6, A. Lerner7, S. E. Antonarakis8 tions in STK11 / LKB1 suggesting genetic heterogeneity. One large PJS- 1University of Geneva; Geneva, Switzerland; 2Division of Medical Genet- family has previously been described with significant evidence for linkage ics, University of Geneva Medical School,; Geneva, Switzerland; 3Service to a second potential PJS disease locus on 19q13.3-13.4. Mutation analy- de Gastro-entrologie, Clinique Rahmouni Djilali, West University Hospital sis of STK11 / LKB1 in the affected members of this family revealed no Center; Algiers, Algeria; 4LDS Hospital and University of Utah Medical mutations, which supported the likelihood for the existence of a yet not Center; Salt Lake City, UT United States; 5Unidade de Gentica e Patolo- identified second PJS gene in this region. In the current study we used a gia Moleculares, Hospital De Ponta Delgada; Ponta Delgada,Aores, Por- gene candidate approach in which we investigated the genomic region108 Posters: Cancer Genetics between markers D19S180 and D19S254 for which multipoint linkage P0043.Frequency and parental origin of de novo APC muta- analysis yielded the maximal LOD score (3.9) in this particular family. Gene tions in familial adenomatous polyposis mapping and mutation search analysis revealed no pathologic mutations in W. Friedl1, R. Caspari2, M. Sengteller1, S. Uhlhaas1, E. Mangold1, P. Prop- several genes mapped in this region including STK13 and NES1, even if a ping1 number of polymorphic variants have been identified. Further analysis of 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; candidate genes in this region is in progress. 2Department of Internal Medicine, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany friedlw@meb.uni-bonn.de P0041. Novel mutations in the SDHD gene in two cases of Apredominance of de novo mutations in the paternal germline has been familial paraganglioma with associated pheochromocytoma reported for several disorders (for review see Crow, Nature Reviews, O. A. Haas1, A. Weinhusel1, P. Waldner1, C. Neumayer2, B. Niederle2 Genetics 1, Oct. 2000). Parental origin of APC mutations in familial ade- 1CCRI, St. Anna Childrens Hospital; Vienna, Austria; 2Surgical Univ. Clin- nomatous polyposis (FAP) has not been systematically examined so far. ic; Vienna, Austria FAPis a precancerous condition characterized by the occurrence of hun- o.a.haas@magnet.at dreds to thousands of colorectal adenomas and extracolonic manifesta- Familial paraganglioma (PGL1; OMIM 168000) is a rare tumor predisposi- tions. FAPis caused by germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene tion syndrome that is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, but APC. We examined 680 unrelated FAPfamilies for germline mutations. In exclusively through the male germ line. This pattern of inheritance is con- 53 out of 411 families with known family history (13%) both parents of the sistent with genomic imprinting. Affected individuals develop slow growing index patient had not developed colorectal adenomas suggesting a de tumors of the head and neck region that affect most commonly the carotid novo mutation. A germline mutation was detected in 41 of these 53 body. Recently, the responsible gene, the succinate-ubiquinone oxidore- patients; in 27 cases the mutation was excluded in both parents. Overall, ductase subunit D (SDHD) was identified (Science 287;848;2000). It the 5 bp deletion at codon 1309 was found in 47/680 patients (7%). This encodes the small subunit of cytochrome b in mitochondrial complex II. mutation was overrepresented in the group of patients with de novo muta- Heterogeneous mutations were detected in five PGL1 families. Based on tions (17/53 = 32%), thus demonstrating that the high frequency of this these findings, we studied two patients with hereditary paragangliomas mutation is not due to a founder effect but rather due to de novo mutation and concomitant pheochromocytoma. Sequencing of the coding region events. Parental origin of de novo mutations could be traced in 8 families. revealed two novel mutations. In the first case, a 36-year-old man, we Five mutations were of paternal, and 3 of maternal origin. Interestingly, the found a mutation in the start codon (ATG>AAG, met>lys) together with a 3 1309 de novo mutation was observed in the maternal germline, only. Muta- bp deletion in intron 1. Analyses of four siblings and two children revealed tions in the paternal germline included one large deletion of about 10Mb, that the start codon mutation segregated with individuals affected by para- two base exchanges (R564X; S1201X) and twice the 5bp deletion at codon gangliomas, whereas the deletion did not. This suggests that the latter 1061. In the maternal germline the 5bp deletion at codon 1309 was found most likely represents a polymorphism on the second allele. This deletion twice, in addition to the mutation c.3556delGAat codon 1186. In conclu- was not found in 100 normal control chromosomes. The second case, a sion, in our sample de novo APC germline mutations show a slightly high- 29-year-old woman, had a 12 bp deletions in exon 3, codons 91-94. Her er frequency in the paternal germline. Further families have to be studied potentially affected relatives are currently under investigation. The identifi- to see whether the observed difference in parental origin and mutation cation of asymptomatic gene carriers in PGL1 families is particularly rele- spectrum are reproducible. Acknowledgement; This study was supported vant, because regular screening programs can be offered that allow the by the Deutsche Krebshilfe. early recognition and treatment of tumors even before they become clini- cally apparent. P0044. Molecular and Clinical Profiles of Singapore Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Patients P0042. Hereditary paraganglioma with P. Y. Cheah, X. Cao, K. W. Eu, F. Seow-Choen pheochromocytoma;genetic and functional study of a new Singapore General Hospital; Singapore, Singapore mutation of SDHD gene gcscpy@sgh.com.sg A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1, J. Favier2, J. J. Mourad3, P. F. Plouin4, J. M. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a heritable form of colon cancer Gasc2, X. Jeunemaitre1 caused by autosomal dominant inheritance of the mutated adenomatous 1Dpartement de Gntique Molculaire, Hpital Europen Georges Pom- polyposis coli (APC) gene. We investigated the APC mutation and pheno- pidou; Paris, France; 2INSERM U36, Collge de France; Paris, France; typic spectrum of 180 members of 39 Singapore FAPfamilies. The protein 3Service de Mdecine Interne et de Chirurgie Vasculaire, Hpital Saint- truncation test (PTT) and DNAsequencing were used to screen the entire Michel; Paris, France; 4Rseau PHRC AOM 95201 COMETE; Paris, APC coding region for germline mutations. APC mutations were found in France 31 families (79 %). 72 patients tested positive while 64 non-affected mem- Anne-Paule.GIMENEZ@hop.egp.ap-hop-paris.fr bers tested negative. The correlation of PTTto clinical diagnosis is there- Background; The paragangliomas are highly vasculars tumors arising from fore 100%, suggesting that PTTis a highly specific presymptomatic test for neural crest cells. They are commonly located at the carotid body FAP. Twenty two different APC mutations, including two genomic deletions, (chemodectoma) and could be secreting (pheochromocytoma). Familial were identified. Thirteen mutations were novel. All mutations, except one, paragangliomas are commonly multiple, bilateral and present at an earlier resulted in the classical colonic phenotype. Nine families have the same age. Transmission of familial tumors occurs through autosomal dominant (AAAGA) deletion at codon 1309, indicating that like the Western families, inheritance via the paternal line. Three loci were described PGL1, PGL2 codon 1309 is also the mutation hot spot for Singapore families. Interest- and PGL3. Recently, the PGL1 and PGL3 loci have been identified as cor- ingly, mutation at codon 332 resulted in attenuated FAPwith left-sided pre- responding to the SDHD and SDHC genes, respectively, which encode for dominance of polyps rather than the right. For the eight families without two proteins involved in the mitochondrial complex II. Patients; We report APC mutations, we screened for beta-catenin mutation which was shown a French family with three affected men. The father and his first son exhib- to substitute for APC mutation in sporadic colorectal cancer. No germline ited bilateral chemodectomas. The second son developed a left chemod- beta-catenin mutation was found. Further analysis reveals atypical clinical ectoma and an ectopic cardiac pheochromocytoma. Genetic study; Poly- features such as the co-existence of adenomatous and hyperplastic polyps morphic markers were selected from the PGL1 and PGL2 chromosome and other non-FAPassociated cancers in these patients. Our results sug- 11q region. The transmission of the paternal allele was demonstrated in gest the involvement of other genes and possibly new variants for the affected children. Direct sequencing of SDHD revealed a new nonsense polyposis syndrome. mutation at codon 22 in all affected individuals. Functional analysis; As mitochondria play a critical role in oxygen sensing, we have analyzed the P0045. Study Of Pedigree Families With Familial Adenoma- expression of angiogenic markers by in situ hybridization and immunohis- tous Polyposis tochemistry in chemodectomas and pheochromocytoma. Ahigh expres- W. Lubinga sion of VEGF and his receptor VEGF-R1, EPAS and HIF1 were detected, Medical University of Southern Africa; Pietersburg, South Africa suggesting that these markers induced by hypoxia could contribute to wlubinga@worldonline.co.za tumorigenesis and tumor vascularity. Others markers are under current BACKGROUND; This study was done at Donald Fraser hospital in rural investigation. Conclusion; As the VHLgene, SDHD is a hypoxia-response remote South Africa. There were 18 pedigree families descended from a gene that might stimulate hyperplasia and tumorigenesis through the chief with 5 wives and 17 children. To date, this family has ~465 pedigree expression of angiogenic factors. members excluding ~135 spouses. Of this pedigree, 15 persons died from colon cancer and 9 members have colorectal adenomatous polyps. Four persons in their late teens have had proctocolectomy. No colorectal can- cer-screening program exists for these families. So far no genetic studiesPosters: Cancer Genetics 109 have been done. OBJECTIVE; To screen pedigree members suspected P0048.Analysis Of Apc Gene Mutations In Familial Adenoma- with FAP for colorectal polyps by colonoscopy. METHODS; Selections tous Polyposis By Primer Extension Preamplification Of were based on risk of having colon polyps from family history and on sat- Microsamples Of Fixed Paraffin-embedded Tissue isfying inclusion and exclusion criteria for colonoscopy. RESULTS; Seven- K. Husnjak, S. Kapitanovic, K. Pavelic ty-seven persons were selected. Thirty-three (37%) persons responded Rudjer Boskovic Institute; Zagreb, Croatia and had colonoscopy. Amother had four and her daughter had eight colon husnjak@rudjer.irb.hr adenomatous polyps. In the latter, polyps showed severe dysplasia with no The purpose of our study was to determine the usefulness of primer exten- malignancy. Both declined further interventions despite counselling for sion preamplification (PEP) method in analysis of APC gene mutations in potential benefits of proctocolectomy. CONCLUSIONS; The study estab- familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients. We analysed polyps and lished a need for regular continuous colon cancer screening for the pedi- peripheral blood from two patients with FAP. They had the germline 5 bp gree and provides information of use in setting up a hereditary colon can- deletion at the codon 1309 of the APC gene. We assumed that at least cer registry. These families need education and counselling about FAP, to some parts of polyps in two patients had the second hit at APC gene and improve compliance to screening programmes and surgical treatment. other early genetic changes. The inability to detect them in DNAisolated Chemotherapy for inducing polyp regression may be considered as an from the whole polyp could be explained by presence of normal tissue alternative treatment for objectors to colorectal surgery. Genetic testing within polyps or heterogenous genetic changes within the epithelium of a identifies persons with the genetic trait and further research in this respect polyp. We analysed microdissections of deparaffinized tissue for mutations is recommended. and loss of heterozygosity at the APC gene. In order to increase the quan- tity of target DNAavailable from small samples, each microdissection was P0046.APC-gene mosaicism in sporadic attenuated FAP first preamplifed by using PEP. Aliquouts of PEP reactions were then J. Meuller1, J. Bjrk2, Y. Engwall1, H. Gronberg3, E. Holmberg4, M. amplifed by using three pairs of APC primers, which could amplify three dif- Nordling1 ferent parts of exon 15 of the APC gene. All samples were also analysed 1Clinical Genetics, Gteborg University; Gteborg, Sweden; 2Dep. Gas- for K-ras mutation. PCR products were analysed by restriction fragment troenterology & Hepatology, Karolinska Hosptital; Stockholm, Sweden; length polymorphism (RFLP) method and by electrophoresis on Spreadex 3Dept of Oncology, Ume University Hospital; Ume, Sweden; 4Dept of EL 300 gels. By using microdissection and PEP-PCR we were able to Clinical Genetics, Ume University Hospital; Ume, Sweden prove germline, second hit mutation and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of johan.meuller@pediat.gu.se the APC gene. In order to confirm the accuracy of PEPmethod, three dif- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP{MIM175100}) is an autosomal dom- ferent pairs of primers for exon 15 of the APC gene were used - the same inantly inherited disease caused by germ line mutations in the APC gene. results were obtained. Our study showed that PEPmethod provided more It predisposes to the development of hundreds to thousands of colorectal accurate insight into different genetic changes of FAP. polyps, of which some will progress to cancer. Additionally, FAP-patients often develop extracolonic manifestation, such as desmoids, osteomas P0049.Novel germ line mutations in Czech FAPfamilies and retinal lesions. There is a high new-mutation rate with estimates of up M. Kohoutova1, J. Stekrova2, V. Jirasek3, J. Kotlas1, J. Kapras1 to 25% of all cases being sporadic. Sporadic FAP-patients from the 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Swedish population are analysed with respect to APC-gene mutations to Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2General Teaching Hospital investigate whether mutational mosaicism could account for some of the of the Faculty, Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 31st Medical new cases. We have to date found one case of low level mutational Department, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University; Prague, Czech mosaicism. The patient had an attenuated form of FAP(few polyps) but Republic mutational screening with direct sequencing or protein truncation tests on mkoho@lf1.cuni.cz blood-derived DNAindicated a normal APC-gene. However, using single- Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inher- stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) low level mutational ited disorder caused by germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis mosaicism was demonstrated. Sequencing of the corresponding DNA- coli (APC) gene. It is characterised by early onset of polyposis coli and band, excised from a silverstained polyacrylamide gel, confirmed the pres- development of colorectal carcinoma as a consequence of mutations in a ence of a mutation in the APC-gene. Mutation screening of various tissue number of tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. The APC gene muta- from the affected patient and from the parents will be used to investigate tions were investigated in 46 Czech unrelated FAP families and 9 sus- the origin of the mutation. Our findings demonstrate the importance of pected FAPfamilies to cover the entire of exons 1 - 15 to the codon 1773. using mutation detection methods which can detect mutated APC-alleles Molecular studies involve DGGE and sequence analysis. The 25 germline present at only low levels, especially for sporadic cases of FAP. APC mutations were found in total of 55 cases. Of the identified mutations eleven mutations have not yet been described and are presumed to be P0047.MALDI-TOF-MS based molecular diagnosis of familial novel;1)seven frameshift mutations 1225delC in exon 9, 2733-2734insA, adenomatous polyposis 3049-3052delAATG, 3332-3335delAAAC, 3751-3752insT, 3818-3822del- A. Humeny1, T. Bonk1, C. Sutter2, J. Gebert2, M. von Knebel-Dberitz2, C. GATGT and 3872-3873insA, all in exon 15 2) two nonsense mutations, Becker1 1297C>T in exon 9 and 1411G>T in exon 11. Both frameshift and non- 1Institut fr Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer- sense mutations resulted in the classical form of FAPbut the deletion C in sitt Erlangen-Nrnberg; Erlangen, Germany; 2Sektion fr Molekulare exon 9 caused attenuated FAP. 3) two splicing mutations, IVS11+1G>A Diagnostik und Therapie, Chirurgische Klinik, Universitt Heidelberg; Hei- and IVS11+1G>Tin intron 11. Family with this type of mutation showed delberg, Germany variable individual phenotypes including an occurrence of CHRPE. The andreas.humeny@biochem.uni-erlangen.de study continues using the combination of PTTand DGGE methods. Sup- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder ported by the grant projects IGAMZ CR NC/6009-3 and GAUK 29/00 which typically progresses from extensive adenomatous polyp formation of the colon to colorectal cancer in early adult life. FAP is associated with P0050.Identification of modifiers of the disease expression in mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) located on chr FAPpatients with a known APC mutation. 5q21 which acts as a tumor suppressor gene. The most frequent mutation M. Plasilova1, N. Bsch2, H. Mller2, Z. Dobbie2 in APC is a 5 bp deletion starting in codon 1309 which predicts a transla- 1University Clinics Basel; Basel, Switzerland; 2University Clinics; Basel, tional frame shift leading to a truncated gene product. In general, the appli- Switzerland cation of MALDI-MS (MALDI-TOF-MS, matrix assisted laser desorption martina.plasilova@unibas.ch ionization - time of flight - mass spectrometry) to DNAanalysis provides a Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominantly inherit- powerful tool for an efficient analysis of genetic polymorphisms and muta- ed colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome, that is caused in the major- tions. In comparison to gel-based or chromatographic techniques, MALDI- ity of cases by germline mutation within the adenomatous polyposis coli TOF-MS offers high accuracy and fast analysis in parallel allowing for high- (APC) gene. However, based on the mouse model studies and a strong throughput qualities. Here, we present a primer extension assay optimized phenotypic variability observed both within and among affected families, for the analysis of the 5 bp APC deletion. The specific extension primer is FAPhas been considered as a complex condition where environmental as elongated to different length depending on the presence or absence of the well as genetic factors play a role in the disease expression. So far, such deletion. This results in defined molecular masses of the products gener- additional genetic factors remain unknown. Alarge FAPkinderd which har- ated, which are reliably distinguished by MALDI-TOF-MS. In addition, a bours an adenine deletion at codon 1982 of the APC gene, has been pre- multiplex assay to screen for other known mutations associated with APC viously reported by our group. Though carrying the same mutation, the is currently being developed. affected subjects (45) present with variable colonic and extracolonic man- ifestations which are in several branches transmitted through the genera-110 Posters: Cancer Genetics tions. To evaluate its correlation with the occurrence of extracolonic dis- gene located at 17p was cloned (HPC2) which has sequence variants that ease we initially performed linkage analysis of the 1p35-36 region, which may be associated with a 2.7-fold prostate cancer risk. Within ACTANE, we revealed lod score of 2.08 for marker D1S211. Furthermore, a detailed have shown that HPC1 is more likely to contribute to larger families with >4 mutation analysis of the candidate sPLA2, NAT2 and COX2 genes exclud- cases and a meta analysis of 772 families from a worldwide international ed them as potential modifiers of FAPphenotype. Recent evaluation of the consortium has shown that only about 6% of prostate cancer families are potential of this pedigree to detect a modifier gene using simulation stud- likely to be due to HPC1. Overall, we have evidence against linkage for Xq, ies revealed very promising results that led us to continue the linkage map- 1p36 and 1q42 loci and have reported that the Xq gene is more likely to be ping on the genome-wide level. The results of simulation studies, a conse- present in smaller clusters and 1p36 is associated with earlier onset dis- quent linkage analysis of further candidate regions and eventually results ease but not with any other cancers, unlike the first report. Our studies of on the genome wide screening for a modifier gene in FAPcondition will be candidate genes have shown that maybe 5% of prostate cancer clusters presented. may be due to germline mutations in the breast cancer-predisposition gene, BRCA2 which has implications for screening of female relatives in P0051. Mutations of the APC gene in Polish patients with such prostate cancer clusters. We are currently investigating what per- familial adenomatous polyposis coli. centage of young onset cases are due to BRCA2. Our studies of low pen- A. Plawski1, T. Banasiewicz2, M. Drews2, P. Krokowicz2, R. Slomski1,3 etrance genes have shown that longer repeat lengths in the androgen 1Institute of Human Genetics; Poznan, Poland; 2Regional Hospital; Poz- receptor gene (>16 GGC repeats) are associated with a halving of dis- nan, Poland; 3Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology; Poznan, ease-free survival. We have identified a genotype at increased risk (GST Poland T/M null & GSTPval/val) that is associated with a 1.8-fold risk. Since sele- slomski@au.poznan.pl nium has been reported to be protective, we are currently analysing data Analysis was performed on DNAisolated from 85 FAPpatients, 165 FAP to assess if there is an association of genotypes of the selenium depend- family members and 50 healthy controls. From all FAPpatients 8,5% had ent glutathione enzyme GPX with prostate cancer risk. Such results may features of Gardner syndrome. In 4 other cases the attenuated adenoma- be useful for identifying individuals at increased risk of developing prostate tous polyposis of colon (AAPC) symptoms were observed. In analysis of cancer so that they can be offered targeted screening and prevention. APC gene in Polish population exons 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and the 5 region These studies are funded by the Cancer Research Campaign and The of exon 15 were scanned for mutations using PCR-HD, PCR-SSCPand Prostate Cancer Charitable Trust. PTT. All differential SSCPpatterns and heteroduplex bands were analyzed by direct sequencing of PCR product. Premature termination of translation P0053.Analysis of the R72Ppolymorphism at the p53 gene in (PTT) was found in 2 families (total 17 families were studied for segment 3 individuals with Barretts esophagus and control population of exon 15). Mutations of APC gene in Polish population are heterozygous, S. Leistner1, F. Segal2, A. P. B. Kaspary3 but most of them (70%) were observed between codons 1040-1309. The 1Hospital de Clnicas de Porto Alegre; Porto Alegre - RS, Brazil; 2Hospital frequency the common 5 bp deletions at codon 1309 are the same as that Moinhos de Vento; Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; 3Hospital de Clnicas de Porto reported by the other groups (9.5%). Results from scanning for mutation Alegre; Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil were subsequently used for carrier detection in FAPfamilies. In 9 families segal@myway.com.br comprising 36 persons at mutation risk but without clinical symptoms we The p53 is a tumour suppressor gene which codes for a nuclear phospho- found 11 persons with APC gene mutation. Thus our study excluded 25 protein of 53KDa related to the regulation of cellular proliferation through person from standard clinical treatment used for group at risk. Direct analy- mechanisms of blockage of the celular cycle and apoptosis, mainly after sis of mutation heredity was the most effective but indirect methods of car- damage caused to DNA. Most mutations in the p53 gene result in a non- rier detection are also useful, but genetic markers selected for this analy- functional protein which present an increase half life, accumulating in the sis should be characterized by high PIC (polymorphic information content) nucleus of tumoral cells. Generally, this mutations are involved in the and heterozygosity. For indirect detection of carrier status we used three development or progression of a series of neoplasias, including oesopha- highly polymorphic (CA)n markers closely linked to APC gene. One hun- gus and cardic adenocarcinomas. Some reports demonstrate iots pres- dred chromosomes from unrelated individuals and 128 chromosomes from ence also in intestinal metaplasia and displasic lesions. Various polimor- unrelated FAPpatients were subjected to analysis of allele frequencies at phisms were also described at the p53 gene, and one of the most frequent loci D5S299, D5S346 and D5S82. In our studies significantly higher fre- is the R72Ppresent in the exon 4 which can be related to an increased quency of allele A4 of D5S299 was observed among FAPpatients. We also suscetibility to various cancers. Loss of heterozygosity its also a common observed new alleles; in locus D5S299 allele A 6.1 (158 bp), in locus and early event in the majority of cancers and is used to describe loss of D5S346 allele A14 (94 bp) and in locus D5S82 allele C6.1 (167 bp). In four chromossomic material which, as a consequence, leaves the cell with only cases polymorphic molecular markers were used for presymptomatic diag- an allele of a mutant gene. nostics. Our strategy, permitted us to diagnose 49 persons of group at risk The aims of the present work were a)to analyse the frequency of the R72P in 11 Polish FAPfamilies using both direct and indirect methods. Support- polimorphism in controls individuals representing the population of Porto ed by National Committee for Research 4 P05A004 16. Alegre and in individuals with Barretts Esophagous (a pre-malignant epithelial alteration leading to adenocarcinoma in 10% of those subjects); P0052. Genetic Predisposition To Prostate Cancer - Results b) to verify the presence of an association between the frequencies From The CRC/BPG UK Familial Prostate Cancer Study and observed for controls and Barretts; and c) to verify loss of heterozygosity the ACTANE Consortium when analysing DNAextracted from blood and affected tissue from indi- R. A. Eeles1,2, S. Edwards1, Z. Kote-Jarai1, D. F. Easton3, D. Teare3, D. P. viduals with Barretts. Dearnaley1,2, A. Ardern-Jones2, A. Murkin2 The method used was PCR of exon 4 of the p53 gene followed by restric- 1Institute of Cancer Research; Sutton, United Kingdom; 2Royal Marsden tion analysis with the enzyme AccII from 80 controls and 23 Barretts. NHS Trust; Sutton, United Kingdom; 3CRC Genetic Epidemiology Unit; Our results showed that the proportion of homozygous for A72, homozy- Cambridge, United Kingdom gous for P72 and heterozygous for the two alleles was 38.75%, 15% and ros@icr.ac.uk 46,25% respectively for the control group and 39.1%, 8.7% and 52.2% in There is evidence for genetic predisposition to prostate cancer; about 5- Barretts individuals. No statistically significant differences were found 10% of patients have a family history of the disease. The CRC/BPG UK regarding the genotype distribution amongst the two groups. Familial Prostate Cancer Study has a multifaceted approach to try to iden- We have found one LOH amongst the informative individuals (8.33%) and tify the genes involved. There is evidence for both highly penetrant and surprisingly, 4 cases of genomic instability (22,2%) suggesting an associ- lower penetrance genes and so several different DNA collections have ation of these events and development of adenocarcinoma. been targeted. These are; a collection of blood DNAfrom 285 single young cases with prostate cancer diagnosed at <55 years; a systematic series of P0054.Combination of GSTM1 null genotype and GSTP1 105 over 1000 prostate cancer patients treated at one centre and for high risk Val allele leads to increased risk of bladder cancer in the Turk- genes, and an international collaboration (the ACTANE consortium) has ish population 194 families with three or more cases of prostate cancer to perform linkage G. A. Toruner1, C. Akyerli1, A. Uar1, T. Aki2, N. Atsu2, H. zen2, M. Tez3, studies. Several linkage studies by other groups have suggested multiple T. Ozcelik1 locations for high risk prostate cancer genes, the first in 1996 at chromo- 1Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University; Ankara, some 1q24 (called HPC1), followed by other loci at 1q42, 1p36 (associat- Turkey; 2Dept. of Urology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine; ed particularly with primary brain tumour), and Xq. Arecent locus has also Ankara, Turkey; 3Ataturk Chest Disease Research Hospital; Ankara, been suggested at 20q and other weaker suggestions of locations have Turkey been described. To date, none of these have been cloned. In October, a toruner@fen.bilkent.edu.trPosters: Cancer Genetics 111 Gluathione S- transferases (GSTs) are phase II enzymes, which introduce case control study. Using allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR)- a glutathione for conjugation of electrophilic metabolites. The polymor- based method; the CYP1A1*3 polymorphism, in exon 7 of the gene, was phisms of GSTs are demonstrated to be associated with bladder cancer in analyzed in 46 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) patients, 63 prostate some populations. No data was available for the Turkish population. cancer (PCa) patients and 155 control subjects. The CYP1A1 Ile/Val geno- GSTM1 null, GSTP1 105 Ile/Valand GSTT1 null genotype polymorphisms type was significantly increased the risk for patients with BPH (OR; 2.8, were determined in 100 age-sex matched controls, 98 random controls, 95% CI; 1.38-5.91). However, there were no statistical differences in the and 121 bladder cancer patients in the Turkish population. The relative risk distribution of CYP1A1 Val/Val genotype among BPH individuals (OR; 1.5, of GSTM1 null genotype was 1.91 (95% CI 1.11- 3.28). This risk is male 95% CI; 0.29-8.05). In the PCa populations, patients with CYP1A1 Val/Val specific (OR; 2.21, 95 % CI 1.18-4.22). The combination of GSTM1 null revealed a 10.4-fold higher risk of having prostate cancer than those with genotype and GSTP1 105 Val allele results in a 3.66 fold risk (95% CI 1.68- [Ile/Ile] (OR; 10.47, 95% CI; 3.49-31.39). In other words, the presence of 7.84). GSTP1 105 Val allele could not be shown to be associated with the Val/Val genotype significantly increased the risk of prostate cancer. Fur- invasiveness of tumor either alone, (OR 2.06, 95% 0.91-4.63) or in combi- thermore, the frequency of Ile/Val genotype was found to be statistically dif- nation with GSTM1 null genotype (OR 3.42, 95%CI 0.96-12.12). In this ferent with an OR of 6.10 (95% CI; 3.07-12.13), suggesting that patients study a slight male-specific risk of bladder cancer due to GSTM1 null geno- carrying this genotype were at increased risk for developing prostate can- type, and a substantial risk for combination of risky GSTM1 null and cer. We also analyzed the influence of GSTM1 polymorphism in patients GSTP1 105 Val genotypes was observed in the Turkish population. and 202 control individuals. The GSTM1 null genotype was observed in 34.7% of the control subjects. No significant differences were observed in P0055. Study of the relationship between TNF-alpha gene the frequency of the nulled individuals in BPH and PCa patients when com- polymorphisms and retinoblastoma pared with control populations. To determine if any combined association I. Imbert, F. Pellestor of BPH and PCa development, we analyzed the combined effect of the Institut de Gntique Humaine, CNRS, UPR 1142; Montpellier, France GSTM1 and CYP1A1 genoype. Among the BPH patients, the combination Isabelle.Imbert@igh.cnrs.fr of GSTM1 null genotype and CYP1A1 Ile/Ile was found to be statistically Retinoblastoma is a retinal neoplasm occuring in early childhood in both different (OR; 2.461, 95%CI; 1.028-5.850). Furthermore, CYP1A1 Ile/Val heritable and sporadic forms. Current knowledge indicates that mutations genotype when combined with GSTM1 +/+ and 0/0 genotypes were also of both alleles of the RB-1 gene localized on chromosome 13 are prereq- statistically significant (OR; 3.346, 95%CI; 1.293-8.658 and OR; 5.086, uisite for the development of this tumor. Previous investigations on 95%CI; 1.715-15.083, respectively). However, BPH patients having Val/Val retinoblastoma patient samples with abnormalities on chromosome 6p genotype with GSTM1 +/+ or 0/0 was not different than those with Ile/Ile have suggested that some genes on 6p could be important for tumor pro- and GSTM +/+. Among the PCa populations, patients with Val allele gression. We suggested in a recent study on Y-79 retinoblastoma cell line revealed higher risk of having prostate cancer when combined GSTM1 that the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) could be a probable can- genotypes. didate gene on chromosome 6p involved in the tumoral development or progression pathway. In this present study focused on the molecular analy- P0058.CYP1A2 And NAT2; Susceptibility Genes For Bladder sis of the TNF-alpha gene in 70 retinoblastoma patient samples, we Cancer described a single nucleotide polymorphism in the 5UTR regulatory region S. Horn1, E. Schnakenberg1,2, R. Werdin3, C. Ehlers4, K. Dreikorn3, W. of the TNF-alpha gene. This single nucleotide change found in retinoblas- Schloot1 toma patients could be associated with the disease susceptibility or sever- 1Center for Human Genetics and Genetic Counselling, University of Bre- ity. Further in this study, the possible consequences of this mutation in the men; Bremen, Germany; 2AdnaGen AG; Hannover-Langenhagen, Ger- retinal tumor development or progression and the action of TNF-alpha on many; 3Urological Division, St. Jrgen Hospital; Bremen, Germany; cell cycle regulated proteins will be discussed. 4Gemeinschaftspraxis Prager & Junge; Dresden, Germany es@adnagen.com P0056.NAT2 polymorphisms among Macedonian lung cancer The acetylation polymorphism plays an important part in the detoxification patients of numerous exogenous substances. The metabolism of aromatic amines A. Anevska1, A. J. Dimovski1, A. M. Stefanovska1, E. Kovkarova2, G. D. via phase I enzymes (cytochrome P450; CYP1A2) and phase II enzymes Efremov1 e.g. N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) have been shown to be individually dif- 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; Skopje, The former Yugoslav ferent. Therefore they can lead to a different predisposition of genotoxic Republic of Macedonia; 2Pulmology Clinics, Faculty of Medicine; Skopje, and carcinogenic effects. In our study we analysed mutations of CYP1A2 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and NAT2 genes in 194 patients suffering from primary bladder cancer and aleks@manu.edu.mk 209 control individuals. Slow acetylators of NAT2 have been said to be N-acetyltransferase (NAT) is one of the major liver enzymes that is more affected by bladder cancer in contrast to rapid acetylators which involved in biotransformation of drugs and other exogenous substances. detoxify toxic metabolites in a faster way. We identified slow acetylators to More than 20 different NAT1 and NAT2 allelic variants have been detected be significantly more prone to primary bladder cancer (odds ratio; 1.88; so far, most of which result from single nucleotide substitutions and/or confidence interval; 1.25-2.82) especially male persons with the frequent small deletion/insertions. Mutant alleles of NATgenes are associated with genotype NAT2*5/*6 (OR; 2.68; CI; 1.51-4.75). The CYP1A2 gene is char- either a slow or a rapid acetylator phenotype. Recent studies have sug- acterized by mutation within the promotor region. This mutation is associ- gested that the frequency of certain NAT2 allels is statistically different in ated with an increased transcription rate leading to an elevated level of lung cancer (LC) patients compared to that of normal control population, highly reactive metabolites. We have identified this mutation significantly which suggests that they are important genetic modifiers of individual sus- more frequent in patients with bladder cancer (OR; 1.54; CI; 1.04-2.28). In ceptibility for LC development. The aim of this study was to determine addition, for the combination of these NAT2 and CYP1A2 mutations we allele frequency distribution of the most common NAT2 polymorphisms in calculated a significantly potentiated risk for the development of bladder LC patients and normal control population from Macedonia. The study was cancer (OR; 4.88; CI; 2.08-11.42). These results indicate that polymorphic performed on DNAsamples isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes of genes of phase I and phase II enzymes contribute to an individual sus- 50 LC patients and a matching number of newborns. The methodology for ceptibility for the development of cancer f.i. bladder cancer. In addition, the the detection of NAT2 polymorphisms included the combination of altered detoxification capacity can release also genotoxic effects within PCR/RLFPand allele specific PCR amplification. The frequencies of NAT2 tumor suppressor genes. homozygous rapid, heterozygous and homozygous slow genotypes were 5%, 42.5% and 52.5% in LC patients and 8%, 32% and 60% in control P0059. Frequency of Type I Transforming Growth Factor -b individuals, respectively (p>0.05). These data suggest that NAT2 acetyla- receptor (6A) polymorphism in colorectal cancer patients tion polymorphisms are not LC sussceptibility factors among Macedonian from Macedonia population. A. M. Stefanovska1, A. J. Dimovski1, M. Panovski2, G. Zografski3, J. Dingis3, G. D. Efremov1 P0057.CYP1A1 and GSTM1 polymorphic genotypes in benign 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; Skopje, The former Yugoslav prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer patients Republic of Macedonia; 2Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine; D. Aktas, M. Hascicek, S. Sozen, H. Ozen, E. Tuncbilek Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; 3Institute of Oncolo- Hacettepe University School of Medicine; Ankara, Turkey gy, Faculty of Medicine; Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace- dilekaktas6@hotmail.com donia The role of CYP1A1 and GSTM1 genotype in benign prostatic hyperplasia kliment@mt.net.mk and prostate cancer risk was investigated in Turkish populations through a Transforming growth factor b (TGF-b) is a tumor suppressor molecule that112 Posters: Cancer Genetics acts by inhibition of cellular proliferation or by promotion of cellular differ- was first suggested in 1986. Several studies have shown that obligate ATM entiation and apoptosis. Its effects are exerted through binding to three carriers have an elevated breast cancer risk but most analyses have not high affinity cell surface receptors. Type I TGFb receptor shows a common demonstrated an increased incidence of protein truncating ATM mutations polymorphism which is a deletion of 3 out of 9 alanine stretch. In recent in women with breast cancer However, Gatti et al have proposed that mis- studies, homozygotes, and higher frequency of heterozygotes, for this sense mutations may be responsible for the elevated breast cancer risk polymorphic allele TbRI(6A) were only found in cancer cases. It was sug- observed in ATM carriers. To test this hypothesis we are analysing 83 non- gested that TbRI(6A) receptor has an impaired antiproliferative capacity BRCA1/2 breast cancer families ascertained by kConFaB, a research con- and acts as a tumor susceptibility allele. Here we present our data on the sortium established to coordinate the collection of data on large numbers frequency of the TbRI(6A) allele in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and a of Australasian families with severe histories of breast cancer. So far one matching number of normal controls (NC) from Macedonia. DNAwas iso- family has been detected with an ATM mutation (T7271G) present in 5/5 lated from 100 paraffin embedded tissue samples of CRC patients and affected family members (P= 0.03), as well in three unaffected carriers. from peripheral blood leukocytes of 100 newborns. The presence of the Pathological review and LOH analysis of these five breast tumours are TbRI(6A) allele was evaluated by PAG electrophoresis of BssSI digested underway, as are mutation and LOH analyses of two gastric tumours from 118 bp PCR fragment from exon 1 of the TbRI gene. Only one homozygote the same family. Full-length ATM cDNAs with and without this mutation will for TbRI(6A) allele was present in CRC patients while in NC homozygosi- be expressed in ATM-null cells to study the interaction between wt and ty for this allele was not detected. (p>0.05). Six and nine heterozygotes mutant ATM protein and to determine whether the mutation acts in a dom- were detected in CRC patients and in NC, respectively (p>0.05). The allele inant negative fashion. In addition we are conducting a case-control study frequency of TbRI(6A) was 0.08 and 0.09 in CRC patients and in NC, to analyse the relationship between ATM polymorphisms and breast can- respectively (p>0.05). These data excludes the TbRI(6A) allele as a tumor cer. 1353 cases and 688 controls have been genotyped for the T2119C susceptibility allele for the development of CRC in our population. polymorphism, previously associated with an elevated breast cancer risk. No significant difference was detected in the frequency of the rare C allele P0060. Genetic Predisposition to Familial and Hereditary in cases (2.8%) compared to controls (2.6%) (P = 0.8), even when the Colon Cancer Attributable to DNArepair (MSH2, MLH1, MSH6) analysis was restricted to individuals under the age of 40 with a history of and other Genes (TGFBR2, CTNNB1) breast cancer in first or second degree relatives. These data do not sup- A. E. Lagarde1, D. Dewar1, E. Bauman1, H. Perras2, S. Viertelhausen3, H. port the hypothesis that the T2119C ATM polymorphism plays a role in Stern3 breast cancer susceptibility but an increased sensitivity to radiation 1Ottawa Hospital Loeb Health Research Institute; Ottawa, ON Canada; remains a possibility. 2CHEO Genetics; Ottawa, ON Canada; 3Ottawa Regional Cancer Center; Ottawa, ON Canada P0062.Search for mutations predisposing to breast cancer in alagarde@lri.ca St.Petersburg, Russia. We addressed the role of known and presumed genetic factors in colon C. Lamber cancer predisposition, most particularly in the context of familial cancers Institute for Experimental Medicine; St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation that are not recognized clinically as classical HNPCC, which may repre- CatLamber@aport.ru sent up to 20% of the cases in the population. One study group (n=87) was Inherited mutations in the BRCAgenes are common in patients with famil- selected from a hospital-based series of newly diagnosed colorectal ial breast and ovarian cancer. Ashkenazi Jewish population is character- patients. It included patients diagnosed under the age of 50 (n=20); 31 ized by three common mutations, namely 185delAG and 5382insC in sporadic cases and 56 patients with a family cancer history. Among these, BRCA1 gene and 6174delTin BRCA2 gene. 5382insC BRCA1 mutation twelve were HNPCC or suspected-HNPCC patients; 18 had one first- contributes significantly to ovarian cancer in Moscow. All the mutations degree relative affected with colon cancer, and 26 had more distant rela- increase 8-10 fold risk of breast tumour development.We have performed tives affected with colon or other cancer types. Most tumors in this familial screening for the common BRCAmutations in the cohort of 26 Jewish and group were stable at microsatellite markers (41/56, 73% MSS), while 13% 38 Slavic patients with familial or sporadic breast cancer and 38 Ashkenazi were highly unstable (MSI). Another group of 82 individuals representing controls. PCR followed by heteroduplex analysis and DNA sequencing 63 families were referred to the genetic clinics in Ottawa, and were identi- allowed us to find carriers of these mutations. We have found one carrier fied through the Ontario Familial Colon Cancer Registry. PCR-SSCPand of 6174delTmutation among patients unselected in respect of breast can- more recently total DNAsequencing were applied to analyze the entire cer. It was the first report of BRCA2 gene mutation from Russia. No cases coding regions of the MSH2, MLH1 and MSH6 genes. Pathogenic MSH2 of 185delAG and 6174delT mutation in BRCA1 gene were found in our and MLH1 germline mutations were identified in a minority of newly diag- patient sample. However, 3 unrelated cases of 5382insC mutations were nosed cases (1.1%), unselected for MSI, family history or age of onset. A found in Slavic breast cancer patients and none in control group. New similar incidence was reported in population-based studies from Finland mutation g71741ins12nt in BRCA1 gene was described. This mutation is and Slovania. MSH2 and MLH1 mutations accounted for 10 % of all colon due to duplication of 12 nucleotides and results in formation of two direct cancer families examined (n~100), unstratified by complexity or MSI sta- repeats in intron 20 of BRCA1 gene. Our results suggest the importance of tus. However, MSH2/MLH1 mutations were more prevalent among families screening the St.Petersburg Slavic patients for 5382insC BRCA1 gene meeting Amsterdam criteria I (6/21, 29%) than among those meeting nei- mutation and the low impact of 185delAG BRCA1 mutation and 6174delT ther criteria I nor II (4/54, 7%). The A(IVS5, +3)Tsplicing MSH2 mutation BRCA2 mutation on breast cancer development in St.Petersburg. This was recurrent, being present in 5% of all familial cases, 19% of criteria I- reseach was supported by grant RFBR ?98-04-49869. positive and 2% of criteria I,II-negative families. Thirty familial cases (4 MSI high, 6 low, 20 MSS) were selected for MSH6 analysis, a study which is P0063. BRCA1/2 mutation analysis in 72 families with breast still in progress. Exon-4 mutations were detected in 2 cases (7%). After cancer sequencing the entire TGFBR2 gene (TGF-beta type II receptor), a single P. Derakhshandeh-Peykar1,2, O. Brandau3, A. Meindl3, E. Holinski- pathogenic mutation was identified among 25 MSS familial cases, and Feder3, J. Murken3 none in 8 MSI cases. No germline mutation, nor deletions, in exon 3 of the 1Dep. of Human Genetics, School of Public Health, Tehran Univ. of Med- beta-catenin gene (CTNNB1) were detected among 40 MSS familial ical Sciences; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Genetic Clinic, Valie-Assr cases. Arelatively important proportion of HNPCC (70%) and of suspect- Sq. 16, Keshavarz blvd.; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran;; 3Abt. Paed. ed-HNPCC families (>90%), and all cases of common familial colon can- Genetik, Kinderpoliklinik der LMU; Munich, Germany cer remain unaccounted for at the genetic level. The limited success of the pupak-peykar@yahoo.com candidate gene approach suggests that linkage or affected sib-pair analy- To determine the pattern and incidence of BRCA1/2-mutation in the Ger- ses have a greater potential to elucidate the mechanisms predisposing to man population, the Deutsche-Kerbshilfe is funding 10 groups, including MSS hereditary and familial cancers. the munich study group. 72 families were divided in riskgroups according to the number of affected patients and age of diseaseonset. Mutaion P0061.ATM variants in breast cancer screening of the BRCA1/2-gene by SSCP-analysis, PTT (Western blot), G. Chenevix-Trench1, A. Spurdle1, G. Mann2, J. Hopper3, K. Khanna1, M. Southern blot and sequencing reveald 4 BRCA1-mutations and 4 BRCA2- Taylor4 mutation in 37 families with at least 2-3 familial cases of isolated breast 1Queensland Institute of Medical Research; Herston, Australia; 2Millenium cancer. At least 1-2 below 50 y.o.a; 2 BRCA1-mutations in 15 families. With Institute; Sydney, Australia; 3University of Melbourne; Melbourne, Aus- breast and ovarian cancer. One mutation in 27 pationts from families with tralia; 4University of Birmingham; Birmingham, United Kingdom les than three affected members or multitumor-families. The 5382insC and georgiaT@qirm.edu.au the 4650delCAmutations were found twice. Suggesting perscreening for The role of the ATM gene in breast cancer has been controversial since it these mutations in the German population. Screening of 20 these familiesPosters: Cancer Genetics 113 for BRCA2-mutation revealed 4 mutations. These results are in ocordance rently identified in distinct geographic and ethnic populations and are with recent findings; (i) a high incidence of BRCA1-mutations in large believed to have spread from a single ancestor. It is important to charac- breast cancer families or families with breast and ovarial cancer, (ii) low terize these founder mutations and determine their geographic distribution incidence in families with less than three affected females, (iii) preponder- in order to be able to design efficient mutation screening. The most recur- ance of putative founder mutations. rent mutation in Sweden is the 3171ins5 mutation in BRCA1. In the west- ern part of Sweden this mutation accounts for as much as 77% of all iden- P0064. BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Analysis of Early-onset tified mutations in this region. Our aim was to in detail analyze the haplo- and Familial Breast Cancer Cases in Mexico type and founder effects of the 3171ins5 mutation and furthermore attempt H. A. Barrera-Saldaa1, P. Ruiz-Flores1, O. M. Sinilnikova2, M. Badzioch2, to estimate the time since the first appearance of the mutation. In the study A. L. Calderon-Garcidueas3, J. F. Gonzlez-Guerrero4, S. Chopin2, C. we included eighteen families with hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer. Szabo2, G. Lenoir2, D. Goldgar2 At least one individual in each family had previously tested positive for the 1Medicine Faculty, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon; Monterrey, 3171ins5 mutation. We used polymorphic microsatellite markers for the Mexico; 2International Agency for Research on Cancer; Lyon, France; haplotype analyses. The markers were located within or flanking the 3Clinica 25 del Seguro Social; Monterrey, Mexico; 4Centro Universitario BRCA1 gene spanning a region of 17,3 cM. We found several different Contra el Cancer UANL; Monterrey, Mexico haplotypes as well on the disease allele as on the normal allele. We HBARRERA@FM.UANL.MX observed however a conserved haplotype in the 3171ins5 carriers for three The entire coding regions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 were screened for muta- markers within or very close to the BRCA1 gene. As this haplotype only tions by heteroduplex analysis in 51 Mexican breast cancer patients. One was found once in the normal alleles it is highly likely that this is a muta- BRCA1 and one BRCA2 truncating mutations were identified in the group tion identical by descent i.e. a true founder. The results from the haplotype of 32 (6%) early-onset breast cancer patients ( 35 years). Besides these analyses were used to estimate the age of the mutation. Using the method two likely deleterious mutations, nine rare variants of unknown signifi- of moments, based on the theory of Galton-Watson branching processes cance, mostly in the BRCA2 gene, were detected in seven of 32 (22%) we estimate that the mutation first appeared sometime around the 11th early-onset breast cancer cases and in four of 17 (24%) site-specific breast century, approximately 50 generations ago. cancer families, one containing a male breast cancer case. No mutations or rare sequence variants have been identified in two additional families P0067. First German Breast Cancer Patient with Germline including each an early-onset breast cancer case and an ovarian cancer Mutations in Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 Genes patient. The two truncating mutations and six of the rare variants have B. Fischer1, U. Schwarz-Boeger2, B. Albacht3, M. Du4, D. Niederacher4, never been reported before and may be of country specific origin. The W. Grote1, W. Gerber3, W. Jonat2, M. Kiechle2, R. Siebert1, N. Arnold2 majority of the alterations appeared to be distinct, with only two of them 1Institute of Human Genetics; Kiel, Germany; 2Department of Gynecology being observed in more than one family. Analysis of a larger series of Mex- and Obstetrics; Kiel, Germany; 3Institute of Medical Psychology; Kiel, Ger- ican breast cancer patients for mutations identified in this study may reveal many; 4Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics; Dsseldorf, Germany these to be founder mutations in the Mexican population. fischer@medgen.uni-kiel.de Very few individuals with a germline mutation in both breast/ovarian can- P0065. High Rate of Germline Mutations in BRCA1 and cer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, have been described so far. BRCA2 genes in the Czech Hereditary Forms of Breast / Ovar- The majority of them are of Ashkenazi-Jewish descendent. We report the ian Cancer first German case with heterozygous germline mutation in both BRCA1 E. Machackova1, M. Navratilova1, H. Pavlu1, D. Valik1, L. Messiaen2, K. and BRCA2 genes. The female patient was diagnosed with breast cancer Claes2, L. Foretova1 at age 32. Her paternal family branch contained four relatives with breast 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute; Brno, Czech Republic; 2University of cancer as well as cases of testicular, prostate and pancreatic cancer. The Gent; Gent, Belgium mother of the propositus deceased from ovarian cancer and the maternal emachack@mou.cz grandmother from early-onset breast cancer. Mutation screening of the ABSTRACTBackground; Estimated 5-10% of all breast and ovarian can- index patient revealed heterozygosity of the mutations 185delAG and cers can be of hereditary origin. Germline mutations in highly penetrant 5950delCTin the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, respectively. Apaternal sis- susceptibility BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes could cause predisposition to ter with breast cancer and the unaffected father were found to carry the these cancers. Material and Methods; Molecular genetic testing of BRCA1 BRCA2 mutation 5950delCTbut not the BRCA1 mutation 185delAG. As to and BRCA2 genes have been performed in 69 high-risk breast and the family history segregation of this BRCA1 mutation from the maternal breast/ovarian cancer families and in 16 early-onset sporadic breast or family branch seems likely. Nevertheless, a novel mutation cannot be ruled ovarian cancer in women diagnosed below 40 years at Masaryk Memorial out as no members of the maternal branch have been tested so far. Nei- Cancer Institute in Brno, Czech Republic. The mutation analysis was car- ther family history nor haplotype analyses of BRCA1 and BRCA2 linked ried out on genomic DNAisolated from blood samples of affected individ- markers provided evidence for an Ashkenazi-Jewish origin of the muta- uals. Protein truncation test and heteroduplex analysis followed by direct tions. To the best of our knowledge we present the first non-Ashkenazy sequencing were used. The genetic counseling and preventive clinical fol- European case heterozygous for both breast cancer susceptibility genes. low-up of gene carriers is part of the genetic program. Results; Agermline As to the implications of double-heterozygosity on genetic counselling we disease causing mutation was found in 34 screened high-risk families recommend complete screening of both genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 in fam- (49%), 21 mutations (7 different) in BRCA1 gene and 13 mutations (9 dif- ilies suspicious for heredity of breast and/or ovarian cancer in both pater- ferent) in BRCA2 gene. One frame shift mutation detected in BRCA1 and nal and maternal branch. This work was supported by the Deutsche Kreb- two frame shift mutations detected in BRCA2 gene were novel mutations. shilfe. In the group of 16 woman diagnosed with sporadic early-onset breast/ovar- ian cancer no disease-causing mutation was found. Conclusion; Amuta- P0068. Mutations of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Saudi tion was identified in either gene in 49% of high-risk families proving that Arabia germline mutations in these breast cancer susceptibility genes might be E. A. El-Harith1,2, M. S. Abdel-Hadi2, D. Steinmann1, T. Drk1 responsible for an important fraction of inherited breast and ovarian cancer 1Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2King Faisal University; cases in the Czech Republic. Spectrum of mutations found in both genes Al-Khobar, Saudi Arabia is variable. doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de Breast cancer is the most common cancer among the female population of P0066. Haplotype analyses and age estimation of a west Saudi Arabia and is characterised by low age at onset and diagnosis at late Swedish founder mutation of the BRCA1 gene. stages of malignancy. We have scanned the major segments of the A. Bergman1, U. Olofsson2, Z. Einbeigi3, Z. Taib2, A. Wallgren3, P. Karls- BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes for pathogenic mutations in genomic DNAsam- son3, J. Wahlstrm1, T. Martinsson1, M. Nordling1 ples of 40 Arab and Asian women from Saudi Arabia who had unilateral 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University hospital/East; Gothen- breast cancer. One truncating mutation, the novel frameshift deletion burg, Sweden; 2Dept. of Mathematical Statistics, Chalmers University of 2482delGACT, was found in exon 11 of the BRCA2 gene in one Arab Technology; Gothenburg, Sweden; 3Dept. of Oncology, Sahlgrenska Uni- patient of Palestinian descent. The potentially disease-associated mis- versity hospital; Gothenburg, Sweden sense substitution R841W in exon 11 of BRCA1 was identified in a second annika.bergman@clingen.gu.se Arab patient. Further unclassified variants included the double mutant The cloning of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes has led to the identification of BRCA1 allele F486L-N550H and the BRCA2 substitution D1420Y, each several hundreds germline mutations in families with a history of hereditary identified in single breast cancer patients. Allele frequencies of common breast cancer. Some of the mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are recur- polymorphisms did not differ significantly from those observed in Cau-114 Posters: Cancer Genetics casian populations. Our findings indicate that BRCA1 and BRCA2 muta- have variant alleles found at high frequency in the population but not asso- tions exist at low levels and may be responsible for some proportion of ciated with an apparent increase in cancer risk. We have screened for breast cancer cases in the ethnically heterogeneous population of Saudi mutations extensively the coding sequence and intron- exon boundaries of Arabia. BRCA1 gene and in a less extend of BRCA2 gene in 100 Greek unrelated patients with a family history of at least one relative with breast cancer P0069.Molecular genetics of bilateral breast cancer under the age 50 yrs and ovarian cancer at any age. With respect to the D. Steinmann, A. Hector, M. Bremer, D. Rades, J. H. Karstens, T. Drk known founder mutations in the European population 185delAG, C61G Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany and 5382insC only the third one was found in five patients (5%) and their doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de affected relatives. Several other unique deleterious mutations were identi- Bilateral breast cancer accounts for about 5-10 % of breast cancer patients fied in exon 11 of BRCA1. Interestingly five rare missense mutations were in Germany. In order to test the hypothesis that mutations in breast cancer identified in the exons 16-24 corresponding to probably functionally impor- genes are more frequent in patients with bilateral breast cancer, we are tant residues into the BRCTdomains. For one of them (G1738R) has been investigating a hospital-based series of 75 consecutive patients with bilat- shown by Hayes et al., 60, p2411 Canc Res 2000 that G1738E results in eral breast cancer and a comparison group of 75 patients with unilateral loss of function in vitro. The in vitro function of these missense mutations breast cancer for mutations in the BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and p53 genes. is under investigation in our laboratory. Regarding to BRCA2 although the Five frameshift deletions (517delGT in BRCA1, 5946delCT, 6174delT, study is still going there are mainly unique mutations. Overall according to 6772delAand 8138del5 in BRCA2) were identified in patients with bilater- our data 5382insC is the only proven deleterious mutation occurring in a al disease, whereas three pathogenic BRCA1 mutations (T300G, relatively high frequency in the Greek population. The majority of the other 3814del5, 5382insC) were identified in the group of patients with unilater- mutations seems to be unique mutations al breast cancer. Furthermore, one truncating ATM gene mutation (3802delG) was found among the patients with bilateral cancer but none in P0072.Characterization of a potential BRCA2 splice site vari- the comparison group. Trends towards an increased prevalence of certain ant missense substitutions (e.g. Q356R of BRCA1, S707Pof ATM and R72P P. J. Bridge1, B. Fraser1, L. Dimnik1, G. Graham1, K. Fedosoff1, R. Hugh- of p53) in the bilateral cancer cohort were noted, with differences being es2, J. Parboosingh1 most pronounced in case of the S707P substitution. We suggest that 1Alberta Childrens Hospital; Calgary, AB Canada; 2Tom Baker Cancer germline alterations in all four investigated genes contribute to the devel- Centre; Calgary, AB Canada opment of contralateral breast cancer in a subset of patients, though their peter.bridge@crha-health.ab.ca prevalence and relative risks appear to be lower than previously indicated BRCAmutation screening is being offered to families with a strong history by family-based studies. of breast cancer. Over 800 sequence variants have been identified in each gene world wide, most being reported only once. The significance of P0070.Genetic Testing For Brca Gene Mutations approximately 5% of the variants identified in the breast cancer information Z. Rudzki1, F. Firgaira2, G. Suthers3 core database (BIC) is unknown. We have identified a previously unre- 1Institute of Medical & Veterinary Science; Adelaide, Australia; 2Flinders ported BRCA2 intron 2 missense variation, IVS2-7T>Ain a 70 year old Medical Centre; Adelaide, Australia; 3SAClinical Genetics Service; Ade- woman with breast cancer at 58 years of age. Three of her five sisters have laide, Australia also had breast cancer (57-76 years of age) and one niece (early 40s). barney.rudzki@imvs.sa.gov.au Colon and uterine cancers are also present in the family. The normal Background & purpose; Mutation analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 intronic sequence leading up to the splice acceptor site is T(10)A(3)TAG; genes is expensive and frequently fails to identify any pathogenic abnor- the IVS2-7T>Amutation results in T(9)A(4)TAG. The IVS2-7Tnucleotide mality. We have reviewed the outcome of genetic testing of patients tested has been shown to cause a splicing error deletion when deleted (IVS2- through the SAFamilial Cancer Service and divided them into categories 7delT) resulting in a splice acceptor sequence of T(9)A(3)TAG. Sequence with a view of increasing the efficiency of mutation testing. Methods; DNA analysis of mRNAshowed that the variant causes a deletion of exon 3 sim- samples were collected from patients who fulfilled the Australian National ilar to that seen in the IVS-7delTmutation. The presence of mutations in Breast Cancer Centre (NBCC) high genetic risk criteria (ie three close intronic sequences downstream of the 3 splice site has implications for relatives with breast or ovarian cancer, or two with high-risk features), or sequence-based and SSCP-based screening strategies. Five to ten per- had breast cancer under the age of 30, or ovarian cancer under the age of cent of BRCA1 and 2 sequence variants in BIC are splice mutations. This 40, or were males with breast cancer. Patients were divided into cate- may be an underestimate given current sequence and SSCP screening gorises according to the clinical setting. Both genes were fully screened by strategies. CCM/direct sequencing or PTT/DGGE/direct sequencing unless a patho- genic mutation was found. Results; Overall, 30% of 244 affected individu- P0073.The Occurrence of Breast or Ovarian Cancer in Fami- als had a mutation in either gene; this represented 26% of the families lies under Inherited Predisposition is Associated with Single tested. The frequency of mutations in each clinical category varied from Nucleotide Polymorphisms of BRCA1 Gene. 0% to 80%. In most categories, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations were equal- A. V. Karpukhin1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A. N. Loginova1, ly likely. However, early-onset ovarian cancer was associated with BRCA1 E. V. Khomich1, A. V. Budilov3, V. M. Zakharyev3, R. F. Garkavtseva2, E. K. mutations, and late-onset breast cancer and male breast cancer were Ginter1 associated with BRCA2 mutations. Conclusions; Clinical categories can 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- provide some clues regarding the chance of identifying a mutation in ences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian BRCA1 or BRCA2, but the overall detection rate remains low. Other selec- Academy of Medical Sciences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Engelgardt tion criteria (perhaps histological indices or immuno-histochemistry) are Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, required to improve the efficiency of genetic testing in familial breast can- Russian Federation cer. socrates@orc.ru Inherited mutation of BRCA1/2 gene results in breast or ovarian cancer. P0071.Frequency of BRCA1 & BRCA2 occurring mutations in However, genome peculiarities that have an influence on occurrence of Greece breast or ovarian cancer in family are not clear for the present. D. Yannoukakos1,2, A. Ladopoulou3, I. Konstantopoulou3, A. Pantazidis3, In present study occurrence of breast or ovarian cancer among predis- C. Kroupis4, E. Lianidou4, C. Tsionou3, G. Nasioulas5, G. Fountzilas6, N. posed families was analyzed in connection with single nucleotide polymor- Pandis7 phism (SNP) of BRCA1 gene. 1National Center For Scientific Research; Athens, Greece; 2Hellenic Coop- The entire coding region of BRCA1 gene in a sample of 44 patients and 13 erative Oncology Group; Athens, Greece; 3National Center for Scientific members of proband families was screened by conformation sensitive gel Research Demokritos; Athens, Greece; 4Dept. of Chemistry, University of electrophoresis (CSGE). All structural variants of amplified DNAfragments Athens; Athens, Greece; 5Molecular Biology Dept., Hygeia Hospital; found by CSGE were sequenced on both strands. Athens, Greece; 6AHEPAHospital, Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group; BRCA1 mutations and a frequently occurred set of 8 SNPs were found. Thessaloniki, Greece; 7Dept. of Genetics, Saint Savas Hospital; Athens, Mutations were predominantly identified in breast/ovarian families. Analy- Greece sis of more than one affected individual in available families was per- yannouka@mail.demokritos.gr formed. It was shown that the set of SNPs is inherited as a whole. Both the The mutational spectrum of breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and mutation and SNPset were on the same chromosome when these gene BRCA2 exhibits considerable ethnic and geographical diversity. Both alterations were investigated in individual. genes have a broad spectrum of putative pathologic mutations and both Patients were classified in accordance with the BRCA1 alterations as hav-Posters: Cancer Genetics 115 ing a mutation, mutation and the SNPset, SNPset only, none alterations. P0076.Sequence Variations of BRCA2 Gene in Breast/Ovari- It was found that the frequencies of breast and ovarian cancer are not uni- an Cancer Families from Russia. formly distributed in this series. This phenomenon was revealed when N. Pospekhova1, E. V. Khomich1, L. N. Lubchenko2, A. N. Loginova1, A. V. affected individuals in families were analyzed (P<0.001). Under BRCA1 Budilov3, V. M. Zakharyev3, E. K. Ginter1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, A. V. mutation the ratio of breast to ovarian cancer in familieswas higher when Karpukhin1 the gene had SNPset also (P< 0,01). 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- The presence of the SNPset among patients with and without mutations ences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian was different (29% and 72%, respectively; P < 0,01). An inheritance of Academy of Medical Sciences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Engelgardt breast cancer was found in 68% of families if proband had the SNPset Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, whereas only 25% of probands had these variations if ovarian cancer Russian Federation occurred in families (P< 0,01). socrates@orc.ru In summary, the occurrence of ovarian or breast cancer under inherited Significant part of inherited breast/ovarian cancer is connected with predisposition is in dependence on the SNPs found. These findings may BRCA2 gene mutation. Information about sequence variations of the gene have predictive and diagnostics significance. is necessary for more understanding of mutation spreading, genome poly- morphism and medical diagnostics. P0074.Mutations and Sequence Variations of BRCA1 Gene in In present study BRCA2 gene sequence variations among breast/ovarian Breast/Ovarian Cancer Families from Russia. cancer families in Russia (Moscow region) were analyzed. The coding A. N. Loginova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, E. V. Khomich1, A. region of BRCA2 gene in a sample of 25 patients was screened by con- V. Budilov3, V. M. Zakharyev3, E. K. Ginter1, R. F. Garkavtseva2, A. V. formation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). All structural variants of Karpukhin1 amplified DNA fragments found by CSGE were sequenced on both 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sci- strands. ences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian There were 8 mutations (32% of 25), 2 of which and two single nucleotide Academy of Medical Sciences; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Engelgardt polymorphism (SNP) are revealed for the first time. Two mutations were Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, recurrent (in two families each). High frequency of some variances was Russian Federation shown; H372N (25%) and IVS11+80del4 (40%). The latter is seldom in socrates@orc.ru other populations. Analysis of more than one affected individual in avail- Distribution of BRCA1 gene mutations appears to be population specific. able families was performed and alterations were confirmed in all cases. Extending information about sequence variations in different geographical SNP haplotypes were determined for all the patients. So frequent and regions is essential for more understanding of mutation spreading and for extensive set of SNPs that was typical for BRCA1 gene in Russia was not medical diagnostics. found for BRCA2. At the same time, the sets of 3-5 SNPs were found in the In present study the entire coding region of BRCA1 gene in a sample of 44 patients. It is interesting that 7 of 8 mutations of BRCA2 are correlative to patients, 13 members of proband families and 28 individuals of control SNP set of BRCA1 gene. This may suggest on association between group (predominantly Moscow region) was screened by conformation sen- BRCA2 mutation and SNPset of BRCA1. sitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). All structural variants of amplified DNA Spectrum of BRCA2 mutations and variations in Russia is described for the fragments found by CSGE were sequenced on both strands. first time. There were 17 mutations among patients (38.6%). These include five dif- At present the SNPs are analyzed on association with clinical phenotype. ferent mutations with predominance of 5382insC (76,4% of all mutations). Such high frequency (the most of known one) may suggest on geograph- P0077.LOH In Tumoral Samples From Patients With Familiar ic region of the mutation origin. Germ-line variations of the BRCA1 gene Breast Cancer Studied For The Brca1 And Brca2 Genes. were found as a frequently occurred set of predominantly 8 polymorphisms A. Osorio1, R. Rodrguez1, A. Martnez-Ramrez1, A. Cazorla2, M. de la that is inherited as a whole. Three of these - IVS1-103T/C, IVS1-115T/C Hoya3, T. Calds3, J. Bentez1 and IVS14-63C/G - are described for the first time. This set of polymor- 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncolgicas; Madrid, Spain; 2Fun- phisms was observed in approximately 50% of both patients and control dacin Jimnez Daz; Madrid, Spain; 3Hospital Clnico San Carlos; Madrid, individuals investigated. Frequency of the genes having single variations Spain was 7% only. Analysis of more than one affected individual in available aosorio@cnio.es families was performed and alterations found were confirmed in all cases. BRCA1 and 2 are susceptibility genes associated with familiar breast can- Haplotypes described by single nucleotide polymorphism of the BRCA1 cer. In these genes the first mutation is germinal while the most frequent gene were determined for all patients. somatic inactivation is a loss of heterozygosity (LOH). We selected 30 Detailed characterization of the BRCA1 gene permits investigation of phe- patients belonging to high risk families with variants in BRCA1 and 2 notype/genotype correlation and is necessary for medical diagnostics. genes; ten cases presented with a truncated mutation, eleven a polymor- phism, and 9 cases a variant with unknown significance. We analyzed LOH P0075. Mutation analysis of the 5 untranslated region of comparing normal and tumoral tissue from paraphynes. a) In all cases with BRCA1 gene a truncated mutation LOH was found. b) We have not found LOH in the 11 W. Hofmann, R. Frege, E. Claen, S. Scherneck cases with polymorphisms. c) Six of the 9 cases presented different Max Delbrck Center for Molecular Medicine; Berlin, Germany unknown variants. In one case, there was LOH; an analysis of segregation whofmann@mdc-berlin.de in different affected members of the family was compatible with a mutation. We screened 92 families with a strong history of breast and/or ovarian can- Four cases presented with the same variation in the BRCA1 gene and cer for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. To date, the routine diag- absence of LOH. In one of these cases, we could demonstrate the exis- nostic of these two breast cancer susceptibility genes comprises analysis tence of a true mutation in the other gene, BRCA2. Finally we did not find for potential mutations within the genomic sequence of the protein coding LOH in the other 4 cases with unknown variants . Our results suggest that: regions including all exons and exon flanking regions of the introns. Muta- A) LOH is the most frequent mechanism of inactivation in patients with true tions within the non-coding regions of the BRCA1 gene are however likely mutations in BRCAgenes. B) LOH could represent a good mechanism to to exist. To evaluate, if such mutations occur and subsequently affect the differentiate mutations versus unknown variants. B) The absence of LOH transcription of the BRCA1 gene, we analysed the sequences of the 5 in patients with polymorphisms could suggest a different role of BRCA UTR of BRCA1 from the bi-directional promoter to the ATG start codon genes in familiar versus sporadic breast tumors where LOH of BRCAs is (nucleotide position 3140-4638, GenBank accession no. L78833) in our present in about 25% of cases. breast and/or ovarian cancer families. Two deletions could identified in a CAAAAn repeat at the 3 of exon1b; 3985del5bp and 3979del10bp. Both, P0078. Genome-wide scanning for linkage in Finnish breast sequences carrying the deletions and the wildtype BRCA1 promoter cancer families sequence respectively were subcloned to drive the luciferase gene. The P. Huusko1, P. Vahteristo2, L. Sarantaus2, S. Juo3, E. Gillanders1, T. constructs were tested by transient transfection into various cell lines fol- Kainu1, K. Rapakko4, M. Jones1, C. Markey1, H. Eerola2, M. Allinen4, P. lowing analysis of luciferase activity. Data as to the activity of deletions- Vehmanen2, J. Leisti4, G. Blanco5, C. Blomqvist6, J. Trent1, J. Bailey-Wil- containing constructs relative to the construct contains the wildtype son3, R. Winqvist4, H. Nevanlinna2, O. Kallioniemi1 BRCA1 promoter will be presented and discussed with respect to their rel- 1Cancer Genetics Branch/NHGRI/NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; evance in BRCA1 diagnostic. 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics/Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 3Inherited Disease Research Branch/NHGRI/NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; 4Department of Clinical116 Posters: Cancer Genetics Genetics/Oulu University Hospital/University of Oulu; Oulu, Finland; bridge, United Kingdom 5Department of Oncology/Oulu University Hospital; Oulu, Finland; Jacques.Simard@crchul.ulaval.ca 6Department of Oncology; Helsinki, Finland Our study was designed to estimate the frequency and penetrance of phuusko@nhgri.nih.gov mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, as well as the role of the demographic Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for a smaller propor- history of the population in the origin and diffusion of these mutated alleles tion of hereditary breast cancer cases than previously suspected. Less in high risk French Canadian breast/ovarian cancer families. 527 individu- than 20% of Finnish families with 3 or more breast cancers showed BRCA1 als from 96 families, which included  3 cases of breast/ovarian cancer, or BRCA2 mutations (Vehmanen et al. AJHG 60;1050, 1997; Huusko et al. were first tested for all BRCA1 and BRCA2 deleterious mutations reported AJHG 62;1544, 1998). We recently reported a possible third breast cancer among French Canadians. Our analysis led to the detection of the R1443X susceptibility locus at 13q21-q22 by linkage analysis in 77 Finnish, (BRCA1) allele in 10 families, the 8765delAG (BRCA2) allele in 16 families Swedish and Icelandic breast cancer families (Kainu et al. PNAS 97;9603). and the 2816insA(BRCA2) allele in one family. Thereafter, the complete This new locus explains only a proportion (estimated at <30%) of the sequence of all exons and splicing sites of BRCA1 and BRCA2 was done remaining families suggesting presence of additional susceptibility loci. in 69 affected individuals or obligate carriers from 61 families, leading to Here, we undertook an exploratory genome-wide search focusing on a the detection of 6 novel frameshift mutations and 15 sequence variants. sample of 14 linkage-informative, multiplex breast cancer families (93 DNA Additional analyses were carried out to test for regulatory mutations and for specimens) from the genetically homogeneous Finnish population. These the presence of large duplication or deletion in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 in families tested negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 and showed no linkage to 63 individuals. The proportion of BRCA1/2-positive families among those the distal 13q21-q22 region. Simulations generated by the FASTSLINK showing <4 (n=8), 4 or 5 (n=50) and 6 (n=31) breast cancer cases of first program assuming genetic homogeneity predicted an expected maximum or second degree, was 0%, 32% and 48%, whereas a mutation was found LOD score of 1.25 (52% of replications with LOD>1, 21%>2 and 3%>3). in 65% of families with at least one ovarian cancer case (n=20). The case Genome-wide linkage analysis was performed with 398 dinucleotide for pursuing the search for new susceptibility loci is compelling, given the repeat markers on ABI 377 DNAsequencers. Based on a modified CASH fact that approximately two-thirds of high risk French Canadian families model which assumes dominant transmission and age dependent pene- undergoing BRCA1/2 testing receive an inconclusive results. In this per- trances, a peak two-point LOD score of 2.04 (q=0.0) was seen at 2q. In spective, this founder cohort will allow us to create subgroups of non- addition, one other chromosomal region showed a two-point LOD score BRCA1/2 families based on their genealogical characteristics and thus >1.0. Analysis of more markers from the chromosomal regions of interest, contributing to sampling design in linkage disequilibrium mapping studies. more individuals from the same families, as well as additional families is in progress to follow-up these leads P0081.Spectrum and frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 poly- morphisms in patients with a familiy history of breast and/or P0079.Characterisation of a new BRCA1 mutation in two Abo- ovarian cancer in Southern Saxonia riginal Manitoban women with family history of breast and A. Kujat, S. Strenge, U. Froster ovarian cancer University of Leipzig; Leipzig, Germany R. Ray1, E. Grudeski1, S. Kim2, A. E. Chudley1, B. N. Chodirker1, E. L. frou@medizin.uni-leipzig.de Spriggs1 Carcinoma of the breast are one of the most common cancer in women 1Health Sciences Centre; Winnipeg, MB Canada; 2WRHABreast Health before menopause. Nearly 5% of breast cancer cases are hereditary. In Centre; Winnipeg, MB Canada 1994 two cancer related genes were identified following linkage analysis in rray@hsc.mb.ca families with breast and ovarian cancer on chromosomes 13 and 17, Mutations in cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for respectively. In the following years a wide spectrum of mutations and approximately 3-10% of breast cancer in the general population and a sequence alterations in both genes were listed in the Breast Information much higher proportion in those with strong family history of breast and Core (BIC). Most studies show a strong correlation between typical ovarian cancer. Germline mutations in these genes have been identified in sequence variants and ethnical origin. Thus it appears important to delin- individuals of all races and ethnic backgrounds. As part of an ongoing eate mutation spectrums for specific regional areas. As one of the 12 Ger- breast cancer-screening program in Manitoba, a novel mutation has been man Breast Cancer Consortium centers we have undertaken genetic characterised in two unrelated women of Ojibway background. Both were counselling in over 200 patients with breast and ovarian cancer during the diagnosed with breast cancer under the age of 42 and have a strong fam- last 3 years. We perform mutation screening for the index patients in ily history of early onset breast and ovarian cancer. The protein truncation BRCA1- and BRCA2-Gene by complete direct sequencing of 90% of the test (PTT) is routinely used to screen for BRCA1 mutations in genomic coding region including the exon-intron boundaries. 40/55 index patients DNAand RNAextracted from peripheral blood. By PTT, the exon 11 wild agreed for molecular testing. In 18 patients we found 19 different muta- type protein fragment (amino acids 224-841) and truncated fragment were tions, 9 mutations in the BRCA1-gene, 10 mutations in the BRCA2-gene. detected at ~76.5kDa and ~35kDa, respectively, in both women. DNA One patient showed a cancer related sequence alteration both in BRCA1 sequence analysis revealed two alterations occurring on the same BRCA1 as well as in BRCA2. In addition we identified a wide spectrum of unclas- allele; a transition, 1506A>G resulting in Lys463Glu and an insertion, sified variants and polymorphisms. 1509-1510insG, leading to a stop codon following residue 478. Although the women studied share the same ethnic background, they live in sepa- P0082. Different allele distribution of BRCA1 haplotypes in rate Ojibway communities and their family history spanning two genera- breast cancer patients and controls tions does not identify a common relative to suggest the families are close- S. Preisler-Adams1, N. Acar2, R. Diallo3, C. Jackisch4, A. Rody5, B. Dwor- ly related. We believe that we have identified a new ethnic specific muta- niczak2, J. Horst2 tion that may allow for better breast cancer-screening in women of Aborig- 1Westflische Wilhelms-Universitt; Mnster, Germany; 2Institute of inal descent. Further studies will help to determine whether this particular Human Genetics; Mnster, Germany; 3Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of mutation is unique to the Manitoba Ojibway population. Pathology; Mnster, Germany; 4Department of Obstetrics; Mnster, Ger- many; 5Department of Ostetrics; Mnster, Germany P0080. Molecular epidemiology of BRCA1 and BRCA2 muta- adams@uni-muenster.de tions in high risk French Canadian breast / ovarian cancer BRCA1 encodes a tumor suppressor that is mutated in a substantial pro- families portion of familial breast cancers. Unexpectedly, only few somatic BRCA1 J. Simard1, M. Dumont1, S. Dlos1, A. Moisan1, C. Samson1, L. Larouche1, mutations have been reported in sporadic cancers. However, frequent loss A. MacMillan1, T. Babineau1, H. Malouin1, M. Tranchant1, H. Vzina2, M. of heterozygosity (LOH) at the BRCA1 locus, reduction of BRCA1 mRNA Dorval3, P. Bessette4, P. Voyer5, J. Lpine6, R. Pichette7, J. Chiquette8, M. levels in tumors and hypermethylation of the BRCA1 promoter region sug- Plante1, R. Laframboise1, P. Bridge9, D. Easton10, F. Durocher10 gest a pathogenic role of BRCA1 in the development of sporadic breast 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qubec and Laval University; Quebec tumors as well. The majority of tumor predisposing mutations in the City, PQ Canada; 2Universit du Qubec Chicoutimi; Chicoutimi, PQ BRCA1 gene is attributed to frame shift or nonsense mutations and only Canada; 3Laval University; Quebec, PQ Canada; 4Centre Hospitalier Uni- few of the identified missense mutations have been verified as pathogenic versitaire de Sherbrooke; Sherbrooke, PQ Canada; 5Carrefour de la Sant by segregation analysis. Most of the rare sequence variants causing amino et des Services Sociaux; Jonquire, PQ Canada; 6Centre Hospitalier aciod changes remain unclassified variants. Among the known polymor- Rgional de Rimouski; Rimouski, PQ Canada; 7Hpital du Sacr Coeur; phisms of the BRCA1 gene there are five common, amino acid exchange Montral, PQ Canada; 8Hpital du St-Sacrement; Quebec City, PQ Cana- causing polymorphisms, which form two distinct haplotypes; either L871- da; 9Alberta Childrens Hospital, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Cana- E1038-K1183-S1431-S1613 (haplotype A) or P871-G1038-R1183- da; 10CRC Genetic Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge; Cam- P1431-G1613 (haplotype B), with an unequal distribution in favor of A.Posters: Cancer Genetics 117 To investigate a possible functional difference between these two BRCA1 significant associations with specific founder alleles could be shown. To isoforms we analysed the allele distribution in three different groups of define the specific haplotype, further informative family members are col- patients; 1) 30 patients with sporadic breast cancer, 2) 118 patients with a lected to confirm the data. familiy history of breast cancer and 3) 198 individuals not selected for breast cancer. Our results show a significant higher proportion of B alleles P0085. Caveolin-1 gene expression is controlled by CpG in both groups of cancer patients as compared to the control group. This methylation in the promotor region finding suggests a disadvantage for carrying the B allele and therefore sup- J. Haeusler, P. Geyer, S. Bochum, W. Vogel, J. Haeussler ports the hypothesis that some of the sequence variants of both BRCA University of Ulm, Department of Human Genetics; Ulm, Germany genes, so far rated as unclassified, are indeed deleterious for juergen.haeusler@medizin.uni-ulm.de BRCA1/BRCA2 protein function. This work was supported by a grant from Caveolin-1 (Cav-1) is an integral membran protein and the principal com- the Deutsche Krebshilfe. ponent of small vesicular invaginations of the plasma membran, the so- called caveolae. Anumber of studies suggest that caveolin is involved in P0083. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in 382 chilean healthy cell signaling and could function as a tumor suppressor. It has also been women with family history of breast cancer shown that Cav-1 is located in close proximity to the microsatellite marker L. Jara, S. Ampuero, L. Seccia, M. Bustamante, J. M. Ojeda D7S522 on chromosome 7q31, a region which frequently attracted atten- Institute of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile; tion in prostate cancer LOH studies. The absence of caveolin-1 mRNAand Santiago, Chile protein expression in the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaPand the ljara@machi.med.uchile.cl observation that a 400 bp fragment of the Cav-1 promotor is methylated at Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women. Chilean least in the breast cancer cell line MCF7 prompted us to analyze the studies reveal that this cancer present the second mortality rate. Afamily methylation status of the Cav-1 promotor in prostate cancer cell lines. history of breast cancer is one of the main risk factor for the development Sequencing of bisulfite modified genomic DNArevealed frequent methyla- of the disease. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the two major hereditary breast tion of four out of seven CpGs in the region tested. In order to evaluate the cancer susceptibility genes. Mutations in these genes are major causes of functional relevance of this promotor methylation we prepared chimeric inherited breast cancer, 664 predisposing mutations have been described, luciferase reporter constructs bearing a SssI-methylated as well as an but in specific populations only some of them were found to be associated unmethylated 356 bp Cav-1 promoter fragment. After transient expression with susceptibility. The purpose of this study was to establish the frequen- in a prostate cancer cells line we observed a significant decrease in pro- cy of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations in 382 chilean healthy moter activity of the SssI-methylated construct compared to the reporter women with two relatives affected with breast cancer. We have determined gene driven by the unmethylated Cav-1 promotor fragment. These results the frequency of 185delAG and 5382insC mutations in BRCA1 and suggest that regulation of caveolin-1 gene expression may be controlled, 6174delTmutation in BRCA2 using mismatch PCR assay. Only the PCR at least in part, by methylation of only a few CpG dinucleotids in the Cav- product of the normal allele acquired a restriction site, this was confirmed 1 promotor region. by specific restriction endonucleases digestion. The frequency of the 185delAG was 0.0026 (1/382). The other two mutations were not detected P0086. Methylation Status of E-Cadherin in Colitis Ulcerosa in studied women group. This genetic study is part of a breast cancer Patients screening program that includes also annual mammography and clinical P. Azarschab1, R. Porschen2, N. Blin1, K. Holzmann2 breast examination during five years. Strategies to reduce morbility and 1Molecular Genetics, Univ. Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany; 2Internal Medi- mortality associated with breast cancer lie in the early detection of women cine, Univ.-Hospital; Tbingen, Germany with genetic risk. Supported by CONAC-Chile (National Corporation of piaaza@yahoo.de Cancer) E-cadherin belongs to the cadherin family of calcium dependent cell adhe- sion molecules. The cadherins mediate cell adhesion, differentiation, P0084. Haplotype analysis in german families with recurrent migration and intercellular cell signalling. Given these essential roles it has BRCA1 and 2 mutations been postulated that changes in E-cadherin expression may account for B. Wappenschmidt changes in cell-cell interaction concerning inflammatory, dysplastic and, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms Universitaet Bonn; Bonn, Germany finally, neoplastic conditions. In long-standing colitis ulcerosa, a precan- Barbara.Wappenschmidt@meb.uni-bonn.de cerous inflammation likely predisposing to the development of colorectal Introduction; In the german population 15 frequent BRCA1 mutations and cancer hypermethylation of the p16 promotor has been observed as an 8 frequent BRCA2 mutations represent 67% and 41% of all mutations early occuring event in neoplastic progression. Presently, we analyzed the found in families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (German breast hypermethylation status of the E-cadherin promotor (-94 to -210) in a col- cancer consortium). The aim of this study is the identification of founder lection of 70 ulcerative colitis samples and 70 controls. 80% of dysplastic mutations and hot spot mutations specific for the german population. Asso- samples showed E-cadherin hypermethylation while this status was noted ciation analysis was performed for 19 different BRCAmutations (BRCA1; in only 20% of the controls. This finding suggests that E-cadherin, consid- 14, BRCA2; 5) which were detected at least 3 times. Methods/Material; ered a tumor suppressor gene in gastric cancer, may play a comparable Patients were genotyped for three intragenic markers D17S855, role in additional, pre-neoplastic stages of the digestive tract. D17S1322 and D17S1323 in the BRCA1 gene and for closely flanking markers D13S1698, D13S171 and D13S267 in the BRCA2 gene. Allele P0087.Hypermethylation of the human homeobox gene, Alx3, frequencies were established in a german control group. The observed fre- correlates with expression repression in neuroblastoma quencies were compared to the frequencies expected from the control K. Wimmer1, X. Zhu2, B. Lamb2, R. Kuick2, M. Eckart1, P. Ambros3, A. allele frequences, assuming Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Statistical analy- Weinhusl3, C. Fonatsch1, S. Hanash2 sis was performed with an exact test of goodness of fit (Mller et al., 1991). 1Institut fr Medizinische Biologie, Universitt Wien; Wien, Austria; Results; BRCA1; For the 3 most frequent mutations (5382insC, T300G and 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI United 3819del5) we could demonstrate a statistical significant association with a States; 3Childrens Cancer Research Institute,St. Anna Kinderspital; Wien, specific allele for all three markers. Other frequent mutations showed a sta- Austria tistical significance for at least one marker. Patients with the 3. most fre- katharina.wimmer@univie.ac.at quent mutation 4184del4bp had no association with any markers. BRCA2; Aberrant CpG island hypermethylation has been shown to be associated Statistical significant association with one or all analysed markers could be with gene inactivation in cancer. Recent reports demonstrate that the pat- demonstrated for patients with mutations 2034insAand 9317insA. In case terns of CpG island methylation in different neoplasias are non-random of mutation C5910G a common haplotype was defined, which was not sig- and tumour-type specific. We have investigated the extent of DNAmethy- nificant because of high allele frequencies of the shared alleles. In patients lation in neuroblastomas using methylation sensitive Restriction Landmark with mutation 3034del4 or 4702del4 we could not identify a common hap- Genome Scanning (RLGS). A novel NotI-EcoRV fragment containing a lotype. Conclusions; The genotype data for the three markers analysed CpG island was found to be methylated in neuroblastoma cell lines. This each in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene are in concordance with the pres- fragment was mapped to chromosome band 1p13 and the corresponding ence of specific haplotypes. Therefore, most of the frequent mutations gene identified as the human orthologue of the murine homeobox gene, detected are likely to be founder mutations. Suprisingly, four C to Ttransi- Alx3. Extensive methylation sensitive sequencing analysis of the promoter tions in the BRCA1 gene, which had been expected to result from inde- region of Alx3 in four neuroblastoma cell lines indicated methylation- pendent mutational events, are probably also founder mutations. In con- dependent reduced expression of the Alx3 gene in these cell lines. Fur- trast, the 4bp deletion in the BRCA1 gene (4184del4bp) and the most fre- thermore, treatment with the methylation inhibitor 5-aza 2deoxycytidine quent mutation 3034delAin BRCA2 are recurrent mutations, for which no induced expression of Alx3 in four neuroblastoma cell lines in which the118 Posters: Cancer Genetics Alx3 gene was hypermethylated and silenced. We have demonstrated Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto; Porto, using methylation sensitive PCR that hypermethylation of the putative pro- Portugal; 4Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the Univer- moter region of the Alx3 gene occurred primarily in advanced-stage but sity of Porto; Porto, Portugal; Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty of rarely in limited-stage primary neuroblastoma tumours. Our data indicate Porto, Hospital S. Joo; Porto, Portugal that in neuroblastoma tumours hypermethylation of the human homeobox mafaldap@hotmail.com gene Alx3, correlated with disease progression, and in neuroblastoma cell Literature suggests that in sporadic gastric carcinoma microsatellite insta- lines hypermethylation of Alx3 correlated with reduced expression. Thus, bility (MSI) phenotype is strongly correlated with hMLH1 promoter hyper- hypermethylation represents an epigenetic mechanism which may substi- methylation. Fifty-seven sporadic gastric carcinomas, classified as MSI-H tute for deletion in altering expression of cancer related genes in neurob- (n=28), MSI-L(n=12) and MSS (n=17), were analysed for hMLH1 promot- lastoma. er methylation status in order to verify this association. Also, the presence of mutations in the repetitive sequences of some target genes, TGFb RII, P0088. Promotor analysis of the DICE1 gene; a candidate IGFII R, BAX and TCF4, was analysed. Possible correlation between tumor suppressor gene hypermethylation of hMHL1 and mutations in these target genes were A. Rpke, I. Wieland, P. F. Wieacker examined. Astatistically significant difference in hMLH1 methylation status Institute for Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke-University; Magdeburg, was observed between MSI-H cases (75% hypermethylated) and MSI-L Germany cases (50% hypermethylated), in contrast to 0% hypermethylation in MSS albrecht.roepke@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de cases (P=0.0001). Asignificant association was also found between the DICE1 is located in a LOH critical region on chromosome 13q14 and is a presence of mutations in target genes and hypermethylation of hMLH1 candidate for a tumor suppressor gene. The gene DICE1 is expressed in (P=0.0001). Mutations in the target genes were found in 21 cases (TGFb human heart, lung, liver, brain, kidney and skeletal muscle. It has been RII), 11 cases (BAX), 8 cases (IGFII R) and 4 cases (TCF4). Methylation found that DICE1 is downregulated in lung and prostate tumors underlin- of hMLH1 in these tumours was seen in 86%, 91%, 88% and 75%, respec- ing that this gene is a tumor suppressor gene. To explain this downregula- tively. MSI-H tumours had mutations in the repetitive sequences of target tion the DICE1 upstream sequence was analysed for methylation in vari- genes in 85% of the cases. MSI-Ltumours were indistinguishable, regard- ous non-small cell lung and prostate tumor cell lines. This sequence shows less of the methylation status, from MSS tumours concerning (absence of) a high G/C-level and is rich in CpG islands. Computational analysis indi- target gene mutations. cated two promoter-like domains, one of them with a TATAbox. In these promoter regions various binding sites for transcription factors like SP1, P0091.T-RNA-based probe design for microarray analysis of AP1, NF-1, GATA, ETF, Oct and c-Myc were found. An accumulation of defined tumor areas binding sites is observed 100-400 bp upstream of the cDNAstart. Both R. Dahse1, A. Berndt2, H. Kosmehl2, U. Claussen1 promoter regions show several restrictions sites for methylation sensitive 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute enzymes. By analysis of lung tumors with methylation sensitive enzymes a of Pathology; Jena, Germany methylation pattern corresponding to the expression level was found. The rdah@mti-n.uni-jena.de tumor cell line SW900 shows high expression and is hypomethylated in DNA microarray technology is one of the most important recent break- contrast to the low expressing Calu-3 and SK-Mes1, which are hyperme- throughs in experimental molecular biology. The aim of our project is to use thylated at all investigated restriction sites. No expression and hyperme- this novel technology for the identification of differentially expressed genes thylation was found in prostate tumor cell lines LNCaPand Du145. These from areas at the tumor-host interface in order to search for signalling path- results suggest that; 1) DICE1, located in a LOH critical region on chro- ways critical for tumor invasion. Efficient expression analysis at the cellu- mosome 13q14, is downregulated in tumor cells; 2) methylation may be the lar level using microarrays requires the development and successful imple- 2nd event in tumor progression. This work was supported by Dr.Mildred mentation of a variety of laboratory protocols and strategies. Major prob- Scheel Stiftung. lems that have to be overcome are; to efficiently obtain high purity and quality RNAfrom limited amounts of neoplastic cells separated from con- P0089.The use of real-time quantitative PCR to detect hyper- taminating normal cells and to perform linear and reproducible RNAampli- methylation of the CpG islands in the promoter region flank- fication. Currently, about 5 g of total RNA(T-RNA) is used for a radioac- ing the GSTP1 gene for diagnosis of prostate carcinoma tive labelled cDNAprobe - this equals about 10000-200000 cells. To over- D. Chu1, G. Fu1, C. Chuang2, H. Huang2, J. Chia2, C. Sun2 come these limitations, we developed a concise guide to a T-RNA-based 1Chang Gung University; Tao-Yuan, Taiwan Republic of China; 2Chang probe design for microarray analysis involving protocols for i) HE staining Gung memorial hospital; Lin-Kou, Taiwan Republic of China and laser microdissecting tumor cells and thereby maintaining the RNA dcchu@mail.cgu.edu.tw integrity ii) isolating DNA-free RNAfrom as few as 2000 cells by simply Prostate cancer is one of the most devastating male neoplastic diseases using heat lysis accompanied by DNase and proteinase K treatment, iii) in the developed countries. Digital rectal examination (DRE) and serum generating amplified RNA(aRNA) by RNAin vitro transcription with a tem- prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are currently used for the detection plate-switching primer. The procedures described here have been tested of prostate cancer. However, the former relies on the examiners subjective and refined from many recently published technologies. Our Cy3- and Cy5- judgement and the sensitivity of the latter is still sub-optimal. A novel labeled probes have been tested successfully in hybridisation of control method with higher detection ability is warranted. It has been reported that microarrays (ArrayLink-control-slides, GeneScan Europe AG, Freiburg, hypermethylation of the CpG islands in the promoter region upstream of Germany). Our guidelines should be applicable to all experimental condi- GSTP1 gene is common in prostate cancer tissues and this genomic alter- tions in which starting tumor material is the limiting factor as in small biop- ation could be used as diagnostic index for diagnosis for prostate cancer. sies, fine-needle aspirates or microdissected tissue areas. In this study we developed a protocol incorporating methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme digestion and the innovated real-time PCR strategy to P0092.Genomic Profiling in Cancer evaluate whether hypermethylation of this region could be used as a S. Shah molecular diagnostic index for prostate cancer. Our data showed that Spectral Genomics, Inc.; Houston, TX United States hypermethylation of the promoter region of the GSTP1 gene was observed sshah@spectralgenomics.com in all 21 prostate cancer tissues analyzed, yet not in 24 of 25 (96%) sam- Drug discovery and disease diagnostics is being transformed by the intro- ples from subjects with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH). Based on the duction of new technologies such as microarrays and bioinformatic solu- current results it was concluded that hypermethylation of the 5 promoter tions. Utilization of a microarray format for analyzing copy number changes region flanking the GSTP1 gene could be a candidate molecular index for with a resolution dependent on the map position of the DNAwithin the prostate cancer diagnosis. genome will allow for analysis of somatically acquired variations. The BAC microarrays available from Spectral Genomics, Inc. provide a set of unique P0090.Association of hMLH1 Promoter Methylation with MSI clones giving a 3Mb coverage over the genome. Each of the BACs contain Phenotype and Presence of Target Gene Mutations in Spo- a mapped sequence tag, and most of them have been FISH mapped to radic Gastric Carcinoma confirm the locations and uniqueness. The array provides a format for high M. Pinto1, R. Mensink2, L. Cirnes3, F. Carneiro3, R. Hofstra2, R. Seruca3, sensitivity analysis where the variation between normal genomic DNA M. Sobrinho-Simes4 samples is less than 5%. Further, comparing the normal genomic DNA 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of from a male and female sample provides a consistent 1;2 copy number Porto; Porto, Portugal; Department of Medical Genetics, University of change with a variation of less than 5%. Utility of the BAC microarrays as Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands; 2Department of Medical Genet- applicable for genomic profiling in cancer will be shown based on results ics, University of Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands; 3Institute of obtained from breast tumor samples. Known cytogenetic variations arePosters: Cancer Genetics 119 confirmed based on an entire genome profile while identifying novel targets in colon cancer therapy. regions of amplifications and deletions. As little as 1ug of total genomic DNAlabeled with distinct fluorochromes is used and hybridized with the P0095. Comparative Genomic Hybridization Studies on array for 4 hours. The sensitivity of the array will be shown through a series Cholangiocarcinoma in Korea of titration experiments along with comparisons of experimental proce- C. Lee, B. Choi, M. Kim, J. Kyhm, H. Choi, Y. Cho dures to reduce non-specific binding and background noise. Automated College of Medicine, Hanyang University; Seoul, Republic of Korea analysis of the arrays based on SpectralWare software quantitatively chhlee@email.hanyang.ac.kr determines the levels of amplifications and deletions affecting individual The elucidation of the genetic changes of cholangiocarcinoma is very arrays elements. important for understanding the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and progression of cholangiocarcinoma. In order to identify the gains or P0093. Gene expression profile of a human cancer cell line; losses in the copy number of DNAsequence in cholangiocarcinoma, we effects of Ginkgo biloba extract used comparative genomic hybridization to study 33 cases of cholangio- J. Fuchs1, M. Podda1, K. Gohil2, J. J. Maguire3, L. Packer2 carcinoma. The whole DNAs from each tumor tissue were labeled with dif- 1Department of Dermatology, Medical School, University of Frankfurt; ferent fluorochromes and then simultaneously hybridized to normal Frankfurt, Germany; 2Department of Molecular and Cell Biology; Berkeley, metaphase spread chromosomes. An image acquisition system was used CA United States; 3Environmental Energy Technologies Division, to quantitate the signal intensities contributed by tumor and reference DNA Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California; Berkeley, along the entire length of each chromosome. Regions of amplification and CAUnited States deletion were demonstrated as quantitative alterations. The losses were juergenfuchs@hotmail.com prevalent on chromosome regions 19p, 19q and 22q, and the gains fre- DNAmicroarrays and oligonucleotide array Gene Chips offer new oppor- quently occurred on 8q and 4q. The minimal regions of overlap for dele- tunities to monitor the effects of pharmaceutical compounds on human tions were assigned to 1p36(TNFR2) and 17p13.1(p53) and 9p13-22(p15, cells. Gene Chips permit the simultaneous monitoring of the activities of p16). Minimal overlapping amplified site could be seen at 13q14.1- thousands of human genes and this technology has been particularly use- q34(RB1, RAP2A), 12q12-q14(CDK2, CDK4, MDM2) and 4q21- ful for analyzing gene expression profiles in cell and tissue cultures. We q25(FGF5, EGF). This study has provided a detailed comparative genom- have applied Affymetrix Gene Chips to define the transcriptional response ic hybridization-map of cholangiocarcinoma documenting new genetic of human epithelial T-24 cells to Ginkgo biloba extract.Ginkgo biloba change and also genetic divergence has been revealed in this poorly extract treated cells showed increased levels of reduced glutathione and understood group of cancer. decreased synthesis of DNA. Quantitative analysis of hybridization signals from Gene Chips revealed net induction of transcription in the T-24 cells P0096.cDNAArray Analysis of Gene Expression in Basal Cell over a period of 72 hours in the presence of the extract. Functional classi- Carcinoma fication of affected transcripts revealed changes in the expression of genes F. Aberger1, G. Neill2, G. Regl1, T. Eichberger1, K. Biedermann1, J. Koller3, encoding antioxidant proteins, vesicular membrane proteins and transport, H. Hintner3, A. Quinn2, A. Frischauf1 DNAsynthesis-repair, cell cycle and transcription. The gene expression 1University of Salzburg; Salzburg, Austria; 2Imperial Cancer Research profile may define, for the first time, the effects of Ginkgo biloba extract on Fund; London, United Kingdom; 3LKASalzburg; Salzburg, Austria gene expression of a human cell line and may explain some of the phar- fritz.aberger@sbg.ac.at macological properties of the extract. Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is the commonest human malig- nancy . Although genetic studies have established that activation of the P0094. Identification of differentially expressed genes in sonic hedgehog signalling pathway (SHH) plays a key role in BCC devel- colon carcinoma by pairwise hybridization of normal and opment, very little is known about the identity of SHH regulated target tumor tissue on global human cDNAarrays genes. A. Schroth1, B. Sipos2, W. Huber1, D. Gssow3, G. Klppel4, B. Kremer5, Using cDNAarray technology we have established mRNAexpression pro- B. Hensch6, M. Grell6, A. Poustka1, H. Kalthoff5, S. Matzku6, B. Korn7 files of BCC samples and in human keratinocytes in the presence and 1German Cancer Research Center; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Institute for absence of recombinant SHH. Pathology,University of Kiel; Kiel, Germany; 3Merck KGaA Preclinical For the identification of SHH target genes two types of cDNAarrays were Research, GBT; Darmstadt, Germany; 4Institute for Pathology, University used; i) High-density human UniGene cDNAarrays for global expression of Kiel; Kiel, Germany; 5Clinic for General Surgery and Thoracic Surgery; profiling from RZPD (www.rzpd.de). These filter arrays represent about 32 Kiel, Germany; 6Merck KGaAPreclinical Research, Oncology; Darmstadt, 000 different ESTclones selected from the UniGene ESTdatabase . ii) We Germany; 7Resource Center Primary Database; Heidelberg, Germany produced filter arrays containing about 100 selected candidate SHH target schroth@dkfz.de genes. Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the Differential hybridisation of both filter array types with cDNAfrom BCC and United States. Development and progression of cancer is accompanied by normal skin, and SHH-treated and untreated keratinocyte samples led to complex changes in patterns of gene expression. The development of col- the identification of a number of genes either responisve to SHH signalling orectal tumors is a multistep process that is known to depend on the dereg- or differentially expressed in BCC versus skin samples. Selected results ulation or mutation of certain critical genes. Therefore colorectal tumors were verified by Northern blots and/or real-time PCR analysis. provide an excellent system for the research of different gene expression patterns because clinical and histopathological data suggest, that most P0097. Genomic imbalances in drug-resistant and -sensitive malignant colorectal tumors(carcinomas) arise from preexisting benign T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cell lines tumors (adenomas). Complementary DNAarrays provide a powerful tool E. R. E. Gebhart1, A. Sauerbrey2, H. Miyachi3, C. R. Chitambar4, H. G. for studying these complex phenomena. To measure variations in gene Drexler5, T. Efferth6 expression between different stages of colon carcinomas, metastasis and 1Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany; 2Department of Pedi- normal colon tissue we used cDNAarrays carrying a global human cDNA atrics, University of Jena; Jena, Germany; 3Department of Clinical Pathol- set of 75.000 non-redundant genes. Poly (A)+ RNAfrom tumor, metasta- ogy, Tokai University School of Medicine; Bohseidai, Isehara, Japan; 4Divi- sis and normal colon tissue was reversed transcribed into radioactive sion of Hematology/Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin; Milwaukee, labelled first strand cDNAand hybridized to two filters each. Array expres- WI United States; 5Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen u. Zellkul- sion data for colon or metastasis versus normal colon tissue confirmed turen; Braunschweig, Germany; 6Virtual Campus Rheinland-Pfalz; Mainz, overexpression of several genes known to be upregulated e.g. lamr1 ( Germany laminin receptor 1 a 40s ribosomal protein ) and downregulated e.g. cea- egebhart@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de cam7 ( carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule ) in colon Seven CCRF-CEM cell lines selected by step-wise drug exposure for carcinomas. Other known genes with interesting functions, that have not resistance towards doxorubicin, vincristine, methotrexate, or hydroxyurea, previously been descriped to be implicated in colon cancer were found up- resp., have been analyzed using comparative genomic hybridization or downregulated in the tumors and the metastasis. . In addition many (CGH). These cell lines were compared to parental, drug-sensitive CCRF- ESTs with unknown names and functions have been found up- and down- CEM as well as to other 15 T-ALLlines not selected for drug resistance. regulated. Knowledge of gene expression patterns typical for certain types The resistant lines revealed distinct patterns of genomic imbalances. Loss and stages of tumors will give insight into tumorgenetics. Molecular of distal bands of chromosome 9p was shared by all sensitive and resist- changes involved in tumor development and progression will provide ant CCRF-CEM lines, as was gain of chromosome 20. Gain of distal bands molecular markers for tumor diagnosis, and clinical prognosis. Finally dif- of 21q was seen in four resistant sublines. Other imbalances were com- ferently expressed gene products offer a promising stategy for testing new mon in two or three sublines or seen as single differences as compared to120 Posters: Cancer Genetics parental CCRF-CEM. Among those were amplification of 5q12-q14 in the YESP, SIS, PDGB, NRALS2 oncogenes it harbors. methotrexate resistant cells and of 7q21 in vincristine resistant ones. These chromosomal regions harbor the drug resistance genes DHFR amd P0101.Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) Analysis of MDR1, resp. Other differences of resistant CCR-CEM lines were also seen Radiation and Non-Radiation induced Meningiomas as compared to other T-ALLlines. Our future efforts aim at those imbal- E. Friedman1, S. Reinstein2, D. Loven3, O. Israeli1, A. Goldring-Aviram2 ances with still unknown candidate genes conferring drug resistance. Work 1Oncogenetics Unit; Tel-Hashomer, Israel; 2Institute of Genetics; Tel- supported by grants of Johannes and Frieda Marohn Stiftung. Hashomer, Israel; 3Institute of Oncology; Petach Tiqvah, Israel eitan211@netvision.net.il P0098. Low-Grade Fibromyxoid Sarcoma Reveals Recurrent Ionizing irradiation to the skull is a known risk factor for meningioma devel- DNA Copy Number Losses at 13q21-q22 by Comparative opment. Skull irradiation for treatment of tinea capitis was applied from Genomic Hybridization 1948-1960 in Israel to about 20,000 new immigrants, mostly children, and S. Kiuru-Kuhlefelt1,2, S. Knuutila1,2, M. Miettinen3 a subset of irradiated individuals subsequently developed meningiomas. 1Haartman Institute; Helsinki, Finland; 2University Central Hospital; Helsin- To gain insight into the genetic factors that determine susceptibility to ki, Finland; 3Armed Forces Institute of Pathology; Washington, DC, WA developing radiation-induced meningiona (RIM), we characterized the United States somatic genetic alterations in 16 RIMs by employing comparative genom- sonja.kiuru-kuhlefelt@helsinki.fi ic hybridization (CGH) and compared the pattern of alterations with 17 spo- Since the description of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS) in 1987, radic-occurring, non -radiation-induced meningiomas (non-RIM). Most of the histologic and cytologic features of this tumor type are now well estab- the tumors (29/33 - 87.9%) displayed at least one DNAcopy number alter- lished, and LGFMS has been accepted as its own entity. LGFMS is a rare ation, and 11/33 (33%) revealed 4 or more changes. The mean number of soft tissue tumor, histologically deceptively benign, yet carrying a metasta- DNAcopy number changes was 2.4+/-1.9 in RIMs and 2.5+/-1.9 in non- tic potential. Knowledge of the molecular cytogenetic background of RIMs, a statistically insignificant difference. The most common deletions LGFMS is restricted to one published case with a ring chromosome. We were noted in chromosome 22 (9/16  56.2% in RIM and 8/17- 47% in non- applied comparative genomic hybridization to evaluate DNAcopy number RIM) and chromosome 1 (6/16 - 37.5% in RIM and 6/17  35.3% in non- changes in eleven LGFMS cases. Nine cases were found to exhibit DNA RIM), with no significant differences between the two groups. Noteworthy, copy number changes. The most prevalent change was loss of chromo- a gain in DNAcopy number of chromosomes 8 and 12 were noted in RIM some 13q21-q22, seen in six cases. Loss of 13q21-q22, although not tumors only. In conclusion, no significant differences were noted between pathognomonic of LGFMS, indicates a tumor suppressor gene(s) in this radiation-induced and non-radiation-induced meningiomas regarding the genomic region to be involved in the pathogenesis of LGFMS. mean number of genetic changes, the extent and frequency of chromo- somes 22 and 1 deletions. It seems that the tumorgeneic pathways of P0099. Chromosomal imbalances assessed by Comparative meningioma formation are similar, regardless of previous skull irradiation. Genomic Hybridization in 97 renal tumors However, the apparent preferential involvement of chromosomes 8 and 12 D. Reutzel1, W. Brenner2, B. Zabel3, J. Decker1 in RIM is intri guing, and requires further investigation. 1Bioscientia Institute, and University Mainz; Ingelheim - Mainz, Germany; 2University Mainz - Dep Urology; Mainz, Germany; 3University Mainz - P0102. Testing different techniques for detection of Childrens Hospital; Mainz, Germany microsatelite instability in Bulgarian patients with Colorectal decker.jochen@bioscientia.de Cancer Ninety-seven primary renal tumors of different subtypes have been T. K. Petrova1, D. Ivanova1, G. Dineva1, M. Tzancheva2, R. Kaneva1, M. analysed applying Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH). Samples Marinov2, H. Kadyan2, P. Pentchev2, D. Nedin2, A. Alexandrova2, V. included clear cell (n=47), papillary (n=15), chromophobic (n=13) and Draganov2, J. Ilieva2, D. Damyanov2, I. Kremensky1 oncocytic subtype (n=16). In addition to known subtype specific changes, 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Queen Jovanna Hos- new imbalances not reported yet in significant frequencies were found. pital; Sofia, Bulgaria Within the group of clear cell RCCs we found a high proportion of tumors dipl1@ns.medfac.acad.bg showing gains of chromosome 1q (28%), and 8q (19%), loss of chromo- Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is the most common some 9 (30%), and 4 (21%). Within the group of papillary RCCs, we found type of familial CRC. Germline mutations in one of DNAmismatch repair additional gain of copy number of chromosome 3 (33%). The genetic find- (MMR) genes are known to be responsible for the HNPCC phenotype. ings were correlated with pathological and clinical data (grading / staging / Their mutations induce microsatelite instability (MSI). Approximately 12- tumor size / survival / smoker/non-smoker, characteristics of the tumor, and 17% of the unselected tumors also show MSI. The aim of this study was to occurence of metastasis). Breakpoint regions assessed by CGH that are test two possible methods for detecting the microsatelite instability in our potentially involved in tumorigenesis or tumor progression will be dis- group of patients- silver staining of denaturing polyacrylamide gels and cussed. automated fluorescence detection (ALF, Pharmacia). Atotal of 91 patients with colorectal cancer have been included in the current study, subgrouped P0100.Detection of DNAgains and losses in ganglioneurob- into six main categories- HNPCC, suspected HNPCC, family cases, lastoma by comparative genomic hybridization juvenile cases, sporadic cases and patients with Family Adenomatous A. D. Toraman1, I. Keser2, G. Luleci2, N. Tunali3, T. Gelen4 Polyposis. Highly efficient set of five markers- D2S123, BAT26, D5S346, 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine; Antalya, Turkey; 2Akdeniz Uni- BAT25 and D18S35 have been selected for detecting the MSI. The mark- versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics; ers D2S123 (CArepeat) and BAT26 (polyArepeat) were chosen to be test- Antalya, Turkey; 3Cukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of ed in the current study. The repeat markers were amplified from both nor- Pathology; Adana, Turkey; 4Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, mal and tumor DNAsamples and were resolved by denaturing polyacry- Department of Pathology; Antalya, Turkey lamide gel electrophoresis and detected by the two different methods. We toraman@hipokrat.med.akdeniz.edu.tr found 10 microsatelite unstable tumors with markers D2S123 and BAT26. The genetic changes in ganglioneuroblastoma, which represents an inter- The results from the two detection protocols were compared for repro- mediary stage between neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma, are not ducibility and accurcy. We recommend these two highly applicable meth- known precisely. We have defined the genomic gains and losses as well ods in the detection of MSI as two step protocol. as their chromosomal locations, of the ganglioneuroblastoma samples belonging to 5 cases (3 male, 2 female) in between ages of 3-4, by com- P0103.Genetic Diagnosis Of Hnpcc; Results From Austria parative genomic hybridization and two-step degenerate oligonucleotide B. Wolf, D. Ilencikova, S. Henglmller, C. Ludwig, E. Roth, J. Karner- primed polymerase chain reaction (DOP-PCR). Gains in chromosomes Hanusch 2p5.1-pter, 5p15.1-p15.3, +7, 13q22-q31, +22 were detected in 3 of our University of Vienna Medical School, Department of Surgery; Vienna, Aus- patients as minimal common regions, while gains in chromosomes 1p35, tria 4p15.1, 10q11.2-q21.2, 12q24.32-qter, +13, 17p12-p13 ve 18p11.35-pter brigitte.wolf@akh-wien.ac.at were displayed in 2 of our patients. No oncogenes were reported to be Defects in a subclass of mismatch repair proteins result in an absent or located in the chromosomal region of 13q21-q31 previously. This region reduced ability to correct DNAreplication errors, a fact that ultimately leads may harbor a novel oncogene which contributes to the initiation and pro- to the formation of tumors in a syndrome called Hereditary Non-Polyposis gression of ganglioneuroblastoma. Furthermore, whole chromosome Colon Cancer (HNPCC). The aim of our study was to establish a presymp- amplification of chromosome 22, which was detected in 3 of our patients, tomatic diagnosis for HNPCC, based on the analysis of microsatellitein- and which has not been reported in previous studies on neuronal tumors, stability (MIN) followed by sequencing of the two most frequently affected may play a spesific role in the progression of ganglioneuroblastoma, with genes, hMLH1 and hMSH2. Thirty-three families (16x Amsterdam criteria,Posters: Cancer Genetics 121 17x Bethesda criteria) were included in the study. DNAwas isolated from group of families that share a common predisposition to colorectal cancer peripheral blood leukocytes and fresh-frozen or paraffinized tumor-tissue. in the absence of any premalignant phenotype. The genetic basis of this Microsatellite instability was investigated at 5 to 10 loci in matched normal disease has been linked to mutations in genes associated with DNAmis- and tumor tissue. Sequence analysis was done on an ABI PRISM 310 match repair. Alarge proportion of families, harbour changes in one of two Genetic Analyzer using the BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Fa. genes, hMSH1 and hMSH2. Approximately 35% of families that adhere to ABI). Out of 29 families 35 tumors were available for microsatellite analy- the Amsterdam Criteria do not appear to harbour mutations in these DNA sis; 21 tumors showed high and 2 low instability. Sequence analysis mismatch repair genes. In this report we present data from a large series revealed 15 mutations (10x hMLH1 and 5x hMSH2), 3 somatic in two of HNPCC families and indicate that there are subtle differences and sim- tumors and 12 germline in 14 families. Twelve at the time asymptomatic ilarities between families that harbour germline changes in hMSH2 com- carriers of a mutation were identified and offered an appropriate screening pared to those harbouring hMSH1 mutations. Furthermore, there are dif- procedure. Twelve relatives without an inherited mutation could be ferences between the mutation positive group (hMSH2 and hMSH1 com- released from the preventive checkups. We were able to show that the bined) and the mutation negative group of families. The major findings inclusion of genetic data can improve the diagnosis and screening modal- identified in this study focused primarily on the extra-colonic disease pro- ities of HNPCC. Following strict criteria for the selection of patients and file observed between the mutation positive families and the mutation neg- applying a prescreening method (MIN) can facilitate the laborious diag- ative families. Breast cancer was not over-represented in the mutation nostic in this multigene disease characterized by various symptoms. negative groups. There was no difference in the age of the colorectal can- cer diagnosis between the hMSH2 and hMSH1 mutation groups but there P0104. Clonal origin of recurrent bladder cancer as deter- was a significant difference between these two groups and the mutation mined by microsatellite analysis negative group. K. Junker, M. Wolf, M. Utting, W. Werner, J. Schubert Department of Urology; Jena, Germany P0107. Screening for HNPCC mutations through genomic kerstin.junker@med.uni-jena.de instability and immunohistochemistry In order to select the optimum therapy for patients at risk for recurrent blad- J. L. Blouin1, M. A. Brundler1, J. F. Egger1, P. Hutter2, C. Soravia1, C. D. der cancer it is necessary to know the pathway of recurrence development. DeLozier-Blanchet1 However, the origin of recurrent bladder cancer is controversely discussed. 1University Hospital of Geneva; Geneva, Switzerland; 2Institut Central des Therefore, the aim of our study is to define the clonal origin of recurrent Hpitaux Valaisans; Sion, Switzerland tumors of the bladder using molecular genetic markers. Nineteen cases jean-louis.blouin@medecine.unige.ch with recurrent bladder cancer (1-4 recurrences per case) were investigat- Dominantly-inherited mutations are identified in 5-10% of patients with col- ed by microsatellite analysis using 4 markers for chromosome 9; D9S747, orectal cancers. Unlike in polyposis coli (APC), mutation search in mis- D9S162, D9S171, D9S1198. PCR was performed according to standard match-repair (MMR) genes in HNPCC (Hereditary non-polyposic colon protocols followed by gele electrophoresis and automated analysis using cancer, Lynch syndrome) is time-consuming and costly due to locus and an automated DNA-Sequencer (LI-QOR). In 14 out of 19 cases losses of allele diversity. Microsatellite instability (MSI) and immunohistochemical heterozygosity (LOH) occured at least in one tumor. Identical LOH was analysis (IHC) in patients meeting the Bethesda criteria facilitate the iden- detected in 10 cases. In all these cases the same allele was affected. Dif- tification of constitutional MMR mutations which may have direct implica- ferent LOH pattern was found in 4 cases showing LOH only in one tumor. tions for treatment and prognosis. To evaluate MSI and IHC testing for the LOH of different alleles did not occured. In 5 cases, no alterations were identification of HNPCC, we analysed 21 unrelated patients meeting the detected using these markers. Our results show that the majority of blad- Amsterdam/Bethesda criteria. The MSI test identifies genomic instability by der cancer recurrences is characterized by monoclonal origin. These data comparing constitutional and tumor DNA with a standard battery of 5 indicate that recurrence is caused by cell dissemination from the original microsatellite markers. IHC determines presence/absence of expression of tumor. For that reason, an early therapy should be performed after the hMLH1 and hMSH2 proteins in tumor. Seven individuals (33 %) had transurethral resection. abnormal results. In all four Amsterdam+ families both tests were patho- logical and led to subsequent identification of mutations in hMLH1 (3) or P0105.Microsatellit instability in sporadic colorectal tumors hMSH2 (1). IHC and MSI results were concordant in all cases, and com- B. B. T. Tunca1, M. Pedroni2, M. Menigatti2, G. Cecener1, A. Scarselli2, E. patible with the underlying molecular defect in the four Amsterdam+ fami- Sala2, F. Borghi2, P. Benatti2, U. Egeli2, A. Zorluoglu3, T. Yilmazlar3, S. lies. Three patients meeting only the Bethesda criteria were positive on Gunduz2, M. Ponz de Leon2 MSI and IHC; mutation identification has been initiated. MSI and IHC test- 1Uludag University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology; ing allows more rapid para-clinical diagnosis and renders molecular inves- Bursa, Turkey; 2Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Universita di Modena; tigation time and budget-efficient, by targeting specific families for germline Modena, Italy; 3Uludag University, Medical Faculty, Department of Gener- mutation research. This multi-step approach is well perceived by both al Surgery; Bursa, Turkey patients and clinicians, and fosters the pluridisciplinary approach needed emre@uludag.edu.tr in these families. (supported by subsidy of Geneva University Hospital, Mutations of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes induce a generalized PRD-00-11) instability of DNAparticularly evident at microsatellite loci. Because of their repetitive structure, microsatellites are particularly prone to replication P0108. Immunohistochemistry in HNPCC Tumour Tissue errors and microsatellite instability (MSI) is thus a sing of MMR deficiency. detects most but not all Carriers of Mutations in DNA Mis- We studied 15 patients with rectum cancer and 14 patients with colon can- match Repair Genes MSH2 and MLH1 cer. DNAwas extracted from normal and cancerous tissue with using fenol- E. Mangold1, M. Mathiak2, W. Friedl1, C. Lamberti3, M. Jungck3, M. Stein- chloroform extraction and proteinase K incubation. It was analyzed for hoff1, M. Ohlendorf1, M. Sengteller1, H. Fischer2, P. Propping1 microsatellite instability (MSI) using 5 markers (BAT25, BAT26, BAT40, 1Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany; 2Department of Pathology; D2123, and D18S57) by radioactive method. Tumors showing MSI in at Bonn, Germany; 3Department of Internal Medicine; Bonn, Germany least 3 of 5 microsatellite loci were defined as MSI(+). We determined MSI e.mangold@uni-bonn.de in 4 patients with colorectal cancer (13,8%). Three tumors are localized in Identification of germline mutations in HNPCC patients is of major impor- colon and one tumor is localized in rectum. Furthermore, we studied methi- tance for predictive testing in family members at risk. Examination of lation pattern of MLH1 promoter in four patients who are determined MSI tumour tissue for microsatellite instability is useful to preselect patients positive. We observed hypermethylation in two of them (50%). The present suspected of HNPCC for germline mutation screening in DNAmismatch report supports the role of hypermethylation is major mechanism of MLH1 repair genes. Immunohistochemistry for expression of MLH1 and MSH2 gene inactivation in MSI positive colerectal tumors. Consequently, hyper- proteins in tumour tissue is a fast and simple method and has been pro- methylation mechanism is an alternative to mutational inactivation of MMR posed as an alternative preselection procedure. In order to examine the genes. sensitivity of this method we examined the correlation between immuno- histochemistry and microsatellite analysis in tumour tissue from HNPCC P0106. Phenotypic characteristics of HNPCC families sub- patients with pathogenic germline mutations in either MSH2 or MLH1. In a divided according to their mutation status large sample of families suspected of HNPCC we had identified patho- R. J. Scott1, A. D. Spigelman2, C. J. Meldrum1, M. McPhillips1, L. Thomas1 genic germline mutations in 65 unrelated patients. A high microsatellite 1Hunter Area Pathology Service; New Lambton, Australia; 2University of instability (MSI-H) was detected in all tumour samples. In 23 patients with Newcastle; Newcastle, Australia mutations in MSH2 and 25 patients with MLH1 mutations both microsatel- rscott@doh.health.nsw.gov.au lite analysis and immunohistochemistry were performed. All patients with Hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) describes a diverse MSH2 germline mutations showed loss of MSH2 expression. Loss of122 Posters: Cancer Genetics MLH1 expression was observed in tumours from 17 patients with MLH1 from three patients in this family, we proposed a multistep model for RCC mutations, while in 8 cases reduced staining of MLH1 protein was detect- development in which (nondisjunctional) loss of the translocation derived ed. We conclude that immunohistochemistry is a useful method for select- chromosome 3 (der(3)) may act as a primary oncogenic event and somat- ing patients at high risk for HNPCC. As its results are pointing towards the ic mutation of the VHLgene as a secondary event related to tumour pro- affected gene, it allows straightforward search for the underlying germline gression. Here we describe the cytogenetic and molecular analysis of mutation. However, within the tumours due to MLH1 mutations there are three novel tumours at early stages of development in two members of this cases showing MSI-H in tumour tissue, but no complete loss of MLH1 pro- family. Again, loss of the der(3) chromosome was found in two of these tein expression. Such cases might be misinterpreted when only immuno- tumours and a VHLmutation in one of them. In the third tumour, however, histochemistry is applied for prescreening. Therefore in cases with normal none of these abnormalities could be detected. These results suggest that or reduced mismatch repair protein expression microsatellite analysis yet another (epi) genetic event may precede the observed der(3) loss and should be performed as well. Acknowledgement; This study was support- VHLgene mutation in the development of this type of familial renal cell ed by the Deutsche Krebshilfe cancer. P0109. Investigation Of Replication Error Phenotype In AML P0112.Alterations Of Patched May Cause Developmental Mal- And MDS Patients. formations And Cancer c M. H. Sheikhha, K. Tobal, J. A. Liu Yin S. Levanat1, I. Crnic1, S. Oreskovic2 University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary; Man- 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Clinical hospital-Petrova,Uni- chester, United Kingdom versity of Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia sheikhha@yahoo.com levanat@rudjer.irb.hr Microsatellite instability (MSI) is associated with defects in the DNAMis- Constitutional hemizygous inactivation of PTCH, the Shh/Ptch signaling match repair (MMR) system. MSI was detected in several forms of human pathway gene, which moderates Shh signalling, manifests itself as Nevoid cancer including haematological malignancies especially in therapy relat- Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) or Gorlin syndrome, a condition ed leukaemia. We have investigated the presence of MSI in 66 patients variably characterized by a number of developmental disorders and mal- including 57 AMLand 9 MDS (18 therapy related, 8 secondary, 10 old and formations, and by predisposition to certain malignancies where the most 30 denovo). Twelve separate microsatellite loci including three mononu- frequent are basal cell carcinomas, medulloblastomas and ovarian fibro- cleotide repeat markers (BAT-25, BAT-26 and BAT-40) were used. mas. The PTCH gene, a human homologue of the Drosophila segment Tumours were considered as RER+ when they showed instability in at polarity gene patched, maps to chromosome 9q22.3 and loss of heterozy- least three loci or one of the mononucleotides. Buccal mucosa was used gosity (LOH) at this site in both sporadic and hereditary basal cell carcino- to obtain the corresponding germline DNAfor 53 patient. In 13 therapy- mas and meduloblastomas suggests that it functions as a tumor suppres- related patients there was no normal DNAavailable and MSI was tested sor. Our studies of LOH in sporadic ovarian fibromas for the same region only in the BATmarkers. Microsatellite loci were amplified by PCR. The and aberrant SSCPpattern in sporadic ovarian fibromas contribute to the products were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed ptch role in their genesis as well. In our studies we used DNAfrom fresh by silver staining. Genetic instability was detected in 24 (36.4%) patients, tissues and blood leukocytes, which were typed for several short tandem 21 of the 57 AML(36.8%) and 3 of the 9 MDS (33.3%). The rate of RER+ repeat polymorphisms spanning chromosome 9q21-q31 and by SSCP was significantly higher in the therapy related and secondary patients com- analysis we have been analyzed variability in PTCH exons. LOH for the pared with the de novo and old ones. Five out of 8 (62.5%) secondary and PTCH region has been found in odontogenic keratocysts, the cyst type 9 out of 18 (50%) therapy related showed RER+ in comparison with 3 out with highly increased incidence in NBCCS. Suggestive temporal distribu- of 10 (30%) old and 7 out of 30 (23.3%) de novo. Our data suggest that tion of Shh signalling, recently observed during tooth development, lead us genetic instability is an important event in the development of the AMLand to investigate its association with dentigerous cysts, the other major non- MDS especially therapy related and secondary malignancies. inflammatory cyst of odontogenic origin. We report here that PTCH is inac- tivated in dentigerous cysts, the implication being the same gene for their P0110.Analysis on the GAP-related Domain of the NF1 Gene genesis as well. More generally, PTCH alterations may prove to be a nec- in Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) Patients with Tumours essary, and perhaps the initiating event, in formation and growth of various S. Ayter, S. Oguzkan, M. Cinbis, B. Anlar, S. Aysun noninflammatory cysts, especially with our observations of incomplete het- Hacettepe University, School of Medicine; Ankara, Turkey erozygosity which we interpreted as LOH in this region for ovarian dermoid sayter@gen.hun.edu.tr cysts. This would be consistent with our view that local PTCH inactivation Neurofibromatosis type1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant disorder can, under predisposing circumstances, lead to persistent though not by caused by mutations of the NF1 gene. It is characterized by multiple neu- itself truly aggressive cell proliferation. rofibromas, pigmentation anomalies, and a variety of other possible com- plications, including an increased risk of malignant neoplasias. The NF1 P0113. Mutation Analysis of the Nijmegen Breakage Syn- gene product neurofibromin that is a large protein, a member of the nega- drome Gene (NBS1) in Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) with tive growth regulatory proteins called tumor supressors. Neurofibromin has Complex Karyotypes a GTPase activating protein (GAP) domain which has shown significant R. Varon1, C. Schoch2, A. Reis3, W. Hiddeman2, K. Sperling1, S. homology between the catalytic region of mammalian Ras-GAP. It is also Schnittger2 called GAP-related domain (GRD) that interacts with the Ras protein, to be 1Institute of Human Genetics, Humboldt University; Berlin, Germany; crucial in regulating the mechanisms of signal transduction and cell prolif- 2Medizinische Klinik III, Ludwig Maximilians University, Klinikum eration/differentiation. GRD is encoded from exons 21-27a on NF1 mRNA. Grohadern; Mnchen, Germany; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich- To date most of the reported NF1 mutations are predicted to result in pro- Alexander-University; Erlangen, Germany tein truncation but very few studies have correlated the causative NF1 raymonda.varon-mateeva@charit.de mutations with tumor formation in NF1 patients. Therefore we analyzed the The chromosomal instability disorder Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome exon 21-27a DNAfrom 10 NF1 tumours by using SSCPtechnology. Dur- (NBS), is associated with immune deficiency, cellular hypersensitivity to ing the analysis of NF1-GRD, electrophoretically abnormal fragments were ionizing radiation, and extreme susceptibility to lymphoid malignancies due detected. Direct sequencing of these fragments allowed us to identify the to a defect in DNAdouble strand break repair. In this study, we analyzed presence of variations and we used these data for further search. We also 19 tumour DNAsamples from patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) plan to compare tumor and nontumor developed NF1 patients DNAs for showing complex chromosomal aberrations, indicative of chromosomal the same exons in order to determine to extend of variability present in instability, for mutations in the NBS1 gene. The samples were analyzed by their NF1 gene. dHPLC analysis and all shifts were directly sequenced. Of the 19 samples analyzed we found one to be heterozygous for a novel 5 bp deletion in P0111. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of early onset intron 12 (IVS12-53del5). By RT-PCR analysis the expected transcript and renal cell carcinomas in a family with a t(2;3)(q35;q21) an additional faint product with skipped exon 13 was observed, indicative N. de Leeuw, D. Bodmer, M. J. Eleveld, M. Ligtenberg, A. Geurts van of aberrant splicing. This exon codes for the binding site of nibrin to Kessel MRE11. However, we also found that all analyzed controls showed this University Medical Centre Nijmegen; Nijmegen, The Netherlands phenomenon. Thus, the IVS12-53del5 is not responsible for the skipping of N.deLeeuw@antrg.azn.nl exon 13 and most probably represents a rare polymorphism which has not Previously, we described a family with renal cell cancer and a constitution- been detected among 250 control chromosomes so far. We found no fur- al balanced t(2;3)(q35;q21). Based on loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and ther NBS1 mutations among the AMLsamples. Although the number of the Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene mutation analyses in five tumour biopsies analyzed samples is not representative, our study indicates that NBS1Posters: Cancer Genetics 123 mutations are not common in AMLwith complex karyotype. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) mutations have recently been reported in Ampullary carcinoma indicating that the Wnt signaling pathway is P0114. TP53 mutations, p53 protein expression and EGFR involved in the development of this tumor. However, b-catenin and AXIN2, expression in pediatric malignant astrocytomas and glioblas- the two key players in this pathway, have not been investigated in this tomas. tumor. Here, we show that 4 of 40 carcinomas of the papilla of Vater har- E. van den Berg1, R. W. Hofstra1, A. Dam2, J. M. Fock3, W. M. Molenaar2 bor b-catenin mutations and 4 others contain AXIN2 mutations. All the b- 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen; Groningen, The catenin mutations affect the conserved GSK-3b phosphorylation sites in Netherlands; 2Dept. of Pathology, University of Groningen; Groningen, The exon 3, while three out of the four AXIN2 mutations were frameshift muta- Netherlands; 3Dept. of Neurology, University Hospital of Groningen; tions resulting in deletion of the DIX domain. The remaining one was a 12 Groningen, The Netherlands bp deletion removing four amino acids in the PP2A binding domain of e.van.den.berg-de.ruiter@medgen.azg.nl AXIN2. Both AXIN2 and b-catenin mutations were found not to co-exist in Background. TP53 gene mutations play a significant role in the develop- the same tumor indicating that either one of the mutations is sufficient for ment and progression of astrocytomas. De novo glioblastomas often show tumorigenesis in the papilla of Vater. Immunohistochemical staining of b- overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) protein. A catenin showed focal nuclear or cytoplastic accumulation of b-catenin in previous study of low grade pediatric astrocytomas showed a high fre- tumor tissues with b-catenin or AXIN2 mutations. Taken together, this is the quency of TP53 gene mutations, but not in residual tumors that showed first study to demonstrate that b-catenin or AXIN2 is mutated in Ampullary progression. Material and methods. TP53 gene mutation analysis was per- carcinoma and suggest that mutations int these two genes response for formed in 3 pediatric malignant astrocytomas (MA) and 4 glioblastomas tumorigenesis in 20% Ampullary carcinomas through the elevation of b- (GBM) using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis mutation detection catenin in tumor cells. The biological impact and the mechanisms of these assay. P53 protein expression and EGFR expression were assessed mutations in the carcinogenesis of the papilla of Vater remain to be eluci- immunohistologically using commercial antibodies. Results. TP53 muta- dated. tions were observed in 2 GBMs, which showed limited and extensive p53 protein expression, respectively. One of them also strongly expressed P0117. Mutations of the N-ras Gene in Childhood Myelodys- EGFR. One MA showed strong EGFR expression, in combination with plastic Syndromes intermediate p53 protein expression, without gene mutations. Intermediate B. Jekic1, V. Bunjevacki1, M. Kuzmanovic2, J. Milasin3, I. Novakovic1, L. p53 protein expression without gene mutations and without EGFR expres- Lukovic1 sion was found in 1 MAand 1 GBM. Discussion. Both TP53mutations that 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Medicine; Belgrade, were found are possibly causative, as they result in a non-conservative Yugoslavia; 2Institute for Mother and Child Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; amino acid substitutions. In one case the mutation involves the replace- 3Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Stomatology; Bel- ment of the last base at the 3 end of exon 5, probably affecting correct grade, Yugoslavia splicing of the mRNAtranscript. The mutation at codon 248 in the other llukovic@eunet.yu case, is a known mutational hot spot in many tumors and codes for a The primary myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are heterogeneous group region of the p53 protein involved directly in contacting DNA. The same of disorders characterized by a failure of the hematopoietic progenitors to mutation has been reported several times in glioblastomas of adults. TP53 differentiate normally, resulting in ineffective and dysplastic hematopoiesis mutations and p53 protein expression did not parallel each other. More- of one or more cell lines. MDS is considered to be preleukemic state and over, EGFR expression occurred together with p53 expression and a p53 in this context, it provides an opportunity to study molecular mechanisms mutation. This suggests that the pathways in children may be different from that precede the development of leukemia. Molecular lesions underlying those in adults. the evolution of MDS are largely unknown. Mutations of RAS genes have been found in variety of human hematologic malignancies including 5 % to P0115. Somatic Mutations And Deletions Of Ptch Gene In 30% of patients with MDS. The Ras gene family consists of three genes, Ovarian Fibromas H-,Ki- and N-Ras genes, which encode p21 ras proteins.They function as V. Musani1, I. Crnic1, S. Oreskovic2, S. Levanat1 GTPbuinding proteins with intrinsic GTP-ase activity. Usually, oncogenic 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Gynecological Clinics-Petro- activation of Ras arises through missense point mutations in codons va, University School of Medicine, University of Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia 12,13(exon 1) and 61(exon 2). It is yet not clear is the role of Ras genes vesna.musani@zg.hinet.hr mutations in childhood and adult MDS (leukemogenesis) is the same. We We have been analyzing molecular genetic alterations of the Gorlin syn- have studied the frequency of N-Ras point mutations in 20 pediatric drome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) region, chro- patients with MDS. Archival bone-marrow samples were screened by DNA mosome 9q22.3 in ovarian fibromas, the trird tumor by incidence in the amplification followed by single-strand conformation polymorphism syndrome. Gorlin syndrome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (SSCP) at both, exon 1and exon 2 of N-Ras. . One patient has showed (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes to basal cell abnormal band shift for exon 1, and two for exon 2,suggesting that role of carcinomas of the skin, medulloblastomas and ovarian fibromas, and wide- N-Ras mutations in childhood MDS may be significant. spread developmental defects. Syndrome related disorders have been attributed to alterations of PTCH gene, a human homologue of the P0118.Identification of RB1 Gene Mutations and pRB Expres- Drosophila segment polarity gene patched, which maps to chromosome sion in Mexicans Patients with Retinoblastoma 9q22.3. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at this site in both sporadic and M. Rodriguez1, M. Gonzales1, M. Salcedo2, F. Salamanca1, R. Coral1, D. hereditary basal cell carcinomas and medulloblastomas suggests that it Arenas1 functions as a tumor suppressor. The aim is to confirm the tumor suppres- 1Human Genetic Unit, Pediatric Hospital, CMN SXXI IMSS; Mexico City, sor role of the ptch in genesis of ovarian fibromas even when they are not Mexico; 2Oncology Research Unit, CMN SXXI IMSS; Mexico City, Mexico syndrome related. DNAwas isolated from fresh tissues and blood leuko- plumita@eudoramail.com cytes. The DNAsamples were typed for several short tandem repeat poly- Retinoblastoma, is a chilhood tumor of the eye that affects about 1/13,500- morphisms spanning chromosome 9q21-q31 in tumors (ovarian fibroma) 1/25,000 newborns and occurs as sporadic or hereditary form. This cancer and matched constitutional tissues. Polymorphic markers D9S127, result from succesive loss or inactivation of the RB1 gene located in D9S287, D9S180 and D9S196 and 20 PTCH exons were used. We 13q14.1. This gene encodes for a 110Kd nuclear phosphoprotein (pRB), screened for allelic loss and by SSCPanalysis we have been analyzing which plays a major role in cell proliferation control. Different types of muta- variability in PTCH exons. PCR reactions were performed and products tions in the RB1 gene have been reported, but point mutations are the were fractionated on 6-12% polyacrilamide gel. We found LOH in 30% of most common. Even though retinoblastoma is common disease in Mexico sporadic ovarian fibromas. In about 70% of ovarian fibromas variability in (about one case/per month, there are not molecular studies about RB1 SSCPpattern was detected. LOH for the ptch region and aberrant SSCP gene mutations and expression in Mexican children. In this study, we stud- pattern confirmed the expectations that the gene patched has a decisive ied 19 patients with bilateral or unilateral retinoblastoma. Genetic and cyto- role in the genesis of ovarian fibromas when they are not syndrome relat- genetic studies were carried out. In addition, detection of RB1 gene and its ed. expression were done. By using SSCP, (single strand conformational poly- morphism) assay several polymorphisms were identified in different exons. P0116. Beta-catenin and AXIN2 Mutations Contribute to Car- In all cases, the sequence of the polymorphisms showed mutations that cinogenesis in the Pallila of Vater produced a frameshift on the open reading frame. In just one tumor we did W. Liu, K. Taniguchi, S. Krishnadath, C. Qian, L. Burgart, P. Roche no detect the pRB protein. This kind of work is important because the iden- Mayo Clinic; Rochester, MN United States tification of mutations may contribute to basic knowledge of this neoplasia liu.wanguo@mayo.edu and furthermorethepossibilitytooffer genetic counseling to relatives in risk. 124 Posters: Cancer Genetics P0119.Promoter Analysis of Human Rad51 Gene apical surface of gastrointestinal epithelium, suggesting its role in protec- L. Hasselbach1, Y. Yuan2, S. Miska2, W. Henning2, H. W. Stuerzbecher2 tion from xenobiotics. Additional physiological functions for P-gp and its 1Department of Clinical Chemistry, Medical University of Luebeck; Lue- role in cancer beyond multidrug resistance in chemotherapy are poorly beck, Germany; 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Lue- understood. We have therefore analyzed tumor and corresponding normal beck; Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 Lubeck, Germany tissue from 400 patients with previously non treated colorectal cancer for liu.hasselbach@medinf.mu-luebeck.de germline and somatic alterations in MDR1 gene using PCR-Conformation- Human Rad51 is know as a DNArepair protein, which plays crucial roles al analysis and direct sequencing. We have identified 12 different germline in both mitotic and meiotic recombination, and also in repair of double alterations. There were 4 missense, 3 samesense, 4 intronic alterations strand breaks. Rad51 protein is essential for cell survival in vertebrates close to exon/intron boundary and 1 alteration in promoter region. We and for embryonic development. It appears to associate either directly or observed significant correlation of at least two germline polymorphisms indirectly with three tumor suppressor genes, P53, BRCA1 and BRCA2. with increased lymphoid infiltration in tumors. Two unique germline alter- Altered expression and overexpression of Rad51 protein have been report- ations, identified in normal and corresponding tumor tissue and all somat- ed in different human cancers like pancreatic carcinoma and invasive duc- ic mutations identified only in tumor tissue, were associated with colorec- tal breast cancer (Maacke et al, Int J Cancer. 2000 Dec 15;88(6);907-913). tal cancers with high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). There were mis- To study the expression regulation of this gene, a PAC clone includes the sense, frameshift and mutations in the promoter region. Interestedly, we human Rad51 gene was identified and subcloned. A8.1 kb DNAfragment found that in all MSI-H tumors with MDR1 mutations, both, the coding and of 5-region of this gene was sequenced and submitted to Genbank Data- promoter regions were mutated. To our best knowledge this is the first base (Accession No. AF203691). This fragment contains intact sequences report of naturally occurring mutations in MDR1 gene. These results sug- of exon 1, intron1, exon 2, intron 2, exon 3 and partial sequences of intron gest that MDR1 plays an important role in development of at least a pro- 3. The translation start codon ATG is located immediately at the beginning portion of MSI-H cancers and that P-gp is involved in immune response in of exon 2. The predicted promoter region has been pointed on 5.4kb colorectal cancer suggesting its physiological function in immunology. upstram of ATG. No TATA-like or initiator sequences were detected, impli- cating this gene could belong to the TATA less GC rich house-keeping P0122.Frequent LOH and absence of mutations in the coding gene family. Three overlapping fragments (F II, F III and F IV) of this pre- region of DNArepair genes in ovarian cancer dicted promoter region were cloned into a luciferase reporter vector named I. I. Arzimanoglou1, L. Hansen2, D. Chong1, M. Psaroudi3, C. Dimi- pGL3. Apair of cell lines, UiRad5-2 and UiLacZ, were delibrately selected trakakis4, S. Michalas4, F. Gilbert1, F. Chervenak1, H. Barber1 for this experiment. UiRad5-2 cell line could express high level of Rad51 1Cornell University/ Weill Medical College; New York, NYUnited States; protein when induced by Ponasterone A, while UiLacZ cell line express 2University of Aarhus/ Institution of Human Genetics; Aarhus, Denmark; beta-galactosidase. Ahigh luciferase activity was detected in both non- 3National Hellenic Research Foundation; Athens, Greece; 4University of induced UiRad5-2 and UiLacZ cell lines transfected with the fragment II Athens/Medical School; Athens, Greece (pGL3-F II, sequence from -4529 to -2135bp to ATG), and no luciferase Arziman@lycosmail.com activity was showed in the other two constructs of pGL3-F III and pGL3-F The aim of our study was to determine loss of heterozygosity (LOH), cod- IV. Nested deletions were made in plasmid pGL3-F II to minimize the pre- ing instability and single base sequence alterations specific for ovarian dicted promoter region into about 300bp. Further study is now going on to cancer (OC). To accomplish this, a combination of high resolution GeneS- reveal the precise function of this region. canTM software analysis followed by automated DNA sequencing, was used. After optimization, the sensitivity of our GeneScanTM system was P0120. The spectrum of RB1 gene anomalies in different brought down to a single base level, as always confirmed by sequencing. forms of retinoblastoma. In case of long repeats, a cloning step using the PCR-Script TM Amp SK(+) O. V. Babenko1, S. Saakyn2, V. Kozlova3, M. Nemtsova1, D. Zaletayev1 system was required to precede sequencing in order to successfully read 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; through them. Selected DNArepair sequences of ovarian tumor DNAwere 2Moscow Institute for eye desease; Moscow, RussianFederation; 3Nation- tested against the matched blood counterparts (DNA pairs). Negligible al Scientific Oncology Centre; Moscow, Russian Federation coding instability was found at hMSH3/ex7 (1/62 DNA pairs), and at vstrel@iname.com hMSH6/ex5 (0/32 DNApairs). Unlike coding instability, LOH confined to Retinoblastoma (Rb) is a childhood tumor of retina with an incidence of the tumor was found in 41% (17/37 DNApairs) of the informative OC cases 1;13000 live births. All forms of Rb result from inactivation of both alleles of at hMLH1/exon12. In addition, preliminary evidence indicated that such a the tumor-suppressor gene RB1. In 5% of cases Rb is found together with trend of frequent LOH in OC is likely to extend to other DNA repair visible chromosome abnormalities - deletions in chromosome 13q14.1, sequences as well. Therefore, our findings support a critical role for LOH and in other cases - with submicroscopic anomalies, small mutations (75- as a mechanism involved in the development of ovarian cancer. On the 80%) and with hypermethylation (10-15%) of the promoter region of RB1. other hand, the occurrence of somatic changes in the coding region of Our aim was investigation of RB1 molecular anomalies causing retinoblas- genes, presumably caused by DNAinstability is not likely to account for toma. SSCPand heteroduplex analysis were used for mutation screening, gene inactivation in OC. microsatellite analysis (introns 2 & 20, D13S262, D13S284) - for loss of heterozygosity detection, methylation analysis of RB1 promoter region - for P0123. DPC4 tumor suppressor gene in human sporadic functional mutations detection.We have studied 60 families with Rb, 50 of colon cancer; loss of heterozygosity which were sporadic (35 unilateral and 15 bilateral) and 10 were hereditary M. H. Popovic Hadzija1, S. Kapitanovic1, S. Radosevic2, T. Cacev1, R. or familial cases of Rb (4 unilateral and 6 bilateral). In all cases a high-res- Spaventi2, M. Hadzija1, K. Pavelic1 olution chromosome analysis had been carried out and no chromosomal 1Rudjer Boskovic; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Pliva d.d.; Zagreb, Croatia anomalies were found. Analysis of PCR products mobility by SSCPand mhadzija@rudjer.irb.hr heteroduplex analyses revealed 40 possible mutations in exons 3 to 23. The purpose of this study was to examine the prevalence of DPC4 loss of Only five mutations were missense (exons 10, 18 and 20). Others were heterozygosity (LOH) in sporadic colorectal cancer. For this purpose we nonsense mutations, frame shift and splice site mutations. We detected analyzed 36 cases of human sporadic colon carcinoma and corresponding germinal mutations in all familial and isolated bilateral cases of Rb. Loss of normal tissue samples. We used polymerase chain reaction (PCR), vari- heterozygosity was found in 32 (70%) tumor specimens of 50 analyzed able nucleotide tandem repeat (VNTR) analysis and restriction fragment tumors. Methylation pattern anomalies of the RB1 gene promoter region polymorphism (RFLP). Each sample was tested for LOH for each of three were found in 7 (15%) of 50 tumors and in 1 case in blood lymphocytes, VNTR flanking markers (D18S474, D18S363, D18S46) onto 10% non- that allowing us to suppose hypermethylation may represent the first allele denaturing polyacrylamide gel LOH was defined by a visible change in inactivation event in carcinogenesis. allele; allele ration in tumors compared with matching normal tissue. We also used BspHI, MaeI and MnlI RFLPsites for detection mutation in exons P0121.The role of P-glycoprotein (MDR1) polymorphisms and 8, 10 and 11. Informativity (heterozygosity) was observed in 35 (97%) from mutations in colorectal cancer 36 analyzed samples. LOH at the DPC4 locus was detected in 18 (51%) of U. Potocnik1, M. Ravnik-Glavac1, R. Golouh2, D. Glavac1 informative tumor DNAs; 13 cases of LOH found by D18S474, 9 cases of 1Medical Faculty, Institute of Pathology, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics; LOH found by D18S363 and 4 cases found by D18S46 markers, respec- Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2Institute of Oncology; Ljubljana, Slovenia tively. At the DPC4 exon 11 locus only one patient had mutation; in exons upotocnik@ibmi.mf.uni-lj.si 8 and 10 did not find mutation. Statistical analysis did not show correlation Multidrug resistance, the main problem in efficient cancer chemotherapy, between DPC4 LOH and age or sex of patients with informative tumor is mainly caused by increased expression and acquired mutations in P-gly- samples. The DPC4 LOH was more frequent in tumors smaller than 5 cm coprotein (P-gp), encoded by MDR1 gene. P-gp is highly expressed on the in diameter than in larger ones. Our results support the view that malignantPosters: Cancer Genetics 125 progression is a consequence of more than one of genetic change and Sandra.Sonner@gmx.de suggest that inactivation of DPC4 gene play a role in a multistep process Several regions of LOH in Wilms tumor are known on chromosome 7, 11 of colon tumor progression. and 16 but until recently no correlation analysis was done between loss at these loci and tumor histology to characterize the genetic defects leading P0124. High Frequency Of Allelic Imbalance At Regions Of to a specific histopathological subtype. For this reason we investigated 19 Chromosome Arm 8p In Ovarian Carcinoma cases of Wilms tumor (4 blastemal, 9 stromal, 3 triphasic, one epithelial I. Pribill1, A. Pfeffer2, R. Zeillinger2, P. Speiser2, M. Krainer2 and 2 tumors of unspecified histology) with a series of markers, and com- 1General Hospital Vienna,; Vienna, Austria; 2General Hospital Vienna; pared the results to the histology of the studied tumors. We found LOH of Vienna, Austria chromosome 11 and 16 only in stromal tumors with a rate of 30% and 18%, ingrid_pribill@akh-wien.ac.at respectively. LOH of chromosome 7 was found in one blastemal and one Progressive genetic changes such as the inactivation of tumor suppressor stromal tumor. No LOH was found in triphasic tumors, possibly because of genes (TSG) are thought to play an important role in the initiation and pro- the variety of cell types found in that kind of tumor. There seems to be a gression of ovarian cancer. Frequent non-random allelic imbalance (AI) at correlation between LOH of chromosome 11 and 16 and stromal tumors. 8p11-p21 and 8p22-pter suggests the existence of TSGs that may be The next step will be the microdissection of the different cell types to look involved in the carcinogenesis of several human malignancies. We inves- for LOH in each of them, to compare the results with the histology of the tigated 70 ovarian tumors with 11 highly polymorphic markers spanning different cell types. 8p12-p21 and 8p22-pter to produce an AI map of 8p in epithelial ovarian cancer. AI was demonstrated in 54 tumors (77%), most frequently occur- P0127.Identification of genetic alterations on chromosome 4 ring at D8S136 (54%) and at D8S1992 (55%). Poorly differentiated and in the early phase of HPV-induced tumorprogression advanced stage cancers were more often affected by AI (G1+G2 vs. G3; C. Backsch1, N. Wagenbach2, B. Rudolph1, B. Meyer1, K. Beer1, E. Stan- 20% vs. 66%; stage I+II vs. III+IV, 36% vs. 54%, p<0.001; Kruskal-Wallis bridge3, A. Schneider1, M. Drst1 test) than well differentiated and early stage tumors. There was no rela- 1Gynkologische Molekularbiologie, Abteilung Frauenheilkunde, Frauen- tionship between histological subtype and AI. Smallest regions of overlap klinik der FSU; Jena, Germany; 2Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches (SRO) were delineated by analyzing 38 tumors with partial AI. One of these Krebsforschungszentrum; Heidelberg, Germany; 3Department of Microbi- regions is characterized by loss of microsatellite markers D8S1992 and ology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine; Irvine, United States D8S261 and is mainly found in early tumors. This area has also been Claudia.Backsch@med.uni-jena.de implicated in tumorigenesis of various other cancers, in particular prostate Human papillomavirus (HPV) types 16 or 18 are involved in the multistep- cancer, where a homozygous loss in this region was described previously. process of cervical carcinogenesis. Transfection of human primary ker- By focusing on this area through datamining and reprobing our previous atinocytes (HPK) with HPV 16 or 18 DNAgenerally gives rise immortal patient population with additional microsatellite markers we integrated this cells. This may be explained by the loss of senescence genes as a con- minimal region of loss into the Genemap99 and the G3 Stanford Radiation sequence of HPV-induced genetic instability. Complementation of these Hybrid Map, thus narrowing it down to roughly 900 kilobases. We are cur- gene defects by the reintroduction of specific chromosomes results in the rently using probes from this region to isolate bacterial artificial chromo- reversion of the immortal phenotype. Comparative genomic hybridization somes (BACs) to achieve genomic coverage of the minimal deletion. (CGH) has shown that chromosome 4 is consistently underrepresented These BACs will also be used for in situ hybridization experiments to early during the immortalising process. The aim of our study is to deter- search for potential homozygous deletions in ovarian carcinomas in this mine a region on chromosome 4 which is associated with senescence in area. Coding sequences are isolated by exon amplification and - together HPV-induced tumorigenesis. Microcell mediated- chromosome transfers with Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) and genes deposited in the public (MMCT) with an entire chromosome 4 and different derivated chromosome databases - evaluated as potential candidate genes by mutational analysis 4 (der (4)) were performed. As recipients served two HPV positive cell lines in cell lines, tumor samples and germ line DNAof ovarian cancer patients. (HeLa, HPK II). Successful microcell fusion was confirmed by microsatel- This work is supported by the Austrian Fonds zur Frderung der wis- lite-PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization using coatasome 4 probe. senschaftlichen Forschung Project Nr. P14138-Gen The introduction of a normal copy of chromosome 4 induced senescence in 80-100% of the resulting HPK II- and HeLa- hybrids. In order to localise P0125. Coincident LOH Regions In Mouse Thymic Lym- potential senescence genes on chromosome 4 we have established 10 phomas And In Human Lymphomas new donor cell lines with different derivated chromosome 4. We have now B. Melendez1, B. Martnez-Delgado1, M. Herranz2, J. C. Cigudosa1, C. started to examine these new donor cells with regard to their ability to Rivas3, J. Fernndez-Piqueras2, J. Bentez1 induce senescence in HPK II, HeLa recipient cells. 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncolgicas; Madrid, Spain; 2Univer- sidad Autonoma de Madrid; Madrid, Spain; 3Fundacin Jimnez Daz; P0128.1p/19q-deleted Oligodendroglioma Is a Distinct Histo- Madrid, Spain logical Tumour bmelendez@cnio.es C. Godfraind1, E. Rousseau2, C. Raftopoulos1, M. Ruchoux3, F. Scaravil- Using an animal model for the study of T-cell lymphomas, frequent loss of li4, M. Vikkula2 heterozygosity (LOH) was revealed in seven chromosomal regions located 1Universit catholique de Louvain; Brussels, Belgium; 2Christian de Duve on mouse chromosomes 4, 12 and 19. These regions, named TLSR1-7 for Institute of Cellular Pathology; Brussels, Belgium; 3Hpital R. Salingro; Thymic Lymphoma Suppressor Region 1 to 7, present their corresponding Lille, France; 4Institute of Neurology; London, United Kingdom orthologous regions on human chromosomes 1 (TLSR2, 3), 9 (TLSR1, 4, catherine.godfraind@anpg.ucl.ac.be 5), 10 (TLSR6) and 14 (TLSR7). In order to know if the mouse LOH regions Oligodendroglioma is a tumour originating from oligodendrocytes, the were maintained in human lymphomas, we analysed a set of 44 non- myelin forming cells in the central nervous system. This glioma preferen- Hodgkin lymphomas of the B and T-cell lineage for loss of heterozygosity tially occurs in adults. It is mostly located in cerebral hemispheres with a on the corresponding orthologous regions, by using molecular microsatel- predilection to the frontal lobe. This lesion accounts for 5-33% of all lite markers mapped on each of these regions. All molecular markers gliomas. The wide range reported for tumour occurrence reflects inter- analysed showed LOH in a range between 2 and 11% of the cases, thus observer discordance in histological diagnosis. Genetic analysis of oligo- confirming all the LOH regions found in mouse thymic lymphomas. We dendroglioma has associated 1p/19q-deletions to chemosensitivity. No his- also found instability at least in one marker of each region. Three of the tological definition for this subgroup has been reported. In order to corre- regions, 1p32-p36, 9p21-p22 and 10q23-q24, contain candidate genes late 1p/19q-deleted oligodendroglioma to a histological phenotype, we p73, p16INK4a and PTEN respectively, which are known tumour suppres- underwent a retrospective study of 59 formaline fixed and paraffin embed- sors. Mutation analyses of p16INK4a and PTEN genes revealed one ded gliomas, mostly reported as oligodendroglioma in the Neurological tumour with a mutation on p16INK4a, whereas no cases with mutations on Institute, London and in the Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, Brussels. PTEN were found. This could indicate the existence of other/s suppres- Chromosomes 1, 9, 10, 17, 19 and 22 were studied by microsatellite analy- sor/s genes near PTEN. In addition, the other LOH regions could contain sis in order to define regions of loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Atotal of 22 unknown novel tumour suppressor genes. 1p/19q-deleted gliomas were identified. Twenty of them share common characteristic histological criteria. This allows to diagnose 1p/19q-deleted P0126. LOH-Analysis of chromosome 7, 11 and 16 in Wilms oligodendroglioma on histological criteria prior to any genetic analysis. tumors, and comparison to histology Thus, a better identification of glioma subtypes and evaluation of their S. K. Sonner1, V. Schumacher1, A. Weirich2, B. Royer-Pokora1 treatment can be done even in centres without genetic diagnostics. 1Inst. fuer Humangenetik, Heinrich-Heine-Universitaet; Duesseldorf, Ger- (catherine.godfraind@anpg.ucl.ac.be) many; 2Kinderklinik der Universitaet Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Germany126 Posters: Cancer Genetics P0129. Allelic imbalance in chromosome 22q13 in Eastern prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients. We also found that loss of 18q is finnish breast cancer patients an early genetic alteration in human pancreatic ductal carcinogenesis. H. Kujala1, M. Anttila2, J. Hartikainen1, V. Kataja3, M. Eskelinen4, V. However, introduction of the SMAD4 gene did not suppress the growth of Kosma5, A. Mannermaa1 pancreatic cancer cells that harbor homozygous deletion of this gene. 1Kuopio University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics; Kuopio, Fin- IPMT (intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor) is thought to be one of the land; 2University of Kuopio, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology; premalignant lesions of the pancreas, which would transform into carcino- Kuopio, Finland; 3University of Kuopio, Department of Oncology; Kuopio, mas. Atotal of 20 IPMTs were analyzed, and we observed frequent LOH Finland; 4University of Kuopio, Department of Surgery; Kuopio, Finland; (7/14, 50%) at the SMAD4 locus. However, SMAD4 protein was observed 5University of Kuopio, Department of Pathology; Kuopio, Finland in tumor cells immunohistochemically, and no mutations of the SMAD4 Hanna.Kujala@kuh.fi gene were observed in any of the tumors. Introduction of the normal copy Chromosome 22q has been suggested as a possible location for a tumour of chromosome 18 into pancreatic cancer cells with and without defective suppressor gene in several studies. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) or allel- SMAD4 gene is now under way, and our preliminary results suggested the ic imbalance (AI) has been observed throughout chromosome 22q in dif- existence of a gene(s), other than SMAD4, that suppresses cell growth. ferent malignant tumour tissues, e.g. breast, ovary and colon. We studied Identification and characterization of the gene(s) that is a candidate for chromosome 22 to find further evidence for a breast cancer susceptibili- tumor suppressor will also be discussed. ty/risk gene and screened it for AI using 13 polymorphic microsatellite markers spanning 6.7 Mb along the q-arm with average distance from each P0132.Loss of heterozygosity of Adenomatous polyposis coli other of 0.5 Mb. and E-cadherin genes in renal cell carcinoma We used 45 breast cancer patients who did not have evident family histo- N. Pecina-Slaus1, K. Gall-Troselj2, K. Radic3, J. Pavelic2, K. Pavelic2 ry of cancer from the late-settlement area of Eastern Finland. Pairs of 1Department of Biology, Medical School University of Zagreb; Zagreb, paraffin-embedded carefully microdissected tumour and matched normal Croatia; 2Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute; specimens were extracted by standard proteinase-K  phenol cloroform Zagreb, Croatia; 3Medical School University of Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia method, PCR amplified with fluorescent-labelled microsatellite marker nina@mef.hr primers and analyzed with Abi Prism 310 genetic analyzer. The AI-value In our study the roles of two tumor suppressor genes (adenomatous poly- was calculated useing formula AI=(T2 x N1)/(T1 x N2), where Tis a tumour posis coli, APC and E-cadherin, CDH1) were investigated in renal cell car- allele and N is a normal tissue allele. Values under 0.6 or greater than 1.67 cinoma (RCC). Both gene products are components of adherens junction, were assessed AI. where E-cadherin is bound to beta-catenin which in turn binds to the cen- AI was found in 37 of 45 tumours (82 %) and five microsatellite markers tral part of the APC protein. Twenty eight human renal cell carcinomas showed AI over 30 %, with one marker reaching 55 %. These results con- together with autologous peripheral blood samples were tested for gene firm the occurrence of a breast cancer tumour suppressor gene in a 1.1 Mb instability. Using specific oligonucleotide primers for exons 11 and 15 of the wide region in chromosome 22q13. The highest AI frequency was howev- APC gene, instability was followed by polymerase chain reaction/loss of er found somewhat more centromeric than previously reported. heterozygosity (LOH) using RFLPmethod. E-cadherin gene was analyzed by PCR amplification of tetranucleotide repeat polymorphic marker P0130. Genetic Alterations In Cervical Carcinomas; Loss of (D16S752) and the alleles were visualized by PAGE/silver staining. Our Heterozygosity and Microsatellite Instability results demonstrate that from 28 tumor samples 15 (53,6 %) were inform- D. Popovic-Kuzmanovic1, I. Novakovic2, D. Lukovic2, K. Kacar2, J. ative for Rsa I/exon 11 polymorphic site. From the noninformative sample, Milasin3, L. Lukovic2, N. Ostojic4, M. Krajinovic2 2 were heterozygous for MspI/exon 15 polymorphism. The overall propor- 1Bezanijska Kosa, University Medical Center; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; tion of LOH cases of the APC gene was 47,1 % (8/17). The polymorphic 2Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Medicine; Belgrade, marker for E-cadherin gene was highly informative 26/28 (92,9 %), while Yugoslavia; 3Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Stoma- only 2 of these (7,7 %) demonstrated LOH. Interestingly, in another three tology; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 4Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology; RCC samples we detected another type of genomic instability; replication Belgrade, Yugoslavia error (RER). Both samples showing LOH of the E-cadherin had also LOH bkosa@bkosa.edu.yu of the APC gene, while only one RER+ sample of the E-cadherin gene It is well known that cervical cancer is multigenetic disease. As the genet- showed LOH at the APC locus. Pathohistological diagnosis showed no cor- ic alterations are the cause of malignant transformation, it is likely that spe- relation with molecular data. However, multivariate analysis indicated cific genetic alterations lead to specific clinical behavior. The aim of this strong positive correlation of age and TNM stage with the presence of LOH study was to localize chromosome arms that harbor likely tumor - sup- of the APC gene. Our results suggest that alterations both in APC and E- pressor genes, by analyzing loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Also we ana- cadherin genes are responsible for evolution and progression of RCC. lyzed presence of microsatellite instability (MI) as a result of replication Genetic changes of the E-cadherin gene are less frequent and are associ- errors in malignant cells. To define the regions of interest we studied the ated with the APC gene alterations. presence of LOH and MI at chromosomes 3p, 6p, 11p/q and 18q in a series of 20 cervical carcinomas. All the tumors were squamous cell carcinomas P0133.Genetic Markers for Prostate Cancer Progression with various degrees of differentiation. LOH was observed at regions 6p14- L. Chu, P. Troncoso, J. Liang 24, 18q21.1-qter, 3p13-26, 11p12-15.2, and 11q13-23 with the frequency M.D.Anderson Cancer Center; Houston, TX United States of 50%, 30%, 25%, 25%, and 20%, respectively. MI was detected in only janliang@yahoo.com one case on chromosome 3p (3p26) and in 3 cases on 6p (6p21.3 and Prostate cancer (PC) is the second leading cause of cancer death among 6p23). Majority of the tumors with LOH and MI were histologic grade II, but men in the United States. Because PC is currently detected at an early had heterogeneous clinical stages. Losses of analyzed chromosomal stage and only a portion of them will progress to become life threatening, regions in cervical carcinomas suggest that a tumor suppressor genes in there is a great need for understanding the genetic basis for PC progres- these regions may be important in the prognosis of the tumor. Low fre- sion. Such an understanding will aid in the development of tests that can quency of MI in our study suggests that this type of genetic alteration be be used to predict the clinical behavior of each tumor for which optimal not very often in cervical carcinomas. treatment strategies can be designed. For the purpose of identifying genet- ic markers that distinguish low from high-stage PC, we analyzed 24 organ- P0131. Genomic analysis of 18q suggests an existence of a confined (T2NoMo) and 21 locally advanced (T3NoMo) tumors by the com- novel tumor suppressor gene that is associated with pancre- parative genomic hybridization (CGH) method. Smears from fine needle atic ductal carcinogenesis. biopsies were used for study. Our results identified six chromosomal A. Horii, H. Inoue, T. Furukawa, M. Sunamura, T. Yatsuoka, T. Yokoyama, regions that were significantly different in organ-confined and locally K. Takeda, S. Fukushige, S. Matsuno advanced tumors. Locally advanced tumors exhibited a significant gain of Tohoku University School of Medicine; Sendai, Japan 3p13-q13, and showed significant losses of 6p21, 6q24-27, 8cen-p23, and horii@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp 10q25-26. In addition, low stage tumors showed a significant loss of Human pancreatic cancer is one of the malignant diseases with the poor- 18q11-12. Our study confirmed the loss of 8p and 10q as the two most fre- est prognosis, mainly due to difficulty of diagnosis at the early stage for cur- quent regions of loss in PC, as seen in published LOH studies, and identi- ative operation and lacking of curative therapies other than operations. To fied several regions of gain or loss not previously reported. Further inves- invent more effective methods for better diagnostic and treatment methods tigation of these regions may reveal genes that are important for the pro- for pancreatic cancer patients, it is necessary to understand its molecular gression of PC. mechanisms. We previously identified that LOH of 18q at the SMAD4 locus, along with LOHs on 17p and 12q, positively associated with poorPosters: Cancer Genetics 127 P0134. Identification of Novel Tumor-Associated Genes in type. Aminimal-tiling path of the contig presented consists of PAC clones, 11q12-q23 which have the potential of being transferred to mammalian cells as stably R. A. Kuner, E. Dahl, C. Pilarsky, T. Specht, A. O. Schmitt, B. Hinzmann, replicating episomes. This feature might facilitate the use of a functional B. Weber, I. Klaman, E. Staub, E. Klopocki, A. Bu, B. Petschke, A. Rosen- strategy by introducing PACs into tumor cells for the identification, verifica- thal tion and characterization of the tumor suppressor gene expected to be metaGen; Berlin, Germany present within SRO2. [The present work was supported by The Norwegian ruprecht.kuner@metagen.de Cancer Society and The Research Council of Norway (EF and HP), the Tumor development is characterized by chromosomal disorders which Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer and the European Molec- may lead to activation of oncogenes or loss of tumor suppressor genes. In ular Biology Organization (Grant STF#8970)]. gynecological tumors, genetic information within chromosomal region 11q12-q23 is often amplified or lost. Assuming that chromosomal P0137. Characterization of a novel trp-gene from the BWS- rearrangements in tumors cause changes in gene expression, four million WT2 critical region on chromosome 11p15.5 ESTs available in public and proprietary ESTdatabases were subjected to L. R. Brixel1, T. Enklaar1, M. Thesker1, C. Spangenberg1, S. Fees1, M. in silico expression analysis using assembled cDNAsequences (Schmitt et Higgins2, B. U. Zabel1, D. Prawitt1 al., 1999). In this first approach 600 candidate genes were identified which 1Universitaetskinderklinik; Mainz, Germany; 2Roswell Park Cancer Center; are associated with sporadic forms of gynecological tumors (Dahl et al., in Buffalo, NYUnited States preparation). Chromosomal assignment of these 600 genes localized 15 brixel@kinder.klinik.uni-mainz.de genes within 11q12-q23. To achieve an even higher coverage of tumor- Positional cloning strategies combined with comparative genome analysis associated genes for this critical chromosomal region we analyzed 968 of human chromosomal region 11p15.5 led to the isolation of a new gene STS-markers between RH13699 (11q12) and RH27416 (11q23) for of the transient receptor potential protein (TRP) gene family. Members of expression analysis as aforementioned. Using this strategy we identified a this family encode calcium channels, that can be devided into three sub- total of 69 genes which are significantly differentially expressed in gyne- groups according to their structural features. Comparison of the new tran- cological tumors. 47 of these genes have been described previously, script with the known trp genes displayed highest homologies to human whereas 22 are novel. Verifying these in silico data by Northern blot tech- TRPC7 and MLSN1, thus classifying it as a member of the l-TRP sub- nique, RNAin situ hybridization and Taqman analysis, we identified one group. The novel gene was therefore named MTR1 (= MLSN1 and TRP tumor suppressor gene candidate for breast cancer in 11q14.1 . related gene). While activation of o-TRPs and s-TRPs results in currents due to ion influx into cells after agonist stimulation (e.g. via IGF1), little is P0135.Identification of ACell Senescence Gene at 6q16.3 for known about the function of l-TRPs. However, the expression of MLSN1 Ovarian Cancer correlates with the metastatic process in melanomas, and initial studies in R. Athwal, S. Gauthami, V. K. Zhawar, N. Rane, A. K. Sandhu, G. P. Kaur C.elegans (ced-11) point to an involvement of l-TRPs in cell growth, death Fels Institute for Cancer Research; Philadelphia, PAUnited States and differentiation. As MTR1 maps to a genomic region that is linked with rathwal@unix.temple.edu Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and a variety of mostly embryonal Applying a Functional Positional approach, we have identified a genomic neoplasias (e.g. Wilmstumors, rhabdoid tumors) we currently study the clone that carries a cell senescence gene, SEN6A, for ovarian tumor cells. role of the gene in tumorigenesis. We found that increased amounts of SEN6A locus was previously identified at 6q14-21. The introduction of MTR1 mRNAare present in a significant proportion of Wilmstumors. We chromosome 6 or 6q into human (SKOV.3) and rat (ROSE199 and ROV12) are currently looking for mutations in BWS- and tumor-DNA. Further func- ovarian tumor cell lines led to the restoration of normal cell growth pheno- tional studies include the search for interacting proteins with a yeast two- types and senescence. Analysis of spontaneous revertant clones, which hybrid assay to elucidate the role of MTR1 in cellular physiology and occurred due to deletions in the donor chromosome, allowed us to map the pathogenetic processes. location of SEN6Alocus within a 1cM genetic interval at 6q16.3. Precise localization of the deletions allowed us to identify three overlapping Yeast P0138. Fine mapping and molecular characterization of the Artificial Chromosome (YAC) clones, corresponding to the smallest dele- breakpoint cluster in thyroid adenomas with 19q13.4 aberra- tion, shared among independent revertant clones. Functional testing of tions candidate YAC clones identified a YAC that restored normal cell growth M. Meiboom, V. Rippe, G. Belge, N. Drieschner, J. Bullerdiek and senescence in ovarian tumor cells. Following the library screen, we Center for Human Genetics; Bremen, Germany assembled a contig of 17 BAC clones corresponding to the complement- meiboom@uni-bremen.de ing YAC. Candidate BAC clones were tested for function by introduction Chromosomal aberrations involving 19q13.4 are the most frequent struc- into ovarian tumor cells. In these experiments two BAC clones were iden- tural alterations in follicular thyroid adenomas and hyperplasias and con- tified to carry SEN6Agene. To further define the smallest genomic region, stitute one of the most frequent specific chromosomal abnormalities in carrying SEN6A, three overlapping BACs were subcloned to generate cos- epithelial tumors at all. Recently, we had been able to establish the cDNA mid clones, each carrying a 35-50 Kb segment. Cosmid clones have been sequence and genomic structure of a KRAB zinc finger gene lying in close assembled in a contig across SEN6A locus. Experiments are currently vicinity to the breakpoint region. This gene we have tentatively designated underway to test cosmid clones for senescence activity in tumor cell lines. as RITA(Rearranged in Thyroid Adenomas). The location, type and the dif- These studies not only identify a genomic clone carrying the senescence ferent expression pattern of RITAin normal tissues (including thyroid) and gene but also demonstrate the utility of the functional approach to identify in thyroid cell lines with 19q13 aberrations make it a candidate target gene cell senescence and/ or tumor suppressor genes. for specific 19q13 alteration. While we had been able to identify part of the genomic structure of part of the gene probably including its complete open P0136. A PAC Contig Covering the Chromosome 16q22.1 reading frame the 5 part of the gene and its promoter still remain unknown. Breast Cancer Loss of Heterozygosity Region To further complete the genomic structure of RITAwe have performed PCR E. Frengen1, P. Rocca-Serra2, S. Shaposhnikov1, L. Taine3, J. Thorsen1, experiments and sequencing. RACE experiments indicate that there might A. A. El Monim3, M. Longy2, H. Prydz1, F. Dorion-Bonnet2 be at least two different transcription start sites. The results also revealed 1The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo; Oslo, Norway; 2Institut Bergoni; Bor- the existence of two nearly identical untranslated exons which apparently deaux, France; 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Pellegrin; Bordeaux, are evolved by exon duplication. We have also improved a 470 kbp high- France resolution metric EcoRI restriction cosmid/BAC contig around and within efrengen@biotek.uio.no RITAand the breakpoint cluster region by sequencing and STS mapping Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on human chromosome 16q is frequently which enabled us to restrict the breakpoint region to a region of about 150 observed both in ductal and lobular invasive breast carcinomas. We have kbp in four primary tumors and to an interval of about 25 kbp in two previ- generated a 2.8 Mb PAC contig covering the smallest region of LOH over- ously described cell lines, respectively. lap on 16q22.1 (SRO2). Two-color FISH established the contig orientation, and long-range mapping verified that the contig faithfully represents the P0139.Amplification and overexpression of PI3KC2B, a can- SRO2 region. 68 transcripts have been identified in the map based on EST didate oncogene in 1q32, in a case with low-grade glioma. screening and CpG island subcloning. One of the genes residing within M. H. Abdel-Rahman, Z. Dai, T. Prior, A. J. Yates, C. Plass, R. Krahe SRO2 is the E-cadherin gene, CDH1. This gene is known to be mutated in The Ohio State University; Columbus, OH United States lobular breast carcinomas, resulting in altered E-cadherin expression. abdel-rahman.4@osu.edu However, E-cadherin shows normal expression in most cases of ductal DNAamplification in 1q32 has been reported in a wide variety of human carcinoma, the major mammary cancer type. Thus, other genes within tumors, including high-grade gliomas. Two candidate oncogenes have 16q22.1 are expected to be involved in the development of this tumor sub- been suggested; GAC1 and MDM4. Using comparative genomic hybridiza-128 Posters: Cancer Genetics tion, we identified a DNAamplification in the 1q32.1 region as the sole evi-9, which is deregulated in murine myeloid leukemias following proviral cytogenetic abnormality in a 5-year old male with low-grade glioma. By integration. Like evi-9, there were three major isoforms of BCL11A, which restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) with AscI-EcoRV-HinfI as differed in the number of carboxy-terminal zinc fingers. Two BCL11Aiso- the restriction enzyme combination, we identified a highly enhanced RLGS forms interacted with BCL6, another highly conserved zinc finger gene fragment. Sequence and BLAST analyses identified the clone as implicated in the formation of normal germinal centers and the pathogene- PI3KC2B. Amplification of PI3KC2B was confirmed by Southern blot analy- sis of B-NHL. All three isoforms of BCL11A, like BCL6, repressed tran- sis; three-fold mRNAoverexpression relative to a normal control pool was scription. Deregulated expression of BCL11Ais thus commonly involved in determined by real-time PCR. In addition, amplification and overexpres- various lymphoid malignancies through either chromosomal translocation sion of MDM4 and GAC1, the closest telomeric flanking genes, was detect- or amplification and may transform B-cells through transcriptional repres- ed. None of an additional 21 low-grade gliomas (seven pilocytic astrocy- sion of the same set of genes involved in the control of B-cell differentia- tomas, seven astrocytomas and seven oligodendrogliomas) showed a gain tion and proliferation as BCL6. in 1q32, amplification or overexpression of PI3KCB, MDM4 and/or GAC1. Expression profiling of the low-grade glioma against cerebrum of a normal P0142. A Gene at a familial RCC-associated t(2;3)(q33;q21) control male with a cDNAmicroarray of 4,000 known genes identified sev- chromosome translocation eral genes VIM, ADD3 and ACVR2 with more than 3-fold increases in T. Druck1,J. Podolski2, T. Byrski3, S. Zajaczek3, J. Lubinski3, K. Huebner1 expression. However, more genes showed greater than 3-fold decreases 1Thomas Jefferson University; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 2University in expression, including BAF60B, TEB4, CYSC, MBP, GAPDH and synap- of Szczecin; Szczecin, Poland; 3Pomeranian Academy of Medicine; topodin. PI3KC2B acts downstream of EGFR, but until now has not been Szczecin, Poland implicated as an oncogene. EGFR-PTEN-AKTpathway is the most com- huebner@lac.jci.tju.edu monly affected pathway in gliomas. Based on our data we suggest We have studied a balanced constitutional chromosome translocation, PI3KC2B as an additional target in this pathway and a candidate oncogene t(2;3)(q33;q21), observed in lymphocytes of a Polish family in which multi- in 1q32.1 amplification. focal clear cell renal carcinoma segregates with the translocation. YAC and BAC contigs were constructed for the 2q and 3q breakpoint regions and all P0140.Deletion of part of the HMGIC locus in a lipoma with a known STSs and ESTs in these regions were mapped relative to the con- translocation t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15) leads to a new fusion tigs. The two BACs crossing the breakpoints were partially sequenced and gene a consensus sequence assembled using our sequence data, as well as I. Lemke, P. Rogalla, J. Bullerdiek Human Genome Project submissions. The chromosome 2 assembled Center for Human Genetics; Bremen, Germany sequence contained an EST, which was extended by 5 and 3 RACE. The ilemke@uni-bremen.de resulting ~1.5 kb cDNA contains two exons that are separated by the The high mobility group protein gene HMGIC has been found to be translocation. By RTPCR, low level expression was detected in ovary, fetal rearranged in a variety of human benign solid tumors. Often, these kidney, fetal thymus and fetal skeletal muscle. An ~11 kDa protein, as pre- rearrangements lead to fusion genes of which that between HMGIC and dicted by the amino acid sequence, was detected by in vitro transcription LPPunderlying the translocation t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15) is by far the most and translation. Bacterial and mammalian expression vectors have been common. The expression of the HMGIC-LPPtranscript in all tumors with constructed and transfections of mammalian cells will be described. the t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15) and the absence of the reciprocal LPP-HMGIC fusion transcript has lead to the conclusion that only the former fusion is of P0143. Analysis of the human chromosome 13 region q14.3 functional significance in terms of tumor development. In this study we often deleted in human malignancies; unusual distribution of have analysed in more detail a lipoma with a t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15). RT- the repeats and new expressed sequences. PCR confirmed the expression of the HMGIC-LPPfusion transcript. FISH T. V. Tyazelova1, A. V. Baranova1, D. V. Ivanov1, B. I. Kapanadze2, T. A. experiments using different probes derived from the HMGIC gene and its Borodina1, M. Y. Skoblov1, A. A. Pestova1, S. Einhorn2, D. Grander2, O. 3 vicinity showed the absence of FISH signals on the derivative chromo- Sangfeldt2, N. K. Yankovsky1 some 3 indicating that the t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15) was accompanied by a 1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; large genomic deletion of about 170 kb. 3-RACE-PCR experiments 2Karolinska Institutet and Hospital; Stockholm, Sweden revealed the presence of a new fusion gene composed of exons 1-6 of baranova@vigg.ru LPPand the last two exons of an as yet unknown gene located in 12q15. Human chromosome 13q14.3 region is often rearranged in a spectrum of To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study showing that the sim- human malignancies particulary B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemias ple translocation t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15) results in a large deletion of DNA (BCLL), non-Hodgkins lymphomas, multiple myelomas, prostatic carcino- which may explain the lack of LPP-HMGIC fusion transcripts in most lipo- mas. Detailed delineation of the minimally deleted regions (MDRs) in BCLL mas with a t(3;12) analysed so far. In addition, the detection of a new patients were conducted by many research groups including our own. No fusion transcript beside the HMGIC-LPP fusion transcript indicate that clear overlaps between MDRs found by different researchers were found, fusions involving the part of LPPinvolving exons 1-6 may play an as yet although all deleteion are clustreed between D13S1168 and D13S25 STS- underestimated role in tumors with the t(3;12)(q27-28;q14-15). markers. Two candidate genes DLEU1 and DLEU2 were cloned from the 10-kb MDR found by us, but no point mutations in them were detected in P0141. Discovery Of The Bcl11a Gene Family By Its Involve- more than 150 BCLLpatients. We have build a 620-kb cosmid contig that ment In The Pathogenesis Of Malignant Lymphoma overlaps D13S1168-D13S25 region, map 8 STS-markers on this contig R. Siebert1, T. Sonoki2, E. Satterwhite3, T. G. Willis2, R. Nowak2, E. L. and sequence 17-kb area encompassing 10-kb MDR. We have searched Arriola2, H. Liu3, L. Harder1, S. Gesk1, D. Steinemann1, H. P. Price2, D. G. GenBank with STS-markers and revealed several BAC sequences that are Oscier4, B. Schlegelberger1, P. W. Tucker3, M. J. S. Dyer2 partially cover the region of interest. Sequence analysis reveal that Alu- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Kiel; Kiel, Germany; 2Institute repeats and putative gene fragments are distributed unequally; centromer- of Cancer Research; Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom; 3Molecular Genetics ic flank is rich in Alu (24,8%) and in putative candidate genes (WI-9598, and Microbiology, University of Texas; Austin, TX United States; 4Royal RFP2, DLEU1, DLEU2 and others), telomeric flank centered around STS- Bournemouth Hospital; Bournemouth, Hampshire, United Kingdom marker GCT16C05 is extremely Alu-poor (only 4,1%) and contains only rsiebert@medgen.uni-kiel.de two expressed sequences. One of them consists of three exons divided by Mature B-cell malignancies are characterized by chromosomal transloca- introns 19366 and 96661 nt in legth. This exons can represent a putative tions involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus on chromosome extremely large gene rearranged or interstitially deleted in BCLL. Another 14q32.3, resulting in deregulated expression of different oncogenes. Chro- interesting feature of the region is unusual abundance of the Alu subfami- mosomal translocation t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) is a rare but recurrent event in B- ly Y- the youngest Alu, that is still capable to propagation. cell malignancies, whereas gains and amplifications of chromosome 2p13 are seen not only in mediastinal and about 20% of extranodal B-cell non- P0144.Atranscript map of the human chromosome 12p12.3 Hodgkins lymphomas (B-NHL) but also in up to 50% of Hodgkins disease tumor suppressor locus (HD). We have identified a zinc finger gene (BCL11A) through molecular D. Sinnett, A. Montpetit, N. Trudel analysis of 4 cases of clinically aggressive CLL with t(2;14)(p13;q32.3) Hpital Sainte-Justine; Montreal, PQ Canada using long-distance inverse PCR methods. This gene is also commonly sinnettd@ere.umontreal.ca targeted in B-NHLand HD with 2p13 amplifications. BCL11Awas identical Allellic loss of the chromosome 12p is a frequent event in childhood acute within its zinc finger motifs to another gene (BCL11B) on chromosome lymphoblastic leukemia. This region was also found deleted in several 14q32.1 and was highly conserved, being 95% identical to mouse, chick- other hematological malignancies as well as a variety of solid tumors sug- en and Xenopus homologues. BCL11Ais the human homologue of mouse gesting the presence of a tumor suppressor gene. The chromosomalPosters: Cancer Genetics 129 region containing this suppressor locus was narrowed down to a ~750kb Porto, Portugal; Dept. Medical Genetics, University of Groningen; Gronin- interval delimited by D12S89 and D12S358. Since no known candidate gen, The Netherlands; 2Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da gene was found, we initiated the construction of a detailed transcription Universidade do Porto; Porto, Portugal; 3Dept. Medical Genetics, Universi- map focusing on a contig of 4 overlapping BACs. Towards this goal we ty of Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands applied a strategy integrating several complementary approaches; (1) beatriz.carvalho@ipatimup.pt Computer-based data mining tools applied to the existing genomic Deletions on chromosome 6 have been reported in different types of can- sequence (750 kb) derived form the BAC contig; (2) Exon amplification and cer. In gastric cancer two smallest regions of overlap (SRO) have been EST resources to identify putative cDNAs; (3) Determination of general identified  one interstitial (6q16.3-q23.1) and one distal (6q26-q27). expression pattern by RT-PCR and Northern blotting; (4) Comparative Recently we delimited the interstitial SRO to a region of 2 cM. To facilitate genomic analysis with distant vertebrate species such as Fugu rubripes a search for genes in this region we assembled a YAC contig that covered and Tetraodon nigroviridis. This transcript mapping strategy has identified the SRO. We applied a new strategy to analyse the gene content of the 42 potential transcription units, including 2 known genes, 5 new genes and region, based on the assumption that many of the human genes present 35 Unigene entries. The region contains also 6 pseudogenes. This map on the YACs may be expressed in the yeast strain. Thus, in a cDNAsub- should facilitate subsequent effort to characterize the candidate genes. traction protocol using two yeast strains containing different YACs it can be This study is a good illustration of how the integration of genome-based expected that the resulting pool of differentially expressed cDNAs will be approaches facilitates the identification of genes in large interval. enriched for the genes encoded by the human inserts of the YACs. By sub- tracting different YACs from the 2-cM region, we isolated 12 human spe- P0145. Cloning of A Cell Senescence Gene at 16q24.3 That cific cDNAclones, of which 8 could be confirmed to originate from 6q16.3- Reverses the Immortal Tumor Phenotype q23 based on sequence analysis. The remaining 4 clones specifically G. P. Kaur, R. Athwal hybridised to the YAC from which they originated. Northern analyses have Fels Institute for Cancer Research; Philadelphia, PAUnited States shown so far, that 4 out of the 12 cDNAclones have expression in differ- pkaur001@unix.temple.edu ent tissues, including stomach. Escape from senescence has been postulated to be a prerequisite for pro- gressive tumor growth. Cells cultured from many tumors can proliferate P0148.Use of Genetic Models in Antimutagenicity Assay indefinitely, while normal diploid cells become senescent after defined M. Afzal, G. Shadab, M. S. Ahmad, A. Huda, M. E. Ahmad number of generations. Cellular senescence is expressed as a dominant Section of Genetics, Department of Zoology, AMU; Aligarh, India phenotype over immortal cell growth. We have applied a functional-posi- hep_amu@usa.net tional approach to map and isolate human genes that induce senescence Genotoxicity assay of a number of synthetic as well as natural products of in immortal tumor cell lines. Acell senescence gene, SEN16, identified on human use are increasingly being taken to screen their qualitative as well chromosome 16 by microcell mediated chromosome transfer into immortal as quantitative effect on various test systems. This has resulted into mammary tumor cells, has been mapped within a genetic interval of 3-7cM searching antimutagenicity and anticarcinogenicity principles to be used as at 16q24.3 (Reddy et al.1999, Oncogene 18;5100-5107). Six yeast artifi- protective measures against harmful effects of the essential chemicals. cial clones corresponding to candidate locus were identified and tested for The list includes antioxidants, scarvengers of free oxygen radicals and functional complementation of immortal phenotype by introducing into MRO species generated in the cellular metabolism. Recent genetic mod- mammary tumor cells. These studies led to the identification of a 360 kb els for antimutagenicity assay include both prokaryotic and eukaryotic sys- YAC (Reddy et al. 2000, Oncogene 19;217-222) In order to construct a tems and cell lines, especially with human tissue culture technique and use high-resolution map of the candidate region carrying the senescence gene, of recombinant DNAtechnology. Taking some steroidal pharmaceutics as a human BAC library was screened with DNAmarkers to obtain relevant mutagens, we have studied synergistic as well as antagonistic action of BAC clones, which were assembled in a contig based upon PCR analysis. Vitamins of B complex, ascorbic acid, super oxide dismutase and certain Some selected BAC clones were retrofitted with a selectable marker and phenolics of plant origin. Metabolic activation system (S9 mix) was used to introduced into human and rat mammary tumor cells for functional com- enhance mutagenicity. Clastogeny, SEC and cell-cycle kinetics profiles plementation. These results identified a 85 kb BAC clone that carries the suggest amelioration of genotoxic damage in human lymphocytes and in senescence gene. In following experiments, we isolated expressed mice bone marrow cells. Findings will be discussed. sequences from the complementing BAC clone by exon trapping. Twelve exons were identified and their sequence comparison with databases has P0149.Research About Heritability Of Lung Cancer identified eight partial cDNAclones. Experiments are in progress to deter- D. C. T. D. Tatiana mine the expression of these clones in tumor cell lines. In conclusion, we National Institute V.Babesfor Pathology and Biomedical Research; have mapped a senescence gene to a 85kb genomic clone and identified Bucharest, United States expressed sequences from this clone. gentica@vbabes.ro In the framework of a larger research progect concering the Risck Factors P0146. Isolation of a novel candidate oncogene within a fre- in Lung Cancerwe obtained data about family history of the quently amplified region at 3q26 in ovarian cancer subjects.There has been interviewed 132 patients with lung cancer and X. Guan1, J. Sham1, T. Tang1, Y. Fang2, K. Huo3, J. Yang4 200 without cancer constituting the control group.We obtaind information 1The University of Hong Kong; Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Adminis- about 905 relatives of probands and about 930 relatives from the controls trative Region of China; 2Sun Yet-Sen University of Medical Sciences; group.Using the Falconers formula we calculated the heritability wich has Guangzhou, China; 3Fudan University; Shanghai, China; 4The University a value 14%+_ 1.98. This value indicated reduced implication of heredo- of Arizona; Tucson, AZ United States familial factors in lung cancer ethiopathogeny being in concordance with xyguan@hkucc.hku.hk data form the literature.The calculation of the heritability proves to be prop- Amplification of 3q25-q26 is one of the most frequent chromosomal alter- er instrument for quantification in genetic factors in the common desease. ations in human ovarian carcinoma. A chromosome microdissectionhybrid selection method was applied to isolate transcribed P0150.Polymorphism of glutathione S-transferase M1 gene in sequences from a primary ovarian cancer containing high-copy-number woman with mastopathy and breast cancer from Bashkor- amplification of 3q25-q26 using 3q26 band-specific DNAs generated by tostan. chromosome microdissection. Using this method, we have isolated a novel N. Eliseeva,Z. Soultanaeva, O. Grinchuk, T. Victorova, E. Khusnutdinova candidate oncogene eIF-5A2 (eukaryotic initiation factor 5A2). EIF-5A2 Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation shares 82% identity of amino acid sequence with eIF-5Aincluding the min- ekkh@anrb.ru imum domain needed for eIF-5Amaturation by hypusine modification at The mastopathy and breast cancer are disgormonal hyperplastic process lysine-50 residue. Amplification and overexpression of eIF-5A2 was fre- in lactic gland. A defining reason of progressing of a mastopathy and quently detected in primary ovarian cancers and ovarian cancer cell lines. breast cancer are neuro-humoral factor stipulated by a stress, depression, The proliferation-related function of eIF-5Asupports that eIF-5A2is acan- neurosis and environmental factors. As a rule, mastopathy and breast can- didateoncogenerelated to the development of ovarian cancer. cer suffer the women of age from 25 till 45 years. Anumber of molecular- genetic studies have been conducted to evaluate associations between P0147. Isolating genes from the interstitial SRO on the long GSTM1 polymorphism and diseases. Polymorphisms at the glutathione S- arm of chromosome 6 in gastric carcinoma by means of sup- transferase M1 (GSTM1) gene locus have attracted much interest because pression subtractive hybridisation the homozygous condition on GSTM1-deletion (GSTM1 0/0) seems to B. Carvalho1, R. Seruca2, C. H. C. M. Buys3, K. Kok3 modify the risk for different types of cancer, allergy and other diseases. By 1Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto; PCR-method polimorphism of GSTM1 gene in 15 patients with mastopa-130 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics thy and 17 with breast cancer was carried out. As control group 45 healthy leukemic cells and/or poor quality of chromosomal preparations. Therefore woman from Bashkortostan were analysed. It was established, that the fre- we use for assessment of hyperdiploidy double-color interphase FISH (I- quency of GSTM1(0/0) genotype for mastopathy patients was 0,80 and FISH) with different satellite and/or locus specific probes (VYSIS) for 10 0,58 for brest cancer patients, whereas in control group it has constituted chromosomes most commonly gained in hyperdiploid cells. According to 0,49. The differences between womans with mastopathy and control group molecular-cytogenetics results we divided patients into several subgroups were significant (X2 =20,99; p<0,001). with different prognosis. During the last 3 years we examined by I-FISH prospectively or retrospectively 69 children (46 boys, 23 girls; mean age P0151. The Effect of Glutathione S-Transferase M1 (GSTM1) 8,4 years) with ALL. Among them we found 29 (42%) with high hyper- and Glutathione S-Transferase T1 (GSTT1) Polymorphisms on diploidy (>50 chromosomes), 11 (16%) with low hyperdiploidy (47-50 chro- Leukemia mosomes), 2 (2,9%) with near triploidy/tetraploidy and 4 (5,8%) with N. Ozten1, H. G. Karabulut2, A. Sunguroglu1, I. Bokesoy2 unspecified hyperdiploidy. In 23 (33,3%) of patients hyperdiploidy was not 1Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology; ascertained. In all patients we analysed at least 200 interphase nuclei and Ankara, Turkey; 2Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of the extent of hyperdiploid clones was 2,5  95%. (Cut-off level 2,5% was Medical Genetics; Ankara, Turkey tested on controls). Small clones under 10% were detected in 17 (24,6%) karabul@dialup.ankara.edu.tr of patients. In 4 cases where the presence of chromosomal rearrange- GST (glutathione S-transferase) genes (GSTs) are defined as a gene ments was suspected by G-banding mFISH with probes and isis software superfamily including four gene families, , ?, p and ? namely. It is thought from METASYSTEMS was performed. Significance of small side clones that carcinogenesis is associated with the absence of functional GSTM1 with hidden hyperdiploidy detected by I-FISH and presence of chromoso- and GSTT1 which leads to a deficit in detoxification of carcinogens. In this mal rearrangements for patients prognosis will be discussed. This work study, the effect of GST polymorphism on leukemia was investigated. was supported by grant IGAMZ CR 4744-3 and GACR 302-98-0071 Patients diagnosed with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) and Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) between P0154.ANovel Translocation , t(11;17)(p15;q21), in a Putative 18 - 70 years of age consisted of 52 males (55.3%) and 42 females Case of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia (47.2%) were included in the study. In control group healty 42 males A. A. Al Saadi1, I. Jaiyesimi2, J. C. Mattson3 (47.2%) and 47 females (52.8%) at the same age were studied. PCR 1Div. of Cytogenetics, Dept. of Anatomic Pathology, William Beaumont analysis were performed with GSTT1 and GSTM1 specific primers on Hospital; Royal Oak, MI United States; 2Div. of Hematology/Oncology, genomic DNAobtained from peripheral blood samples from both patient William Beaumont Hospital; Royal Oak, MI United States; 3Div. of and control group after obtaining their informed consent. GSTT1 and Hematopathology, Dept. of Clinical Pathology, William Beaumont Hospital; GSTM1 genotypes were determined by agarose gel electrophoresis of Royal Oak, MI United States PCR products. GSTM1 null genotype was seen in 13 cases of 38 AML alsaadi@beaumont.edu patients (34.2%), 11 cases of 22 ALLpatients (50%), 10 cases of 23 CML Acute promyelogenous leukemia (APL) is a clinical subtype of acute myel- patients (42.5%) compared to 37 cases in control group. There was no ogenous leukemia (AML) characterized by a translocation involving the association for GSTM1 null genotype between AML, ALL, CMLand control RARa gene on 17q12-21, and five other genes, reported to date; PMLat groups. GSTT1 null genotype was seen in 11 cases of 38 AMLpatients 15q21, RARa gene; PMLat 15q21, PMZLat 11q23, NuMAat 11q13, NPM (28.9%), 7 cases of 22 ALLpatients (31.8%), 6 cases of 23 CMLpatients at 5q35, and STAT5b. We report an unusual case of AMLin a 48 year old (26.1%) compared to control group in which no GSTT1 null genotype was woman who had ecchymoses, a high white count (29.8 bil/L) with 55% observed. A significantly higher incidance of GSTT1 null genotype was myeloblasts, anemia (Hb 8.9 gm/dL), and thrombocytopenia (65 bil/L). seen in both total patient group and ALL, AML, CMLsubgroups when com- With no coagulopathy at presentation. Marrow examination revealed pared to control. On the other hand, no significant correlation were replacement of normal marrow by leukemic blasts with reniform nuclei and observed in the incidence of GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotype with smok- cytoplasmic granulation, Auer bodies, but without increased hypergranular ing, family history, sex and age parameters in patient group. To our knowl- promyelocytes. Avariant APL(M3v) was suspected but interphase FISH, edge, this is the first study in which GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms using a PML/RARa probe, failed to reveal the classic t(15;17). The patient were investigated in CMLpatients and we found an association between received induction chemotherapy with Idarubicin and Ara C achieving a GSTT1 null genotype and leukemia whereas no association could be complete remission after two courses. She was then treated with high- obtained for GSTM1 null genotype. dose Ara C for 4 cycles as consolidation followed by maintenance therapy with Daunorubicin and Ara C. She did well for 21 months, then presented P0152. Heterochromatin variants and their association with with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. A repeat marrow showed leukemia relapsed leukemia. She was reinduced with Mitoxantrone, Ara C, and A. Movaffagh Etoposide. Allogenic transplantation is planned after complete remission. Department of Human Genetics, Shahid Beheshti Medical University; At presentation and at relapse the patient had a unique t(11;17)(p15;q21). Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran Further FISH studies using RARa dual color rearrangement probe docu- ms_sheikhan@hotmail.com mented that the entire RARa gene was translocated to 11p15 in Astudy of hromatin regins in chromosome 1, 9, and 16 was performed on metaphases. This novel translocation, t(11;17)(p15;q21), has not been pre- peripheral blood and heteroc bone marrow frome 10 normal individuals viously reported in either classic or variant APL. and 16 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and actue nonlym- phocytic leukemia (ANLL) was studied. The results showed that there was P0155.Deletion of the Long Arm of Chromosome 15 with an significant differences in chromosome 1 and 9 between the CMLpatients Extra Copy of the Deleted Chromosome. ARare Abnormality p < 0.01 and the nomal individuals employed as controls . Analysis of the In Myelodysplastic Syndrome Transforming to AML. inversion in chromosomes 1 , 9 and 16 of CMLpatients and control groups K. J. Saunders, B. Czepulkowski, K. Williams, M. Aldouri, N. Telford in the present study found significant increases in partial and total inver- Rayne Institute; London, United Kingdom sions in CMLpatients . the results did not show increases in C  band het- karensaundrs@hotmail.com erochromatin variants in chromosomes 1,9 and 16 ANLL patients com- We report on two patients with MDS transforming to AMLwhich, after chro- pared to controls. However, frequency of complete inversion was noticed mosome analysis were found to have an interstitial deletion of the long arm to be significantly higher p < 0.05 in ANLLpatients compared with controls. of one chromosome 15 with an extra copy of the deleted chromosome. Deletion of chromosome 15 is an unusual abnormality in haematological P0153. Detection of hyperdiploidy in childhood acute lym- malignancies and after a thorough search of the literature we were only phoblastic leukemia (ALL) by FISH methods able to find one other reported case. Asearch of the Chromosome Abnor- L. Sindelarova1, Z. Zemanova1, J. Brezinova2, S. Kurkova2, P. Smisek3, J. mality Database, Oxford UK (CAD) listed a second case. However, both of Stary3, K. Michalova1 these cases have only one copy of the deleted chromosome 15. This is, 13rd Medical Department, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Fac- therefore, the first report of the duplication of a deleted chromosome 15. ulty of Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Institute of Hematol- We compare our cases with the other two recorded cases in order to deter- ogy and Blood Transfusion; Prague, Czech Republic; 32nd Pediatric mine whether a trend exists which may associate this chromosome abnor- Department, Faculty Hospital Motol; Prague, Czech Republic mality with a particular disease type and prognosis. lsindel@vfn.cz Early detection of hyperdiploid clones is of great significance in diagnostic P0156. A highly unusual case of Acute Myleloid Leukemia and prognostic evaluation of children with ALL. However, conventional (AML) M5a; Atypical clinical and cytogenetic findings. cytogenetic analyses are often hampered by a low yield of dividing H. C. Rossbach1, L. Glaskova1, D. P. Dumont2, W. Chamizo2, J. Barbosa2,Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics 131 M. J. Sutcliffe3 birgitte.preiss@ouh.dk 1All Childrens Hospital; St. Petersburg, FLUnited States; 2All Childrens Chromosomal abnormalities are often difficult to characterize completely in Hospital; ST PETERSBURG, FL United States; 3All Childrens hematologic neoplasia. In acute myeloid leukemia (AML) we find that 37% Hospital/Univ. of South Florida; St. Petersburg, FLUnited States of the patients with clonal chromosome aberrations show an incomplete rossbach@allkids.org karyotype by G-banding. As clonal chromosome aberrations are of inde- A3 yr old patient presented with a two-week history of malaise, fatigue, pendent prognostic significance, and karyotype analysis in AMLis used as intermittent low grade fever, bruising and leg pain. He developed massive an up-front investigation for treatment stratification in our institution, it was bilateral proptosis with chloromas of the frontal cranial bones (reminiscent important to obtain a complete karyotype. By single or oligotarget FISH it of metastatic neuroblastoma) and gingival hyperplasia. The clinical and will be impossible to characterize but a few cases, money and amount of pathological diagnosis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia subtype 5a suggested material being the limiting factor. With a success rate (obtainment of the non-random chromosome abnormality associated with AMLM5a, i.e. mitoses) of nearly 100% in AML, multitarget FISH becomes an attractive t(9;11)(p21-22;q23). Translocation (9;11), however, was not observed. solution as an adjuvant diagnostic tool. From November 1, 1997 till Cytogenetic analysis revealed a pseudodiploid karyotype involving two November 1, 2000 we investigated 95 cases of AML. M/F ratio 0.78, medi- inversions within one copy of chromosome 11. The clone, comprising the an age 66 years (16-88 years). By SKYthe abnormal clones were detect- majority of cells analyzed, also showed duplication 1q21q32. The remain- ed in all cases but 4 (few abnormal G-band mitoses). The SKYextended ing 7/20 cells showed a normal karyotype. Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridiza- or confirmed the G-band findings in 96%. All marker chromosomes, except tion (FISH) analyses using probe CCND1 for the 11q13 locus and the MLL 3, were characterized. Cryptic translocations (translocations not suspected probe at 11q23 clearly demonstrated the double rearrangement confirming from the G-band karyotype) were found in 26 cases. The chromosomes the GTG banding result of pericentric inv(11)(p13q13) and paracentric most often involved in G-band and SKYaberrations, respectively, were; #5, inv(11)(q13q25). To our knowledge, the phenomenon of two inversions #21, #7, #8, #17 and #5, #8, #7, #17, #21 in descending order. We find within one chromosome has not been previously described. The 11q dele- SKYa powerful adjuvant diagnostic tool that, in contrast to molecular bio- tion or translocation typically associated with M5 clusters around two logical techniques, does not compromise one of the advantages of kary- breakpoint regions, 11q23-24 and 11q13-14. Two of three breakpoints in otyping techniques, the analysis of the entire genome in one investigation. this case, however, are atypical. The 11q25 band is not specifically Data to be presented will be updated. described in leukemia while the 11p13 band is usually associated with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). In summary, although this patient P0159. Prognostic impact of cytogenetics in untreated AML has chromosome 11 rearrangements, the specific breakpoints and the patients aged 16-60 years; preliminary results of the random- double inversion have not been previously described. The significance of ized AML-10 phase III trial of the EORTC and GIMEMA this complex karyotype is reviewed in the context of the complicated clini- Leukemia Groups cal course. A. Hagemeijer1, S. Suciu2, G. Solbu2, S. Bhola3, M. Mancini4, A. Bern- heim5, P. Rodts2, P. Fazi4, R. Willemze6, F. Mandelli4, R. Zittoun7, T. de P0157. Cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and molecular Witte8 genetic investigations in 17 patients with AML or MDS and 1Center for Human Genetics; Leuven, Belgium; 2EORTC Data Center; amplification of the MLLgene Brussels, Belgium; 3Department of Clinical Cytogenetics; Leiden, The B. Streubel1, C. Schoch2, H. Karlic3, G. Mittterbauer4, K. Lechner5, T. Netherlands; 4Department of Human Biopathology and Hematology, Uni- Bchner6, C. Fonatsch1 versity la Sapienze; Rome, Italy; 5Cytogenetic Laboratory; Villejuif, France; 1Institut fuer Medizinische Biologie; Vienna, Austria; 2Medizinische Klinik 6Department of Hematology; Leiden, The Netherlands; 7Htel-Dieu; Paris, III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilians University; Munich, Ger- France; 8Department of Hematology; Nijmegen, The Netherlands many; 33. Medizinische Abteilung des Hanusch-Krankenhauses; Vienna, Anne.Hagemeijer@med.kuleuven.ac;be Austria; 4Medizinische und Chemische Labordiagnostik; Vienna, Austria; The AML10 protocol is a randomized study of induction and intensive con- 5Department of Internal Medicine I; Vienna, Austria; 6Abteilung fr Innere solidation followed by stem cell transplantation, allogeneic or autologous. Medizin A, Westflische-Wilhelms-Universitt; Muenster, Germany All FAB types except M3, were eligible. Atotal of 2,157 pts were included, berthold.streubel@univie.ac.at 915 by EORTC (E) and 1,242 by GIMEMA(G) members. Cytogenetics at Chromosome aberrations involving the MLLgene located in 11q23 are fre- diagnosis was peer-reviewed. Excluding unknowns (43 E, 338 G), not quently observed in acute leukemias. The aberrations mainly consist of done (37 E, 148 G), failure or insufficient mitoses (150 E, 353 G), valid data translocations with a variety of partner chromosomes. The amplification of were obtained for 1088 patients (pts) (685 E (75%) and 403 G (32%)). MLL has been described recently only in a few patients. We report 17 1,038 pts were evaluable for response; 402 (39%) had a normal karyotype patients with MLLamplification suspected by G-banding and confirmed by (>= 20 mitoses) and 636 (61%) an abnormal one. Among abnormal cases, FISH analysis. Twelve patients had the diagnosis de novo acute myeloid the following changes were found; t(8;21) (15 %), inv(16) (15%), translo- leukemia (AML), one patient had a de novo myelodysplastic syndrome cation 11q23/MLL(7%), t(9;11) (3%), +8 (15%), -7 (8%), -5 (4%), 7q- (5%), (MDS), one a secondary AMLafter MDS, and three patients suffered from 5q- (4%), abnormalities of 3q (7%), t(9;22) (3%), del(12p) (2.5 %). Atotal secondary AML/MDS after genotoxic treatment. Eight patients presented of 111 (17.5%) pts had a complex karyotypes (> 3 aberrations), half of MLLamplification on long uniformly stained regions, 6 patients within ring them with aberrations of chromosomes 5 and 7. Overall survival (OS) rate chromosomes, two patients on double-minute chromosomes, and one at 3 yrs was 40%. The Coxs model showed that the cytogenetic findings patient in form of long uniformly stained regions as well as in ring chromo- were the strongest independent prognostic factor, followed by age and somes. In all patients FISH analysis with two-colour probes for the 5 WBC. Pts with t(8;21) and inv(16) had the best outcome; OS rate of 60%. region and the 3 region of MLLshowed a cluster consisting of multiple The worst outcome was related to -7, -5, 12p- and t(9;22), followed by hybridization spots of both probes. Southern blot analysis of four patients t(11q23) and 7q-. Additional analyses identified cytogenetic subgroups and with a probe spanning the breakpoint cluster region of MLLdid not reveal allowed refined assessment of reason for treatment failure. In conclusion, any rearrangements. To explore the expression of MLL we performed karyotype appears as the strongest independent prognostic factor for out- semi-quantitative RT-PCR and real-time RT-PCR in 11 of our 17 patients. come. In comparsion to the relative levels of MLL expression of bone marrow cells from healthy volunteers and AMLpatients without 11q23 rearrange- P0160.Analysis of Men1 Gene in AMLby Application of FISH ment the 11 patients wih MLLamplification did not show an overexpression Technique of MLL. Our based on Southern bolt analysis using only a probe spanning H. Acar1, M. Kaynak1, S. Yildirim1, T. Cora1, D. A. Largaespada2 the breakpoint cluster region of MLLsuggest that the amplification of 11q23 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Medical Faculty; does not involve a rearranged copy of the MLL gene. As our RT-PCR Konya, Turkey; 2Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, results did not show high level expression of MLLit could be speculated Cancer Center, University of Minnesota; Minneapolis, MN United States that the MLLpromoter and enhancer sequences - which have yet to be yaseminsena@hotmail.com identified and characterized - may not be amplified with the coding Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a malignant disease which effects imma- sequence. ture or undifferentiated myeloid cells and is characterised by their accu- mulation in bone marrow and pheripherial blood. It has different genetic P0158. Spectral Karyotyping (SKY) in Acute Myeloid abnormalities involving numarical and structural anomalies of chromosome Leukemia. 11. Recently, a tumor suppressor gene, the multiple endocrine neoplasia B. Preiss, G. Kerndrup type 1 gene (Men1) was cloned and mapped to chromosome 11q13. Muta- Department of Pathology - Chromosome Laboratory, Odense University tions of the Men1 tumor suppressor gene cause the multiple endocrine Hospital; 5000 Odense C, Denmark neoplasia type 1 (Men1) syndrome in humans, and they are involved in a132 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics variety of sporadic human tumors. To assess the potential involvement of hematological malignancies, in particular in myelodysplastic syndromes this gene in the patogenesis of myloid leukemia, we analysed the Men1 (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). The size and position of delet- deletions in myeloid leukemias. This was achieved by using fluorescence ed segment vary among patients but band 5q31 is commonly deleted in in situ hybridization with Men1 cosmid gene probe in interphase most of them. Although del(5q) sometimes occurs as a sole chromosomal nuclei.With this technique reliably detected the Men1 gene in interphase abnormality, more often it is present with additional chromosomal changes. nuclei of myeloid leukemias. *This study was supported by Selcuk Univer- On the contrary, translocations of 5q were found to be rather sporadic sity Research Fund events in MDS. In our study we followed 39 patients (29 men, 10 women, average age 60,6 years) with MDS/AML with deletion 5q and complex P0161.Specific FISH screening assays for MLL/11q23 translo- chromosomal rearrangements by FISH methods. In the first group of cations patients (9) whole chromosomal painting probes (WCP) were used to S. Strehl1, M. Knig1, M. Reichel2, R. Marschalek3, O. A. Haas1,4 determine the chromosomal partners in translocations. In the second 1CCRI, Childrens Cancer Research Institute; Vienna, Austria; 2Depart- group (30 patients) FISH with 5q31 locus specific probe confirmed deletion ment of Genetics; University of Erlangen, Germany; 3Institute of Pharma- of this chromosomal region in all cases except one and we suspect 5q31 ceutical Biology; University of Frankfurt/Main, Germany; 4LBICD, Ludwig as a primary cytogenetic lesion. We were able to detect chromosomal Boltzmann-Institute for Cytogenetic Diagnosis; Vienna, Austria instability of deleted chromosome 5q by FISH with WCPprobes and mul- strehl@ccri.univie.ac.at ticolor FISH (mFISH) using multicolor probes specific for all chromosomes. Rearrangements of the MLL gene on chromosome 11q23 account for mFISH revealed cryptic aberrations; reciprocal and terminal translocations approximately 5-10% of acquired karyotype abnormalities encountered in and small insertions to various chromosomal partners (chromosome 7 as children and adults with acute lymphoblastic, acute myeloblastic, poorly the most frequent), fragmentations of deleted long arms of chromosome 5 differentiated or biphenotypic leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes. was also frequently found. In all patients complex rearrangements of 5q To date, at least 40 different 11q23 translocations have been determined were connected with poor clinical outcome. This work was supported by cytogenetically and at least 25 MLL fusion partner genes have been grant GACR 302/98/0071 and CEZ J 13 98 111100004 M? MTCR. cloned. Rapid detection of MLLgene translocations at diagnosis is of clin- ical significance and can be easily accomplished by a recently developed P0164. Complex translocation between the two homologue dual-color FISH method that allows the detection of MLL/11q23 rearrange- chromosomes 5 in CML- characterization of the aberration by ments in metaphase and interphase nuclei even in cases with 3 MLLdele- multicolor banding (MCB) tions. This assay is appropriate for the analysis of MLLinvolvement, how- K. Mrasek1, A. Heller1, H. Starke1, V. Trifonov2, N. Rubtsov2, U. Wedding3, ever, detection of the involved fusion partner gene is limited to samples I. F. Loncarevic1, C. Bleck1, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 where metaphases are available, and impossible in cases with 3 MLL 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute deletions. We have adapted this FISH assay for the detection of specific of Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation; 3Clinic of translocations involving different MLLpartners. Using various gene locus- Internal Medicine; Jena, Germany specific BAC clones in combination with the MLLprobes we have already i8lith@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de established FISH assays for the detection of translocation partners We report on a patient with a clinically diagnosed Philadelphia negative AF4(4q21), AF6(6q27), AF17(17q21), and MSF(17q25), and the develop- chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) with a so far unrecorded complex ment of further assays for AF9(9p22), AF10(10p12) and other MLLpart- translocation event between the two homologue chromosomes 5. At the ners is under way. In general, the FISH probes are set up in a way that spe- GTG-band level the karyotype was normal, apart from an enlarged chro- cific translocations result in two fusion signals and in one fusion signal in mosome 5 and an extremely shortened second chromosome 5. Both deriv- case of a 3 MLL deletion in metaphase and interphase nuclei. These ative chromosomes 5 consisted exclusively of #5 derived material as assays will facilitate studies of specific translocations by interphase FISH. proven by 24-color FISH. To characterize the complex aberration in more detail the multicolor banding (MCB) technique using a chromosome 5 spe- P0162. Interphase Fish Assay For The Analysis Of Chromo- cific probe set was applied. Using this DNAbased high resolution banding some Breakpoints In 3q21 In Myeloid Leukemia procedure, the karyotype could be described as 46,XX,del(5)(pter- R. Wieser1, U. Schreiner1, M. Aytekin1, H. Pirc-Danoewinata2, H. Rieder3, >q12;;q33->qter),ins(5)(pter->q15;;q12->q21;;q21->qter) [see Figure]. In C. Fonatsch1 consequence, the aberration leads to a partial deletion of the long arm of 1Institut fuer Medizinische Biologie; Wien, Austria; 2CCRI, St. Anna Kinder- chromosome 5; del(5)(q21q33), which would not have been identified spital; Wien, Austria; 3Institut fr Klinische Genetik, Klinikum der Philipps- using conventional banding techniques or 24-color FISH. Even though 5q- Universitt; Marburg, Germany is a frequent finding in cases with MDS, 25% of MDS cases have a dele- rotraud.wieser@univie.ac.at tion in the long arm of chromosome 5, up to now 5q deletions are Chromosome aberrations affecting band 3q21, namely, the inv(3)(q21q26), described in only 2 cases with Ph-positive CML. In summary, our results the t(3;3)(q21;q26), and the t(1;3)(p36;q21), are associated with together with the data from the literature indicate, that the long arm of chro- megakaryocytic dysplasia, normal or elevated platelet counts, and a par- mosome 5 - especially the region 5q33 - is not only frequently involved in ticularly unfavourable prognosis for the affected patients due to poor rearrangements in MDS, but are also of importance for a small subset of responsiveness to chemotherapy. Their diagnosis is therefore of great clin- CMLpatients. Acknowledgments; This work was supported by the Herbert ical importance. This prompted us to develop a molecular assay that can Quandt Stiftung der VARTAAG, the Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs- be used to confirm or exclude 3q aberrations suspected on the basis of Stiftung, the DAAD, the DFG and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. classical cytogenetic analysis, and to monitor disease progression. Since no fusion genes are consistently associated with any of the 3q21 P0165. Characterization of a Rare Variant Philadelphia rearrangements, and overexpression of the EVI-1 gene in 3q26 is also not Translocation; t(9;10;22)(q34;q22;q11) in Chronic Myeloid strictly correlated with the presence of the inv(3) or t(3;3), RT-PCR assays Leukemia by Fluorescence in situ Hybridization are not suitable to confirm and/or track these chromosome aberrations. We W. Emberger, A. Behmel, M. Tschernigg, E. Petek, P. M. Kroisel, H. Zier- therefore developed an interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization ler, K. Wagner (FISH) assay, in which separation of red and green fluorescent probes that Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Graz; Graz, colocalize in normal interphases indicates the presence of a 3q21 Austria rearrangement. This assay was validated on three cell lines and 25 primary werner.emberger@kfunigraz.ac.at samples from different leukemias with and without 3q21 aberrations, and We report on a currently 59 year old male chronic myeloid leukemia patient was shown to be highly sensitive and specific. with a rare variant Philadelphia translocation t(9;10;22)(q34;q22;q11). Flu- orescence in situ hybridization with whole chromosome paints was used to P0163.Chromosomal instability of deleted long arms of chro- confirm the cytogenetic findings. With a BCR/ABLspecific probe the known mosome 5 in myeloid malignancies. rearrangement on the derivative chromosome 22 could be found. Variant J. Brezinova1, Z. Zemanova2, S. Kurkova1, L. Sindelarova2, I. Chudoba3, Philadelphia translocations may result from a two step process with pri- K. Michalova2 mary formation of the classical rearrangement and a second aberration 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion; Prague, Czech Republic; event, or a one step complex chromosomal rearrangement based on 23rd Medical Department, General Faculty Hospital and1st Medical Fac- simultaneous chromosomal break events. Our results showed no evidence ulty of Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 3MetaSystems GmbH; for a second break event of one of the involved chromosomes but a two Altlussheim, Germany step process can not be ruled out completely. Variant Philadelphia translo- brez@uhkt.cz cations involving chromosome 10 are rare and the majority of chromosome Deletions of the long arms of chromosome 5 are common findings in 10 breakpoints of variant Ph translocations cluster to chromosomal sub-Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics 133 band 10q22 and 10q26. The prognostic implications as well as the rele- 9q34 was observed. Using the fluorescence in situ hybridization whole vance of the additional breakpoint region 10q22 are discussed. chromosome probes, it was established that the segment of chromosome 7(q22-qter) translocated to chromosome 9 at or near 9q34. No transloca- P0166. Does ABL-BCR RNA negativity indicate a deletion in tion of the broken segment of chromosome 9 has been observed to 7 or to chromosome der(9)t(9;22) in CML? any other chromosome. The involvement of 7q31 and 9q34 in thistranslo- J. Rmer1, C. Bleck1, U. Claussen1, A. Heller1, H. G. Sayer2, H. Starke1, cationsuggestsa novel gene fusion in chronic leukemogenesis. M. Ziegler1, I. F. Loncarevic1 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, FSU; Jena, Germany; P0169. Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) signal pat- 2Clinic for Internal Medicine II, FSU; Jena, Germany terns in Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia(CML) and Acute Lym- ilon@mti-n.uni-jena.de phoblastic Leukaemia (ALL) patients in Singapore using ES- ABL-BCR expression is only found in about 60-70% in BCR-ABLpositive FISH BCR-ABLProbe chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). ABL-BCR transcription is suggested not S. L. Tien1, C. Siwaswaren2, P. Lim2, E. Lim2 to correlate with the response to interferon alpha therapy, although, a dele- 1Singapore General Hospital; Singapore 169608, Singapore; 2Singapore tion in der(9) chromosome, where the ABL-BCR gene resides, seems to be General Hospital; Singapore, Singapore associated with a worth prognosis. To investigate whether ABL-BCR RNA ghetsl@sgh.com.sg negativity indicates (1) a deletion in der(9)t(9;22)(q34;q11) and (2) corre- We used Vysis LSI bcr/abl extra signal (ES) translocation probe to study lates with a worth prognosis in CMLwe have analyzed 18 CMLpatients for FISH signal patterns in CMLand ALLpatients in Singapore General Hos- BCR-ABLand ABL-BCR RNAand DNAby RT-PCR and FISH, receptively, pital. From 1999 to 2000 we studied 51 consecutive CMLcases and found so far. BCR-ABLexpression serves as positive control for RNAorigin and 12 cases (23.5%) with deletion of ASS region giving 1R1G1F signal, 1 of integrity. In 5 of the 18 patients we detected no ABL-BCR transcription. Flu- which had small deletion of ASS region giving 1R1dimR1G1F signal. Two orescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with a commercial probe, that com- other cases (3.9%) with 1R1G1F signal were found to have masked prises all the ABLand BCR genes, confirmed the suspected deletion of the Philadelphia chromosomes due to insertion of BCR into ABLregion. The ABL-BCR fusion gene in one, and elucidates a complex translocation in a remaining 37 cases showed the usual 2R1G1F fusion with no deletion of second patient, who lack the ABL-BCR fusion gene due to a translocation ASS region. Deletion of ASS region in Philadelphia chromosomes t(8;9;22). FISH could not confirm the deletion in the remaining 3 patients, appeared to confer a poorer prognosis for CMLpatients. In ALLpatients, which have to be investigated in more detail to resolve whether small dele- using the similar ES-FISH probe, we found 4 cases of t(9;22) which gave tions are present and not detected by FISH. We speculate, that patients double fusion signals, 1R1G2F and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) lacking the ABL-BCR transcript belong to the same clinical group as those study showed that these cases were due to minor-bcr p190 e1a2/e1a3. with a deletion in the der(9)t(9;22) chromosome. Two ALL cases gave 2R1G1F signals and PCR showed that they had major-bcr p210 b2a2/b3a2. We concluded that using the ES-FISH signal P0167. Chromosome instability in patients with chronic probe in interphase nuclei and metaphase spreads the incidence of ASS myeloid leukemia (CML) treated with Interferon. deletion in CMLpatients was found to be 23.5% in Singapore and its sig- B. Porto1, M. Cunha2, I. Malheiro1 nal patterns could apparently differentiate the major-bcr from minor-bcr in 1Laboratrio Citogentica, Instituto Cincias Biomdicas Abel Salazar; t(9;22) ALL. Porto, Portugal; 2Servio de Hematologia, Hospital St Antnio; Porto, Por- tugal P0170.Cytogenetic alterations in hematological malignancies vaspor@mail.telepac.pt S. A. C. T. Castillo Taucher, A. M. S. Fuentes, A. A. M. Paulos, T. T. C. The response of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) to the treat- Anguita ment with Interferon can be evaluated by cytogenetic analysis, using the Seccin Citogentica, Laboratorio Clnica Alemana; Santiago, Chile number of Philadelphia chromosome positive (Ph1+) and negative (Ph1-) scastill@ns.hospital.uchile.cl cells to classify the cytogenetic response as complete (no Ph1+ cells), Among 518 cytogenetic studies done in hematological malignancies, we major (less than 35% Ph1+ cells), minor (equal or more than 35% Ph1+ had 52 failures (10%). Normal results represented 290 cases (56%), cells), or no response (equal or more than 95% Ph1+ cells). We have per- expected when controlling remissions or in uncertain diagnosis. Different formed a cytogenetic study in 24h non-stimulated cultures of bone marrow aberrations were found in 176 cases (34%). The total number of studied cells from 18 patients with CMLat diagnosis, during and after treatment patients is 386, many of them have repeated controls, the pediatric popu- with Interferon. 9 patients presented cytogenetic response and 9 patients lation is 78 (20,2%). The most frequent reference diagnosis were acute had no response to treatment. In this study we evaluated the presence of myeloid leukemia (15,2%), chronic myeloid leukemia (12,3%), acute lym- chromosome instability (CI), i. e., the presence of chromosome and chro- phoid leukemia (11,6%), myelodysplasia (11,2%) and multiple myeloma matid breaks and rearrangements. For the 18 patients studied, the results (7,6%). The most common cytogenetic finding was t(9;22)(q34;q11) in 76 showed that; 1. CI is observed during and after treatment with Interferon studies (43%), either isolated or with additional aberrations. We also per- and not at diagnosis; 2. the presence of cells with CI was higher in the formed FISH studies in 57 patients; in 25 cases with X and Yprobes for group of patients that had cytogenetic response (6/9) than in the group of control of grafting of bone marrow transplantation with a non-sex matched patients that had no response (3/9); 3. considering all the studies together, relative; in 15 cases in search of t(9;22)(q34;q11) with 13% positive results; the presence of cells with CI was higher in occasions of complete cytoge- in 14 cases looking at del13q14 in multiple myeloma with 57% positive netic response (7/8) than in occasions of minor (3/10) and no response results and in 3 cases for t(15;17)(q22;q21) with 1 positive result. We (1/6); for major response, we observe the presence of CI in 7 out of 14 intend to clarify some complex cases with many marker chromosomes with occasions. This results suggest that the presence of chromosome instabil- multiple FISH or comparative genomic hybridisation. ity in CMLpatients treated with Interferon may be related to good cytoge- netic responses. P0171.Characterization of complex aberrant leukemia cases by means of multicolor banding (MCB) P0168. Atypical Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia; a 7 and 9 A. Heller1, N. Rubtsov2, V. Trifonov2, H. Starke1, I. F. Loncarevic1, U. Translocation in a Filipino Child. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 F. F. Natividad1,2, M. L. Enriquez1,3, F. G. Hernandez4, M. N. Chua4, C. T. 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute Tahimic2, A. G. Eduria1, C. P. Urrete5 of Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation 1Research and Biotechnology Division, St. Lukes Medical Center; Quezon ahel@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de City, Philippines; 2College of Science, University of the Philippines, Dili- In tumor cytogenetics complex aberrant karyotypes are frequently man; Quezon City, Philippines; 3Physics Department, College of Science, observed. GTG-banding and 24-color-FISH approaches using whole chro- De La Salle University; Manila, Philippines; 4Department of Pediatrics, mosome paints as probes often cannot resolve the karyotypes of such UST Hospital; Manila, Philippines; 5Medical Research Laboratory, Philip- cases. The multicolor-banding (MCB) technique, allowing the differentia- pine General Hospital; Manila, Philippines tion of chromosome region specific areas at the band and sub-band level, mampi@stluke.com.ph is the technique of choice to enlighten the chromosomal aberrations, Acase of an atypical chronic myelogenous leukemia in a Filipino child is regions and exact breakpoints involved. MCB is based on regionspecific presented. At diagnosis the seven year-old boy had mild anemia, hyper- libraries producing changing fluorescence intensity ratios along the chro- leucocystosis with granulocytes in all stages of maturation, eosinophil of mosomes, which are used to assign different pseudocolors to specific 16% and normal megakaryocytes. Leucocyte alkaline phosphatase was chromosomal regions. Three leukemia cases with highly aberrant chromo- zero. Using the GTG-banding technique, the absence of Philadelphia chro- somal constitution, each, have been studied by GTG-banding and 24-color mosome was noted in all cells analyzed. The involvement of 7q31 and FISH, the latter was applied to clarify which chromosomes contributed134 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics material to which marker. The exact breakpoints and the orientation of genetically detectable 22q11-12 alteration FISH indicated a breakpoint in chromosomal regions involved was subsequently determined by MCB. the IGLlocus. Translocation partners were 3q27 (BCL6) and 8q24 (c-MYC) Case 1 was a 72 year old patient suffering from plasmocytoma. In con- as well as chromosomal regions 2p13, 2p16, 4q13 and 16p12 (oncogenes ventional cytogenetic analysis (GTG-banding) a highly complex karyotype unknown). The new FISH assays provide a flexible, simple and reliable tool with 51 to 53 chromosomes and 2 different subclones could be identified. to detect IGK and IGLtranslocations, providing an important means for the Trisomy 3, 5, 7, 14, 15 and 19 could be observed by GTG-banding and clinical-management of lymphoma patients as well as for the identification confirmed by 24-color FISH. MCB mixes for #1, #5 revealed moreover an of new B-cell associated oncogenes. Supported by the Deutsche Krebshil- inv(1)(p13.3;q21.1) and a defined the exact breakpoint for chromosome 5 fe and IZKF (Kiel). in a t(5;11;1) to 5q14. Case 2 was a 14 year old boy suffering from a sec- ondary MDS due to a methotrexat and cyclophosphamid treatment against P0174. Suptyping Blastic Peripheral B-cell Lymphomas juvenile rheumatoid arthritis for several years. Complex changes including According To Chromosomal Aberrations a der(7)t(19;7;19;7;6;19;6) and translocations of chromosomes #6 and #7 L. Harder1, B. Schlegelberger1, T. Springer1, S. Gesk1, H. Nowotny2, T. and #12 and #13 have been characterized by 24-color-FISH and in more Zwingers3, W. Grote1, R. Siebert1 detail by MCB. Case 3 was an AMLpatient presenting e.g. the following 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Kiel; Kiel, Germany; 2Ludwig- aberrations; dic(5;18), der(20)t(1;20;18) and der(18)t(8;18;5;2;20). The Boltzmann Institut fr Leukmieforschung; Wien, Austria; 3estimate GmbH; exact breakpoints and the orientation of the involved chromosomal regions Augsburg, Germany were determined by MCB. In summary, the power of the MCB technique to sharder@medgen.uni-kiel.de determine breakpoints and orientation of chromosomal parts within even Blastic peripheral B-cell lymphoma (BBCL) is a biologically and clinically highly complex marker chromosomes with only one hybridization is heterogenous group of lymphoid neoplasms. No reliable criteria for sub- demonstrated. Acknowledgments; This work was supported by the Herbert classification of BBCLfor clinical practice are currently available. We thus Quandt Stiftung der VARTAAG, the Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs- investigated whether a subclassification of BBCLis possible on the basis Stiftung, the DAAD, the DFG and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. of recurrent genetic aberrations detected by chromosome analysis and FISH. There was a significant difference in the frequency of changes P0172. Chromosome rearrangements in leukemia under the affecting the IgH locus in 14q32 in the morphologic variants of BBCL. Near- first year of age. ly half of the lymphomas of centroblastic (cb) subtype but only 25% of the S. Acevedo1, M. Cuello1, A. Picon2, E. Dibar3, I. Larripa1 lymphomas of immunoblastic (ib) subtype had a breakpoint in 14q32 1Instituto de Investigaciones Hematologicas, Academia Nacional de Medi- (p<0.04). The translocation t(11;14) occured in all blastoid mantle cell lym- cina; Buenos Aires, Argentina; 2IHospital Alejandro Posadas; Buenos phomas (bmcl) and was restricted to this subtype. In ib lymphomas, Aires, Argentina; 3Hospital Italiano; Buenos Aires, Argentina t(8;14), t(11;14) and t(14;18) were present significantly less frequently than shacev@intramed.net.ar in Burkitts lymphomas, bmcl and cb lymphomas, respectively. Moreover, Leukemia in infants has been defined as a rare event arising in stem cells cytogenetic and FISH analyses revealed the IgH translocations in ib lym- of early hematopoietic differentiation, up to their first year of life. We pres- phomas to be predominantly those characteristic for B-CLL, like ent a series of eight patients with acute leukemia, including three cases of t(2;14)(p13;q32) affecting the BCL11Agene or t(14;19)(q32;p13) involving neonatal leukemia,< a month of age. We excluded two Down Syndrome the BCL3 locus. There were also significant differences in the frequency of with somatic mosaisism of low proportion (12% in PB) associated cases changes affecting other chromosomal regions; ib lymphomas contained diagnosed as biphenotypic and lymphoblastic leukemia . These patients predominantly deletions in 8q and 14q, changes of 4q and losses of chro- showed a 100% +21 in the bone marrow aspirate, while the leukemoge- mosome 10; cb lymphomas showing gains of chromosoms X, 7 and 18, neous reaction was present. Bone marrow aspirates and/or peripheral losses of chromosomes 13 and 15, changes of 1p36, 1q, 3q27, 8q and blood were cultured in RPMI 1640, supplemented with fetal calf serum and 11q; bmcl showing losses in 1p21~31 and 9p, gains of 3q21~24 or com- without mitogen stimulation. Cases were GTG banding analyzed and kary- plete chromosome 3. Multivariate analysis revealed deletions in 1q42~qter, otypes were established according to the ISCN. These were characterized duplications in 1q23~32, trisomy 5 and changes of 15q as independent by a higher incidence of structural aberrations such as; t(4;11)(three cases) prognostic factors in cb lymphomas. In ib lymphomas, changes of 7q and and del(7)(q21-qter)(two cases), add(2q) (one case). The remaining two 8q showed an adverse effect with even stronger impact on survival than cases correspond to a normal karyotype and to a numerical alteration the International Index. These findings underline that genetic aberrations (+5,+22). Sex ratio was 5;3 showing a little preference of affected girls. Six might help to define biologically and clinically distinct entities of BBCL. We patients were diagnosed as AMLwhile the other two were ALLand Biphe- acknowledge the collegues from the Kiel-Wien-Lymphoma Study Group notypic leukemia. We conclude that cytogenetic studies are very important and the support of the Deutsche Krebshilfe grant 10-1556-Schl4 to differentiate those Down related cases with leukemogeneous reaction which will spontaneously remit from those acute leukemias with chromo- P0175. Three different types of Robertsonian Translocations some rearrangements of poor prognosis. Determination of the neoplastic cause a similar Myelodysplastic syndrome cell genotype is a relevant parameter to establish the correct therapy. S. Kokkinou1, I. Papadimitriou2, K. Pavlou3, E. Meidanis1 1Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglio General Hospital; Athens, Greece; 2Bio- P0173. Novel FISH assays to detect immunoglobulin light chemistry Dept., Sismanoglio General Hospital; Athens, Greece; chain loci rearrangements in B-cell malignancies 3Immunology Dept., Sismanoglio General Hospital; Athens, Greece J. I. Martin-Subero1, L. Harder1, S. Gesk1, F. J. Novo2, M. J. Calasanz2, dimitris0@otenet.gr W. Grote1, B. Schlegelberger1, R. Siebert1 The occurrence of Robertsonian translocations is rarely encountered in 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Kiel; Kiel, Germany; hematopoietic malignancies. We identified five patients carrying a Robert- 2Department of Genetics, University of Navarra; Pamplona, Spain sonian translocation suffering from persistent leukopenia, with a low value imartin@unav.es of vitamin B12 in their serum, progressing to anemia and thrombocytope- The majority of B-cell malignancies bear chromosomal translocations nia. between the immunoglobulin (IG) genes and oncogenes leading to dereg- The bone marrow and the trephine biospy specimene revealed a ulation of the latter. IGH at 14q32 is most frequently involved, whereas myelodysplastic syndrome, not fitted to any type of FAB classification. translocations of IG kappa (IGK) at 2p12 and IG lambda (IGL) at 22q11 Standard PHA-stimulated cultures of peripheral blood showed the translo- have been described in 5-10% of the cases. The most reliable method to cation in 100% of metaphase cells with a modal number of 45 chromo- detect translocations affecting a promiscuous locus is Fluorescence In Situ somes, including X and Y. Chromosomes were G banded and 40 Hybridization (FISH) with differentially labeled probes flanking the break- metaphases analysed. C-banding was also performed. The three types of point. As no break apart probes have been available for IG light chain loci, Robertsonian translocation were t(13;14)(p11; q11) in three out of five (3/5) we designed two novel FISH assays to detect translocations involving IGK and t(14;21)(p11;q11) and t(13;13) (p11;p11) in the other two patients. and IGL. BAC clones flanking each breakpoint were differentially labeled. We suggest that these patients had two oncogenic advantages; False-positive ratios were calculated from experiments on healthy donors, 1. The Robertsonian translocation itself, is associated with genetic insta- being 0.3% for IGK and 1.4% for IGL. We tested twenty-five cases of B-cell bility. malignancies with cytogenetically detectable chromosomal abnormalities 2. The low value of vitamin B12, since it is known that it can interfere to at 2p11-14 (n=13) and 22q11-12 (n=12). FISH revealed IGK involvement double strand DNAbreak. in six of 13 cases (46%) with cytogenetically detectable 2p11-14 break. In conclusion, we suggest that carriers of Robertsonian translocation have Translocation partners were chromosome bands 7q21, 8q24 (three cases), an increased risk of aquiring a hematological malignancy. 10q24 and 16q24 containing the B-cell associated oncogenes CDK6, c- MYC, NFKB2 and c-MAF, respectively. In 6 of 12 cases (50%) with cyto-Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics 135 P0176. Molecular Cytogenetic Analysis of the Monoblastic P0179. Cytogenetic studies in familial Waldenstr ms Cell Line U937 macroglobulinemia. J. Lee, Y. Cho, C. Lee, S. Shim, H. Seo, J. Khym M. De Braekeleer1, F. Morel1, A. Herry1, M. J. Le Bris2, G. Le Calvez2, V. College of Medicine, Hanyang University; Seoul, Republic of Korea Marion2, C. Berthou1, J. F. Abgrall1 yhcho@email.hanyang.ac.kr 1CHU Morvan & Universit de Bretagne Occidentale; Brest, France; 2CHU The cell line U937 was derived from the pleural fluid of a patient with dif- Morvan; Brest, France fuse histocytic lymphoma, and the cells phenotypically resemble blast cells marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr of the monocytic lineage. Previous analysis of the cell line U937 has shown Waldenstrms macroglobulinemia (WM) is a rare disease, occurring main- that several chromosomal rearrangements and markers. The U937 kary- ly in the 6th and 7th decades of life. It is characterized by an excessive pro- otype however, has remained incomplete, and marker structures have liferation of an IgM-producing cell clone. The serum protein electrophore- never been fully described. The origins of the marker chromosomes of the sis shows a monoclonal spike due to the secretion of large amounts of IgM. U937 were identified by conventional G-banding analysis and molecular Familial occurrence of Waldenstrm macroglobulinemia has been only sel- cytogeneric techniques. Fluorescence in situ hybridization(FISH) using domly reported and no cytogenetic analyses performed. We have followed whole chromosome painting probe confirmed the identities of markers three brothers with WM for the last 10 years. Two of them, diagnosed at 65 which were partially identified by G-banding as t(1;5), t(6;12), t(10;11), and 61 years old, and now aged 72 and 69 respectively, are still in a sta- der(2)t(2;6), der(3)t(1;3), der(6)t(2;6), der(13)t(1;13), der(16)t(4;16), ble condition, with no clinical symptoms, although one of them has hyper- ider(13q), der(16), dup(6p) and partial deletions of 2p, 3q, 15q. By com- lymphocytosis. Cytogenetic analyses on bone marrow short and long term parative genomic hybridization(CGH), the genomic abnormalities detected cultures showed no chromosomal abnormalities. The third brother was were overexpressions of chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 6, 13, 15, 2o, 21. These diagnosed at age 57; he remained stable during two years, at which time overexpressions nearly consist with chromosomal abnormalities. he developed neuropathy of the lower limbs. He was then treated with chlorambucil for 34 months. Two years later, he developed chronic P0177. Frequency and Significance of Cytogenetic Aberra- myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) that evolved a year later in refractory tions in B-NHL anemia with excess of blasts (RAEB), of which he eventually died. Cyto- E. Krmer1, H. Grner1, H. Nowotny1, H. Tchler1, G. Hopfinger2, R. genetic analyses on a bone marrow sample obtained while he was in Heinz1 transformation showed complex rearrangements. An abnormal clone, with 1LBI Leukemia Research and Hematology; Wien/Vienna, Austria; 23rd minor variations, was found in all 20 metaphases analysed; 44,XY, Medical Department Hanusch-Hospital; Wien/Vienna, Austria t(1;21)(p36;q11), del (2)(p23), add(3)(p13), +der(3) (3qter- kroemel@gmx.at >3p12;;?;;14q21->14qter), del(4)(q32), der(5) t(5;13)(q10;q10), -6, -13, At our department cytogenetic analysis of NHL-patients has been done for del(14)(q21), hsr(20)(q11), -21. Some of these chromosomal aberrations, more than one decade. Using the REALclassification system the cytoge- such as trisomy 3q and partial deletion of 6q, have been previously netic data-bank of patients with B-NHLwas searched for the most frequent described during the evolution of WM or multiple myeloma whereas 5q- is chromosoal aberrations. The analysis was focused on the four largest often observed in secondary myelodysplastic syndromes, mainly following diagnosis-groups of B-NHL; CLL, DLBL, follicular lymphoma (FOLL) and chemotherapy. Homogeneously staining regions (hsr) have rarely been MCL. Klonal cytogenetic aberrations were found in 97 of 111 CLL, 87 of reported in leukemia and, to the best of our knowledge, only once in 109 DLBL, 66 of 76 FOLLand 31 of 43 MCL. Only cases with chromosome CMML. changes (281 in total) were taken into account for analysis. Frequencies of primary and secondary aberrations were determined for the different NHL- P0180.Clonal chromosome aberrations in bone marrow cells subgroups, and in addition the incidence of non-random associations of Fanconi anemia patients - conventional cytogenetic and between primary (f.e. t(11;14), t(14;18)) and secondary chromosomal molecular cytogenetic studies changes was looked for. According to the new WHO classification system H. Tnnies1, W. Ebell2, H. Neitzel1 there are now only 2 grading subgroups (based on morphological criteria) 1Charit, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Institute of Human Genetics; Berlin, remaining in follicular lymphoma (1+2 and 3 of the REALclassification). Germany; 2Charit, Campus Virchow-Klinikum; Berlin, Germany Cytogenetic data seems to not entirely support this change. Holger.Toennies@charite.de Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal resessive chromosome instability P0178. Prognostic Importance of Trisomy 3 in Gastrointesti- disorder characterized by a variety of congenital anomalies and a high inci- nal MALT Lymphomas - FISH Analysis of 26 Cases dence of bone marrow failure (aplastic anemia), as well as increased rate J. Krugmann1, S. Dirnhofer2, A. Tzankov1, H. C. Duba3, M. Erdel3 of malignancies, including leukemias and solid tumors. FA patients are 1Institut fr Pathologische Anatomie der Universitt; Innsbruck, Austria; considered preleukemic and the disorder presents a model for the study of 2Institut fr Anatomie der Universitt; Basel, Switzerland; 3Institut fr Medi- the etiology of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid zinischeBiologieundHumangenetikderUniversitt;Innsbruck,Austria leukemia (AML). During bone marrow failure in FA-patients, clonal chro- jens.krugmann@uibk.ac.at mosomal aberrations are detectable in bone marrow cells of the patients. Trisomy 3 was found to be a recurrent numerical chromosomal change in Today the prognostic value of the variety of this genomic imbalances is not lymphomas of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type. Different known, however it seems that they differ to these found in non-FApatients frequencies, however, have been reported and the pathogenetic role of tri- with aplastic anemia, MDS, and AML. In our institute more than 50 FA- somy 3 remains unknown. In the present study we examined archival patients were diagnosed for FA. Most of these patients take part on a long paraffin embedded tissues from 26 well documented cases of surgically term follow up including yearly conventional cytogenetic (CC) analysis of resected primary gastrointestinal MALTlymphomas for the occurrence of the bone marrow. In most of the cases, clonal numerical and structural trisomy 3 and 12 by bicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization on isolated chromosomal aberrations could be detected. Chromosome aberrations are interphase nuclei and tried to compare the results with the clinical out- further characterized in detail by molecular-cytogenetic techniques as flu- come. The collective includes 14 men and 12 women with a mean age of orescence in situ hybridization (FISH), microdissection and comparative 60 years (male 41-83, female 21-85). 12 cases were classical low grade genomic hybridization (CGH). Additionally, for some patients, we were able marginal zone MALTlymphoma, 1 case showed a low and high grade lym- to collect further data on karyotype evolution of different clones due to sev- phoma component (mixed type) and 13 cases were diffuse large B-cell eral bone marrow analyses. Main objective of our study is to uncover the lymphoma of MALTtype (high grade). The lymphoma were staged accord- origin of unknown additional chromosomal material and the detection of ing to the modified Ann Arbor system by Musshoff. Six patients presented partial losses of chromosomal segments by different molecular cytogenet- with stage EI1, 8 with EI2, 10 with EII and one patient with stage III and IV. ic strategies. The data collected gives us the opportunity to find possible According to control experiments on nuclei from reactive tissues the cutoff links between chromosomal imbalances, bone marrow failure, and level for trisomies was set at 15% nuclei with three signals. No trisomy 12 MDS/AMLin FApatients. was found and trisomy 3 was detected only in 4 of 26 (15%) MALTlym- phomas including 2 low grade and 2 high grade lymphoma. Two patients P0181.In Situ Analysis of Telomeres in Haematological Malig- had a lymphoma recurrence and died during the follow-up period. We con- nancies clude that in our series trisomy 3 showed low occurrence and was found in M. Sklenickova1, K. Krejci2, J. Malaska3, J. Fajkus4 both low grade and high grade MALT lymphoma. We speculate that tri- 1Department of Analysis of Biologically Important Molecular Complexes, somy 3 might correlate with increased recurrence rate in patients with gas- Masaryk University Brno; Brno, Czech Republic; 2Institute of Biophysics, trointestinal MALTlymphomas, but this needs further investigations. Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic; Brno, Czech Republic; 3Fac- ulty Hospital Brno; Brno, Czech Republic; 4Institute of Biophysics, Acade- my of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Department of Analysis of Biologi-136 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics cally Important Molecular Complexes, Masaryk University; Brno, Czech Methods; DNAfrom the cell line Daudi was prepared according to the pro- Republic cedure of dynamic molecular combing. Double target FISH was applied sklemar@sci.muni.cz using the W-fragment and different cosmid probes (kindly provided by Dr. Analysis of telomere length is performed in malignant cells, in which telom- G. W. Bornkamm) covering the whole genome of the virus. The cosmid eres usually gradually shorten and are stabilized only upon activation of covering both terminal repeats (TR) was double labeled with biotin and telomerase. In rare cases an extreme expansion or complete loss of indi- digoxygenin, thus allowing a simple identification among the rest of the vidual telomere occurs. These individual differences cannot be detected viral genome. Results; We constantly observed a non interrupted hybridis- using the most common technique, TRF (Southern hybridization of termi- ation pattern of the double labeled cosmid spanning both TRs. In case of nal restriction fragments), which is able to show only an average size of an integration of the viral genome into the host we would expect to see a telomeres. Therefore an in situ labeling technique (dideoxy-PRINS) was separation of the hybridization signals. Thus, we interpret this picture as used for detailed analysis of telomeres in childhood leukemia and multiple fusion of the two TR as it is the case in the episomal form. myeloma samples. PRINS utilizes an unlabelled probe (in this case Telo2; Conclusion; The method applied allows a visualization and unambiguous (CCCTAA)7), which hybridizes to its target seguence and serves as a identification of the episomal form of the EBV. primer for chain elongation using Tth DNA-polymerase to incorporate labeled nucleotides. Dideoxy PRINS is more specific for labeling P0184.Rapid FISH analysis on native smears in haematology sequences which lack one or more of the four bases of DNA; the base(s) B. Klein, M. Gerusel-Bleck, M. Fhrer, C. Bender-Gtze, J. U. Walther can be added in the form of dideoxynucleotide(s). For evaluation of telom- Kinderklinik und Kinderpoliklinik der Universitt Mnchen; Mnchen, Ger- ere dynamics, samples were also assayed for telomerase activity using many TRAPassay (telomere repeat amplification protocol) and for expression of JU.Walther@kk-i.med.uni-muenchen.de telomerase reverse transcriptase and RNAsubunits using RT-PCR. In our Minimal residual disease is an essential parameter for monitoring child- presentation, we show examples of our recent results, e.g. observation of hood leukaemia under therapy especially after stem cell transplantation a single-telomere expansion (about 9-fold elongation with respect to the (SCT). Detection of chromosomal markers by metaphase analysis fails in average length of all the other telomeres on a given metaphase) on chro- low grade mosaicism. Therefore we adopted a simple and fast FISH mosome 4, arm q in one of childhood leukemia samples. Besides, current approach to detect numerical and structural aberrations in smears from results of telomere analysis of childhood leukemia and multiple myeloma peripheral blood, bone marrow and other body fluids. Clonality was inter- are shown and discussed in relation to possible regulatory mechanisms of preted according to a cut-off value specific for each category of anomalies telomere maintenance. established using healthy donors. In ALL, t(12;21) and classical hyper- diploidy had disappeared by day 33 in all three and four patients investi- P0182. Telomere Shortening In Patients With Chronic Lym- gated, respectively.After HLA identical SCT for Ph-positive CML in two phocytic Leukemia patients, the marker disappeared after 30 days in one, in the other it per- S. Palanduz1, N. Serakinci2, K. Cefle1, M. Aktan3, G. Tutkan1, S. Ozturk1, sisted for three years and disappeared only after immunotherapy (DLI). G. Dincol3, Y. Pekcelen3, J. Koch4 Monosomy 7 was found in five patients with AML/ MDS; three were suc- 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Med- cessfully grafted from identical family donors with quick clearing of the icine, Division of Medical Genetics; Istanbul, Turkey; 2Danish Cancer Soci- monosomy; in one the clone finally disappeared after 2nd SCT. His slides ety, Dept. Cytogenetics; Aarhus, Denmark; 3Istanbul University, Istanbul were successfully hybridised and analysed after nine years of storage. The Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology; fifth was grafted from the haploidentical mother and only transiently lost the Istanbul, Turkey; 4Danish Cancer Society; Aarhus, Denmark marker for 28 days. One infant with AULand trisomy 8 grafted from his spalanduz@istanbul.edu.tr identical mother has remained free from trisomy for one year after SCT. In Telomeric region of the chromosomes are involved in the maintenance of addition we detected small clones (<15%) with monosomy 7 (n=6) and tri- genomic integrity. Telomeres compensate for the chromosomal shortening somy 8 (n=1) in seven patients with acquired aplastic anaemia. Five of as it happens after each round of cell division. Because of the dynamics of them progressed to overt MDS. In conclusion, FISH can be used for rapid telomeric DNAreplication, telomeres are thought to influence the progress monitoring of clonal markers - even in stored material and small clones - in of cellular senescence and cancer progression. Not unexpectedly, it has childhood leukaemia and MDS. been reported that telomeres are shortened in acute leukemias where the cell turnover is high. B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a partic- P0185. Genetic and Functional Profiling of Disseminated ularly interesting haematological malignancy in regard to telomere dynam- Tumor Cells by a fully Automated Microscopical Device ics because most of the malignant cells in CLLare mitotically inactive. In P. F. Ambros1, G. Mehes1, A. Luegmayr1, A. Witt2, E. Kubista2, T. Lrch3, this study we aimed to evaluate the length of telomeric sequences in C. Hattinger1, R. Ladenstein1, H. Gadner1 patients in B-cell CLLby the ddPRINS technique. Twenty patients with CLL 1CCRI, St. Anna Kinderspital; Vienna, Austria; 2Dept. of Special Gynecolo- (female/male; 5/15, mean age; 62.058.48) and four healthy donors gy, University of Vienna; Vienna, Austria; 3MetaSystems; Altlussheim, Ger- lyomphocytes as our control group (female/male;1/2, mean many age;60.0312.05) were included. We found short telomers and no ambros@ccri.univie.ac.at detectable telomeric repeats at the sites of chromosome fusion. In the The detection, quantification as well as the genetic and functional charac- patient group, we observed less intense telomeric signals than the control terization of disseminated tumor cells (DTC) present in the bone marrow group. We are in the opinion that reduced telomeres in CLLreflects the (BM), peripheral blood (PB) and apheresis products (AP) are becoming dominance of malignant cells with an abnormally long life span. These increasingly significant in the treatment of patients with solid tumors both cells may have encountered many antigenic stimulants in the past and at diagnosis and during the course of cytotoxic treatment (MRD detection). hence underwent multipl clonal expansions. Our findings imply that short- To overcome limitations due to the current techniques and to enable an ened telomeres in CLLmay be reflecting the history of the disease and exact quantification, we have fully automated the screening and relocation serve as an independent prognostic factor. procedure of immunological stained samples (RCDetect, MetaSystems). This device allows the simultaneous search for up to three fluorescence P0183. Fine mapping of the episomal Epstein-Barr virus signals. The automatic relocation of immunolabeled cells enable sequen- (EBV) on DNAfibers of the Burkitts lymphoma cell line Daudi tial genetic (FISH) and also functional analyses of positive cells. With this J. Reisinger, S. Rumpler, P. F. Ambros approach, tumor-typical genetic aberrations such as translocations, gene CCRI, St. Anna Kinderspital; Vienna, Austria amplifications or simple gains or losses can be identified allowing the ambros@ccri.univie.ac.at unambiguous proof of the malignant nature of the questionable cell. The Background; Intracellular Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) exists as either stable sensitivity of the system is only limited by the number of cells available for integrated into the genome or as covalently closed episome circularized analysis. Data on quantitative and qualitative analysis of tumor cells car- via the terminal repeats (TR). The integration of DNAviruses into the host ried out in over 700 clinical samples (BM, PB and AP) from neuroblastoma genome is frequently associated with immortalisation and malignant trans- and breast carcinoma patients will be presented. In addition, functional formation of human cells whereas episomal copies are not linked to tumor analyses, e.g. proliferation capacity, and apoptotic rate was monitored in a development. large series of bone marrow samples with disseminated tumor cells. With Aim; As the two forms of viral persistence are associated with different bio- the help of this computer assisted microscopic system the automatic logical features we wanted to work out a simple technique to discriminate search, quantification, as well as genetic and functional analysis of low both forms. We applied a DNA spreading technique to enable deeper tumor cell infiltrates in routine bone marrow preparations can be carried out insights into the organization of the virus to be able to clearly discriminate efficiently and reliably. both forms. Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics 137 P0186.Deficiency in a double strand break repair subpathway >22pter). The existence of complex chromosomal abnormalities stresses in ataxia telangiectasia during S phase promotes multiple the atypic aspect and the radio-induced origin of these tumors. Deletion of chromosome exchanges; probands and obligate heterozy- the short arm of chromosome 1 is frequently observed in meningiomas, but gotes with different breakpoints. The 1p11 region could be implicated in radiation J. C. Leonard, J. Schmidt, A. M. Mullinger, R. T. Johnson induced meningiomas in particular. Further molecular investigations of this Coriell Institute for Medical Research; Camden, NJ United States region would be of great interest. leonard@umdnj.edu A-Tcells are chromosomally unstable, and are hypersensitive to ionizing P0189. Comparative genomic hybridization of 5 new medul- radiation and other agents causing DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). loblastoma cell lines. Chromosome studies have suggested a defect in DSB repair, but direct S. Dub1,2, M. Muleris3, R. Molist3, F. Fortin1, Y. Th or t2, F. L veill1,2, N. measurements are less clear, and the underlying defect and basis for cell Lemieux1,2,4 killing are uncertain. Here we use the topoisomerase I inhibitor camp- 1Dpartement de Pathologie et de biologie cellulaire, Universit de Mon- tothecin (CPT), which induces DSBs predominantly in replication forks, tral; Montral, PQ Canada; 2Centre de recherche de lHpital Sainte-Jus- and show that A-Tcells are defective in the repair of this subclass of DSBs. tine; Montreal, PQ Canada; 3Institut Curie; Paris, France; 4Dpartement de After CPTtreatment, A-Tcells pass to G2, where they remain; normal cells Pathologie de lHpital Sainte-Justine; Montral, PQ Canada repair most of their DSBs and arrest briefly in G2. The frequency of CPT- sopdub@hotmail.com induced chromosome aberrations in each of a wide variety of A-T cells Medulloblastomas, a primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the cerebellum, examined, including different ATM gene mutations, is abnormally high; represents approximately 25% of all intracranial tumors in children. Sever- aberrations are S-phase-derived and many are multiple illegitimate chro- al studies demonstrated numerous non-randomly chromosomal abnormal- matid exchanges. In normal cells the aberrations are mostly chromatid ities. However, the specific oncogenic events involved in the development breaks. Data also suggest that obligate A-T heterozygotes show more and progression of this tumor remain unknow. In this study, molecular cyto- aberrations than normal controls. Whole chromosome painting reveals the genetic approaches were performed to allow a more comprehensive cyto- complexity and type of exchange aberrations. The data suggest that the A- genetic evaluation of 5 new MB cell lines that we have previously estab- T protein recognises DSBs in active replicons and targets homologous lished. Using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), we detected DSB repair there, thus helping to suppress illegitimate S-phase recombi- changes in copy number (gains and losses) in our cell lines. The most nation. recurrent chromosomal abnormalities found were gains of 3q, 4q, 7q, 8q, 15q, 17q and losses of 11q and 17p. Also, karyotypes and fluorescence in P0187.CGH analysis of radiation induced meningioma situ hybridization (FISH) were done and show multiple chromosomal E. Rajcan-Separovic1, J. Maguire2, T. Loukianova1, M. Nisha1, D. rearrangements and polyploidy in accordance with the CGH results. These Kalousek1 results reveal many clonal imbalances that had previously been reported 1BC Childrens Hospital, Department of Pathology; Vancouver, Canada; and some novel changes such as 3q, 4q and 15q. We also show that these 2Vancouver General Hospital,Department of Anatomical Pathology; Van- new cell lines are cytogenetically representative of the PNET/MB tumors couver, Canada and should be helpful for further understanding of the biology of these eseparovic@cw.bc.ca tumors. This study confirms many of the previously reported cytogenetic Epidemiological studies of patients previously exposed to ionizing radiation data such as losses of 11q and 17p and gains of 7q, 8q and 17q, and also suggest an increased risk for developing meningiomas. Genetic events reveals potentially important novel regions that could be implicated in the underlying such tumorigenesis are unknown. Cytogenetic studies of radia- tumorigenic process of MBs. Additional studies are needed to furnish more tion induced meningiomas (RIMs) are rare and so far discordant; one case insight on the roles played by the changes observed. This project is par- was reported without, and one case with loss of chromosome 22, a change tially supported by the Centre de recherche de lHpital Sainte-Justine. frequently associated with spontaneous meningiomas (SMs). Molecular genetic analysis using markers from chromosome 22q showed no LOH in P0190.Molecular and Conventional Cytogenetics in Yugoslav the 15 RIMs studied. There are no comparative genomic hybridization Neuroblastoma Patients (CGH) studies of RIMs so far. We used CGH to investigate the genetic M. M. Djurisic, M. Guc-Scekic, D. Radivojevic, T. Lalic, D. Djokic basis of 7 RIMs. CGH analysis was done on paraffin embedded tissues in Mother and Child Health Institute; Belgrade, Yugoslavia a blinded manner, including SMs and normal brain tissue. CGH analysis of makid@ptt.yu three RIMs identified common losses of 1p, 7p and 18q. Losses of 2p, 3p, Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in chil- 6q, 10q,11q and 11p were present in at least one of the RIMs. Interesting- dren occurring at a rate of about 1 in 10.000 live births. This tumor is char- ly, 7p loss is infrequently observed in SMs and yet it was present in all of acterised by its unpredictable behavior; some neuroblastomas mature and the 3 RIMs studied so far(analysis of the other 4 RIMs is in progress). CGH regress spontaneously whereas others progress rapidly and agressively. analysis of one SM demonstrated monosomy 22, loss of 1p, 6q,14,18q and Genetic alterations found in NB cells, beside clinical parameters and the gain of 1q. These changes are in accordance with common genetic age of patient, has a great significance in development and clinical course changes previously identified by CGH in sporadic meningomas. The iden- of the disease. Molecular and cytogenetic analyses of genetic determi- tification of RIM-specific genetic changes is of clinical importance since nants in NB cells have an object of establishing precise and prompt diag- they often show more aggressive behavior with a high recurrence rate fol- nosis of NB. Double coloured FISH were performed on tumor imprints with lowing therapy. The observation of distinct genetic characteristics in RIMs the probes for centromeric and telomeric region of chromosome 1. Also, may also provide new insight into the mechanism of tumorigenesis. markers D1S80 and D1S76 were analysed using PCR. Routine cytoge- netic analysis were done on G banded chromosomes. Simultaneous com- P0188. Detection Of A Common Chromosomal Rearrange- bining of the molecular genetic methods such as FISH and PCR and clas- ment In Seven Cases Of Radiation-induced Meningiomas sical cytogenetics will provide making quick, precise and prompt diagnosis P. Roll1, H. Zattara-Cannoni1, M. Krahn1, H. Dufour2, G. Lena2, A. M. of neuroblastoma. Vagner-Capodano1 1Cytogenetic Oncology Laboratory, CHU Timone; Marseille, France; P0191. Analysis of five different prognostic markers in neu- 2Department of Neurosurgery, CHU Timone; Marseille, France roblastic tumors proll@wanadoo.fr C. Stock, I. M. Ambros, S. Rumpler, A. Luegmayr, R. Ladenstein, P. F. Exposure to ionizing radiations is known to increase cancer risk. Radio- Ambros therapy may also induce solid tumors. We report the cytogenetic study of CCRI, St. Anna Kinderspital; Vienna, Austria 7 cases of radiation-induced meningiomas ; 2 cases following irradiation of ambros@ccri.univie.ac.at children with tinea capitis, 1 case following radiotherapy of a glioma in a 6 Objectives; Established genetic factors of aggressive tumor growth in neu- months-old child, 1 case after radiotherapy of an astrocytoma WHO grade roblastomas are; MYCN amplification (NMA), deletions at 1p36.3, and a II at age 14 and finally 1 case of temporal angioma, 1 case of cranial near diploid or near tetraploid DNAcontent. Recently, gain of 17q21-qter pharyngioma and 1 case of medulloblastoma irradiated during childhood. was described to be the most frequent prognostic marker. Another study, The cytogenetic findings included complex karyotypes with numerical and however, suggests that gain of 1q21-23 define a subset of NB with adverse structural abnormalities. All metaphases showed a der(1) and monosomy outcome. We investigated all these prognostic markers in an attempt to 22. Molecular cytogenetics using CGH and SKYtechnique permitted us to correlate specific genetic changes and outcome. refine the karyotype findings ; del(1)(p11-pter) and del(22)(q12-qter) using Patients and methods; The tumor collection encompassed 14 primary CGH and translocation of a part of chromosome 22 on the 1p13-pcen tumors of all stages and three samples from patients under cytotoxic treat- region of chromosome 1 using SKYtechnique, der(1)(qter-1p11 ;; 22q12- ment. We analyzed the status of 1p36.3, 1q21-23, MYCN, and 17qter by138 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics FISH using D1Z1, D1Z2, 955E11 (1q21), 910C8 (1q21), and 918H5 (1q23) P0194.Spectral karyotyping of the human colorectal carcino- (M. Rocchi, Italy), MYCN, D2Z, TP53, and 17q25 (probe 946e12, T. Haaf, ma cell lines HT-29 and CX-1 MPIMG; Berlin, Germany). S. Koehler1, H. Luehrs2, T. Menzel2, W. Scheppach2, C. Steinlein1, M. Results; Among the 10 patients with localized/regional (stage 1, 2A, 2B, Schmid1, R. Melcher2 and 3) or 4s disease, all in complete remission, we observed none of the 1Institute of human genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Department of Medi- chromosomal anomalies mentioned above except two cases exhibiting cine; Wuerzburg, Germany gain of 17q (totally or sub-totally resected tumors). All stage 4 tumors (7 sigridkoehler@web.de patients) displayed at least one of the prognostic markers; two tumors from Knowledge of the specific genetic changes in colorectal cancer could be patients with fatal outcome exhibited gain of 17q as sole genetic aberra- important for prognosis and therapy. HT-29 and CX-1 are commonly used tion, three tumors (patients in partial remission) displayed NMA, 1p36 dele- cell lines for in-vitro studies of colorectal cancer. In the present study the tion, and 17q gain, and two tumors from patients with fatal outcome were chromosomal alterations of HT-29 and CX-1 were analysed by spectral positive for all analyzed prognostic markers. karyotyping (SKY) in order to clarify the complex translocations, that could Conclusion; Preliminary results suggest that the simultaneous presence of not been detected by standard banding techniques. Spectral karyotyping all genetic aberrations define a subset of NB with extremely unfavorable (SKY) is a new sensitive method to detect chromosomal aberations by prognosis. classifying each chromosome in different colors. The application of SKY allowed detailed analysis of marker chromosomes in the colorectal cells P0192.Cytogenetic Studies In Human Carcinoma Esophagus lines HT-29 and CX-1. We identified common gains (chromosomes 7, 11, S. M. A. N. Gupta 15 , and 20) that were amplified about four times or more in both cell lines. University of Jammu; Jammu, INdia, India By comparing the two cell lines five similar structural alterations were lalitsen@yahoo.com found; del(4)(q31), i(8q), i(13q), der(17)t(17;19)(p10;q10), and del Cytogenetic finding in 30 carcinoma eso pts. Carcinoma esphagus, the (18)(q21). Because of this similarity a fingerprint analysis was performed cancer of food pipe forms an important class of cancers. It ranks sixth in ts and revealed no differences in the banding pattern between both cell lines. ncidence in the world and makes up about 10% of G.I.T. cancers. Besides Most of the structural and numerical aberration found in HT-29 and CX-1 other clinical symptoms, dysphagia and epigastric pain are two main symp- were identical. Afingerprint analysis revealed a common genetic origin. toms that makes endoscopic study a must. Atotal of 40 pts complaining of Obviously both cell lines were derived from the same patient. This results dysphagia with or without epigastric pain were subjected to endoscopy. 10 have important implications for past and present studies on these colorec- patients were found to have normal esophagus while 30 patients showed tal cell lines, because to date these cell lines were thought to be of differ- a growth in their food pipe. Biopsis form of growths in all 30 cases were ent genetic origin. collected for histopathology and cytogenetic study. Majority of these growths were histopathologically confirned to have cancerous growth. P0195.Mutagen-induced Chromosome Lesions in Peripheral Cytogenetic study carried out in the biopsis collected for this purpose con- Blood of Filipino Jeepney Drivers; Evaluation of Cancer Sus- tained different kinds chromosomal changes. Centromere spreading, cen- ceptibility tromere stretching fragmentation, ring formation and sickness were the M. L. D. Enriquez1,2, I. Q. Postor3, C. R. Cheng2, G. L. Hamoy2, D. R. San- main structural changes. Most of the aneuploid cells contained a Marker tos1, F. F. Natividad1,3 chromosome. Polyploid cells had circular arrangement of the chromo- 1Research and Biotechnology Division, St. Lukes Medical Center; Quezon somes with a hollow space in the centre. Attempts have been made to find City, Philippines; 2Physics Dept., College of Science, De La Salle Univer- the etiology of cancerous esophagus by studying the socio-economic con- sity; Manila, Philippines; 3College of Science , University of the Philippines; ditions and other related environmental factors. Quezon City, Philippines mldenriquez@stluke.com.ph P0193.Characterization of the colon cell line HT29 clone 19A Drivers of public utility vehicles particularly jeepneys which are not air- con- by means of GTG-banding, 24-color FISH and multicolor ditioned are constantly exposed to the hazards of pollution. In this study, banding (MCB) jeepney drivers were chosen to provide preliminary data on the possible A. Kchler1, S. Michel1, B. Pool-Zobel2, A. Schferhenrich2, A. Heller1, H. effects of this exposure on the sensitivity of chromosomes. Preliminary Starke1, V. Trifonov3, N. Rubtsov3, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 data on the mutagen sensitivity of chromosomes from peripheral blood 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Depart- lymphocytes of thirty five (35) Filipino jeepney drivers are presented. The ment of Nutritional Toxicology, Institute of Nutrition; Jena, Germany; 3Insi- peripheral blood samples were cultured following the routine 72-hour tute of Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation microculture technique. Five hours before harvest the cells were exposed almu@mti-n.uni-jena.de to bleomycin, a radiomimetic agent. Responses to the clastogenic effects The human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line HT29 was established in of the mutagen expressed as average number of chromatid lesions or 1964 and its subclone 19Awas terminally differentiated with 5mM sodi- breaks per cell (b/c) were noted. The mean b/c in the drivers group is 1.46 um butyrate in 1984. However, it was never karyotyped in detail before, while that of the control group is 0.75. Results also show that 77.14% of even though used in a variety of mutagenesis experiments. GTG-banding the drivers showed a b/c value higher than 1.0 which is established as the revealed that the cell line was hyperdiploid (66-68 chromosomes) and a borderline for mutagen sensitivity. Higher than this value is taken as hyper- number of marker chromosomes were present. For further characterization sensitive to the effects of bleomycin. In the control group, only 22.8 % have of the chromosomal rearrangements 24-color flourescence in situ a b/c value higher than 1.0. If sensitivity to mutagens is considered an indi- hybridization (FISH) experiments have been performed. Acomposite kary- rect measure of DNArepair capacity, these drivers of jeepneys are at high otype was determined as follows; risk of acquiring environment-induced cancer. 64~69,XX,+del(Xp),+1,+der(1)t(1;11;16),+2,+der(2)t(1;2),+der(3)ins(3;12), +der(4)t(2;4),+5,+del(5q),+7,+7,8,+dup(8),+del(9),+der(9)t(6;9;X;9),+10,+ P0196.Changes in the sex chromosomes in male breast can- 1 1 , + 1 1 , + d e l ( 1 1 p ) , + d e l ( 1 1 q ) , + 1 2 , cer patients 13,13,+i(13q),+i(13q),+der(13)t(5;i(13q)),+15,+16,+17,+del(18),- C. Hanson1, T. Gerdes2, M. Kirchhoff2, I. Kpf3, H. Rose2, B. Weijdegrd1, 19,+del(19),+der(19)t(5;19),+der(19)t(17;19),+20,+20,+22,+22 [cp10]. A. Weimarck3, Y. Wettergren4, R. Hultborn3 Moreover, 32 non-clonal aberrations have been observed in the 10 ana- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospi- lyzed metaphase spreads. Multicolor banding studies on selected chromo- tal; Gteborg, Sweden; 2Chromosome Laboratory, Department of Clinical somes (e.g. #8, #13) are in progress. In the present case HT29 clone 19A Genetics, Juliane Marie Center, Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark; was described earlier as terminally differentiated due to the shape of the 3Department of Oncology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital; Gteborg, cells in culture, implicating an at least almost normal karyotype, which Sweden; 4Department of Surgery, Oncolog lab, Sahlgrens University Hos- could not be confirmed. Thus, to clarify if a cell line is suited for molecular pital/S; Gteborg, Sweden genetic approaches cytogenetics should be performed before. Acknowl- charles.hanson@obgyn.gu.se edgments; Supported by the Herbert Quandt Stiftung der VARTAAG, the Following a previous study of male breast cancer (MBC) (Hultborn et al, Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs-Stiftung, the DAAD, the DFG and the 1997) performed on archival paraffin-embedded tissue, we started an Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. investigation applying the high resolution comparative genomic hybridiza- tion (CGH) technique on fresh material (lymphocytes) from MBC patients. Here we report results from the study of eight men being under current fol- low-up at the Department of Oncology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gteborg, Sweden. The aim of the study was to disclose suspected minor genomic gains and losses, specifically in X- and Y-chromosomes, in malePosters: Cancer Cytogenetics 139 breast cancer patients. One patient turned out to be a Klinefelter (47, XXY) P0199.Asimple specific pattern of chromosomal aberrations male. Finding one XXYmale among such a small group of MBC patients at early stages of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas; supports our finding of a closer association between MBC and Klinefelters PIK3CAbut not p63 gene as a likely target of 3q26-qter gains syndrome (Hultborn et al, 1997). The aberrations in the Ychromosome of R. R. Redon1, T. Hussenet1, D. Muller2, J. Abecassis2, S. P. du Manoir1 patients Nos 2, 7 and 8 seemed to be deletions in the same Y q-arm 1IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP; Illkirch, France; 2Centre Paul Strauss; region. Further, two patients (Nos 3 and 5) seemed to have amplifications Strasbourg, France in this same Yq-arm region as well as in the Yp-arm. We hypothesise that redon@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr changes in the Ychromosome may be a risk factor for male breast cancer. By CGH analysis of 21 low-grade, node and metastasis negative HNSCC, Result of CGH-analysis of the X and Ychromosome arms in males with we showed a simple and specific pattern of aberrations for pT1-2 but not breast cancer pT3 tumors, with frequent gains on the long arm of chromosome 3 (found Chromosome X (+ amplif, -Chromosome Y (+ amplif, - in 67% of cases), involving systematically the 3q26-qter area but with two Patient No del) del) alternative smallest region overlaps at 3q26 and 3q28-qter. First, to evalu- 1 --- --- ate the relative contribution of two outstanding positional and functional 2 --- p-, q- candidate oncogenes, PIK3CAat 3q26 and p63 at 3q28, in the pathogen- 3 --- p+, q+ esis of HNSCC displaying a 3q gain, we measured their respective tran- scription levels in tumors with previously determined gene copy number. 4 --- --- DNp63, the predominant p63 transcript, is overexpressed in tumors com- 5 --- p+, q+ pared to normal tissues, but its expression level is independent to gene 6 --- --- copy number. In contrast, a significant PIK3CAoverexpression is associ- 7 XX p+, q- ated with increased gene dosage. These results indicate that PIK3CA, 8 p+, q+ q- contrary to DNp63, may participate to the progression of head and neck tumors consequently to a low-level 3q over-representation Second, we P0197.Constitutional chromosomal rearrangements of 9p23- selected, by CGH and FISH on interphase nuclei, tumors exhibiting local- 24 in BRCA2 mutation carriers ized gains or amplifications in the 3q26-qter region. Analysis of these L. Savelyeva1, A. Claas1, I. Matzner1, P. Schlag2, W. Hofmann3, S. Scher- tumors by high resolution CGH on a BAC array dedicated to chromosome neck3, B. Weber4, M. Schwab1 3 will refine the mapping of 3q gains in head and neck cancer. 1German Cancer Research Center; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Robert-Rssle Klinik; Berlin-Buch, Germany; 3Max-Delbrck-Centrum for Molecular Med- P0200. Analysis of Aneuploidy Frequency in Washing and icine; Berlin-Buch, Germany; 4University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, Bioptic Samples of Blader Transitional Cell Carcinoma by United States FISH Technique L.Savelyeva@dkfz-heidelberg.de M. Kaynak1, M. Kilin2, M. S. Yildirim1, H. Acar1, A. Cenker2 Germ line mutations of the BRCA2 gene account for a large proportion of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Medical Faculty; familial breast cancer cases in females and the majority of familial breast Konya, Turkey; 2Department of Urology, Selcuk University, Medical Facul- cancer in males. Recent studies provide evidence for a role of the BRCA2 ty; Konya, Turkey protein in the maintenance of genomic integrity by involvement in DNA murat.kaynak@turk.net repair and recombination. In pursuit of identifying in humans genetic dam- Blandder transitional cell carcinomas are heterogenous groups of tumors age resulting from mutated BRCA2 we have analyzed constitutional kary- in biological and behavior terms. Most of them are diagnosed at the first otypes of BRCA2 mutation carriers. FISH analysis from lymphocytes of presentation as low grade and superficial, but about two-thirds of patients patients of breast cancer families with germ line BRCA2 mutation revealed present recurrences of which 10-25% will be of a higher stage. Karyotyp- additional constitutional chromosomal alterations on 9p23-24. The ing of tumors have been demonstrated to be an important prognostic index rearrangements obseved include inversions, duplications and amplifica- of cancers. However, accurate karyotype analysis of solid tumors is fre- tions. Additionally, a high level of random somatic chromosomal abnormal- quently insuficient by few number of recognizable metaphases. The detec- ities on 9p23-24 has been shown. The 9p rearrangements are complex in tion of numerical chromosomal aberrations on interphase nuclei by fluo- all families analysed showing that this chromosomal region has suffered a resence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been evidence to be important tool number of intrachromosomal recombinations. The topography of the 9p for bladder cancer. In this study, we performed FISH analysis with chro- rearrangements can differ among family members, even within an individ- mosome specific probes to detect numerical chromosome 8 and 11 aber- ual that can have cell populations with different 9p rearrangements. Col- ations on washing and bioptic samples of bladder transitional cell carcino- lectively these results raise point to an association of mutant BRCA2 with ma. The result showed that chromosomes 8 and 11 aneuploidies were genomic instability and gene alteration in 9p23-24 in at least a subset of increased. The incidence of aneuploidy increased in the paralel of the BRCA2 mutation carriers. tumour stage. P0198.Copy Number Changes In Breast Tumors; Preliminary P0201.The MN test in urothelial cells of cervix cancer patients Findings G. Ghandi, P. Sharma S. Artan1, U. Oner2, M. Muslumanoglu1, S. Isiksoy2, H. Ozon1, B. Yasar3, Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University; Amritsar, H. Kiper3, O. Cilingir1, N. Basaran1 India 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; baurs@glide.net.in Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Cervix cancer is a very frequent cancer among women especially in devel- Pathology; Eskisehir, Turkey; 3Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, oping countries while reduction in its incidence in the developed world has Department of Surgery; Eskisehir, Turkey been reported through various mass screening approaches because of the sartan_61@yahoo.com possibility of treatment on its early detection.Urine samples of just- diag- Breast cancer is one of the carcinomas that the extensive chromosome nosed cervix cancer patients (n=25; age-range 21-75 yr) and of those with aberrations involve in tumor development. Analysis of chromosome abnor- other gynaecological problems (n=25; age-range 21-70 yr) , were malities in solid tumors by the CGH has gained much importance since it processed for the MN test . The patients had married at an early age (11- is more sensitive than cytogenetics in respect to analysis of DNAgains and 15 yr) and had more number of abortions (n=21; 19 spontaneous and 2 losses. Purpose ; Screening of breast tumors for copy number changes induced) as compared to those in the controls (n=16; 5 spontaneous, 11 and comparing them with pathologic grades for tumor progression. Materi- induced). The total number of pregnancies were 127 and 93 in the patients als/Methods ; DNAsamples from 11 ductal and 4 lobular carcinomas were and control groups, respectively. The cancer patients had mostly (n=19) analysed. The tumor and control DNAs were differentially labelled by the low socioeconomic status while there were more control individuals (n=14) PCR labelling technique. Results ; Our preliminary results revealed a sub- belonging to middle socioeconomic status. An elevated frequency of cells stantial degree of overlap with the previous published reports. However, 2 with micronuclei was observed in 72% of the cancer patients which with of 11 ductal carcinomas showed 5q13.3-q21 amplification and 2 of 4 lobu- the Students t-test was significantly high (0.3590.058) as compared to lar ones revealed 5p gains and 16q21-q23 deletion. Of 15 analysed sam- that in control ones(16.7%, 0.0580.066). There were 8 individuals each in ples, 8 (53%) showed various copy number changes. The correlation stages I and II and 9 in stage III with the highest frequency of MNd cells between the genetic changes and pathologic grades were discussed. Con- being observed in stage III cancer patients though statistical significant clusion ; Gains and losses found by CGH are especially valuable because results were also observed when damage in stages I and II were compared of determination of mechanisms and the effective genes involved in breast with the control data. Highest frequency of cells with micronuclei was tumor development and progression. observed in patients married in the age range of 11-15 years, though the140 Posters: Cancer Cytogenetics damage in the other age-at-marriage groups was also significant. Maxi- the mouse tumors is low. But distinct genomic loci become affected. The mum damage was also observed in 51-60 yrs age group though data in increased copy number of some candidate genes on chromosome 11 and the different age groups when compared to their parallel and total age 15 was measured by quantitaive realtime PCR. We found a variable groups was significantly elevated too. The incidence of MNd cells was degree of amplification on chromosome 11 for Egfr, c-Rel and Stk10 and highest in the group with 4-6 number of pregnancies in the cancer patients on chromosome 15 for c-myc. Further, cell lines were established from dif- but was also significant as compared to that in the parallel control groups. ferent tumors. Significant results were also obtained on comparing the frequency of MNd cells in both, the low and middle SES groups with their parallel controls. P0204. Cancer Incidence in High Background Radiation The results of the present study for the MNT in urothelial cells have Areas; Facts Versus Fear revealed an elevated frequency of cytogenetic damage in cervix cancer J. Mortazavi1,2 patients even in a tissue which is not the site where the cancer has devel- 1Iranian Nuclear Regulatory Authority; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; oped. 2Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences; Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran P0202. Late Cytogenetic Changes after X-ray Treatment of radioadaptive@angelfire.com Malignancy It has been reported that upon reaching a certain level of cell damage the J. Koblik production of repair enzymes is triggered which decrease the chromosome Department of Clinical Genetics, General Hospital, NsP; Spisska Nova aberrations (Pohl-Ruling 1990, 1991). If so, prolonged exposure to high Ves, Slovakia levels of natural radiation in areas with elevated levels of background radi- nspspis@nextra.sk ation could decrease the frequency of chromosome aberrations. There are A 30 year old man with azoospermia was routinely investigated in the reports indicating that increased levels of chromosome aberrations in lym- Department of Clinical Genetics in our hospital. His karyotype was phocytes can be used to predict cancer risk in humans (Hagmar analysed after PHAstimulation of lymphocytes following short term culti- 2000,1998). One may conclude that a dose of ionizing radiation sufficient vation of peripheral blood. Taking his history, it was ascertained that in to produce a certain level of cell damage increases production of antioxi- childhood. Hodkgkins disease had been confirmed histologically. He dants and repair enzymes that decrease either the frequency of chromo- began treatm ent at 7 years, receiving several series of combined cytosta- some aberrations or the cancer risk. People in some areas of Ramsar, a tic treatnents supplemented with X ray therapy. The patients history is city in northern Iran, receive an annual radiation dose from background summarised in table l./on the poster/. For the last l4 years, the patient has radiation that is more than five times higher than the 20 mSv yr-1 that is felt very well. He is not taking medication and he has no problems with the permitted for radiation workers. Inhabitants of Ramsar have lived for many primary disease. He is examined by an oncologist twice a year/including generations in these high background areas. If an annual radiation dose of scintigraphy/with negative findings. He has no complications,except for a few hundred mSv is detrimental to health, causing genetic abnormalities azoospermia. The karyotype was analysed using standard methods and or an increased risk of cancer, it should be evident in these people. Our chromosomes were stained by Giemsa, following G banding by the trypsin cytogenetic studies show no significant differences between people in the method. Chromosomal aberrations were detected in about 20% of the high background compared to people in normal background areas. As analysed mitoses and inclited neuploidy, monosomy and polysomy of the there was no increased levels of chromosome aberrations, it may be pre- autosomes, balanced and unbalanced translocations, newly derived mark- dicted that the cancer incidence is not higher than the neighboring areas er chromosomes, breaks, dicentric chromosomes, acentric fragments and with normal background radiation level. Although there is not yet solid epi- other changes. Pictures of them are demonstrated on the poster.Three demiological information, most local physicians in Ramsar report anecdo- explanations can be proposed for these findings, which require further tally there is no increase in the incidence rates of cancer or leukemia in investigations. /a/the long term effect of X ray irradiation in childhood, inter- their area. There are no data to indicate a significant increase of cancer fering with the stem cells of the bone marrow, /b/ manifestation of the onset incidence in other high background radiation areas (HBRAs). Furthermore, of secondary malignancy /leukemia?/ not yet presenting symptomatical- several studies show a significant decrease of cancer death rates in areas ly,or /c/ Persistence of the primary disease. Patients history of the disease with high backgrounds. To test for adaptive response, an in vitro challenge is documented on the poster. dose of 1.5 Gy of gamma rays was administered to the lymphocytes. Lym- phocytes of Ramsar residents showed significantly reduced radiation sen- P0203. Characterization of secondary genomic changes in sitivity for chromosome aberrations compared to those of residents in nor- pancreatic tumors in transgenic TGFalpha/p53+/- and TGFal- mal background areas. Specifically, following this exposure inhabitants of pha/p53-/- mice - a murine tumor progression model for pan- HBRAs had about 56% the average number of induced chromosomal creatic cancer in human abnormalities of those in normal background radiation area (NBRA). These B. Schreiner1, U. Zechner2, F. Greten2, M. Wagner2, S. Koschnik2, C. findings suggest that adaptive response can be induced by chronic expo- Weber2, W. Deppert3, H. Kern4, G. Adler2, H. Hameister1, R. Schmid2 sure to radiation at levels lower than have been used in the laboratory. 1University of Ulm, Department of Human Genetics; Ulm, Germany; 2Uni- Given the apparent lack of ill effects in the populations of these high dose versity of Ulm, Department of Internal Medicine I; Ulm, Germany; 3Univer- rate areas, these data further suggest that current dose limits are overly sitiy of Hamburg, Heinrich Pette Institute for Experimental Virology and conservative. It can be concluded that prolonged exposure to high levels Immunology; Hamburg, Germany; 4University of Marburg, Department of of natural radiation possibly triggers processes such as the production of Cytobiology and Cytopathology; Marburg, Germany antioxidants and repair enzymes, which decreases the frequency of chro- bettina.schreiner@medizin.uni-ulm.de mosome aberrations and the cancer incidence rate. Transgenic mice overexpressing transforming growth-factor alpha (TGF- alpha) in exocrine pancreas show a transdifferentiation of acinar cells to P0205. Using cytogenetics methods in differential diagnos- duct-like cells. These cells form tubular structures, express ductal markers tics of urothelial neoplasms and develop pancreatic cancer with long latency and low incidence. As I. A. Bushkova, G. E. Plugnikova expected the Ras/Erk-pathway is activated in premalignant lesions in Rostov Regional Institute of Pathology, Department of Experimental TGFalpha transgenic mice. To investigate the effect of p53 inactivation on Pathology; Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation tumor susceptibility, TGFalpha-transgenic mice were cross bred with hete- matsionis@aaanet.ru rocygous p53 knock out mice, to generate TGFalpha/p53+/- and TGFal- Malignant urothelial neoplasms occupy the second place on frequency and pha/p53-/- mice. By p53 inactivation tumor formation is accelerated. on lethality among neoplasias of a bludder. The favourable location of the TGFalpha/p53+/+ mice develop pancreatic tumors on average by day 360, latter allows to utillize in treatment a local chemotherapy and immunother- TGFalpha/p53+/- by day 265 and TGFalpha/p53-/- by day 100 (TGFal- apy, however, not always it is possible to reach desirable outcome. Thus, pha/p53+/+ n=32, TGFalpha/p53+/- n=41, TGFalpha/p53-/- n=11). To iden- basing on histological research it is impossible to predict behaviour of a tify recurrent, secondary chromosomal imbalances, pancreatic carcinomas tumour - whether this tumor will be invasive, whether this invasive tumour were analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and by LOH will metastasize. Areason is hidden in heterogeneity of a tumour. The last using different markers. Tumors in TGFalpha/p53+/- mice segregate the researches in the field of molecular genetics have allowed closely to be wildtype p53 allel and acquire homozygous deletion of the p16INK4a / approximated to solution of these problems. As is known, the neoplasia is p19INK4a/ARF locus. CGH screening of these tumors revealed several accompanied by genom changes of malignant cells. Researches indicat- gains and losses. The most common overrepresentations were observed ing link of a biological potential of tumours with particular violations DNA on chromosome 11 proximal and on chromosome 15 distal and underrep- already have appeared. So, series of the authors bind development of a resentations on chromosome 11 distal and on chromosome 14. In contrast cancer of the bludder to deletions in particular districts of chromosomes 9p, to human pancreatic adenocarcinoma the total number of aberrations in 13q and 17p. Thus mapping here genes-supressors, such as p16Posters: Cytogenetics 141 (encodes inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinase), Rb (gene of a susceptibil- pseudocolors to specific chromosomal regions. We present for the first ity to a retinoblastoma), p53 - so-called Lthe genom watchdog- are time the complete set of appr. 160 regionspecific microdissection libraries exposed to mutations. These genes participate in a regulation of cell cycle, covering the entire human genome and the resulting MCB patterns for all not admitting a cell with DNAdamages to division. It was detected that the human chromosomes at the 550 band level. Clinical cases with congenital p16 deletion is a marker for a squamous metaplasia with greatest pro- or acquired complex chromosomal rearrangements involving different gressiveness. The mutations of p53 gene are correlated with a degree, chromosomes are presented. In some of these cases neither convention- stage and presence of a vascular invasion. The violations in Rb gene are al GTG-banding nor 24-color-FISH could resolve the complex changes, authentically influence on a survival rate of the patients. e.g. interstitial deletions, insertions or inverted insertion. Using this new And though the proteins, products of pathological genes, are well detected and straight forward MCB technique, complex rearrangements could be by immunohistochemistry methods, it does not allow to reveal hetero- clarified with one single flourescence in situ hybridization (FISH) experi- geneity of a neoplasia. We have concentrated the researches on attempt ment. Acknowledgments; This work was supported by the Herbert Quandt to prove genetic heterogeneity of non-papillary cancer (primary carcino- Stiftung der VARTAAG, the Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs-Stiftung, mas in situ) and secondary centers of carcinoma in situ at preexisting pap- the DAAD, the DFG and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. illary tumour, as it is known, that the prognosis of current non-papillary can- cer is much worse and it practically is not diagnosticated at cytoskopy. P0208. Microdissection of spectral karyotyped Chromo- Knowledges about heterogeneity of these groups of urothelial tumours will somes; The new FISH-MD technique offers the most accurate give possibilities of development various protocols of treatment for them. karyotyping under SKY. J. Weimer, N. Arnold P0206.Interphase FISH for evaluation of minimal residual dis- Universitts-Frauenklinik Kiel; Kiel, Germany ease (MRD) in CMLpatients joerg.weimer@t-online.de R. Talwar1, K. Kucheria1, V. Jobanputra1, V. P. Choudhry2 Atechnique disclosing most information about chromosome modifications 1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences; New is the technique of choice for analysis of chromosome alterations. The high Delhi, India; 2Department of Haematology, All India Institute of Medical Sci- efficient way to detect chromosome modifications by spectral karyotyping ences; New Delhi, India (SKY) and their detailed specification with microdissection of chromo- vjobanputra@hotmail.com somes labeled by fluorescense paints (FISH-MD) incited us to combine Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematopoietic malignancy both techniques to a new united technique called SKY-MD. This new tech- that progresses from a benign chronic phase to an ill-defined accelerated nique gives an overview of derivative chromosomes by spectral karyotyp- phase and subsequently blast crisis. Among the various drugs adminis- ing first and identifies such changed chromosomes through following tered to CMLpatients, Interferon-alpha(IFN) is gaining importance due to microdissection in an united procedure. Reverse painting identifies the its ability to induce cytogenetic response unlike the other myelo-suppres- involved chromosome regions including the breakpoints of such microdis- sive drugs like Busulphan (BU), Myleran, Hydroxyurea (HU) etc. The pres- sected chromosomes. SKY-MD was successfully applied on a prenatal ent study was conducted in our laboratory to assess the response to IFN case and unveils an invisible cryptic aberration. therapy in the Philadelphia (Ph) positive CMLpatients by sequential cyto- genetic analysis and to evaluate the importance of employing FISH as an P0209. Technical improvements for ultrastructure analyses adjunct procedure in evaluation of minimal residual disease (MRD). Cyto- on human chromosomes in the interphase and mitosis of the genetic analysis using standard protocols was carried out in 210 patients cell cycle with the laser scanning microscop LSM 510 (including 12 in blast crisis). Out of these, 185 patients (167 Ph+ and 18 V. Beensen1, T. Liehr1, A. Heller1, H. Starke1, M. Wiederhold2, P. Mhlig3, Ph-) were studied following presentations with clinical features of CML P. Ullmann4 while 25 cases (MPDs, acute leukemias and leukemoid reaction) were 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Clinics analysed to exclude the possibility of having Ph translocation, of Anesthesiology and Critical Care; Jena, Germany; 3Institute of Molecu- t(9;22)(q34;q11). Further dual colour FISH using specific probes for bcr lar Biotechnology e.V.; Jena, Germany; 4Carl Zeiss Jena GmbH; Jena, and abl genes was done in 28 patients and the results were compared with Germany those of conventional cytogenetics. Standard Ph translocation was vbee@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de observed in 167 cases (89 were 100% Ph+ and the rest were mosaics The ultrastructure of human chromosomes and their structural and func- ranging from 50-90%). One of the mosaic cases revealed the presence of tional organization in the interphase nucleus are still largely unknown. double Ph translocation in 23% of metaphases. Thirty-six Ph+ patients on Their exploration would be of great scientific interest. The simultaneous Interferon (IFN) therapy were followed up at intervals of 4 months till 3 presentation of fluorochromed chromosomes in combination with fluores- years. Sequential cytogenetic analysis and FISH was done in these cases cence-immunohistochemical presentations of the cytoskeleton provides an at every follow up. Twelve patients showed cytogenetic response after 12 innovative methodical approach to the study and solution of the open ques- months, 7 after 16 months, 3 after 20 months, 1 after 24 months and 1 after tions. For the simultaneous presentation of the cytoskeleton proteins with 32 months of IFN therapy. In all, varied degrees of cytogenetic response primary and secondary antibodies (antibodies labeled with FITC and Rho- was observed- complete response (0% Ph+ cells) in 2 cases, partial damine) and metaphase chromosomes (amniocyte preparation; in situ response (1% to 35% Ph +cells) in 1 case, minor response (35% to 90% technique; 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole - DAPI - staining), the common Ph+ cells) in 21 patients and no response (Ph+ cells >90%) in 14 cases. methanol-acetic acid fixation (3;1) was replaced with a fixing pretreatment These results show that IFN therapy can suppress the Ph+ clone and of the cells with a mixture of triton X-100 (2%), formaldehyde (2%) and glu- reverse the bone marrow karyotype to normal in a significant number of taraldehyde (0.5%). This kind of specimen-preserving pretreatment does patients. On comparing the results of cases analysed by FISH, in 25 cases not cause any visible spreading of chromosomes in the form of metaphase the results were same as those obtained by cytogenetics. However 3 plates. Fluorochroming of individual chromosomes or chromosome regions cases which were Ph-negative on karyotyping showed positive bcr/abl (multicolor FISH) was performed after a method described by RUBTSOV fusion signals on metaphase spreads and interphase nuclei. The results et al. (Hum. Genet. 97; 705-709, 1996). An efficient analysis of specimens indicates that FISH is a highly sensitive and efficient tool for detecting even prepared by the new object-preserving method described is made possible low levels of abnormal cells that appear Ph-negative by cytogenetics. The especially by the capability for simultaneous excitation of all fluorochromic study shows the importance of using FISH for detecting response at the dyes used (including DAPI, FITC, Rhodamine) and the acquisition and molecular level in CMLpatients on therapy and demonstrates the efficien- analysis of data in three dimensions. For instance in the metaphase stage cy of FISH in detecting abnormal clone of small size. compared with an interphase nucleus a quantitative increase in the tubu- line and tau-protein concentration can be correlated to the increase of P0207.Multicolor banding (MCB) of all human chromosomes chromosomal DNAconcentration. In the case of simultaneous tested - based on region specific microdissection libraries actin such a quantitative increase was not found. The obtained data allow T. Liehr1, A. Heller1, H. Starke1, A. Weise1, K. Mrasek1, V. Trifonov2, N. conclusions to be drawn on the intracellular, intranuclear and intra-chro- Rubtsov2, U. Claussen1 mosomal localization of elements of the cytoskeleton (e.g. tubuline and 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute tau-protein), and permits analyses of the location-specific interaction of Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation between DNAprobe and target-DNAin the chromosome (e.g., by multicol- i8lith@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de or FISH). In addition to this 3D analyses we made image stacks (e.g. of The multicolor-banding (MCB) technique, allowing the differentiation of FISH stained metaphase plates) to generate three-dimensional image chromosome region specific areas at the band and sub-band level, is information, such as the creation of stereo images and orthogonal or based on regionspecific libraries producing changing fluorescence intensi- oblique image sections. These techniques allow us to further investigations ty ratios along the chromosomes. The latter are used to assign different on cell-biological questions and ultrastructure analyses. In the medical142 Posters: Cytogenetics field, this may deepen our understanding of the structure and function of The multicolor-banding (MCB) technique, allows the differentiation of chro- the elements of the cytoskeleton and their interaction with other cell struc- mosome region specific areas at the band and sub-band level. It is based tures as the chromosome, the kinetochore and the centrosome. on microdissection derived region specific libraries producing changing flu- orescence intensity ratios along the chromosomes, which are used to P0210. Characterization of a small supernumerary marker assign different pseudocolors to specific chromosomal regions. A MCB chromosome by centromere specific multicolor-color FISH probe set for chromosome 2 was used in combination with region specific (cenM-FISH); case report YAC probes to characterize aberrations with involvement of chromosome I. Hartmann1, H. Starke1, A. Nietzel1, F. von Eggeling1, M. Rocchi2, V. 2. Two clinical cases, both presenting mental retardation and multiple dys- Beensen1, B. Mitulla3, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 morphic stigmata were analyzed up to now. Case 1 had a der(2)t(2;8) and 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute the breakpoints according to GTG banding and CGH were located in 2q37 of Genetics; Bari, Italy; 3Central Clinic, Genetic Counseling; Suhl, Ger- and 8q22. Using MCB these breakpoints were corrected and refined to many 2q37.3 and 8q23-24.1. Case 2 had a deletion - again according to GTG- i8lith@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de banding and CGH data - in 2q32-33. MCB showed, however, that the dele- Cytogenetic diagnostic was done in a newborn boy who presented with tion was more proximally located and MCB combined with the region spe- typical features of Down syndrome like hypertelorism, simian crease and cific YAC 762E6 confirmed that breakpoints of the deletion were in 2q31 hypomotility. The suspicion of Down syndrome was confirmed in cytoge- and 2q32. MCB analysis on two other patients with duplication in 2p are in netics as a free trisomy 21 was detected. Additionally a small supernu- progress. In summary, it has been demonstrated, that MCB can success- merary marker (SMC) chromosome was detected in 28/35 analyzed fully be combined with region specific YAC probes and can be used for the metaphase spreads (karyotyope; 48,XY,+21,+mar). Such stable small refinement of uncertain chromosomal breakpoints. Acknowledgments; This SMC often present without molecular cytogenetically detectable euchro- work was supported by the Herbert Quandt Stiftung der VARTAAG, the matin and are uneasy to characterize in standard cytogenetic approaches, Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs-Stiftung, the DAAD, the DFG and the as neither GTG-banding nor 24-color FISH using whole chromosome Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. libraries as probes are able to explain their origin. Microdissection and reverse painting could be used for their characterization, as well. Howev- P0213. Diagnostic applications of M-FISH analysis to chro- er, this technique is used more reasonably for larger markers with larger mosomal aberrations portions of euchromatin. Recently, we developed a probe set, using all M. Sone1, T. Iwai1, S. Yamamoto1, S. Ogita1, S. Furukawa1, Y. Hamada1, human centromeric probes labeled in different colors, allowing the simul- I. Kondo2 taneous characterization and identification of all chromosomes by their 1Kagawa Childrens Hospital; Zentsuji, Japan; 2Ehime University School of centromeric region (Nietzel et al., Hum Genet., in press). The technique, Medicine; Ehime, Japan called cenM-FISH has been applied in the presented case and revealed, sone@kagawasyo.hosp.gp.jp that the small SMC was a derivative chromosome 4. As it was not stained Multiple fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) analysis allows the by a whole chromosome painting probe for chromosome 4 it was described visualization of 22 human autosomes and two sex chromosomes, in 24 dif- as a der(4)(p11q11). As the karyotypes of the parents were completely ferent colors. We have used M-FISH analysis in four patients with compli- inconspicuous two de novo events must have taken place to lead to the cated chromosomal aberrations determined preliminary by GTG-binding detected numerical aberrations. Studies to exclude uniparental disomy 4 methods; one case with 46, XY, t(8;16;11), one case with 45, X, -14, are in progress. In summary, the cenM-FISH technique is a very useful +t(1;14), one case with 46, XY, +12p, and one case with 46, XX., der(5), approach for the one step identification of all human chromosomes by their t(5;7)(p15.1;p15.3). Furthermore, region specific DNAprobes were used to centromeres. Acknowledgments; This work was supported by the Herbert verify precise break points in abnormal chromosomes.Then, karyotypes Quandt Stiftung der VARTAAG, the Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs- wereidentified as follows; one was 46, XY, t(8;16;11)(q21.2;p11.2;p11.2), Stiftung and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. one was 45, X, -14, der(Y); t(Y;1)(q11.2; q25), t(Y;14)(p11.3;q13), ins(Y;3) (p11.3; q24 q25), one was 47, XY, +dup(12) (pter-q13.11) and one was 46, P0211.The significance of microsatellite analysis in the rou- XX,der(5), t(5;7)(p15.1; p15.3)mat. In all cases, deleted and duplicated tine diagnostics of MR/MCAsyndromes portions were discertained by GTG-binding methods. The M-FIHS analysis M. Czak1, . Morava2, G. Kosztolnyi2 was able to identify easily chromosomal origins in marker chromosomes. 1University of Pcs, MTA-PTE Clinical Genetic Research Group; Pcs, The M-FISH analysis in addition to the GTG-binding method is provided Hungary; 2University of Pcs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child with the most cytogenetic information in complicated chromosomal aberra- Development; Pcs, Hungary tions. mrita@apacs.pote.hu In the recent years the basic role of the routine chromosomal examination P0214. A new versatile technique to detect specific in the clinical evaluation of mental retardation/multiple congenital anom- sequences within single DNA molecules; Multiphoton multi- alies (MR/MCA) syndromes has progressively been completed by FISH. color FISH (MM-FISH) However, even the time and labour consuming FISH techniques including A. Ghlert1, I. Riemann2, A. Nietzel1, N. Rubtsov3, V. Trifonov4, U. YAC/BAC clones may be insufficient to give precise answer to the clinical Claussen1, T. Liehr1, K. Knig2 geneticists. Cases are presented in which microsatellite marker analyses 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Laser using dried blood spots on Guthrie cards resulted in significant additional Microscopy Division, Institute of Anatomy II; Jena, Germany; 3Institute of information and completed the clinical diagnostics. In the first (patient with Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation; 4Institute of an unusual phenotype and a ring chromosome 15) the karyotype/pheno- Cytology and Genetics; Novosibirsk, Germany type correlation analysis was supplemented by precise data, in the second i8lith@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de (a complex chromosomal rearrangement) the lost of significant parts of Multiphoton multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridisation (MM-FISH) is chromosomal material could be excluded with more certainty, in the third based on non-resonant two or more photon excitation of multiple FISH flu- (an interstitial deletion of the X chromosome) the extent of the missing part orophores in a subfemtoliter excitation volume. We used a femtosecond could be defined more precisely. On the base of these observations, the laser source at 800 nm (near infrared = NIR) in combination with a laser authors suggest that it is worth enrolling microsatellite analysis to the rou- scanning microscope and objectives of NA>1.2 to induce the fluorescence tine protocoll of MR/MCAdiagnostics, which may result in significant data of a variety of FISH fluorophores and to perform pinhole-free fluorescence essential not only for uniparental disomy but also for otherwise unsoluble imaging with submicron spatial resolution. FITC-labeled 40 kb subtelomer clinical problems. probes and multicolor-labeled centromere probes that bind to repetitive sequences of 0.340 kb and 2.000 kb have been detected. Three-dimen- P0212. Chromosome 2 rearrangements precisely character- sional depiction of 10m cryosections and of an amniocyte interphase ized by multicolor banding (MCB) and simultaneously with nucleus have been done. Taking advantage of the simultaneous excitation region specific probes of different FISH fluorophores we realized multicolor imaging with a single A. Weise1, H. Starke1, M. Volleth2, M. Stumm2, A. Heller1, N. Rubtsov3, V. scan and a single excitation wavelength. Additionally, we have visualized Trifonov3, M. Rocchi4, K. Mrasek1, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 Spectrum Orange and Spectrum Green labeled bcr and abl gene probes 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute of 300 and 650 kb on single DNA-fibers with an estimated number of 75 - of Human Genetics; Magdeburg, Germany; 3Institute of Cytology and 225 m-1 fluorescent molecules. MM-FISH provides the possibility to Genetics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation; 4Institute of Genetics; Bari, detect specific DNA-sequences within interphase nuclei and tissue biop- Italy sies with high light penetration depth and without out-of focus fading. Addi- i8lith@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de tionally, the NIR laser microscope was used to create laser cuts on chro-Posters: Cytogenetics 143 mosomal DNA. On one hand, the effects of these laser cuts was analyzed daniela.ehling@biologie.uni-bielefeld.de by paint generation from chromosomes after laser cuts of different size. On To date, almost complete sequences of two human chromosomes are the other hand human chromosomes were dissected with laser in specific available and allow to search for chromosomal regions of interest if suit- regions, the fragments were collected and amplified by DOP-PCR, to cre- able computing programs are at hand. We have used the REPuter pro- ate chromosome region specific DNA-libraries. The labeled products were gram to view the distribution of exact and degenerate repeats with a mini- successfully tested with FISH on human chromosomes. In summary, MM- mal length of 20 bp in the Down syndrome critical region and subtelomer- FISH and the possibility of using NIR laser microscopy for microdissection ic region of 21q22.3. The program allowed us to select for large regions have potential applications in the field of molecular cytogenetics, prenatal without repeats and high gene content. Moreover, we have designed spe- diagnostic and molecular pathology - especially for 3-D-applications. cific primers within these sequences and isolated several overlapping BAC clones by screening a BAC library. By sequencing the ends of these BAC P0215. Assessment Of Ipm-fish, A New M-fish Technique clones the exact size and positions of the clones in the map of chromo- Combining Combinatorial Labeling And R-banding; Study Of some 21 were determined. These BAC clones are generich and are com- 18 Patients With Various Constitutional Chromosomal posed of fewer repeats compared to other sequences known on chromo- Rearrangements. some 21, thus they are suitable for Fluorescence in situ hybridisation J. Aurich-Costa1, E. Grgoire1, H. Mossafa2, S. Tapia2, D. Chrif1 (FISH) analyses. These clones yield high-intensity, region-specific FISH 1Genset, S.A.; Evry, France; 2Laboratoire Pasteur Cerba; Cergy Pontoise, signals on both metaphase chromosomes and interphase nuclei and rep- France resent a major source for the identification of trisomy and subtelomeric joan.aurich@genset.fr deletions for chromosome 21. Here, we present a combined software and The recently described M-FISH and SKYtechniques are complementary to experimental approach and show the application to extract specific the standard karyotypic analysis identifying the origin of rearranged chro- sequences that are useful for the detection of human chromosomal disor- mosomal fragments. However only the poor DAPI banding is usually used ders. to define the breakpoints. Here, we report the analysis of 18 patients pre- senting different constitutional chromosomal abnormalities with a new M- P0218. Partial Trisomies and the Nature of Chromosomal FISH technique; IPM-FISH, which combines IRS-PCR painting probes and Bands M-FISH, resulting in a simultaneous labeling and R-banding. Method; A. I. Corominas, E. A. Pastene, E. I. Aranda Patients presented constitutional abnormalities including numerical and Centro Nacional de Gentica Mdica; Buenos Aires, Argentina structural chromosomal rearrangements. These patients have been previ- clamidia@radar.com.ar ously karyotyped by RHG banding. Ten to thirty metaphases were ana- The human genome is a mosaic of isochores, long segments of DNAwith lyzed by IPM-FISH. Painting probes were labeled with combinations of distinctive characteristics of gene richness and nucleotid composition FITC, DEAC, Cy3, Texas Red, Cy5. Images were acquired and analyzed (Bernardi et al.). The correlation between isochores and chromosomal as already described (Aurich-Costa et al., Genes Chromosomes and Can- bands has been extensively studied, but the relation with viability of these cer, in press). Results; All chromosomal abnormalities were detected and segments in triple doses was poorly explored. Brewer et al have described completely described using IPM-FISH in a single experiment. There is a a map of partial trisomies and their correlation with different phenotypes. perfect correlation in the breakpoint definition between IPM-FISH and RHG Over the last 25 years, partial autosomal trisomies have been important banding. Only when the chromosomal abnormalities involved heterochro- tools for gene mapping, with the aim of locate genes in contiguous gene matic or repeat regions is IPM-FISH unable to determine the chromosomal syndromes, contributing towards the mapping of several loci. Asystemati- origin. However, in those cases, whatever the technique used in the kary- cal analysis of chromosomal segments not observed in partial trisomies otypic analysis, other FISH techniques are required to determine the ori- can provide information about triple-dose lethal genes, and, on the other gin. Conclusion; Here we show that even for intrachromosomal rearrange- hand, those segments observed in tetradoses, those vertically transmited ments, IPM-FISH is a sensitive, precise and reliable technique. in triple doses, and those appeared in triple doses with normal phenotypes, can yield clues on the biological role of chromosomal organisation. We pro- P0216. High-resolution Mapping of the Human 4q21 and the pose here a map of chromosomal duplications based on clinical informa- Mouse 5E3 CXC Chemokine Cluster by Fiber-FISH. tion from reports appeared in Medline about autosomal partial trisomies, M. Erdel1, M. Theurl1, M. Meyer2, H. C. Duba1, G. Utermann1, G. Werner- and analyse its correlations with different types of chromosomal bands. Felmayer2 1Institut fr Medizinische Biologie und Humangenetik der Universitt; Inns- P0219. The use of FISH for the assessment of results from bruck, Austria; 2Institut fr Medizinische Chemie und Biochemie der Uni- transfection and transgenesis experiments. versitt; Innsbruck, Austria A. Y. van der Veen, H. H. Faber, T. Dijkhuizen, A. van den Berg, T. Tim- martin.erdel@uibk.ac.at mer, A. ter Elst, P. M. J. McLaughlin, C. H. C. Buys The CXC or small inducible cytokine B subfamily (SCYB) includes the non Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen; Groningen, The ERL CXC T-cell chemoattractants MIG (SCYB9) and IP-10 (SCYB10). Netherlands These gamma interferon-inducible chemokines were localized to human A.Y.van.der.Veen@medgen.azg.nl chromosome 4q21 and have been shown to be organized in a mini-cluster Results from transfection and transgenesis experiments are usually that is distant from another tight cluster of other CXC chemokine genes at assessed by PCR with primers for the sequence of the cDNA or the 4q12. The physical separation together with data from phylogenetic analy- genomic fragment under study. Sequences to be introduced either contain sis of the CXC proteins suggest that MIG and IP-10 form a distinct evolu- a selectable marker themselves or are being co- transfected with a plas- tionary lineage. We recently identified the human and mouse homologue mid carrying such a marker. We have used FISH analysis (i) to quickly of the closely related chemokine I-TAC (SCYB11) and mapped this gene assess the proportion of cells into which a cosmid had been co- transfect- to the same mini-cluster at 4q21 and the orthologous mouse locus 5E3, ed with a neomycin-resistant plasmid and to check the clones resulting respectively, by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). Here, using iso- after appropriate dilution to obtain monoclonal cultures for cosmid content, lated PAC and BAC probes and cloned sequences from SCYB9, SCYB10, (ii) to determine integration sites for PACs with a selectable marker and to and SCYB11 from man and mouse, we applied two-colour FISH on select those clones that had single copy or low copy integration; (iii) to stretched DNA fiber preparations (Fiber-FISH). On both, human and determine integration sites of human gene constructs in human gene- mouse DNAfiber targets, the three chemokines were found in an identical expressing transgenic mice and rats. In all these applications, FISH analy- arrangement as a cluster within a range of approximately 25 kilobases. We sis appeared to be an easy and excellent method of assessment of results. have determined the arrangement from centromer to telomere Where the latter occurs on the basis of many cells in culture or tissue, thus (SCYB11/SCYB10/SCYB9) and the distance separating the genes (5 kb obliterating differences between individual cells, FISH analysis leads to a and 7 kb, respectively). Sequence and FISH data strongly support the very precise picture on a cell by cell basis. Therefore, we consider FISH hypothesis that the three genes result from gene duplication which took analysis a welcome if not necessary complement to assessment by PCR. place before emergence of muroid rodents. P0220.De novo der(5) identified as an interstitial insertion of P0217. Identification of high quality anchored BAC FISH chromosome 3 material by COBRAmulti-colour FISH probes by using REPuter program H. Engels1, M. Krei-Nachtsheim1, A. Ehrbrecht1, S. Zahn1, R. Schubert1, D. Ehling1, J. V. Choudhuri2, J. Weidner3, R. Giegerich2, J. Wirth1, T. G. Schwanitz1, C. Ergang1, M. van der Burg2, D. Hansmann3, A. K. Raap2, Schmitt-John1 H. J. Tanke2, J. Wiegant2 1University of Bielefeld; Bielefeld, Germany; 2Faculty of Technology; Biele- 1Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany; 2Department of Molecular feld, Germany; 3Praenadia GmbH; Muenster, Germany Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands;144 Posters: Cytogenetics 3Zytogenetisches Labor Dr. Hansmann / Dr. Wei; Meckenheim, Germany probes and the use of specialized techniques such as MFISH and sub- hengels@meb.uni-bonn.de telomereric probes have improved significantly the services offered by clin- A5 year old boy presented with ASD II, bilateral cleft palate, strabism, bilat- ical cytogenetic laboratories. eral optic nerve coloboma, sensorineural hearing loss, bilateral inguinal herniae, micropenis, seizures and a pronounced psychomotor develop- P0223. NOR activity of a bisatellited additional chromosome mental retardation. Height, weight and head circumference were well in karyotype of patient with the features of Turner phenotype below the 3rd centile. The family history was inconspicuous. Cytogenetic A. Pendina, O. Chiryaeva, T. Kuznetzova analyses demonstrated a derivative chromosome 5 with additional materi- Otts Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Saint-Petersburg, Russian al of unknown origin in the distal long arm. FISH with a whole chromosome Federation paint / WCP5 indicated a heterologous insertion of material within 5q3. Its pendina@mail.ru banding pattern was inconclusive and did not allow identification of the A13-years-old girl with typical clinical features of Turner phenotype (short inserted material. COBRAmulti-colour FISH with 24 WCPs pointed out a stature, shield chest, short neck) subjected to cytogenetic analysis. Cul- chromosome 3 origin of the inserted material which was confirmed by FISH tured lymphocytes studies identified the small supernumerary marker chro- with a WCP3. Even with this information, the breakpoints of the aberration mosome in 49% of cells. The both parents had normal karyotype. Multiple could not be determined upon re-examination of GTG-, CBG- and QFQ- staining techniques were used for identification of the extra chromosome. banded metaphases; Although a pericentromeric origin of the inserted With QFH-banding the marker appeared as monocentric with two major material could be excluded after CBG banding, its banding pattern fit nei- QFH-positive bands and with satellites of variable size on its both ends; ther the short nor the long arm of chromosome 3 exactly. To clarify the ori- with C-banding, two C-positive regions indicated that chromosome pos- gin of the insertion, studies by 48 colour COBRA-FISH are in progress. sessed two centromeres. Silver staining demonstrated the presence of Using only 5 fluorophores, this novel technique achieves colour identifica- NORs variety in size on both ends. NOR activity was estimated by the size tion of 48 different targets, in our case the differential labeling of all human of silver deposits using Arbitrary Scale Units of 0-3. The NOR activity of p and q arms by PQ-COBRA-FISH (Genome Res. 10;861-865). Results of each acrocentric chromosome in patient karyotype was the same as in the additional studies as well as a genotype-phenotype correlation will be parental karyotypes, except both chromosomes 14 and maternal chromo- presented. Supported by the DFG / Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft some 22. Comparisons of the total cellular NOR activity of cells with mark- er and without it showed significant difference (P<0,05). This difference P0221.Chromosomes in interphase are similar to metaphase was conditioned by marker chromosome NOR activity. NOR activity of chromosomes acrocentric chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, 22 was the same in both cell U. Claussen1, J. Lemke1, J. Claussen1, I. Chudoba2, I. Trifonov3, N. lines. The existence of compensatory mechanisms regulating Ag-NOR Rubtsov3, H. Starke1, A. Heller1, K. Sperling4, T. Liehr1 activity seemed to be rather improbable in that case. 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Meta- Systems GmbH; Altlussheim, Germany; 3Institute of Cytology and Genet- P0224.Computer assisted dagnosis of chromosomal aberra- ics; Novosibirsk, Russian Federation; 4Institute of Human Genetics; Berlin, tions Germany A. Koehler1, B. Wolf2, U. Tautenhahn2, J. Pelz2 ucla@mti-n.uni-jena.de 1Institut fuer Humangenetik; Giessen, Germany; 2Institut fuer Human- To understand the regulation of gene expression and the function of genes genetik; Berlin, Germany at the 3D-level, the knowledge of the structure of chromosomes in inter- angelika.koehler@humangenetik.med.ini-giessen.de phase nuclei is of main interest. Here, using the high resolution DNA- The diagnosis of human malformation syndromes, if not possible at a based multicolour banding technique (MCB), we examined the shape and glance, requires much subsequent work. In the case of an unrecognised banding pattern of human chromosomes 5 on lymphocyte interphase pattern of multiple congenital anomalies a chromosome karyotype is usu- nuclei and on nuclei of HeLa cells at the 2D-level arrested at different phas- ally requested. Developmental delay, growth retardation and abnormalities es of the cell cycle (early, middle, late G1; early, middle, late S; early mid- of three different organ systems strongly suggest a chromosomal aberra- dle, late G2). Chromosomes 5 in 2 dimensionally flattened interphase tion. Some commercially available computerised data-bases like SYN- nuclei are bent, folded, and show a MCB pattern similar to metaphase DROC and the Human Cytogenetics Database provide information on the chromosomes. The length of their axis is comparable to that of metaphase phenotypes of patients with cytogenetically ascertained chromosome aber- chromosomes at the 700 band resolution. The MCB pattern is visible in all rations. The diagnostic abilities of these programs were tested using the phases of the cell cycle and can even be used for the identification of small clinical findings of 101 patients with an established karyotype. Both pro- structural chromosome aberrations which may be of fundamental interest grams are based on an algorithm which seeks and defines a diagnosis by in cytogenetics. a set of phenotypic components all having the same weight (descriptive algorithm). Asecond (Bayesian) algorithm is applied by SYNDROC to rank competing diagnoses in order of probability. We used three levels of preci- P0222. FISH, MFISH and Subtelomeric Probes in Clinical sion to evaluate the proposed diagnoses; suggestion of the correct (1) Cytogenetics chromosome, (2) chromosome arm, (3) aberration typ. The best results C. B. Lozzio, T. Ryan, E. Bamberger, E. Ralston, E. Holland, W. Carter, C. were yielded with the descriptive algorithm; the respective chromosome Worthington, K. Harmon was diagnosed in nearly all cases, the correct chromosomal arm in about University of Tennessee; Knoxville, TN United States 60% of all tests and the aberration typ on the right chromosome arm was clozzio@mc.utmck.edu suggested in about 25%. With the Bayesian algorithm the respective num- From January 1, 1995 to December 15, 2000 we have performed 1375 bers were 52%, 28% and 16%. The probabilities calculated with this algo- molecular cytogenetic studies in 167 amniotic fluids, 5 CVS, 63 bone mar- rithm were far from being convincing with values of less than 0.25 for the rows, 115 tissues and 996 cultures of peripheral blood. Microdeletion syn- majority of cases. Since all patients had a cytogenetically confirmed diag- dromes, rearrangements and marker chromosomes have been detected or nosis, it seems to be necessary to change some of the estimates that went characterized by these techniques. We used wcp, alpha satellite and spe- into the Bayesian formula. cific region probes for FISH. MFISH was performed with the Multicolor Spectra Vysion Assay from Vysis and the Applied Imaging CytoVision Soft- P0225.21/21 Carrier As a Result Of Unexpected Segregation ware. The subtelomeres were investigated with either the Chromoprobe In Robertsonian Translocation 14/21 Multiprobe Tfrom Cytocell or the ToTelVysion Vysis probes. Examples of E. Kovacova, F. Cisarik chromosome markers identified by these techniques include two small The Hospital of Zilina; Zilina, Slovakia markers derived from chromosome 5, a small marker 7 in a case that also foxi@mail.viapvt.sk had a pericentric inversion of the X chromosome and a marker 13q32-qter We studied segregation of Robertsonian translocation (RT) 14/21 in large with neocentromere. Several cases with de novo translocations were rec- family. Besides carriers of RT14/21, we found exchange in chromosomal ognized by these techniques. In two of these cases the translocated region composition from RT14/21 to 21/21 in one sibling. He has one child with was very small and included the subtelomeres. In these cases we used the trisomy 21 and there was one spontaneous abortion. In the rest of family multiple subtelomeric probes. We found that an add (18)(p11.2) was a we found another 2 cases of trisomy 21 and 5 spontaneous abortions. We der(18)t(18;14) with monosomy 18p and partial trisomy 14q and the other examined another 7 families with various RTs in our database. Alltogether, case had a der(8)t(8;13) with monosomy 8p and partial trisomy 13q. in 8 genealogies there were 40 carriers, 4 cases of trisomy of acrocentrics MFISH studies in bone marrows and solid tumors characterized the origin and 18 spontaneous abortions. We did not find the same case of exchange of multiple chromosome rearrangements and helped in the interpretation of of acrocentrics in RTs in our database. The literature does also not refer to the diagnoses and/or prognoses. We conclude that the availability of new such identical unusual segregation in RTs. Chromosomes 13, 14 and 21Posters: Cytogenetics 145 are preferentially engaged in RTs, therefore carriers of 13/14, 14/21 and ods. Semen samples were collected from 7 normal males aged 26-31 21/21 are most frequently found in the population of newborns as well as years. Aminimum of 6,000 sperm nuclei per sample for disomy and 12,000 in groups of patients with various types of ascertainment. Preference of sperm nuclei per sample for diploidy were evaluated for each chromosome chromosomes 13, 14 and 21 in RTs explains Therman /1989/ in hypothe- (618,335 sperm nuclei total). Hybridization efficiency was 99.61%. We did sis about crossing-over in segment A-B, dealing with inversion of A-B in not observe significant differences in disomy rates for any chromosome chromosome 14 relative to chromosomes 13 and 21. We assume that when comparing spermatozoa with good motility to those with poor motili- occurence of exchange of chromosomes in RT from 14/21 to 21/21 is ty. Diploidy rates in the discontinuous Percoll separated spermatozoa were extremely seldom, and may proceed via two mechanisms; a/ meiotic not significantly different between spermatozoa with good motility and crossing-over with exchange in RTfrom 14/21 to 21/21, and subsequent those with poor motility (p=0.31). However, after separation by glass-wool loss of chromosome 21 after fertilisation in early trisomic zygota b/ mitotic method the frequency of diploid sperm with good motility (mean=0.26%; crossing-over in early zygota, releasing the chromosome 14 from RT14/21 range=0.16%-0.37%) was significantly higher than those with poor motility and formation of RT21/21. Risk of unbalanced offspring for male carrier (mean=0.22%; range=0.12%-0.35%) (p=0.046). After separation by swim- RT14/21 is about 2.5%, while risk for carrier RT21/21 is 100%. up method the frequency of diploid spermatozoa with good motility (mean=0.18%; range,0.12%-0.30%) was significantly lower than those P0226.An interesting case of mosaic tetrasomy, trisomy, dis- with poor motility (mean=0.25%; range,0.17%-0.43%) (p=0.010). Even omy and monosomy of chromosome 13 though significant differences were observed between motile and poorly M. Zanganeh, S. Voghouie, A. Karimin-Nejad, N. Naghashpour, R. Assaie, motile spermatozoa selected by swim-up and Glass-wool methods, the dif- M. H. Karimi-Nejad ferences were so small that they could be ignored in clinical practice. Our Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of results suggest that the separation of motile sperm by the methods Iran described here does not have an effect on the selection of spermatozoa of mhkarimi@mavara.com disomy and diploidy. Mr. & Mrs. A.F., an unrelated couple were referred to our center for chro- mosomal study with history of three abortions. Mr. A.F. is 32 years old and P0229.ARare Case; Mosaic Trisomy 22 Mrs. A.F., a 27 years old female with G3 P0 Ab3. Twenty metaphse M. Ozdemir1, N. Ay2, B. Durak1, H. Berkil1, Y. H. Ozon1, I. Kaya1, N. spreads of Mr. A.F. revealed normal male karyotype. 50 metaphase Basaran1 spreads were studied from PHAstimulated lymphocytes of Mrs. A.F. show- 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; ing four mosaic patterns with robertsonian translocation of chromosomes Eskisehir, Turkey; 2SSK Hospital Pediatrics Department; Eskisehir, Turkey 13. 45, XX, der(13;13)9q10;q10)/ 45 cells (90%) showed 45 chromosomes mozdemir@ogu.edu.tr with one copy of the derivative chromosome, 3 cells (6%) showed 46 chro- The case, 9 years of age, the daughter of healthy parents (mother;43 years mosomes with 2 copies of the derivative chromosome without normal 13s father;44 years) was referred to our center because of the mental retarda- (tetrasomy 13), 1 cell (2%) showed one derivative chromosome and one tion. The pedigree was normal, the two sibs of the proband were healthy. normal 13 (trisomy 13), 1 cell (2%) had one normal chromosome 13 Her pysical examination revealed facial dysmorphism, microchephaly, (monosomy 13). Unfortunately further medical work up and examination hiperflexibility of the joints. The chromosome constitution of her was deter- was not possible because of lack of cooperation on the patients part. We mined as 46,XX/47,XX,+22 (98/2) (2%). Because of the mosaic karyotype, believe that the various mosaic cell lines are a result of pre and post zygot- skin biopsy was performed and then the FISH results were analysed. The ic nondisjunction???? mosaic trisomy was confirmed (46,XX/47,XX,+22) (73/27) (27%). The physical features of the case were in consistent with her mosaic karyotype. P0227.Increased rate of meiotic and mitotic non-disjunction This case was reported since mosaic trisomy 22 is the rarely seen abnor- of chromosome 21 in an arab family mality and it is a good example to show the importance of FISH in mosaic C. Ramel1, A. Krebsova1, L. Al Gazali2, H. Neitzel1, K. Sperling1 karyotypes. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Humboldt-University, Berlin; Berlin, Ger- many; 2Paediatrics Department, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain; Al P0230.Chromosome analysis in mental retardation. Ain, United Arab Emirates R. Mikelsaar1, A. Salo2, K. Varb1, A. Svari3, K. Muru1, R. Teek1 christian.ramel@charite.de or rubberchris@web.de 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu; Tartu, Down Syndrome (DS) is usually the result of maternal meiotic non-dis- Estonia; 2United Laboratories Ltd; Helsinki, Finland; 3Karula Homeschool; junction. DS with free trisomy 21 in more than two siblings of chromoso- Karula, Estonia mally normal parents is due to gonadal mosaicism or premature cen- mikels@ut.ee tromere division (PCD). Here we report on a consanguineous arab family Mental retardation affects 2-3% of the population and is etiologically very with 10 children of whom three had free trisomy 21. The parental kary- heterogeneous. It has involved at least in 503 gene disorders and in most otypes were normal and did not exhibit PCDs. Based on 22 evenly distrib- chromosomal anomalies. Routine cytogenetic analysis indicates that chro- uted microsatellites, it was shown that the extra chromosome was of mosomal anomalies are the cause at about 35% of cases of severe men- maternal origin, resulting from an error in meiosis I (2 cases) and meiosis tal retardation. Multiprobe-FISH reveals submicroscopic subtelomeric II. The recombination rate (1 and 2 exchanges in the siblings) was normal. chromosome defects in 7% of unexplained cases of moderate and severe In addition, we have analysed the rate of somatic malsegregation in inter- mental retardation. We have performed cytogenetic analysis in 243 phase nuclei of cytochalasin B-blocked binucleated lymphocytes and lym- patients with severe mental retardation. Using standard cytogenetic tech- phoblastoid cells (LCLs) in both parents, their trisomic offspring, the grand- niques (Giemsa, C-, R-, Q banding) 54 (22.2%) cases of chromosomal mother and greatgrandmother and three unrelated controls. Fluorescence anomalies were identified; 38 cases (15.6%) of aneuploidies and 16 cases in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed using pericentric (6.6%) of structural rearrangements. We have performed a pilot study of probes for chromosome 21 and 22 to score 1000 binucleated cells per indi- Multiprobe-FISH (Cytocell Chromoprobe Multiprobe-T System) in 8 vidual. The frequency of non-disjunction of chromosome 21, but not of 22, patients with unexplained severe mental retardation and malformations was significantly increased in the lymphocytes and LCLs of the mother /dysmorphisms and normal conventional 400-550 bands karyotype. From compared to the other family members and controls as well. To the best of them in one case a subtelomeric rearrangement was identified; deletion our knowledge this is the first report that a high rate of maternal meiotic Xq. The girl (21 year old) has etiologically unclear severe mental retarda- non-disjunction is paralleled by a specific increase in mitotic non-disjunc- tion, short stature (140cm, -2.3SD), slight microcephaly (48cm, -2.3SD), tion. Further studies are in progress to elucidate the genetic basis of this dysmorphic features as epicanthic folds, short fingers, V clinodactyly etc. new phenomenon. These features coincide with previously published certain clinical diagnos- tic criteria that improve the detection rate of subtelomeric rearrangements. P0228.Assessment of aneuploidy rate in motile spermatozoa Results suggest that banding analysis combined with M-FISH increase the selected by three different methods possibility to detect causes of mental retardation. O. Samura, N. Miharu, K. Ohama Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hiroshima University School of P0231.Korean Cytogenetic Database Medicine; Hiroshima, Japan D. Hwang, S. Cho, J. Choe, Y. M. Choi, S. Y. Moon samurao@clubaa.com Hamchoon Womens Clinic; Seoul, Republic of Korea Using multi-colour fluorescence in situ hybridization, we compared the fre- doyhwang@hamchoon.co.kr quencies of disomy and diploidy of chromosomes 1, 16, 18, X and Y Korean Cytogenetic Database Study Group was organized in 1997 to between spermatozoa of good motility with those of poor motility after sep- establish Korean cytogenetic database. The Korean Cytogenetic Database aration by swim-up, glass-wool and two-layer discontinuous Percoll meth- Study Group consists of 23 contributing Cytogenetic Laboratories through-146 Posters: Cytogenetics out South Korea. was found in 40 cases. Two cases of Edwards syndrome (trisomy 18) and The Korean Cytognetic Database is critical 1) to study the epidemiololgy of one case of Pataus syndrome (trisomy 13) was found. Sporadic cases of cytogenetic abnormalities among Koreans, 2) to design clinical cytogenet- various translocations and other abnormalities like 46, XYt(9;18), 46, XY ic services, 3) to understand unique cytogenetic findings among Koreans, t(3;4), 46, XY(18p-), 46, XYisochromosome 17 and five cases of marker 4) to determine urgent cytogenetic research questions. Between 1997 and chromosome were also encountered. This data gives an idea of the spec- 1999, 7147 cases of abnormal karyotypes were registered. The classifica- trum of cytogenetic disorders seen in Indians from our region. tion based on tissue samples are follows; 4495 cases of peripheral blood, 235 of peripheral blood-oncology, 1060 of amniotic fluid, 1098 of chorionic P0234.Genetics findings in 100 infertile men referred to Uro- villi, 141 of fetal blood, 394 of Product of conception, 607 of bone marrow mias Cytogenetics and Molecular Medicine unit and 17 of other specimens. Among these, the detailed analysis of 4401 M. Omrani cases of peripheral blood and 979 of amniotic fluid will be presented. Mottahary Hospital; Uromia, Islamic Republic of Iran In numeric abnormalities, trisomy 21 was the most common abnormalites Davood40@hotmail.com and followed by trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 among autosomes. Among sex Genetics findings in 100 infertile men referred to Uromias Cytogenetics chromosome, XXYwas the most common and followed by 45,X. In struc- and Molecular Medicine Unit Dr.M.D.Omrani*, Dr. M.R.Fallah, Mrs. F. Azizi tural abnormalites, reciprocal trnalocation and robertsonian translocation Cytogenetics and Mol. Med. Unit, Mottahary Hospital, Uromia, Iran Dept of are two most common abnormalities. The t(13;14), t(14;21) and t(14;22) Urology, Imam Hospital, Uromia, Iran Keywords; infertility, Azoospermia, were the most common robertsonian translocation in descending orders Klienfilters syndrome From 100 men who presented at infertility clinics and among Koreans. who had Azoospermia and severe oligozoospermia, blood and semen In conclusion, Korean cytogenetic database present the first comprehen- samples were taken and cytogenetics and PCR studies were carried out. sive epidemiologic data on cytogenetic abnormalities among Koreans. Our The chromosomal studies revealed the following results; About 30% of data are compatible with other datasets reported in other countries. cases were classified as classic Klienfilters syndrome, 13.3% as Mosaic Klienfilters syndrome (46XY/46XXY), 10% Familial Hypospadiasis, 6.6% P0232. Age Depending Changes In Contribution Of Aneu- Male with 46XX karyotype (SRYgene present, azoospermia factor gene ploidy Formation Mechanisms In Human Oocytes absent), 3.3% Chromosomal deletion (Ypdel), 3.3% Hormonal problem T. Kovalenko, A. Stefanovich, I. Barilyak (hyperprolactenemia), and 30% Idiopathic. In order to find out the causes Ukrainian Scientific Center of Medical Genetics; Kiev, Ukraine of infertility in the idiopathic cases, PCR reactions were carried out using tamila@humgen.kiev.ua leukocyte DNAand sperm DNA. Y-chromosomes deletions in leukocytes Three main mechanisms of aneuploidy formation are known; meiotic biva- DNAbut not in sperm DNAwere detected. No Y-chromosomes deletions lents nondisjunction, equal number of hypo- and hyperhaploid oocytes is were detected in the fathers of these men. AZF deletions in these men result of it; anaphase lagging, its outcome is hypohaploid oocytes; and pre- (65% of idiopathic cases) are de-novo mutations. The impact of these find- cocious division of centromeres of univalents at first meiotic division, ane- ing in this small city which has habitants with different cultural and belief uploidy by single hromatids is result of this mechanism. But up to our days backgrounds were very important. In some part of this area still there is an reasons of aneuploidy formation by these mechanisms are still unknown. old belief that all infertilities of a couple back to the female and man has The aim of this work was to investigate the maternal age influence on the right for second marriage without paying any attention to his wife. There- contribution of each mechanism of aneuploidy formation in oocytes fore these results are a relief for women from the sense of guilt. It also retrieval during IVF programs. Oocytes from 67 women (average age gives the opportunity to offer genetic testing and genetic counseling before 29.43.2 years) undergoing IVF were the object of this study. Women were starting assisted reproductive procedures. divided into two groups; group1  35 patients under 30 years old, average age  26.41.8; group2  32 patients from 30 years old, average age P0235.Clinicogenetic profile of Variant Klinefelter Syndrome 33.52.5. Such air drying methods as described by Tarkowski, 1966; patients Mikamo and Kamiguchi, 1983; Wramsby, 1985; Almeida and Bolton, 1993 R. Dada1, K. Kucheria2 were used to prepare the oocytes for cytogenetic analysis. Our results 1AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences; New Delhi, India; 2AIIMS; showed that 50% of oocytes were aneuploid. Increase of hypohaploid New Delhi, India oocytes number in the first group (41.24.9% versus 33.34.7%; in group rdada@hotmail.com 2) was showed. The main mechanism of aneuploidy formation in the group Klinefelter Syndrome (KFS) is a numeric sex chromosomal aberration 1 was anaphase lagging (33.8%). In the group 2 two mechanisms of ane- caused by meiotic nondisjunction. Approximately 15% KF patients are uploidy formation were predominate; anaphase lagging and precocious mosaics with variable phenotype. Available literature does not distinguish division of centromeres of univalents at first meiotic division (both 14.3%). the variant cases from KFS but since these cases have a distinct pheno- In such way increasing of female age can change contribution of different type we analysed these cases in detail. Cytogenetic analysis was done in mechanisms of aneuploidy formation. 85 cases of male infertility. Of this 9 cases were diagnosed as KFS, 6 were mosaic KF and 3 were variant cases. Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization was P0233.Spectrum of congenital cytogenetic disorders encoun- done in variant cases to asses the percentage of different cell lines and this tered in north India was compared with the cytogenetic results. In all variant cases detailed R. Das, S. Kaur, G. Garewal clinical examination was done. One Variant case with Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & Research; Chandigarh, 47,XXY(60%)/48,XXXYY(26%)/49,XXXYY(14%) was 5.8 feet tall with India poorly developed secondary sexual characters, scant body hair, gynaeco- pallab@ch1.dot.net.in mastia, bilateral soft testis, high gonadotrophin levels and normal testos- Analysis of the spectrum of congenital disorders over the last ten years terone levels. He also had congenital heart disease (CHD) with Mitral encountered in the Nehru Hospital, a referral hospital catering to four Valve Prolapse and coarse facial features. Testicular Fine needle aspira- neighbouring states in north India, is presented. Aneuploidy of the autoso- tion cytology (FNAC) showed Sertoli Cell Only syndrome. The second vari- mal chromosomes and the sex chromosomes are commonly encountered ant with 46,XY(53%)/48,XXXY(40%)/49,XXXYY(7%) was 5.6 feet tall with problems. The aneuploidies are a result of a non-disjunction error in meio- poorly developed secondary sexual characters, euchnoid habitus and ele- sis I or anaphase lag. Karyotyping of GTG-banded metaphases from vated gonadotrophins and low Testosterone level. He had low IQ, was peripheral blood lymphocytes for genetic disorders on 1400 samples was mentally retarded and had difficulty in speech which led to temper performed. We found 339 cases of Downs syndrome with trisomy 21. tantrums. He also had delayed milestones. FNAC showed few germ cells Translocations to chromosomes 21, 13 and 14 were encountered in 6.99 in some semeniferous tubules but predominantly SCO type 11 syndrome percent of cases and mosaicism was found in 2.43 percent. Sex chromo- The third KF variant had 46,XY(50%)/47,XXY(30%)/48,XXYY(20%) chro- some aberrations like Turners syndrome (TS) was found in 76 cases with mosome complement.MRI showed normal testis a nd gonadotrophin lev- 29 percent patients having mosaicism. There were two cases with 45, els were in the normal range. He was 5.8 feet tall and had low IQ. The XY/XO. In addition three cases of TS were mosaics for XXX or super- mean FSH , LH and Testosterone levels in these 3 KF variant was female. There were 26 cases of Klinefelters syndrome with four of them 36.6mIu/ml,16.6mIu/ml and 1.8ng/ml respectively. The percentage of showing mosaicism. Nineteen individuals were diagnosed to be male mosaic cell lines identified cytogenetically was confirmed by FISH. These pseudohermaphrodites with female phenotypes and 9 cases were female variant cases had additional clinical features than KF patients and thus pseudohermaphrodites with male phenotypes. Of the 65 cases refered as variant cases should have a detailed clinical examination to look for CHD, ambiguous genitalia where no sex could be ascribed phenotypically, in 46 behavioral and speech problems and skeletal abnormalities. Those variant cases male genotype and in 19 cases female genotype could be assigned. cases with normal cell line may show spermatogenesis in some semenif- Mullerian agenesis confirmed on ultrasonography and a normal karyotype erous tubules on FNAC and thus these couples can be advised to go in forPosters: Cytogenetics 147 Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) after genetic counseling . FISH formed comparative FISH-mapping of individual PAC clones from a human in adjunt to conventional cytogenetics helps in identifying in low level Y-chromosomal PAC contig to chromosomes of humans, great apes and mosaicism and enables us to calculate the accurate risk estimation in Old World monkeys. The PAC contig spans approximately 2.8 Mb in prox- cases going in for ART. imal Yq11.21 including the entire AZFa-region. Interestingly, our FISH- results revealed that some DNAsegments within the PAC clones are not P0236.Cytogenetic Evaluation of Infertile Males from Chennai exclusively restricted to their place of origin in Yq11.21, but are found at (Madras), India additional Ychromosomal, X chromosomal and as well as at autosomal P. M. Gopinath1, C. S. Nagarajappa2, N. Chandra3, K. Baba4, A. sites within the human karyotype. Similar results were obtained for great Rajashekaran5 apes, although certain human PAC clones were observed to generate 1Genetics Department (IBMS) Madras University, Taramani; Madras, India; altered signal patterns on the Ychromosomes of great apes. These altered 2Anatomy Department, JJM College of Medicine; Davanagere, Karnataka, patterns indicate species-specific rearrangements during primate evolution India; 3Department of Genetics; Chennai, India; 4Pathology Department and some of these are also of phylogenetic interest. (IBMS); Chennai, India; 5Madras Andrology Research Centre; Chennai, India P0239.Comparative study of disomy and diploidy in sperma- gopinathpm@yahoo.com tozoa of fertile and infertile men using FISH Atotal of 204 infertile men comprising of 186 married men, referred for S. Zahn1, G. Schwanitz1, G. Haidl2, A. Ehrbrecht1, R. Schubert1 infertility lasting between 3 and 14 years and 18 unmarried individuals 1Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany; 2Institute of Dermatology; aged between 11 and 28 years, referred for congenital abnormalities of Bonn, Germany external genitalia or absence of secondary sexual characters were inves- susanne.zahn@gmx.de tigated. Data on family history, habits, occupational hazards, details of clin- Infertility affects ~15 % of all couples. In about half of these cases the infer- ical examination and laboratory findings including hormone levels, ultra- tility can be attributed to the male partner. One possible cause of male sound and X-ray report, semen analysis and infections and/or surgical infertility is an increased proportion of aneuploid and polyploid spermato- operations were recorded using a questionnaire. Eighteen men were found zoa. In our study, sperm cells of eleven infertile patients, aged 28-47 years, to possess chromosomal abnormalities upon analysis of GTG  banded and four healthy probands of proven fertility, aged 33-36 years, were inves- metaphases obtained from cultured lymphocytes from the married men tigated. Disomy rates of chromosomes 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 18, X and Yas well (Azoospermia = 98; Oligozoospermia = 88). Seven showed 47, XXYkary- as diploidy rates were analysed by single- and triple-colour fluorescence in otype, 9 were Klinefelter mosaics, one was a Klinefelter variant (48 XXYY) situ-hybridization. Semenograms of the patients showed oligoasthenotera- and one possessed an inherited translocation t (1; 22). Meiotic studies and to- (OAT, n=4), oligoastheno- (OA, n=2), terato- (T, n=3), asthenoterato- histological evaluation were carried out in 38 cases employing testicular (AT, n=1) and oligoteratozoospermia (OT, n=1). The mean disomy rate for biopsy. Desynapsis, X-Y dissociation, a low number of chiasma, univa- all autosomes analysed was similar for infertility patients (0,11 %) and con- lents, stickiness, spermatogenic arrest at various levels, germ cell degen- trol subjects (0,09 %). In contrast, significant differences between fertile eration and aplasia (Sertoli cell only syndrome and mixed SCO) were and infertile males were observed for gonosome aneuploidies and diploidy some of the abnormalities noted. Eleven unmarried men showed an rates. The average frequency of sex chromosome aneuploidy in infertile abnormal karyotype  4 had 47, XXY complement, 6 were Klinefelter patients was twice as high as in the controls. The frequency of XYsper- mosaics and one had an inherited translocation t(Y; 15). These results sug- matozoa, caused by meiosis I failures, was 0,05 % in fertile and 0,19% in gest that chromosomal aberrations play an important role in the causation infertile males. In contrast, XX and YYspermatozoa were demonstrated in of male infertility. Acorrelation was also observed between the abnormal 0,11 % of both groups. Diploid spermatozoa were detected with a mean karyotype and the phenotypic characteristics. frequency of 0,16 % in infertile males; the controls showed a mean of 0,05 %. A donor-adapted protocol for spermhead decondensation ensuring P0237. FISH analysis of five 47, XXY patients support the maximum probe penetration and hybridization efficiency will be presented. hypothesis that only 46,XYgonia can complete meiosis. Furthermore, we discuss the correlation of sperm aneuploidy / diploidy and J. Selva male infertility. CHI Poissy-St germain; Poissy, France ampcyto_poissy@hotmail.com P0240. Sex reversal in a girl with an Xp;Yq translocation The aim of our study was the evaluation of meiosis in 47,XXYor 46,XY resulting in a duplication of the Dosage Sensitive Sex rever- gonia in azoospermic non mosaic Klinefelter patients by two ways ; -inves- sal locus tigation of the correlation between the sex chromosomes complements of M. DesGroseilliers1, J. Michaud2, E. Lemyre2, N. Lemieux3 the biopsied testicular cells and the efficiency of spermatogenesis -evalu- 1Dpartement de Pathologie et biologie cellulaire, Universit de Montral ation of the aneuploidy rate in post meiotic cells, when found. Material and et Centre de recherche, Hpital Ste-Justine; Montral, PQ Canada; 2Cen- methods ; Both karyotype and FISH analysis on lymphocytes of five tre de recherche, Hpital Ste-Justine; Montral, PQ Canada; 3Dparte- azoospermic men were homogeneously 47,XXY. Testis biopsy was per- ment de Pathologie et biologie cellulaire, Universit de Montral et Centre formed for the 5 patients . In the IVF laboratory, if any testicular spermato- de recherche, Hpital Ste-Justine; Montral, PQ Canada zoa were recovered, all the biopsied tissue was frozen for a subsequent desgrosm@magellan.umontreal.ca Intra Cytoplasmic Sperm Injection attempt, excepted one smear, which Sex determination and development in humans is a very complex process. was prepared for FISH analysis, with three directly labelled probes for X,Y Many genetic or chromosomal disorders can alter the process and result and 18 chromosomes (ChromoprobeCytocell) Results ; A total of 280 in sex reversal. For example, XY females can result from an abnormal labelled testicular cells was observed. The only patient for whom no sper- interchange between the X and the Ychromosomes, or from a mutation in matozoa was recovered had only diploid 47,XXYtestis cells (n=56). The the SRY(Sex-determining Region of the Ychromosome) or in the andro- four other patients, displayed 46, XYand 47,XXYdiploid testis cells . All gen receptor genes. Some other aberrations such as mutations of SF1, pachytene figures were 46,XY(n=21). The post meiotic aneuploidy rate, SOX9 or WT1, deletions of 2q, 9p or 10q, and duplication of Xp21 have based on the observation of spermatids (n=66) and spermatozoa(n=26) been reported. We present the case of a girl with dysmorphism and was 6,5%.and involved mostly (4/6) Ymeiosis II malsegregation and auto- delayed growth development associated with an abnormal male karyotype. somal disomy. Our results support the hypothesis that only 46,XYgonia FISH analysis with probes WCPY(Whole Chromosome Painting of the Y), can achieve successfully meiosis in Klinefelter patients, with a low aneu- WCPX (Whole Chromosome Painting of the X), DYZ3 (recognizing the Y ploidy rate for sex chromosomes in resulting haploid cells. centromeric region), DYZ1 (recognizing Yq12), SRY (Yp11.3), DXS142 (Xp21.1), and the co-hybridization of TelVysion subtelomeric Xp/Yp and P0238. Evolutionary breakpoints on the Y chromosomes of Xq/Yq have shown a 46,X,der(Y)t(X;Y)(p11.3;q11.222~q11.23) karyotype. higher primates Probe SRYwas positive. Thus, the sex-reversed patient has two copies of R. Wimmer1, S. Kirsch2, A. Weber1, G. Rappold2, W. Schempp1 all the genes within the Xp11.3-Xpter fragment, including DSS (Dosage 1Institut fr Humangenetik und Anthropologie; Freiburg, Germany; 2Institut Sensitive Sex reversal). Areview of the literature shows that the Xp-dupli- fr Humangenetik und Anthropologie; Heidelberg, Germany cation is associated with sex reversal when DSS is duplicated. This case wimmerra@ukl.uni-freiburg.de adds strength to the hypothesis that the double presence of active DSS in Comparative FISH-mapping of human Ygenes and gene families on chro- XYindividuals, even in the presence of active SRY, might be sufficient to mosomes of higher primates have shown that Ychromosomal rearrange- cause sex reversal. (This research was supported by grant from Rseau ments are confined to the non-recombining parts of the Ychromosomes of de Mdecine Gntique Applique-FRSQ). higher primates, outside the pseudoautosomal and the sex-determining region. In the course of our search for evolutionary breakpoints we per-148 Posters: Cytogenetics P0241. The study of the frequency of heteroploidy in sperm of 15 ], 47,XXX, [1 case], 46,X,+mar(X) [2 cases], and of Y-containing DNA from men with low-quality semen. in 3 patients. In lymphocyte cultures of two patients with UTS phenotype I. Fedorova, J. Loginova, L. Petrova, T. Kuznetzova we detected 46,XX with both methods. We analysed interphase nuclei of Otts Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Saint-Petersburg, Russian buccal cells with Xcen in these patients. X-monosomy was found in both at Federation lower ( 17 % and 9 % ) frequency . The proportion of the mosaics in our irendf@mail.ru material was thus 33,33%. The results of chromosome analysis in one cell High frequency of heteroploidy in male spermatozoa may be attributed to system should be completed by investigation of a second one, preferen- male infertility. Heteroploidy frequency in spermatozoa from 11 healthy tially originating from an other germ layer, if phenotype-karyotype discrep- men and 39 men with low-quality semen was analyzed by means of single ancies are diagnosed. color FISH technique with centromere specific probes to chromosomes 18. Single-probe FISH revealed frequency sum of chromosome 18 disomy and P0244. Two cases of extra marker chromosome in infertile diploidy in semen of control subject 0.71%. The frequency of chromosome men. 18 disomy and diploidy was higher in patients with oligoastenoteratosper- J. Lissitsina1, R. Mikelsaar1, K. Varb1, G. Timberg2, M. Punab2 mia and oligoastenospermia. The moderate inverse correlation between 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu; Tartu, frequency of chromosome 18 disomy and diploidy and sperm concentra- Estonia; 2Clinic of Surgery, University of Tartu; Tartu, Estonia tion of spermatozoa, percentage of spermatozoa with progressive motility Jelena.Lissitsina@kliinikum.ee and spermatozoa with normal morphology was found. The frequency of supernumerary marker chromosome is 0.3 - 1.0% in infertile men. Extra marker chromosome might be the cause of meiotic P0242.An increased frequency of aneuploid sperm in infertile arrest and instability in spermatogenesis resulting in infertility of men. Cyto- men with teratozoospermia genetic analysis from peripheral blood culture of 9 infertile men (sperm R. H. Martin1, C. Templado2, T. Hoang1, C. Greene3, A. Rademaker4, J. density <10M/mL) revealed two patients with mosaic supernumerary mark- Chernos1 er chromosomes which were present in 93% (case 1) and 3% (case 2) of 1Dept Medical Genetics, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Canada; cells (n=200). Both marker chromosomes were smaller than G-group chro- 2Departmento de Biologia Celular y Fisiologia e Immunologia, Universidad mosomes and C banding positive. In case one, the AgNOR staining Autonoma de Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; 3Dept Obstetrics and Gyne- showed that the marker chromosome was bisatellited. There were also cology, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Canada; 4Cancer Center Biom- both t(14q;21p) and trisomy 21, confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridi- etry Section, Northwestern University Medical School; Chicago, ILUnited sation (FISH) in 3% and 2.5% of cells (n=400), respectively. But they were States absent in skin fibroblasts. The karyotype was mos rhmartin@ucalgary.ca 47,XY,+mar/46,XY,+t(14q;21p),+mar/48,XY,+mar,+21/46,XY. Case one We have demonstrated that infertile men who are candidates for intracyto- showed that supernumerary marker chromosome might cause through the plasmic sperm injection (ICSI) have an increased frequency of chromoso- interaction with other chromosomes major chromosomal anomalies as tri- mal abnormalities in their sperm. Reports based on prenatal diagnosis of somy 21 and t(14;21) which are the real cause of sterility. In case two, the ICSI pregnancies have confirmed the increased frequency of chromoso- marker chromosome was present only in 3% of metaphases and karyotype mal abnormalities in offspring. Most studies to date have lumped various was interpreted as mos 47,XY,+mar/46,XY. This case indicates that in even types of infertility together. However, it is quite likely that some subsets of with very low frequency the supernumerary marker chromosome might be infertility have an increased risk of sperm chromosomal abnormalities associated with infertility of men. whereas others do not. We have studied 9 men with severe terato- zoospermia (0-13% morphologically normal forms) by multicolour fluores- P0245.Cytogenetic Findings In Azoospermic Men cence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis to determine if they have an B. Durak1, M. Turgut2, Y. H. Ozon1, C. Can2, W. Schempp3, Y. Ozyurek2, increased frequency of disomy for chromosomes 13, 21, XX, YYand XY, N. Basaran1 as well as diploidy. Eight of the men also had asthenozoospermia (<20% 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; forward progression) but none of the men had oligozoospermia (<20 X 106 Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of sperm/ml). The patients ranged in age from 20 to 49 years (mean 33.2 Urology; Eskisehir, Turkey; 3Albert Ludwigs University Institut for Human- years) in comparison to 18 normal control donors who were 23-58 years genetics and Anthropology; Freiburg, Germany (mean 35.6 years). The control donors had normal semen parameters and bdurak@ogu.edu.tr no history of infertility. Atotal of 180,566 sperm were scored in the terato- The study was performed to determine the specific chromosomal abnor- zoospermic men with a minimum of 10,000 sperm analyzed/donor/chro- malities of the azoospermic infertile men from the department of Urology of mosome probe. There was a significant increase in the frequency of dis- Osmangazi University. The karyotypes of 30 cases were determined from omy in teratozoospermic men compared to controls for chromosomes 13 GTG and C banded metaphases of peripheral blood samples. Of 30 (.23% vs .13%), XX (.13% vs .05%) and XY(.50% vs .30%) (p<.0001, 2- analysed azoospermic infertile men, 25 had normal karyotypes but the tailed Z statistic). This study indicates that men with teratozoospermia and remaining 5 cases showed some chromosome abnormalities. One case asthenozoospermia but with normal concentrations of sperm have a sig- had mosaic 46,XY/47,XYY(80/20) karyotype, one case had 46,XY,isoYp, nificantly increased frequency of sperm chromosomal abnormalities. two cases showed 47,XXY, and the other showed 46,XY,t(15;19). The karyotypes of two cases with structural chromosomal abnormality were P0243.Mosaicism In Turner Syndrome also confirmed by the FISH analysis. In the review of literature, it has been M. Dobos1, R. Raff2, J. Szabo1, A. Ehrbrecht2 discussed that autosomal translocations, especially the ones of acro- 12nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University; Budapest, Hun- centrics could possibly be the reason of infertility since the abnormalities in gary; 2Institute of Human Genetics,; Bonn, Germany NOR regions of the translocated chromosomes cause false X/Yrecombi- Pgabi@gyer2.sote.hu nations during the meiosis. The reported cases with autosomal transloca- Most of the Turner patients (UTS) are mosaics. The variability in cytoge- tions support this hypotesis. Our case is especially important because of netic findings explains some of the phenotypic differences. In patients with being another example supporting this mechanism. mosaic UTS, clinical variability results from the unequal tissue distribution of the cell lines and from the type of chromosomal defect. We investigated P0246. Molecular Cytogenetic Detection of Robertsonian 299 patients because of short stature with or without Turner stigmata or pri- Translocation in Sperm Nuclei of Carrier mary amenorrhoea. Chromosome analysis was performed from lympho- M. S. Yildirim, H. Acar, T. Cora, M. Kaynak cyte cultures. The karyotype analysis proved X - chromosome abnormali- Selcuk University, Medical Faculty; Konya, Turkey ties in 135 cases including 45 mosaics. The non-mosaic karyotypes were mselman@dostmail.com 45,X [62 cases] , 46,X,i(X) [ 14], 46,X,del(Xp) [4], 46,X,del(Xq) [6], Robertsonian translocations are the most common structural chromosome 46,X,r(X) [1], 46,X,+mar [3]. The number of mosaic karyotypes investigat- anomalies in man. Carrier of the translocations may result in offspring with ed by GTG was 30 . In addition the 45,X cell line we detected 46,XX [5 chromosomaly unbalanced which may cause spontaneous abortion or cases], 46,X,i(X) [4], 46,XX/47,XXX [2], 46,X,+mar [6], X-deletion [4], and phenotypically abnormal individual,although the carriers are phenotypical- Y-chromosome containing cell line in 9 patients (45,X/46,XY [7], ly normal. Therefore analysis of the chromosomal constitution of their 45,X/46,X,t(X;Y)[1], 45,X/46,X,r(Y) [1]. The karyotypes of 15 patients with sperm nuclei can be helpful in assesing this risk in individual situation. We Turner phenotype were normal. By reason of clinical symptoms we also have used dual color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on decon- studied the lymphocyte cultures of these patients by FISH using wcp X, densed sperm heads from carrier of structural chromosome reorganiza- DXZ1, wcp Y and DYZ3 probes. FISH demonstrated the presence of a tions t(21;21). In addition, in sperm nuclei, the behavior of the Robertson- second cell line with numerical gonosome aberration ; 45,X [ 7 cases out ian translocation pattern along with sex chromosome was determined. ThePosters: Cytogenetics 149 present study demonstrates that analysis of the segregation pattern of (7.8%) had oligomenorrhea. The mean age (+/- SD) was 21.8 (+/- 5.7) Robertsonian translocation in sperm nuclei gives further information about years. The most common cause for referring was primary amenorrhea chromosomal abnormalities in sperm and offsprings. (66.0%), followed by secondary amenorrhea (15.1%) and oligomenorrhea (5.9%). Other main complaints were infertility and short stature. 561 cases P0247.Concurrent Use of Alpha Centromere and Heterochro- (76.5%) were cytogenetically normal (46,XX) and 172 cases (23.5%) had matin Fluorescent in situ Hybridization Probes to Enumerate abnormal karyotypes, mostly 46,XY(59 cases, 8.0%) and 45,X (30 cases, Disomy in Human Sperm 4.1%), followed by 45,X/46,X,iso(Xq) and 46,X,iso(Xq) (respectively 2.0% A. E. Frayna1, W. G. Kearns2, S. F. Hoegerman1 and 1.9%). Other abnormal karyotypes were structural abnormalities of 1Department of Biology, The College of William & Mary; Williamsburg, VA chromosome X, consist of deletion of Xp and Xq and ring (X), trisomy X (a United States; 2Center for Medical Genetics, The Johns Hopkins Universi- 47,XXX cell line with or without 45,X and/or 46,XX cell lines), marker X, ty School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD United States Robertsonian and X; autosome translocations. Also there were 14 cases of aefray@wm.edu pericenteric inversion of chromosome 9. This study revealed that the most Studies of aneuploidy frequencies in normal sperm by FISH have yielded common cause of menstrual disorders among the patients reared, as variable results. Past inconsistency resulted, in part, from variable scoring woman is 46, XY, followed by Turner syndrome and its variants. of closely associated homologous signals. Spatially paired signals may be interpreted as either disomy or as fragmented target sequences (a split P0250.Translocations and Spontaneous Abortions signal). Martin et al. (1995) proposed that two signals be scored as dis- R. R. A. P. Pardo Vargas, S. A. C. Castillo Taucher, M. S. C. Calvo Pran- omy only if separated by one signals diameter or more. This reduced data di, P. P. S. Sanz, V. V. D. Daher, L. A. T. Tobella, S. D. S. Salazar variability but the criterions appropriateness remains undetermined. To Hospital Clnico Universidad de Chile; Santiago de Chile, Chile address this, we estimated disomy 9 frequency using two-chromosome, servgene@ns.hospital.uchile.cl three-color FISH. Alpha satellite centromeric sequence and adjacent hete- Chromosomal anomalies usually invoked as one important etiology that rochromatic region probes were used concurrently. Aprobe for chromo- should be considered, when a couple has spontaneous abortions. In this some 18 was used to determine ploidy. We score essentially haploid cells work we present the results of 481 cytogenetic studies corresponding to as disomic for chromosome 9 only if we observe two signals for both its 481 trophoblasts of spontaneous abortions in a 10 years period. We had centromeric and heterochromatic targets regardless of the distance 382 (79,4%) positive cultures, and 162 (42%) had chromosomal alteration. between them. Acell with three signals for 9, regardless of the distance The most frecuent structural alterations were desbalanced translocations between the two signals from the same target, is interpreted as monosomy (6,2%). We studied five pairs(50%) of parents of this group, and we fond 9 with a split signal. Based on 30,644 sperm from three normal donors, we always a balanced translocation in one of them. We believe that the high estimate the disomy frequency to be 0.11%. Centromeric and heterochro- ratio of translocations in the parents may be reflecting more frecuent chro- matic sequence split signals occurred at frequencies of 0.9% and 1.2% mosomal rearrangements in the descendants of couples with balanced respectively. Disomic cells with signals separated by less than one diame- translocations as has been recently suggested in preimplantational stud- ter were nearly three times as common as monosomic cells with greater ies. split signal separation. With either chromosome 9 probe alone and the cri- terion of Martin et al., the disomy frequency would have been 0.07%, P0251.Is there an increased frequency of low level sex chro- roughly a 50% underestimation. Chromosome 1 results will also be pre- mosome mosaicism in couples undergoing intracytoplasmic sented. sperm injection? F. Morel1, J. Amice1, V. Amice2, A. Herry1, M. J. Le Bris2, M. T. Le P0248. Chromosomal anomalies in referred couple with Martelot2, S. Roche2, V. Julou3, A. Val ri4, M. Collet1, M. De Braekeleer1 recurrent pregnancy loss 1CHU Morvan & Universit de Bretagne Occidentale; Brest, France; 2CHU B. Kar1, D. Vasanthi2, N. Jayshankar3, G. Haripriya3, G. Perumal3 Morvan; Brest, France; 3CH; Lorient, France; 4CHU Cavale Blanche; Brest, 1Apollo Hospital; Chennai, India; 2Department of Medical Genetics and France Obstetric Gynecology, Apollo Hospital; Chenni, India; 3Department of Med- morelfred@lycosmail.com ical Genetics and Obstetric Gynecology, Apollo Hospital,; Chenni, India Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) is now widely acknowledged as the ahel@vsnl.com most effective therapeutic approach to severe male infertility. However, Recurrent pregnancy loss is a well-known clinical manifestation of various one problem raised by ICSI is the potentially elevated genetic risk associ- etiological factors. Convincing evidence on the causes of recurrent preg- ated with this technique. Some of the genetic anomalies observed in chil- nancy loss is meager. Several factors are associated with recurrent preg- dren born after ICSI arise de novo without a predisposing parental chro- nancy loss few of them included genetic/chromosomal, environmental eti- mosome aberration, others may be derived from a predisposing abnor- ologies, infectious agents, maternal congenital, acquired anatomic abnor- mality present in one of the parents. Moreover, several studies have shown malities, immunologic, endocrinologic dysfunctions and some are partly an increased frequency of constitutional chromosome aberrations in male influenced by hereditary factors. During the period of past 2 years a total and female partners of couples examined prior to ICSI. Nevertheless, of 96 couples were referred for cytogenetic analysis with a history of two many questions have not been broached, such as the meaning of low level or more abortions without recognizable gynecological causes for the con- sex chromosome mosaicism. When an abnormality is seen in a low per- firmation of possible chromosomal anomalies. After the detailed family his- centage of cells, sex chromosome mosaicism by banding is suspected to tory and pedigree analysis, routine PHAstimulated peripheral blood cul- be an artefact but can we be too categorical? Cytogenetic investigations tures were set up and karyotyping was done after GTG banding and other were performed in 379 patients (179 males and 200 females) prior to ICSI banding techniques were performed as required. A high incidence of treatment. Control groups were obtained from 194 males and 227 females 12.5% (n=12) of chromosomal abnormalities was observed among 96 cou- who underwent a standard cytogenetic examination because of family ples referred (i.e. both structural and numerical). Those included 4.2% with chromosomal abnormalities (excluding the gonosomes). At least 16 cells balanced reciprocal translocations (N=4), 3.1% with pericentric inversions were karyotyped. The routine analysis was performed on R-banded chro- (n=3) and 5.2% with gonosomal aneuploidies/mosaicisms (n=5). In addi- mosome preparations. Sex chromosome loss or gain was observed in at tion to these chromosomal heteromorphisms and single cell abnormalities least one cell from 24.5% of ICSI females against 22.03% of control were also found in 11.4% (n=11) and 2.1% (n=2) respectively. These data females (p=0.70). X chromosome loss was observed in at least one cell suggests that couple with a history of two or more abortions should be from 20.5% of ICSI females against 18.94% of control females (p=0.69). investigated cytogenetically. DNAmicrosatellite and FISH analysis are in Nevertheless, we found a significant difference between these two groups progress in few patients found with rare chromosomal translocations. (p=0.01) if we considered X chromosome loss in at least two cells; 8% for ICSI females against 2.64% controls. No significant difference in X chro- P0249.Cytogenetic study of menstruation disorders mosome gain (47,XXX or 48,XXXX) was found between ICSI females and K. Alavi, K. Alavi, A. R. Mohammadinia, M. H. Karimi-Nejad controls. Sex chromosome loss or gain was observed in at least one cell Karimi-Nejad Pathology & Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of from 10.61% of ICSI males against 9.79% of control males (p=0.79). No Iran significant difference was observed between male groups concerning mhkarimi@mavara.com gonosome loss (45,X) or gain (47,XYYand 47,XXY). These results sup- In this survey, 733 cases with abnormal menstruations have been investi- ported previously published studies indicating that the loss of one X chro- gated. All cases were referred to our Center, from 1979 till 1999, and cyto- mosome in only one cell in females undergoing ICSI is probably an arte- genetically have been studied by G banding method as routine and C and fact. Nevertheless, these results suggest that when two 45,X cells are Q banding in some cases.554 of 733 cases (75.6%) had primary amenor- found, the patient could have true low level sex chromosome mosaicism. rhea, 122 cases (16.6%) had secondary amenorrhea and other 57 cases In this case, we recommend confirmation of mosaicism by fluorescence in150 Posters: Cytogenetics situ hybridization (FISH) before discussing the expected risk of chromoso- mal gonadal development. mal aberrations in the offspring of the infertile couple. P0255. Reciprocal translocation t(13;18) in a woman with P0252. Cytogenetic Studies in patients with Bad Obstetric reproductive failures; case report History A. R. M. Stana1, A. G. A. L. Lungeanu2 S. Nagaraj1, S. Rajangam2 1Filantropia Hospital; Bucharest, Romania; 2National Institute; Bucharest, 1St.Johns Medical College; Bangalore 560034, India; 2St.Johns Medical Romania College; Bangalore, India genetica@vbabes.ro n.srinivas@usa.net Achildless couple was reffered for cytogenetic examination because of The phrase Bad Obstetric History has been used because it avoids the their reproductive problems; after eight years period of sterility and two stigmas engendered by abortion and habitual. The term bad obstetric spontaneous abortions, the last pregnancy ws interrupted following ultra- history includes not only couples with recurrent abortions but also with still- sound examination. The anomalies detected at 11 weeks of gestation by births and offspring with multiple congenital anomalies. Abortion is the this early ultrasound evaluation suggested a fetal chromosomopathy. Later most common complication of pregnancy and is responsible for significant on we performed cytogenetic analyses of both partners, using convention- emotional distress to couples desiring children. Karyotyping of 104 couples al banding techniques. The husband had a normal karyotype, but the wife with bad obstetric history was done, after ruling out other etiological factors was found to be a carrier of a balanced reciprocal translocation t(13;18). (anatomical, infectious, hormonal, seminal). Using conventional as well as The consequences of this gross structural chromosomal rearrangements molecular cytogenetic techniques (FISH) detection of the chromosomal are discussed. Our results are important for the genetic counseling and abnormality and confirmation has been done. In this study, cytogenetic recommendation for prenatal diagnosis in future pregnancies. analysis revealed chromosomal abnormalities in 20 out of 104 couples (19.23%). Major chromosomal abnormalities have been found in 5 out of P0256. Cytogenetic abnormalities in two cases of primary 104 couples (4.80%) and minor chromosomal abnormalities (variants) in amenorrhea. 15 out of 104 couples (14.42%). The major chromosomal abnormalities A. G. A. L. Lungeanu1, A. A. Rodewald2, V. I. Stoian3 were X mosaicism (45,X/46,XX); 3 cases of Reciprocal 1Nationa InstituteV.Babes Bucharest; Bucharest, United States; 2Ham- translocation{46,XX,t(7;8)(q31;p22);46,XY,t(7;13)(q31;q32); burg University, Institute for Human Biologie; Hamburg, Germany; 3Facul- 46,XY,t(4;6)(4;15)(p12q21;q15q26)} and Robertsonian translocation ty of Biology, Department of Biology, Bucharest University; Bucharest, {45,XY,t(13;14)} During counseling the chromosomal cause of bad obstet- Romania ric history has been explained, with a request for follow up including pre- genetica@vbabes.ro natal procedure. There are presented two phenotypically normal females of 21 and 23 years old, respectively, diagnosed as primary amenorrhea. First case, S.M., was P0253. Detection of sex chromosomes mosaics in lympfo- reffered for cytogenetic investigation at 21 years age, because of her men- cytes of patients with Klinefelters and Turners syndrome strual cycle began at 17 years and was intermittent. At the time she pre- S. Kurkova1, Z. Zemanova2, V. Hana2, J. Musilova2, K. Michalova2 sented herself for karyotype exam she was under hormonal tretment. GTG 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion; Prague, Czech Republic; banded karyotypes revealed cellular mosaicism 45,XX,- 23rd Medical Department, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Fac- 14,+18p/46,XX,+18pter,(20%/80%). The presence of supplementary frag- ulty,Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic ment on the short arm of 18 chromosome was found both in 45 and 46 kurkova@uhkt.cz chromosome metaphases, which could explain the failure of prescribed The aim of this study was to detect numerical changes of sex chromo- hormonal therapy meant to regulate her cycle. Hypodiploidy was associat- somes in dividing and non-dividing nuclei of peripheral lymphocytes of ed with chromosome 14 monosomy, and we cannot exclude that the sup- males and females with previously diagnosed Klinefelters and Turners plementary fragment on 18p might come, possibly, from 14. We consider syndrome using interfase fluorescence in situ hybridization (I-FISH). We this feature, which is peculiar to this case, involved in the primary amenor- compared clinical findings with cytogenetic results, determined the differ- rhea developed by our subject; meanwhile, we excluded X chromosome ences in sensitivity of classical and molecular-cytogenetic methods and involvement. The second case, M.I., 23 years old with primary amenor- estimated control values for healthy males and females. 26 males with rhea, exhibited a mosaicism 45,XX,t(20;21)/ 45,X0. By our knowledge, Klinefelters syndrome and 18 females with Turners syndrome were there are not other previous reports concerning involvement of this translo- examined. In males with Klinefelters syndrome the mosaics with cation in primary amenorrhea. 47,XXY/46,XY karyotype was found by I-FISH in all patients, small cell lines with numerical sex chromosome changes were ascertained in 8 P0257. Rare Triple Transformations As The Cause Of Marital cases (33%). In 7 females with Turners syndrome I-FISH proved kary- Infertility otype 45,X. Remaining 11 females had chromosome mosaics of two or T. Kranjc, S. Brankovic-Niksic, S. Nikolic, G. Radivojevic-Pilic more clones. In all females I-FISH confirmed the results of classical cyto- Institute of Mental Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia genetic methods and in 6 females (30%) it revealed other clones previ- nbrankov@eunet.yu ously not detected. As a control 10 healthy males and 10 healthy females The paper presents the case of two marital couples with a large number of were examined and mosaics of gonosomes were not detected. The cutt-off miscarriages in the first trimester of gravidity. The analysis of karyotype of level for the VYSIS probes used was 2,5%. The examination of fibroblasts peripheral blood has indicated the presence of two very rare triple translo- cultures by I-FISH would prove the existence of the sex chromosome cations. In one case, we had 46, xy, t (5; 8; 15) (p13; p21; q13) and in mosaics in different tissue. This would be important finding specially in another; 46, xx, t (2; 8; 13) (p13; p23; q22). The paper also discusses the patients with Klinefelters syndrome. Study was supported by grants GA possibility for having healthy offspring. UK 30/96 and GACR 302/98/0071. P0258. Chromosome 21 Disomy In The Spermatozoa Of The P0254. Replication of the X chromosome in gonadal tissues Fathers Of Children With Trisomy 21 of a fetus with cystic hygroma and 46,X,del(Yp) karyotype. I. Kaya1, B. Durak1, Y. H. Ozon1, T. Donmez2, N. Basaran1 H. A. Aviv 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School; Newark, NJ United States Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of avivha@umdnj.edu Urology; Eskisehir, Turkey The SRYgene on the short arm of the X chromosome is necessary for ankaya@yahoo.com male development. Without SRY, patients with the 46,XYkaryotype devel- In this study FISH analysis has been carried out in the sperm samples of op as females, fail to achieve normal puberty and have dysgenic gonads 10 normal males and 13 fathers of children with trisomy 21, totally 23 with high incidence of gonadoblastoma. We report a female fetus, aborted males. The purpose of our study is to detect the hybridization efficiency at 17 weeks of pregnancy, with a non-mosaic 46,X,del(Y)(p11.2).ish and segregation frequencies by using locus spesific probes of chromo- del(Y)(SRY-) karyotype diagnosed by classical cytogenetics and FISH. some 21 and 13. In our study 23,420 nuclei have been examined and the Ovarian tissue was full of oocytes and mitotic figures. FISH studies of hybridization efficiency is determined as 97.9 %. 13,420 nuclei of our case paraffin embedded ovarian tissues with the X and Ycentromere probes group have been examined. As the control group, a total of 10,000 nuclei revealed extensive sex chromosome mosaicism manifested by loss of the were analysed (Table1). In conclusion, disomic spermatozooa can be Ychromosome and replication of the X chromosome. We propose that the effective in the formation of aneuploidic embryo. However, to increase the X chromosome replication is a post-zygotic event that arises to facilitate reliability of the method of aneuploidy screening on the fathers of children gonadal differentiation in the absence of all the factors necessary for nor- with Down syndrome , paternity test have to be performed and the numberPosters: Cytogenetics 151 of donor series have to be increased. tional material on the proximal region of one chromosome 15. FISH analy- Table 1 ses with probes from the Prader-Willi/Angelman region showed this region HAPLOIDY DISOMY DISOMY DIPLOIDY is triplicated on the abnormal chromosome, the middle segment being (%) 21(%) 13(%) (%) inverted in orientation. Then, the patient is tetrasomic for the 15q11-q13 CONTROL 95.28 0.49 0.3 1.26 region. Molecular studies using microsatellite and RFLPanalyses demon- CASES 92.57 1.6 0.6 1.3 strated that the triplication is maternal in origin, with two alleles being involved. It is interesting to note that tetrasomies 15q11-q13 with intra- P0259. Direct duplication of 8p21.3p23.1; FISH delineation chromosomal triplication, as those associated with supernumerary inv dup and clinical significance (15) chromosome, most often result from rearrangements occuring at Y. S. Fan1, J. H. Jung1, V. M. Siu1, S. A. Farrell2, G. B. Cote3 maternal meiosis. In both situations, the dosage of maternal/paternal 1London Health Sciences Centre; London, ON Canada; 2The Credit Valley imprinted regions is identical and, in the absence of mosaicism, pheno- Hospital; Mississauga, ON Canada; 3Sudbury Regional Hospital; Sudbury, types are expected to be similar. We compare the phenotype of our patient ON Canada with that of patients from these two classes of tetrasomy 15q11-q13. Final- fany@lhsc.on.ca ly, we propose a mechanism to explain the formation of intrachromosomal We report six cases in two families and a sporadic case with a dir triplication. dup(8)(p21.3p23.1). In one family, the duplication started in the mother and was transmitted to one son and one daughter. In the second family, the P0262.Unusual genotype / phenotype correlation in a patient father was mosaic for the anomaly which was transmitted to his two daugh- with partial monosomy 15 and partial trisomy 14 ters. In each case, the cytogenetic anomaly was initially described as a M. Volleth1, J. Brger2, P. Muschke1, P. Wieacker1, M. Stumm1 8p+ with banding analysis. These were further studied with fluorescence in 1Dept. of Human Genetics; Magdeburg, Germany; 2Dept. of Human situ hybridization using whole 8 painting, 8p specific painting and 8p sub- Genetics; Berlin, Germany telomeric probes. Deletion was not detected in the subtelomeric region of Marianne.Volleth@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de the short arm of the abnormal chromosome 8 examined in one family and Deletion and other abnormalities of human chromosome 15q11-q13 are in the sporadic case. The phenotypic picture varies from normal to moder- associated mainly with two developmental disorders, Prader-Willi syn- ate mental reardation in the affected individuals. No obvious dysmorphism drome and Angelman syndrome (AS). Despite the advanced analysis of or congenital defects were consistently observed among these cases. After this critical region and the identification of new genes, the exact genotype comparing the chromosome region involved in our cases with those in oth- / phenotype correlation is still unclear, especially in translocation patients. ers having direct or inverted duplications of 8p, it is thought that the seg- We report on a girl with an unbalanced translocation whose breakpoint falls ment 8p21.1->21.3 might be the critical region for a 8p duplication syn- within the 15q11-q13 region. The patient presented some features of drome. The parental origin of the duplication does not seem to impact on Angelman syndrome as mental retardation, speech impairment, develop- its clinical significance. mental delay, microcephaly, hypopigmented skin, light hair and eye color. Other clinical features typical for AS such as ataxia are missing. GTG- P0260.Clinical, cytogenetic and FISH findings in a 19y old girl banding and FISH analysis of the patient detected a derivative chromo- with 45,X,del(18)(q21.3)de novo some 14 due to an unbalanced maternal inherited translocation O. Rittinger1, G. Kronberger2, E. Ploechl2 t(14;15)(q13;q11.2). The der(14) resulted in a partial monosomy 15p13- 1Clinical Genetics, Childrens Hospitalh; Salzburg, Austria; 2Clinical Genet- q11.2 and a partial trisomy 14p13-q13. SNRPN is not deleted and AS has ics; Salzburg, Austria been excluded by methylation analysis. YAC FISH was performed for the o.rittinger@lks.at detailed breakpoint characterization. The breakpoint on chromosome 15 An increasing number of structural chromosomal aberrations is considered lies proximal from YAC 254b5 and very close to the centromere. Therefore, to be a clinically recognizable condition, mainly through a distinctive phys- it is unlikely that the partial monosomy 15 mainly affects the patients phe- iognomy and malformation pattern. This holds true also for terminal dele- notype. The break-point on chromosome 14 lies between YAC 855c06 and tions of the long arm of chromosome 18,originally identified by Grouchy et YAC 950b08, resulting in a trisomic segment of about 30 cM. However, the al.1964. We report on a 19y old girl affected by a distal deletion of 18q and, patients phenotype is not similar to that of other patients with proximal tri- in addition, pure monosomy X. We would like to discuss the impact of the somy 14q. But pure trisomies of chromosome 14 are rarely described and respective aberrations on the clinical features. Interestingly, there is a con- a correct genotype / phenotype correlation is difficult. Our data suggest siderable overlap of the features of both conditions; mild mental retarda- that a pure trisomy 14p13-q13 may generate an AS-like phenotype. tion, triangular face, carp like mouth, microcephaly, unusual concave deep set nails and bilateral club foot refer mainly to the autosomal deletion, P0263. Complex chromosomal rearrangements of 6 post- some other facial features , eg the deep hair line, epicanthus, ptosis, the natal cases; are they as rare and detrimental as we think? down-slanting palpebral fissures mirror the well-known Turner syndrome S. M. Zneimer, J. C. Kelly, S. D. Stewart aspect.No hearing impairment or cardiac failure was diagnosed.Growth Quest Diagnostics; Van Nuys, CAUnited States retardation, a common finding in both clinical pictures,resulted in a final susan.m.zneimer@questdiagnostics.com height of 143cm.Cytogenetic investigation let assume the breakpoint in We report 6 cases in which complex chromosome rearrangements 18q22,but this remains to be proven by FISH to date. More complex (CCRs) were observed, each with varying clinical manifestations from rearrangements or only interstitial deletion were excluded by subtelomeric normal to severe congenital anomalies, in a series of 5000 postnatal chro- FISH analysis. Multiplex PCR investigation for possible Y chromosome mosome studies. In all cases, at least 3 breakpoints and 2 chromosomes sequences was uneventful.Hormonal results revealed the exspected were involved. In cases 1-3 (see karyotypes below), an inversion of one hypergonadotrophic insufficiency of the ovary,but could not detect any chromosome was present with a translocation involving a second chromo- abnormal response of GH to provocative agents. Self-esteem and social some. In cases 4-5, CCRs involved 3-way reciprocal translocations. Case acceptance improved markedly by psychological and hormonal support. To 6 involved 2 chromosomes in which a portion of one chromosome was our knowledge, this patient represents the first case of Turner syndrome inserted into the X chromosome. The G-banded karyotypes are below; involved in this particular autosomal anomaly. Case 1; 46,XX,der(2)inv(2)(q14q23)t(2;3)(p15;q27) Case 2; 46,XY,der(12)inv(12)(q21.3q24.1)t(1;12)(q42.3;q24.3) P0261. Intrachromosomal triplication of 15q11-q13 ; a new Case 3; 46,XX,der(5)inv(5)(p13p15.1)t(5;8)(q23.2;q22.1)/46,XX observation. Case 4; 46,XY,der(7)t(7;13)(p11.2;q14.3)t(7;21)(q11.2;q22.3) F. Vialard1,2, C. Mignon-Ravix3, D. Parrain4, M. F. Portno1, M. Le Lorch5, Case 5; 46,XY,t(1;7;14)(q32.3;p21.2;q21.2) S. Romana5, M. G. Mattei3, H. Moirot2 Case 6; 46,X,ins(X;8)(p22.1;p23.1p23.3) 1Laboratoire de Cytogntique, CHU Saint Antoine; Paris, France; 2Labo- All cases are apparently balanced rearrangements. Three of the CCRs ratoire de Cytogntique, CHU de Rouen; Rouen, France; 3Unit Inserm (1,2 and 4) were phenotypically normal individuals with a history of repro- U491, Faculte de Mdecine; Marseille, France; 4Service de Neurophysi- ductive problems. Three of these CCRs (3,5, and 6) were studied for an ologie, CHU de Rouen; Rouen, France; 5Laboratoire de Cytogntique, indication of developmental delay or phenotypic anomalies. CHU de Necker; Paris, France There are few reports of CCRs in the literature implying that these events fvialard@hotmail.com are quite rare. However, it is possible that CCRs occur more frequently We report a new case of intrachromosomal triplication of the proximal than expected from the literature. Our data suggests that balanced forms 15q11-q13 region. At our knowledge, it is a rare chromosomal disorder. of these events may even be fairly common in the population. It appears Our propositus is a 22 year old boy, with severe developmental delay and that genomic material itself and not the number of breaks and chromo- epilepsy. Cytogenetic R-bands analysis suggested the presence of addi- somes involved may influence phenotype. Only balanced forms of CCRs152 Posters: Cytogenetics were observed in this study. Although CCRs have the potential to giving The San Luis Valley Syndrome (SLVS) is due to a recombinant chromo- rise to unbalanced forms, a high rate of gamete loss may explain their some 8 resulting from a recurrent pericentric inversion in a population of scarcity. Hispanic ancestry originating from the San Luis Valley in Colorado (AJHG,2000,66;1138). We report on a 4 years old boy born to unrelated P0264. Dup 9p syndrome with multiplex hemangiomatosis Spanish parents. He presents with severe mental retardation, right sided and deafness in a familial t(10;22) carrier spastic hemiplegia and brain malformations (agenesis of corpus callosum, J. Krteszi1, . Morava1, M. Czak2, T. Decsi3, G. Kosztolnyi1 left frontal cortical dysplasia, hydrocephaly). He shows facial dysmorphism 1University of Pcs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child Develop- with large low set ears, hypertelorism, pterygium colli, pectus excavatum, ment; Pcs, Hungary; 2MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group; Pcs, but no cardiac defect. Prometaphase chromosome analysis reveals a Hungary; 3University of Pcs, Department of Pediatrics; Pcs, Hungary recombinant chromosome 8 with a pericentric inversion (p23 q22) and judit.karteszi@freemail.hu duplication 8(p11 p22). This duplication is confirmed by CGH. The break- The characteristic features of duplication 9p syndrome include severe points of the pericentric inversion 8(p23 q22) are similar to those reported mental/growth retardation, microcephaly, deep set eyes, carp-mouth, VSD, in the SLVS chromosome 8 variant. However, whereas the rec(8) observed umbilical hernia and 5th finger clinodactyly. Epilepsy may also be present in the SLVS consists in dup(8)(q22-qter), and del(8)(p23-pter), in our case in some patients. We report on a female infant with typical features of the the rec(8) includes dup(8)(p11-p22) and no detectable deletion by CGH. 9p trisomy syndrome associated with multiplex hemangiomatosis and sen- The clinical features in our patient are indeed compatible with the dup(8) soneurinal deafness. High resolution analysis and fluorescent in situ syndrome. Molecular tools are now used in order to study the breakpoints hybridisation using the chromosome 9 specific painting probe detected a regions and explore a possible link with the SLVS. de novo partial duplication of 9p [dup 9(p21p23)] as part of a complex chromosome rearrangement. Abalanced translocation [t(10;22)(q26;q12)] P0267. Duplication (4)(q31.1qter) in a newborn with suspi- was found in the patient and in her symptomless father without any alter- cious clinical diagnosis of Nijmegen breakage syndrome ation of the short arm of chromosome 9. Patients with balanced transloca- I. Cernakova1, M. Kvasnicova2, Z. Lovasova2, N. Badova3, E. Seemano- tions involving chromosomes 10 and 22 are seldom described. The de va4, K. Spackova5 novo duplication of a chromosome, other then the chromosomes involved 1Lab. experimental medicine; Olomouc, Czech Republic; 2Dept. Clin. in the rearrangement, in an offspring of a translocation carrier has not been Genetics; Banska Bystrica, Slovakia; 3Dept. Paediatrics; Banska Bystrica, reported yet. The new partial duplication of chromosome 9 in association Slovakia; 4Inst. Genet.; Prag, Czech Republic; 5Lab. exptl. med., Dept. with (10;22) translocation in our patient could be related to a possible insta- Paed., Palacky Univ.; Olomouc, Czech Republic bility of the balanced chromosomal rearrangement. iveta.cernakova@hotmail.com Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive condi- P0265.Maternal insertion of 18q11.2-q12.2 in 18p11.3 leading tion characterised by progressive microcephaly, early retardation of to recurrent unbalanced translocations in the offspring growth, chromosomal instability, hypersensitivity to ionising radiation and detected by microdissection and multicolor banding (MCB) immunodeficiency predisposing to recurrent infections and malignancies in H. Starke1, G. Senger2, M. Kossakiewicz3, H. Tittelbach3, N. Rubtsov4, V. childhood. We report a case of a newborn with some clinical features of Trifonov4, A. Heller1, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1 NBS and usefulness of combination of clinical examination, classical cyto- 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Practice genetics, FISH and molecular methods in establishing of correct diagnosis. of Medical Genetics and Gynecology; Regensburg, Germany; 3Kos- The newborn is the 2nd child of young, healthy and genetic unrelated par- sakiewicz; Nrnberg, Germany; 4Institute of Cytology and Genetics; ents. He is hypotrophic with unspecific somatic stigmatization; micro- Novosibirsk, Russian Federation cephaly,facial dysmorphism and heart abnormality (ASD). The karyotype b6sthe@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de of the child was 46,XY, add(4)(q35) de novo with chromosomal breaks in A24 year old women was referred to amniocentesis because of Down syn- 4% of metaphases. We revealed the origin of additive material on 4q as drome in the family. No chromosome 21 aberrations but a chromosome dup(4)(q31.1qter) using the whole chromosome painting probe 4 and 18q- was detected by GTG-banding. After microdissection and reverse telomere probe 4q combined with G-banding technique. The translocation painting (the created microdissection library was called MIDI 58), the deriv- t(14q;21q) was also in 4 metaphases by FISH detected. The suspicious ative chromosome 18 was defined as del(18)(q11.2q12.2) [see Figure]. clinical diagnosis of NBS was excluded because the deletion 657del5 in Ultrasound examination of this child (in the following called child 1) was NBS1 gene on 8q21 was not detected. We compare the similarity of clini- inconspicuous, however, pregnancy was terminated. The karyotype of the cal picture of our patient with cases with duplication of distal part 4q mother showed a morphologically altered chromosome 18, as well. It was described in the literature. classified as an inv(18)(p11.3q12.1) according to GTG banding. One year later an inconspicuous girl was born (child 2), showing the same aberrant P0268. Report of 6 cases of trisomy 10p resulting from chromosome 18 as in the mother. Now, in her third pregnancy (child 3), parental pericentric inversion (10) karyotypic analysis of the chorion cells revealed an 18q+. Multicolor-band- R. Karimin-Nejad, H. Karimi, H. Miri, N. Nabavi-Nia, M. Rahimi, K. Shir- ing (MCB) analysis using a chromosome 18 specific probe set revealed, neshan, M. H. Karimi-Nejad however, a normal banding pattern for 18q and changes in 18p. The iden- Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of tical changes as in the fetus were detected in the short arm of the so-called Iran inverted chromosome 18 of the mother. Additional hybridization of the mhkarimi@mavara.com microdissection library MIDI 58 confirmed, that the maternal altered chro- During the past 20 years and among more than 25000 peripheral blood mosome 18 was in fact an ins(18)(pter->p11.32;;q11.2->q12.2;;p11.31- karyotypes, we have detected 6 cases of add(10)(q25). All of these cases >q11.2;;q12.3->qter) [see Figure]. Application of the probe MIDI 58 on the were referred between 1-12 months of age with multiple congenital anom- aberrant chromosome 18 of child 3 showed a duplication dup(11.2q12.2) alies including; severe growth retardation, congenital dislocation of the hip, [see Figure]. As ultrasound diagnostics is inconspicuous, the parents bilateral club feet, high bossing forehead, narrow face with sagging decided not to terminate the pregnancy. In summary, the partial monosomy cheeks, broad nasal bridge, harelip or cleft palate, small round chin, large in child 1 and the partial trisomy in child 3 can easily be explained by posteriorly rotated low set ears, hyperflexed limbs, hypoplastic genitalia unequal crossing over events during maternal meiosis. MCB in combina- and severe hypotonia. In 5 of the cases, their parents karyotypes were tion with microdissection and reverse painting were the prerequisite to studied, and 3 of the fathers and 2 of the mothers had a pericentric inver- determine the karyotype of the mother and her offspring correctly. Acknowl- sion in chromosome 10. The inversion involves the short and the long arm edgements; This work was supported by the Herbert Quandt Stiftung der with breakpoints at p11 and q25, resulting in a long acrocentric chromo- VARTAAG, the Madeleine Schickedanz-Kinderkrebs-Stiftung, the DAAD, some 10. This identified the karyotype of the children as the DFG and the Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung. rec(10)dup(10p)inv(10)(p11q25). One of the families did not participate in the study. Prenatal diagnosis has been performed for two of the families, P0266.An unusual de novo inversion and duplication of chro- revealing a normal fetus in one and a trisomy 10p in the other. mosome 8; 46, XY,rec(8) dup(p11 p22), inv (8)(p23 q22) Arela- tionship with San Luis Valley Syndrome ? P0269.DiGeorge Syndrome in Czech Republic C. Hans1, D. Delneste1, S. Graw2, F. Christiaens3, E. Vamos3, L. Duprez3 M. Nemeckova1, E. Kocarek2, A. Puchmajerova2, T. Klein3 1Hopital Erasme Universit Libre de Bruxelles; Bruxelles, Belgium; 1Gennet CZ, s.r.o.; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Institute of Biology and Med- 2Eleanor Roosevelt Institute; Denver, United States; 3Hopital Universitaire ical Genetics, University Hospital Motol; Prague, Czech Republic; 3Kardio- Des Enfants Reine Fabiola; Bruxelles, Belgium centrum, University Hospital Motol; Prague, Czech Republic chans@ulb.ac.be michaela.nemeckova@gennet.czPosters: Cytogenetics 153 90 percent cases of DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) with variable clinical man- melaragno.morf@epm.br ifestation -conotruncal congenital heart diseases, craniofacial dysmorphia, Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is characterized by severe growth and hypocalcemia, immunodeficiency, psychiatric disorders- are due to mental retardation, typical facial appearance, and seizures. It results from 22q11.2 microdeletion. Estimated incidence of 1/4000 live births is ranging the partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4 (4p16.3). In most DGS among the most frequent microdeletion syndromes. Peripheral blood reported cases, the deletion can be detected by conventional chromosome of 86 patients suspect from DGS was investigated by FISH using LSI analysis, while in some cases, a microdeletion can only be detected by probe (Vysis) between 1997-2000. At 24 patients the microdeletion was molecular probes. This study presents a male patient with WHS who died found. 23 from them had congenital heart defect. Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) with 37 years. He carried a karyotype 45,XY,der(4)t(4;13)(p16;q11)mat,- 39 %- and interrupted aortic arch (IAA) 35 %- were the most frequent 13. Abalanced translocation could be observed in his mother and grand- ones. At one case the microdeletion was inherited from mother with forme mother. His brother presents mild mental retardation, minor phenotypic fruste of DGS. Epidemiological and clinical consequences of DGS are dis- alterations and a karyotype 47,XY,+der(13) t(4;13)(p16;q11). The same cussed. extra derivative chromosome 13 was also present in one of his three chil- dren, a girl who has the same phenotype as her father. Fluorescent In Situ P0270.Amolecular cytogenetic and clinical study of patients Hybridization (FISH) was performed using LIS WHS Microdeletion Probe with the Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. (Vysis) revealing two signals in the balanced translocation; one in the nor- P. Kuglk1, R. Gaillyov2, H. Radilov1 mal chromosome 4 and one in the derivative chromosome 13. Thus, both 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, girl and her father have partial trisomies for 4p16-pter and 13pter-q11, Masaryk University; Brno, Czech Republic; 2Department of Medical Genet- while the WHS patient had monosomy for the same segments, although ics, Childrens Hospital, Faculty Hospital; Brno, Czech Republic the unbalance for the chromosome 4 is the relevant one for the phenotype. kugl@sci.muni.cz It is an unusual balanced translocation as it results in two different unbal- The Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angelman (AS) syndromes are two distinct anced gametes from 3;1 disjunction, both giving viable individuals. One of mental retardation syndromes that are caused by either microdeletions or them could be fertile and transmit the extra derivative chromosome. The uniparental disomy of the same chromosomal region. The deletions unbalanced gametes arising from 2;2 disjunction in this translocation responsible for PWS and AS have been localized to band 15q11-q13 of would probably be less compatible to life. (CNPq). chromosome 15. PWS is characterized by infantile hypotonia with feeding problems, short stature, small hands and feet, almond-shaped eyes, P0273.Clinical variability in ring chromosome 15 syndrome; hypogonadism, psychomotor retardation, hypopigmentation, and develop- implication of deletions of subtelomeric regions ? ment of obesity. AS is characterized by severe mental retardation, B. Doray, F. Girard-Lemaire, O. Caron, E. Flori seizures, inappropriate laughter, ataxic gait, puppet-like upper limb move- Laboratory of Cytogenetics; Strasbourg, France ments, lack of speech, large mandible, hypopigmentation, an open mouth doray_s@club-internet.fr with protruding tonque, and microcephaly. We report the results of molec- Ring chromosome 15 is an uncommon chromosomal abnormality (about ular cytogenetic and clinical studies on 29 patients suspected for PWS or thirty cases reported since 1975). The common clinical phenotype includes AS. During the last 2 years we diagnosed 4 patients with deletion 15q11- severe short stature, microcephaly, triangular face and variable mental q13 using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with D15 S10 and retardation. We report here two patients with ring chromosome 15. The first SNRPN DNAprobes. In patients without a cytogenetic deletion, molecular patient is a girl followed-up from birth to the age of 18 months. She pre- study of uniparental disomy for chromosome 15 was performed. Based on sented a severe phenotype including pre and postnatal growth retardation, our results we analyzed the clinical criteria and typical phenotype features psychomotor delay, microcephaly with triangular face, congenital heart dis- for patients having deletion 15q11-q13 or uniparental disomy. ease and renal malformation. Aring chromosome 15 was identified in 95 % of the analysed blood lymphocytes. FISH using subtelomeric probes P0271. A Case of Marfanoid habitus with mental retardation showed deletion of the subtelomeric regions. The second patient was a 33 associated with a subtelomeric translocation year-old man. He was referred in genetic department for infertility. He had M. C. Vincent1, S. Julia1, P. De Mas1, D. Lacombe2, G. Bourrouillou1, P. a small stature, but no significant dysmorphism and he was normally intel- Calvas1 ligent. Chromosome analysis revealed a ring chromosome 15 in all 1Hospital Purpan; Toulouse, France; 2Hospital Pellegrin; Bordeaux, France analysed blood lymphocytes. FISH using subtelomeric probes was per- vincent.mc@chu-toulouse.fr formed and proved the presence of subtelomeric regions in this ring chro- The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technology has made new mosome. This report emphasises the large clinical variability of ring chro- approaches available for cytogenetic screening such as subtelomeric mosome 15 and may suggest that deletions of subtelomeric regions would rearrangement examination which would be missed by conventional chro- be associated with a more severe phenotype. However, other similar mosome banding methods and painting probe in molecular cytogenetics. reports would be necessary to support this hypothesis. We report here a case of unbalanced cryptic translocation in a family with both recurrent miscarriages and three children with mental retardation. The P0274.Recurrent pure maternal 12p trisomy index case (IC), a 14 years old girl, is the second among two girls born D. Souza1, R. A. Bicudo2, M. S. G. Silva2, C. C. Benetti-Filho2, D. Moretti- from non consanguineous parents. Since infancy, she presented a devel- Ferreira1 opmental delay, a marfanoid habitus and dysmorphic facies features 1Dept. of Genetics, IBB-UNESP; Botucatu, Brazil; 2Genetic Counselling including epicantal fold, suborbital fullness of rubber tissues, prominent Service, IBB-UNESP; Botucatu, Brazil nose with squared and wide nasal root and dysplastic ears. Echocardio- sag@fmb.unesp.br gram, renal ultrasound examination, skeleton radiographies and metabol- 12p trisomy phenotype is a subject that has been debated in the literature ic analyses were normal. Conventional cytogenetic analyses failed to . Even though patients with pure 12p trisomy are rare, there are several detect numerical or structural chromosome aberration. FISH analyses reports on patients carrying it by translocation with other autosomes. Two using Multiprobe panT CYTOCELL kit were performed in order to detect brothers have been recently referred to our service. Their phenotypes were putative subtelomeric rearrangement. The analysis demonstrated in the similar and consisted of turricephaly, round facies, prominent front, epi- index case a p-arm telomere monosomy and a p-arm telomere trisomy for cantic fold, scarce eyebrows, wide nasal bridge, short nose, anteverted the chromosome 8 and 12 respectively. The molecular cytogenetic exami- nostrils, long nasal filter, thin upper lip, malformed ears, short neck, severe nation of the father involved the identification of the balanced subtelomer- hypotonia and Neuro-Pshycho-Motor-Development delay. Both children ic translocation t(8,12)(pter,pter). This cryptic chromosome anomaly result- were males and aged 8 and 2 years when genetically and clinically ed from an unbalanced subtelomeric translocation by malsegregation adja- assessed. Cytogenetic analyses of both patients revealed karyotypes 47, cent-1 type. Accurate genetic counselling and the opportunity for early pre- XY, der (21)t(12; 21)(12 pter -> 12p11.21;;21q 11.1-> 21p 11.1) analyzed natal diagnosis can now be offered to this family. This type of molecular by banding techniques GTG, CBG, high resolution and FISH. Cytogenetic cytogenetic telomerics analysis allowed the description of putative new analysis of the mother revealed karyotype 46, XX t (12; 21)(12 qter-> 12p syndromic association which do not share any features with described tri- 11.2 ;; 21q 11.1 ->21 qter). The father showed normal karyotype. The somy 12p and monosomy 8p. patients two sisters presented balanced translocation 12/21, an extra chromosome of the sexual pair and karyotype 47, XXY, t (12; 21) (Kline- P0272. Translocation (4;13)(p16;q11) giving rise to different felter Syndrome associated with balanced translocation). The patients unbalances; duplication 4p and deletion 4p (Wolf-Hirschhorn have the 12p trisomy classical phenotype. The brother of the patient with Syndrome) Klinefelter Syndrome is likely to be another example of interchromosal M. I. Melaragno, S. S. Takeno, M. Corbani, D. Brunoni effect on maternal meiosis, resulting in the chromosome X non-disjunction. UNIFESP; Sao Paolo, Brazil Supported by FUNDA O LUCENTIS 154 Posters: Cytogenetics P0275. Trisomy 14q syndrome; confirmation by two rec suzanne.demczuk@muhc.mcgill.ca dup(14q) in two generations with familial pericentric inver- Unbalanced chromosomal anomalies can lend information on the position sion (14)(p12q24) of genes and on the understanding of pathologic mechanisms of common A. Dufke1, P. Ruppersberger2, R. H. Schffel3, P. Kaiser1 diseases. Thus, one locus for asthma and allergic disease, a multifactorial 1Department of Medical Genetics; Tuebingen, Germany; 2Gemeinschaft- trait, has been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 5. We report on a spraxis Dr. Limbach; Heidelberg, Germany; 3Pediatrician in Private Prac- patient with a partial trisomy of chromosome 5 and significant asthma and tice; Lichtenau-Fuerstenhagen, Germany allergies. andreas.dufke@uni-tuebingen.de The patient presented, at 6 years of age, congenital heart disease (ASD, In a girl presenting with conspicuous craniofacial features and psychomo- VSD, PDA), developmental delay, severe eczema, asthma, numerous food toric retardation cytogenetic analysis revealed a rearranged chromosome allergies and elevated serum IgE. The blood karyotype showed extra 14 with pure trisomy of the distal bands 14q24 to 14qter (rec dup(14q)) material on the short arm of chromosome 22. Spectral karyotyping (SKY) due to a paternal pericentric inversion (14)(p12q24). Familial examination revealed that the extra material on chromosome 22 originated from chro- gave the same pericentric inversion in the two oldest sibs of the proposita mosome 5. FISH studies with BAC probes were undertaken to determine (Kaiser et al., 1984; Clin Genet 26; 73-76). Examination of the younger sis- the extent of chromosome 5 trisomy. BACs mapping to 5q34 and 5q35 all ter had been refused by the parents. This younger sister had three con- hybridized to the der(22). The childs karyotype is thus; 46,XX, secutive miscarriages. Chromosomal analyses had not been carried out on der(22)t(?;22)(?;p11.1). ish der(22)t(5;22)(q34;q11.1) (wcp5+, D22Z4+, the fetuses. Only during the fourth pregnancy she was diagnosed to carry D5S400+, D5S2006+). Parents karyotypes were normal. the familial pericentric inversion. Chorionic villus sampling was performed The patient illustrates a case of pure partial trisomy of 5q34-5qter, as loss which led to the loss of a chromosomal healthy fetus. In a fifth pregnancy of 22p material is non-significant. The distal 5q trisomy genotype has been no prenatal cytogenetic analysis was carried out and a boy was delivered associated with clinical signs that include growth and mental retardation, by caesarean section because of fetal distress at 35 weeks of gestation. eczema, craniofacial anomalies, and malformations of heart, lungs, and Stenosis of the aortic isthmus was noted. At the age of 5 months he pre- genitalia; many of which our patient presents. The trisomic region does not sented with developmental delay. He had minor facial anomalies, including include the chromosome 5 interval (5q31) linked to asthma and allergic dis- eye abnormalities and a characteristic shape of the ears. The phenotype ease. However, numerous genes potentially involved in heart development was very similar to the proposita. Cytogenetic investigation showed the (hCsx, MSX2), IgE levels (H2R) and asthma and allergic response (LCT4 same imbalanced karyotype (rec dup(14q)). We therefore propose a dis- synthase, LCP2, H12-3) have been mapped to this chromosomal region. tinctive multiple congenital anomaly / mental retardation (MCA/MR) syn- drome due to partial trisomy of distal chromosome 14q. We discuss the P0278. Psu dic(21;21)(21pter->21q22;;21q22->21pter) in two recombination risk of the given inversion and compare the clinical and newborns with Down syndrome cytogenetic data with previously reported cases on trisomy 14q. Along A. Polityko1, N. Shorokh2, J. Jaroshevich1 term follow up of the proposita is given. 1Institute for Hereditary Diseases; Minsk, Belarus; 2Regional Genetic Cen- tre, Brest; Brest, Belarus P0276.Anew case of partial trisomy 6p  monosomy 6q from lazjuk@bcsmi.minsk.by a familial inversion of chromosome 6. Dicentric structure having only one active centromere is called pseudodi- M. Gregoire1, Y. Leroux1, V. Bourdon1, M. Krier2, J. Andre2, P. Jonveaux1, centric. Such chromosome is able to overcome the cell divisions success- B. LeHeup1 fully and is a stable structure in constitutional karyotype. We report on two 1Department of Medical Genetic CHU de Nancy-Brabois; Vandoeuvre, unrelated infants with the typical for Down syndrome phenotype features in France; 2Pediatric Nephrology CHU de Nancy-Brabois; VANDOEUVRE, both. Their karyotypes had pseudodicentric chromosome constructed due France to two chromosomes 21q22 junction. No prenatal chromosome studies has leheup@facmed.u-nancy.fr been done in both cases. Chromosome analyses were performed after This report describes a new patient with unusual clinical signs which are standard preparation of PHAstimulated lymphocyte cultures with subse- related to a partial trisomy 6p and monosomy 6q. The patient, born in 1983, quent GTG and C banding, respectively. Cytogenetic studies of GTG- is the first of a normal father born in 1956 and a normal mother born in banded metaphases showed that proposita I, a newborn female, have 1959. Pregnancy has been uneventful. She was born at the term of 38 karyotype 46,XX,psu dic (21;21)(21pter->21q22;;21q22->21pter),+21. The weeks with normal birth lenght and weight. Head circumference was slight- analysis of C banded chromosomes showed the presence of the second ly decreased at 2,5 SDS. During the first days of life biological evidences centromere region in pseudodicentric chromosome. The parental kary- of renal insufficiency lead to the diagnosis of a left renal dysplasia with otypes were found normal. Proposita II was newborn male with typical bilateral ureteral reflux. Cytogenetic examination was reported as normal. Down syndrome features, his karyotype was 46,XY,psu dic (21;21)(21pter- Developmental milestones were delayed with the walk present after 18 >21q22;;21q22->21pter),+21. The parental karyotypes were normal too. months of life. Language did not appear before 4 years of life with evidence Cytogenetic aspects of de novo pseudodicentric chromosomes are dis- of nasal speech. At 13 years height and weight were in the 50th centile. cussed. Pubertal development was normal. The mean IQ was evaluated at 53 with mental progression around 7 years of age. The facial dysmorphism was P0279. De novo rea(13q13q); Most are Isochromosomes mild with microcornea, strabism, asymetrical right ptosis, prominent nasal Rather Than Robertsonian Translocation bridge, low set ears, and prognathism. Halluces and thumbs were broad B. Wang1, J. Williams2, L. G. Shaffer3 and symetrical shortening of the 4th metacarpal and metatarsal bones 1Changhua Christian Hospital; Changhua, Taiwan Republic of China; 2The were also reported. The progression of renal insufficiency lead to kidney Prenatal Diagnostic Center of Southern California; Los Angeles, CAUnit- transplantation in 1998. Her mother reported two early miscarriages at the ed States; 3Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX United States 6th week of gestation in 1998 and 1999. The cytogenetic reevaluation of baotyan@cch.org.tw the patient and her parents gave the following results ; mother ; 46, XX, Robertsonian translocations that most commonly give rise to secondary tri- inv(6)(p23q27); patient ; 46, XX, rec(6)dup(6p)inv(6)(p23q27)mat. The somy 13 are rob(13q13q). Over 90% of rob(13q13q) are ascertained as de patient has a trisomy of the 6pter - 6p23 and monosomy of the 6q27-6qter novo rearrangements in trisomy 13. Recent studies (Shaffer et al. 1994) regions. Compared to the data of the literature the cytogenetic anomalies demonstrated that 3 of 4 cases with homologous rearrangements of chro- are identical to the case reported in 1993 by Wauters. To the difference of mosome 13 resulting in trisomy 13 were isochromosomes. We present that clinical report our patient did have neither short stature, blepharophi- results of molecular analyses in a case of de novo homologous chromo- mosis, nor cardiac malformations . The shortening of metacarpal and some 13 rearrangement [rea(13q13q)]detected in an abortus specimen. metatarsal bones have not been reported so far. An abortus specimen was collected from a 37-year-old, G3, P0, SAB2 woman following diagnosis of a missed abortion at 8 weeks gestational P0277.Acase of pure partial trisomy of 5q34-qter associated age. Cytogenetic studies revealed the karyotype of the abortus to be with asthma, allergies and hyper IgE. 46,XX, -13,+rea(13q13q)de novo. Using 10 micro-satellite markers from S. Demczuk1, B. Dion1, P. Lepage2, B. R. Hadad3, T. Hudson2, V. M. Der chromosome 13, it was determined that this rea(13q13q) was a maternal- Kaloustian4 ly derived isochromosome and that there was no recombination involved in 1Montreal Childrens Hospital Research Institute; Montreal, PQ Canada; the rearrangement. This would suggest that the isochromosome formed 2Genome Center, Montreal General Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 3Insti- postzygotically. However, a meiotic origin can not be excluded. These posi- tute for Molecular and Human Genetics, Georgetown University; Washing- ble mechanisms of isochromosome formation will be discussed. ton, DC United States; 4Medical Genetics, Montreal Childrens Hospital; Montreal, PQ CanadaPosters: Cytogenetics 155 P0280. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of a familial developmental peculiarities until a speech delay was diagnosed at the age translocation with breakpoint on 12p11 cosegregating with of two years. On examination at 42 months he presented with very mild brachydactyly E dysmorphic features including a dolichocephalus, supraorbital fullness of J. Wirth1, A. Vester2, H. C. Hennies3, K. Hoffmann3, A. Kobelt4, H. G. Noth- subcutaneous tissue and a bulbous nasal tip. The Denver Developmental wang2, H. H. Ropers2, T. F. Wienker5, S. Baehring3 Screening Test revealed a psychomotor delay of almost 18 months. Termi- 1Developmental Biology, University Bielefeld; Bielefeld, Germany; 2Max nal deletions of the short arm of chromosome 8 reported previously Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 3Max-Delbrueck- demonstrated a common breakpoint 8p23 in the majority of patients. In Centrum Berlin-Buch; Berlin, Germany; 4Institute of Medical Genetics; general the children show mild to moderate mental retardation and only Chemnitz, Germany; 5Institut fr Medizinische Statistik, Dokumentation minor facial dysmorphisms. Physical abnormalities mainly include heart und; Bonn, Germany defects, seizures and behaviour difficulties. Although the factors responsi- jutta.wirth@biologie.uni-bielefeld.de ble for a normal spermiogenesis (TDF, AZF) are present in the boy infertil- Autosomal dominant brachydactyly type E associated with severe hyper- ity in adulthood due to disturbed XYpairing in meiosis I must be expected tension has been described in a large Turkish kindred. Linkage analysis of this pedigree localized the critical region to an interval of 6 cM on chromo- P0281.Anew case of interstitial 6q deletion with Prader-Willi- some 12p11. Interestingly, chromosome rearrangements associated with like phenotype similar phenotypes involving the same chromosomal segment were report- L. Faivre, M. De Blois, S. Jacquemont, O. Raoul, C. Turleau, M. Prieur, A. ed (Nagai et al. 1995, Baehring et al. 1997). We have previously described Munnich, M. Vekemans, V. Cormier-Daire a translocation with breakpoint on 12p11 cosegregating with typical fea- Dpartement de Gntique; Paris, France tures of brachydactyly E in four generations. Cytogenetic and molecular lfaivre@hotmail.com studies revealed that the breakpoint is located 3 Mb proximal to the critical More than 30 cases of interstitial deletion of chromosome 6q have been interval for brachydactyly E and hypertension. Breakpoint spanning YAC reported in the literature, with variable breakpoints and clinical features. and PAC clones were identified. Partial sequencing of clones provided a Four of them displayed clinical features suggestive of Prader-Willi syn- complete sequence of 150 kb spanning the breakpoint. By Southern blot drome. Here we report a fifth case of interstitial 6q deletion and Prader-Willi analysis we could demonstrate that the open reading frame of the parathy- like phenotype. The probant was described as floppy and with feeding roid hormone-like hormone gene (PTHLH), which was supposed to be a problems in early infancy. He sat at age 2, walk at age 3 ?, and the speech good positional candidate for brachydactyly, is not disrupted. Other candi- was very poor at age 5. His behaviour was hyperactive, with short atten- date genes are now under investigation. The identification of the break- tion span and intolerance to frustration. Excessive weight began at age 3, point will enable us to discover genetic factors contributing to brachy- with a big appetite and food-seeking behaviour. At physical examination at dactyly E and might give insight into the etiology of brachydactyly E asso- age 5, weight was +5.5 SD, height was -1 SD, and OFC was + 2.5 SD. He ciated with hypertension. had slight dysmorphic features including a square face, large forehead, small palpebral fissures, mild strabismus, thin nose, and thin lips. Hands P0281. Charge Association and Interstitial Chromosome and feet were small, external genitalia were normal. Investigations showed 22q11 Deletion; Molecular, FISH and Clinical Study absence of malformations, a normal methylation assay in the SNRPN S. Guarducci, M. Lapini, U. Ricci, E. Lapi, L. Ombroni, E. Andreucci, I. region, and normal FISH study with the SNRPN probe. However, cytoge- Sani, L. Giunti, M. Giovannucci Uzielli netic examination showed an interstitial deletion of chromosome 6q, Genetics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Univer- del(6)(q16.1q21). Karyotypes of the parents were normal. Parental origin sity of Florence, A.Meyer Children Hospital; Florence, Italy of the deletion is in progress. This observation confirmed that individuals uzielli_ml@unifi.it with a Prader-Willi phenotype and normal cytogenetic and molecular stud- CHARGE Association is a non random occurrence of congenital malfor- ies of the 15q11-q12 region should be examined for a deletion 6q. It is mations that has been described in clinical series; inclusion criteria for the worth noting that the 6q16.2 band is common in 4 out of the 5 cases. CHARGE Association are at least four of the major features (monolateral or bilateral coloboma of the eye, heart defect, atresia of the choanae, P0282. Extreme growth retardation in a child with a de novo retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, criptorchidism, ear interstitial 20q13.2 deletion. anomalies and hearing defects). Cleft lip and palate or high-arched palate, D. Genevive1, L. Faivre1, O. Raoul1, D. Sanlaville1, F. Monceaux2, M. velopharingeal insufficiency, micrognathia, facial palsy, esophageal atre- Bonnet1, P. Gosset1, C. Ozilou1, A. Munnich1, M. Vekemans1, M. Prieur1, sia, malakoplakia of the colon, cerebral anomalies, have been also V. Cormier-Daire1 described in the clinical spectrum. All of the features of CHARGE Associa- 1Dpartement de gntique hpital Necker Enfants Malades; Paris, tion occur, more or less expressed, in the series of patients who have dele- France; 2Service dEndocrinologie Pdiatrique hpital Necker Enfants tions within chromosome band 22q11 (Ryan et al., 1997). Viceversa, not all Malades; Paris, France cases of CHARGE Association show the 22q11 deletion. We report the gendav@club-internet.fr observations of a long follow-up study of four children, two females and Deletions of chromosome 20q are extremely rare and have not been asso- two males, with CHARGE Association; in two of them, FISH and molecu- ciated with a particular phenotype. Here we report on a girl with a chromo- lar analysis revealed a deletion in the critical region 22q11. In the other two some 20q deletion. Mensurations at birth were 1320 g for weight, 38 cm for children, who were negative for the 22q11 deletion, we are now analysing height, and 27.5 cm for OFC and severe feeding difficulties were noted in the PAX2 gene for deletion and nucleotidic variations of the coding the first months of life. Nocturnal enteral feeding was started with no sig- sequence, because the pattern of expression of PAX2 suggests that genes nificant effects on height. At age 11 months, weight was 4180 g (-5 SD), encoding downstream targets effectors could be candidate gene for the height was 55 cm (-7 SD), and OFC was 39.5 cm (-5 SD). Clinical exami- CHARGE Association (Tellier et al, 2000). nation showed rare hair, high forehead, irregular eyebrows, broad nasal bridge, bulbous nose, iris dysplasia, large ears, short philtrum, thin upper P0280. Unbalanced translocation 8/Y(45,X,-Y,t(Y;8)(q12p23)); lip, micrognathia, and numerous skin dimples. She could not sit without aid case report and review of literature and was hypertonic. Cardiac and renal ultrasound, and cerebral MRI were K. Bosse1, H. Engels1, K. Van der Ven2, R. Raff1 normal. High resolution blood chromosomes of the child and her parents 1Institute of Human Genetics; University of Bonn, Germany; 2Department showed a de novo interstitial 20q13.2 deletion in the proband. In situ of Reproductive Medicine; University of Bonn, Germany hybridisation studies confirmed the presence of the telomeres. Analysis of bosse@meb.uni-bonn.de the parental origin of the deletion is in progress. The other reports of chro- A25 year old healthy G1P0 female underwent amniocentesis at 16 weeks mosome 20q deletion were reviewed but none of them had similar break- of gestation because of abnormal triple test results. Ultrasound examina- points and similar striking phenotype. tion demonstrated isolated bilateral choroid plexus cysts. Karyotype analy- sis from amniocytes revealed an unbalanced de novo Y/autosome translo- P0283.Ahereditary case of distal short arm deletion of the X cation [45,X,t(Y;8)]. A molecular genetic investigation with 30 specific chromosome sequence tagged sites (STS) located between Yp11.32 and Yq11.23 S. Vjatkina1, T. Kuznetzova2, T. Kuznetzova2, J. Loginova2, O. Chiryaeva2, excluded partial deletions in Yeuchromatin. At that time no subtelomeric L. Petrova2, L. Petrova2, L. Petrova2 probes for chromosome 8p were available and the parents were informed 1Otts Institute of Obstretrics and Gynecology; Saint-Petersburg, Russian about the remaining risk of a terminal deletion of 8p. At birth the boy pre- Federation; 2Otts institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Saint-Peters- sented with average body measurements and an unremarkable physical burg, Russian Federation examination. FISH with a probe of the subtelomeric region 8p (Locus pendina@mail.ru D8S2333) confirmed a monosomy 8pter to 8p23. The boy showed no Partial deletions of the short arm of the X chromosome are known to be156 Posters: Cytogenetics compatible with fertility in some cases but they cause a significant ovarial P0287.Acase of the balanced translocation between the 12 insufficiency with Turners signs or gonadal dysgenesis in other cases. We and X chromosomes, accompanied by the mental deficiency. report a family in which a mother (54 years old) and two daughters (27 O. A. Kotkova, E. Staroverova, O. Udalova years old) with short stature but without other Turners stigmata had the Medical Diagnostic Centre; Nizhny Novgorod, Russian Federation same chromosomal anomaly. The standard cytogenetic technique (QFH) medcentr@sandy.ru and FISH with locus-specific DNAprobe (Xp21.1) revealed non-mosaic Aproband - patient, age 17, was born from the third pregnancy. The fami- karyotype 46,X,del(X)(qter-p21.1;). As revealed by RBA technique the ly history is not aggravated. The age of mother is 36. The toxicosis were abnormal X was always late replicating in all the examined cells. One of observed in the first half of pregnancy, pneumonia in 16 weeks.. The girl the sisters has an eight month old daughter with normal karyotype 46,XX. was born in time, precipitated labor, the mass at birth is 3850 g., height-56 The other sister has now 37 weeks pregnancy. Prenatal diagnosis demon- cm. At examination; the weight is 51 kg., the height is 162 cm. Middle con- strated normal female karyotype in this fetus. Our investigation suggest stitution, the subcutaneous fat is poorly developed. The skin is dry, the tur- that plural genetic factors on both arms of human X chromosome are gor is decreased. Adiffusive muscular hypotony. The forehead is convex, involved in ovarian development. the occipitalbone is impressed. Therere the supplementary cartilages at the external surface of the floor of the auricle. The features are right. A P0284. Unusual mosaicism due to non-homologous postzy- macroglossia, the gothic palate. The first degree scoliosis. The longitudi- gotic recombination involving chromosomes 6 and 10 in the nal, transverse platypodia, the sandals-like foot. The physical development mother, and 46,X,der(X)t(X;6) in her daughter. is according to the age. The tonicoclonic fits are observed since 3,5 I. Petkovic1, I. Barisic2 months. The fits, expressed in spontaneous vomiting, headache without a 1University Childrns Hospital Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia; 2University Chil- loss of consciousness, have appeared since 3 years 3- 4 times a year. She drens Hospital Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia is reading by syllables, the handwriting is unstable with mistakes. The cal- iskrapetkovic@vip.hr culation is within 10 by means of fingers. At self- service and communica- It is well known that unbalanced translocations are mostly familial, and tion she is rapidly exhausted and becomes indifferent, fretful, hypomimic. cytogenetic analysis of parents usually reveal the reciprocal exchange of The infatility in judgements, the scanty vocabulary are noted, infatility in chromosome segments identified in a given unbalanced rearrangement. In judgements, the scanty vocabulary are noted, she is egocentric. The this report we present an unexpected cytogenetic finding of chromosome extension of the brain large cistern, petrification of the anterior falx. The rearrangement transmission. Our patient is 23-month old girl with short areas of pathologic density in the brain tissue are not revealed. The corti- stature, failure to thrive, moderate mental retardation, deficiency if IgG, cal sulci are visualized clearly. The rheoencephalogram is a small asym- mild facial dysmorphism, no malformation or abnormalities of visceral metry of the blood flow. The EEG - the significant alterations of the brain organs. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood and fibroblast revealed a bioelectrical activity in the form of disfunction of the diencephalic - truncal karyotype of 46, X, der(X)t(X;6)(q22; p11). Cytogenetic investigation of the structures. The brain spastic readiness threshold is decreased. The ele- father revealed normal karyotype (46,XY), while the mother presented ments of the epileptiform activity are registered. Therere no focal alter- 46,XX/46,XX, der(10)t(6;10)(p11; p11) in the peripheral blood, and 46,XX ations. The karyotype of mother is 46,XX, the karyotype of father is 46,XY. was observed in fibroblasts culture. We suggest that unusual mosaicism in The karyotype of proband is 46,X,t(X;12)(X q ter -> X p 21.1 ;;12 q 13.1 - the mother is due to unstable 6p11 region leading to the jumping non- > 12 q ter; 12 p ter -> 12 q 13.1 ;; X p 2.11 -> X p ter). Taking into consid- homologous postzygotic recombination involving chromosome 10 eration the presence of the phenotype microabnormalities in combination (observed) and X (not observed) at S/G2 phase of the cell cycle. The moth- with a mental deficiency, spastic syndrome it is possible to presure a pres- er transmitted to her daughter der(X)t(X;6) and normal chromosome 6. ence of the monosomy (microdeletion) 12 chromosome. P0285.Trisomy 9p22p24 Due To AMaternal Insertion Translo- P0290.De novo structural rearrangement with duplication of cation 11p15 in a boy with prenatal onset of overgrowth, dysplastic P. F. Ippel1, J. M. Engelen2, J. M. de Pater1 kidney, hydronephrosis and dysmorphisms. 1University Medical Center; Utrecht, The Netherlands; 2Clinical Genetics K. B. J. Gerssen- Schoorl1,1, J. B. G. Verheij1, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, A. Center; Maastricht, The Netherlands H. van der Vlugt2, A. Y. van der Veen1, L. K. Leegte1, A. J. van Essen1 pfippel@knmg.nl 1University of Groningen, Department of Medical Genetics; Groningen, We report on a boy with partial trisomy 9p, due to a maternal insertion The Netherlands; 2University Hospital; Groningen, The Netherlands translocation ins t(12;9)(q24.1;p22p24)mat. His phenotype is characteris- K.B.J.Gerssen-Schoorl@medgen.azg.nl tic for partial trisomy 9p; his clinical manifestations are mental retardation, We present a boy with some features suggestive of Beckwith-Wiedemann growth retardation, microcephaly, epicanthus, low-set ears micrognathia, syndrome and additional congenital anomalies; prenatal onset of over- clinodactyly of the fifth fingers and extremely small genitals. The mother growth; birth weight 3,710 g, birth length 50 cm and head circumference and 2 carrier brothers did not show any dysmorphic features but had major 35.4 cm at 33+4 (or possibly 35+5) weeks gestation (all above P97), dys- learning difficulties not present in related non-carriers. The inserted seg- morphic ears (but no clear earlobe crease), no evident macroglossia, ment is very small and the GTG banding findings were confirmed by using hypertelorism, a right epicanthic fold, deafness, transient hypotonia with microdissection and FISH. hypoventilation, transient cardiac hypertrophia of ventricles, internipple dis- tance >P97, abdominal hypotonia with diastasis recti, right dysplastic kid- P0286. Screening for Cryptic Chromosome Rearrangements ney and left congenital hydronephrosis due to pelviureteric obstruction. using subtelomeric probes; The experience of a UK diagnos- The G-banding pattern of lymphocyte metaphases was interpreted as tic cytogenetics laboratory. 46,X,?t(Y;11) (q11.2;q13.3). FISH using whole chromosome paints of chro- N. Friend, D. Corney, R. W. Palmer mosomes Yand 11 confirmed the translocation. Despite a negative DA- Great Ormond Street Hospital; London, United Kingdom DAPI staining result, presence of Yheterochromatin could be demonstrat- deborah.corney@gosh-tr.nthames.nhs.uk ed with probe pY3.4. The der(11) chromosome showed a hybridisation sig- The availability of commercial kits containing subtelomeric FISH probes nal on 11q13.4 with BAC 120P20. Asubtelomeric probe specific for 11p has allowed the application of these probes for the screening of diagnostic hybridised to both arms of the der(11) chromosome. Asubtelomeric probe cases. Since August 1998 the North East London Regional Cytogenetics specific for 11q hybridised to the q-arm of the der(Y) chromosome, but not Labortory has successfully screened 95 cases for the presence of cryptic to the der(11) chromosome. Therefore the karyotype was eventually rearrangements using these probes. These cases were all seen by a clin- defined as 46,X,?t(Y;11)(q11.2;q13.3). ish der(Y)t(Y;11)(q12;q13.4), ical geneticist and referred specifically for subtelomeric screening. Atotal der(11)t(11;11)(q13.4;p15.5).This resulted in a duplication of 11p15.5. The of 6 cryptic rearrangements were identified which had apparently normal possible mechanism of origin will be presented. Trisomy 11p15.5 of pater- G-banded karyotypes. In addition, 5 cases were found to have chromo- nal origin results in an overexpression of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IgF2). some abnormalities which were detectable on high resolution G-banding This is probably responsible for the partial expression of features of the and two patients had microdeletions detected by commercial microdeletion Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome in this case, in particular the overgrowth. probes. The finding of 6 cryptic rearrangements out of 95 cases gives a fre- quency of cryptic rearrangements of approximately 6% which is consistent P0291. Partial monosomy 13q associated with anophthalmia with other published reports. In total, 13 out of the 95 cases (13.6%) were due to a familial translocation (9;13)(p24.3;q31.3) cytogenetically abnormal. These findings demonstrate the usefulness of S. Sodia, E. Petek, W. Emberger, H. Zierler, K. Wagner, P. Kroisel this technique in a diagnostic setting since using conventional cytogenet- Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Graz; Graz, ics, approximately half of the chromosomally abnormal patients in this Austria group would not have been identified. sigrun.sodia@kfunigraz.ac.atPosters: Cytogenetics 157 We report on a newborn boy with a partial monosomy 13(q31.3-qter). After nuclei and extended chromatin fibers (ECFs-FISH). We have analyzed 24 an uneventful pregnancy he was born at term, birth weight was 3170 g, members of 7 families; 9 patients with clinical symptoms of CMT1Adis- length 50 cm, head circumference 33 cm. Because of hypospadia in com- ease and 15 normal individuals. The use of fibers-FISH with the bination with bifid scrotum, blepharophimosis and anophthalmia, cytoge- pVAW412R3, pVAW409R3 and 17 SpectrumOrange probes has resulted netic analysis was performed. An unbalanced translocation in the detection of a duplication in 8 patients. However, 100% of duplica- 46,XY,der(13)t(9;13)(p24.3;31.3) was found. His mother shows a balanced tion was only in 4 of them. In the next 4 patients the mosaicism for 17p11.2 translocation 46,XX,t(9;13)(p24.3;q31.3) Therefore the patient has a partial duplication was detected in 30-80% of analysed chromatin fibers. 6 normal monosomy 13q31.3-qter combined with a partial trisomy of the telomeric individuals were shown to have the mosaicism in 10-80% of analysed chro- segment of 9p. MRI of the brain showed hypoplasia of corpus callosum, matin fibers. We conclude that mosaicism for the CMT1Aduplication in absence of optic nerves and chiasma opticum with only tiny hypointense patients and members of their families could be successfully diagnosed by structures in both orbits. Acritical region for major organ development has well-established ECFs-FISH method. This work was supported by State been assigned to 13q32. Genes involved in various types of eye anomalies Committee of Science - Grant No 4.PO5A.081.13. The FISH results were were mapped to 13q, but non for anophthalmia so far. By subsequent cyto- worked out owing to computer system (MetaSystems GmbH) purchased genetic analysis of the family, 4 carriers of the balanced familial transloca- by Foundation for Polish Science. tion in three generations were identified. One 27 years old uncle of the patient, with mild mental retardation, congenital heart defects, micro- P0294.Prenatal detection of mirror (reverse tandem) duplica- cephaly and clinodactyly showed the corresponding unbalanced translo- tion of chromosome 21. Cytogenetic evidence for postzygot- cation with partial trisomy 13q and partial monosomy for the very telomer- ic origin. ic segment of 9p. Detailed mapping of both chromosomal breakpoints will J. J. van der Smagt, Y. M. Hendriks, E. Bakker, D. Verbove, C. Schouten, improve our understanding on the molecular basis of malformations M. M. Bartelings, G. C. Beverstock observed in cytogenetically unbalanced members of this family. Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC); Leiden, The Netherlands j.j.vandersmagt@kgc.azl.nl P0292. Genetic heterogeneity in 3 Tunisian patients with Mirror duplications of chromosome 21 are a rare cause of Down syndrome, microdeletion 22q11.2 different from the usual i(21q) or homologous Robertsonian translocations. L. Ben Jemaa Khemakhem, H. Kamoun, L. Hila, N. Bayou, R. Mrad, F. Theoretically they could arise as a result of telomeric fusion or subtelom- Maazoul, M. Chaabouni, H. Chaabouni eric translocation between two chromosome 21 homologues, or as a result Service des Maladies Congnitales et Hrditaires EPS Charles Nicolle, of illegitimate exchange between sister chromatids. Pangalos et al. (1992) Laboratoire de Gntique Facult de Mdecine; Tunis, Tunisia demonstrated by molecular methods in their three cases that they were in lamia.khemakhem@rns.tn fact reverse tandem duplications with a deletion of distal 21q22.3. As no The syndrome of microdeletion 22 can includes cardiomyopathy, aplastic mosaicism was observed they favoured prezygotic origin of the rearranged or hypoplastic thymus and parathyroid glands, cleft palate, and a peculiar chromosome. Our case concerns a prenatal diagnosis for Duchenne mus- dysmorphic facies. Heart malformations usually include interrupted aortic cular dystrophy. At CVS the short term culture demonstrated a 46,XX kary- arch arteries, truncus arteriosus, and tetralogy of Fallot; numerous associ- otype in 14 cells, while in all 14 cells of the long term culture a 46,XX,- ated abnormalities are observed. The disorder frequently progresses to 21,+der(21)t(21;21)(q22.3;q22.3) karyotype was observed. The same psychomotor retardation, with a 50% chance of mental retardation. The abnormality was found in all 31 amniocytes analysed, and after termination affection is due to a microdeletion on chromosome 22 in the q11.2 area. of the pregnancy in fetal skin, kidney and liver. No evidence of mosaicism We describe here three cases of microdeletion 22. was found. Both parents have normal karyotypes. Most likely the The first case is a Cayler syndrome. The patient is one year old boy. He rearranged chromosome has arisen after fertilisation. Other mechanisms has consanguineous healthy parents, two brothers and one sister normal. are conceivable but would require an unlikely second event. Ultrasound at The patient has asymmetrical crying facies; Asymmetry of the mouth when 19 weeks showed no abnormalities suggestive of a Down phenotype. After crying with drooping of the left corner, Retrognathism, high arched palate, termination only minimal dysmorphic signs consistent with Down syndrome abnormal ears, umbilical hernia, bilateral cryptorchidism and congenital and no heart defect were found. The results of DNA-analysis, characteris- heart disease ; ventricular septal defect associated to septal anevrism. He ing this unusual chromosome rearrangement are presented. has a delayed psychomoteur developement. Cardiofacial syndrome is described by Cayler (Omim 125520) in 1967. P0295. Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes in Chilean This syndrome associates asymmetrical crying facies (ACF) due to Patients. Clinical and Molecular Diagnosis. hypoplasia or absence of the depresor muscle of the angle of the mouth B. Curotto, L. Santa Mara, A. Alliende, F. Corts and congenital heart disease. Incidence of ACF is estimated of 0.63% to INTAUniversity of Chile; SANTIAGO, Chile 0.82% per live birth; 2.5% to 8% of these children have congenital cardiac malliend@uec.inta.uchile.cl defects. The second case was a girl with psychomoteur retardation, she Prader Willi (PWS) and Angelman AS) syndromes are multigenic disorders has speech defect ,retroverted ears, bulbous nose ,micrognatia,heart dis- characterized by developmental and neurobehavioral abnormalities. Dif- ease, microcephaly,arachnodactyly and ear anomaly. ferent underlying genetic defects cause loss of expression of genes locat- The third case was a girl with a malformative syndrome with tetralogy of ed either in paternal or maternal 15q11-q13. Approximately 70% of PWS fallot, ptosis of the reight eye, epicanthus, hypertelorism and deficit of cel- and AS patients have a deletion in 15q11-q13, whereas uniparental disomy lular immunity. (UPD) accounts for 25% of PWS cases and 2-3% of AS. Asmall number In the three cases cytogenetic study by double FISH; D22S75 (DGCR) of patients have a mutation at the imprinting center. UBE3Agene is mutat- localised in 22q11.2 and D22S39 (Control Probe) in 22q13.3 showed a ed in 20% of AS. To confirm the presumptive clinical diagnosis of PWS or microdeletion of 22q11.2 region (D22S75). AS in 62 Chilean patients we used a methylation specific PCR assay, FISH This deletion has been described in Cayler syndrome, included in CATCH analysis and classical cytogenetics; 23 out of 37 PWS patients had posi- 22 group. tive scores according to the Holms consensus diagnostic criteria (PWS-A The other cases are member of CATCH 22 group with different clinical group), the remaining 14 patients were not completely evaluated under this signs who push us to ask the question ; when we must search the criteria (PWS-B group). AS patients were evaluated with the consensus cri- microdeletion 22 ? In most cases microdeletion is de novo but we have to teria. In 17 out of 62 cases (27.4%) the molecular analysis confirmed the detect it in parents for genetic counselling. clinical diagnosis of PWS or AS; 34.8% in the PWS-Agroup, 21.4% in the PWS-B group and 24% in AS patients. Those cases with a positive methy- P0293.Mosaicism for a duplication of 17p11.2 region in Char- lation test were analyzed by FISH. Classical cytogenetics showed struc- cot-Marie-Tooth 1Adisease detected by ECFs-FISH analysis. tural rearrangements in 2 PWS cases; 46,XY,del(15)(q11- M. Zawada1, M. Jarmuz1, J. Wigowska-Sowinska2, J. Wronka2 q13);45,XX,del(15)(q11-q13),der(13;14)mat; and one with normal molecu- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, lar analysis; 46,XY,t(5;7)(q12;q31). These results confirm that Holms cri- Poland; 2University of Medical Sciences; Poznan, Poland teria is of great assistance in PWS and suggest that definitive clinical diag- mzawada@man.poznan.pl nosis of PWS and AS must be confirmed by molecular and cytogenetics Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1A disease (CMT1A) is a peripheral neuropathy analysis. associated with a submicroscopic tandem duplication on the short arm of chromosome 17. The 17p11.2 region contains the peripheral myelin pro- tein 22 gene (PMP-22), the dosage of which plays a crucial role in the aeti- ology of the disease. The CMT1Aduplication is not visible by standard cytogenetic analysis, but is detectable by FISH analysis of interphase158 Posters: Cytogenetics P0296.Familial partial 9p trisomy, six cases and four carriers telorism, craniosynostosis, polysyndactily etc. The patient was referred to in three generations our center for cytogenetic analysis. Chromosome preparations were I. Dimofte1, A. Popa1, D. Balaban1, T. Poalelungi1, L. Enache2, V. Broas- obtained from PHA-stimulated lymphocytes. Chromosomes were stained ca1, S. Nedelcovici1 using G-banding techniques. The karyotype revealed one structurally 1Faculty of Medicine; Constanta, Romania; 2Faculty of Medicine; Iasi, abnormal chromosome 7, specifically a deletion of the short arm of chro- Romania mosome 7. The breakpoints were on the short arm of chromosome 7 revarsarea@lycos.com bands p21 to pter. The karyotype is; 46,XY,del(7)(p21?pter). Fluorescence Six cases of translocation trisomy for distal half of the short arm of a num- in situ hybridation using a Cytocell Chromoprobe-T7ptel/qtel showed 7ptel ber 9 chromosome and four asymptomatic balanced translocation carriers and qtel signal on one chromosome 7 but only 7qtel signal on its homo- are presented in a three -generation pedigree. The clinical features are logue. No consistent 7ptel signal was detected elsewhere. FISH results remarkably similar to those recently recognized and increasingly reported confirmed a deletion of a 7ptel sequence on one chromosome 7 that has in full short arm (9p) trisomy and should be considered a modification of not been translocated to another chromosome. In our case both parents the same syndrome. In addition to non-specific mental retardation and had normal karyotypes indicating a de novo partial deletion of the short short stature, there is, in common, a characteristic facies, including down- arm of chromosome 7. turned corners of the mouth, a slightly bulbous nose, moderately large ears, suggestively wide-set eyes with an anti-mongoloid slant, dysplasia P0299. Xp21.2 deletion in a mother and three of her four and hypoplasia of the nails, clinodactyly of the 5th fingers, and abnormal daughters dermatoglyphs. It appears that the trisomy 9p syndrome in its variant P. Trioche1, G. Tachdjian1, F. Perreaux1, M. Portnoi2, A. Aboura1, P. forms, including trisomies for more or less than just the short (p) arm, is Chevalier1, P. Labrune1 one of the most common clinical autosome anomalies in humans, exceed- 1Hpital Antoine Bclre; Clamart, France; 2Hpital Saint Antoine; Paris, ed only by trisomy 21 (Downs syndrome) and possibly trisomies of chro- France mosomes 13 and 18. philippe.labrune@abc.ap-hop-paris.fr Short stature in females is often caused by monosomy X or deletion Xp. P0297.Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a de novo balanced We report on a mother and three of her 4 daughters with short stature as X-autosomal translocation with predominant inactivation of sole phenotypic anomaly. Patients and methods ; The first and the third the derivative X chromosome in a girl with multiple malfor- daughter of healthy unrelated parents were referred for retarded growth at mations ages 5.5 and 3 years, respectively. The father1s height was 170 cm, and K. Shirneshan1, B. Glser2, K. Bink3, J. Wirth4, S. K. Bohlander1 the mother1s 156 cm. In both sisters, growth had been delayed since birth, 1Institute of Human Genetics; Gttingen, Germany; 2Institute of Human below the 3 percentile. Except short stature, physical examination proved Genetics; Ulm, Germany; 3Institute of Pathology, Technische Universitt; entirely normal. Abdominal and cardiac ultrasound examinations were nor- Mnchen, Germany; 4Developmental Biology, University of Bielefeld; mal. Blood laboratory tests gave normal results for renal functions, RBC Bielefeld, Germany and WBC counts, thyroid hormones, cortisol, LH and FSH. Bone matura- kshirne@gwdg.de tion was delayed in both girls. The second daughter did not present any We report on the characterization of a de novo reciprocal growth retardation, whereas the fourth daughter was examined at the age t(X;15)(p11.3;q26) in a girl with multiple congenital malformations. Delivery of 24 months while her growth was slowing down to the 5th percentile. occurred at term (39 weeks), with 2220 g birth weight .Head circumference Chromosomal analysis were performed in both parents and the four sis- (34 cm) and length (54cm) were normal. Several dysmorphic features were ters. The three affected girls were put on growth hormone therapy with observed including facial stigmata, hands with abnormal morphology and good initial results. Afifth pregnancy began a few weeks ago. Both con- ulnar deviation, hypoplastic fifth toe and shortened fifth metatarsal. Radi- ventional and molecular cytogenetic analyses showed deletion of band ographically, a hypoplastic corpus callosum and variant Dandy-Walker cyst Xp21.2 in affected patients. Conclusion ; Isolated Xp21.2 deletion resulted were observed. She had a poorly differentiated liver, a neonatal muscular in this family in isolated retarded growth whereas all other physical abnor- hypotonia and suffered from a not treatable epilepsy. At the age of 16 malities encountered in Turner syndrome were absent. Moreover, the hem- months she died. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated an apparently bal- izygoty of the chromosomal region Xp21.2 is not associated with ovarian anced reciprocal translocation with breakpoints in Xp11.3 and 15q26. function anomalies. These results are useful for genetic counseling of indi- Replication banding analysis from EBV-transformed lymphocytes showed viduals with partial monosomy X. inactivation of the derivative X-chromosome in 98%. FISH analysis result- ed in the identification of a spanning YAC (ICRFy900C1228) for the Xp11.3 P0300. Williams And Catch22 Syndromes - Clinical And breakpoint and BAC bA89K11 for the 15q26 breakpoint, respectively. No Genetical Diagnosis smaller clone was identified for Xp breakpoint. Interestingly, the serine I. Malcic, H. Kniwald, I. Baric, D. Begovic, M. Jelusic, R. Lasan threonine-protein kinase, PCTK1, was mapped within a BAC that flanks Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health; Zagreb, Croatia the region at the telomeric site and extends with its 5 end into the break- iva.trcic@zg.tel.hr point region.Thus, we suggest that disruption of PCTK1 is not well tolerat- Williams and CATCH22 syndormes represent two clinical syndromes with ed and forces activation of the non-rearranged X-chromosome. This could multiple involvmen,with well recognized genetical varities. We present 14 lead to functional disomy for most of Xp and functional monosomy of patients (7 with Williams and 7 with CATCH22 syndrome), in whom the 15q26. The hypothesis that these functional aneuploidies are responsible diagnosis was confirmed by demonstration of deletions with fluorescent in for the phenotype is supported by data from the literature where similar sytu hybridization (FISH). Williams syndrome is generally characterized by phenotypic abnormalities are described for patients with monosomy 15q26 mental deficiency, gregarious personality, unusual elfin faces, and functional disomy of Xp. supravalvural aortic stenosis and idiopathic infantile hypercalcaemia. Patiens with Williams syndrome show a hemizygous submicroscopic dele- P0298. Anewborn with a de novo partial deletion of the short tion of 7q11.23 detectable by FISH. The deleted portion of the choromo- arm of chromosome 7(p21?pter) confirmed by fluorescence some corresponds to the elastic gene. We report 7 patient (3 girls and 4 in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis boys) with characteristics of Williams syndrome and FISH varified dele- A. Divane1, V. Peristeri2, A. Andreou2, N. Morrison3, L. Florentin1 tions of 7q11.23. These patients showed the characteristics faces and gre- 1Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, Alfalab Medical Institute of garoius personalities. Cardiac evaluation revealed in all 7 children pres- Research and Diagnosis; Athens, Greece; 2Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, ence of supravalvular aortic stenosis (2 underwent surgical procedure by Ippokratio Hospital; Thessaloniki, Greece; 3Institute of Medical Genetics; Doty), and in all 4 patients peripheral pulmonary stenosis. Hypercalcaemia Glasgow, United Kingdom was not documented in these patients. Learning difficulties are present in tir_div@yahoo.com all patients. Chormosome analysis done on peripheral blood were found to The patient a newborn boy born at term from healthy parents had a variety be normal in all patients. CATCH22 syndrome, the acronym (Cardiac of abnormalities. Initial examination immediately after birth, showed an defect, Abnormal face, Thymic hypoplasia, Cleft palate, and Hypocal- apparently normal boy. Eleven hours later the boy was transferred to the caemia), as a concept that compromises DiGeorge syndrome, velo - car- intensive care unit due to feeding difficulties. More detailed examination dio - facial syndrome and conotruncal anomaly face syndrome, is con- revealed a number of facial, hand and nail, heart and genital malforma- nected with submicroscopic 22q11.2 deletion. We present 7 patients with tions. These included microopisthognathia , low set ears, bilateral mal- CATCH22 syndrome with 22q11.2 microdeletion. Major cause of morbidity formed elicosis of ears, broaden nasal tip, lycostoma, ulnar deviation of the in those children was congential heart disease (CHD) (4 with tetralogy of 5th finger, clinodactily of the 5th finger, toe nail hypoplasia, cardial anom- Fallot, 2 with persistent truncus arteriosus and 1 child with pulmonary atre- alies, abnormal external genitalia, hypospadias, muscle hypotonia, hyper- sia). Other phenotypic characteristics included abnormal facies (hyper-Posters: Cytogenetics 159 telorism, low set small ear lobes and micrognatia). Clinical findings of P0303. Detection of subtle chromosome abnormalities by immunodeficiency were present in 4 and hypocalcaemia in 3 children, subtelomere analysis. respectively. One child has cleft of soft palate. All of the CHDs are suc- A. N. Lamb1, C. Lytle1, A. S. Aylsworth2, C. M. Powell2, K. W. Rao2, M. cesfully corrected surgically. Hendrickson3, J. C. Carey3, J. M. Opitz3, D. H. Viskochil3, A. R. Brothman3, J. Proffitt4, M. Irons5 P0301. Cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic investigation 1Genzyme Genetics; Santa Fe, NM United States; 2University of North of Rett syndrome Carolina; Chapel Hill, NC United States; 3University of Utah; Salt Lake City, S. G. Vorsanova1, Y. B. Yurov2, V. Y. Ulas1, I. A. Demidova1, V. O. Sha- UT United States; 4Vysis, Inc.; Downers Grove, IL United States; 5Chil- ronin1, A. D. Kolotii1, A. K. Beresheva1, I. V. Soloviev2 drens Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health; Moscow, allen.lamb@genzyme.com Russian Federation; 2National Centre of Mental Health, RAMS; Moscow, Subtelomere FISH analysis was performed in two separate studies. The Russian Federation first was performed on individuals with dysmorphic features and develop- yurov@pediatr.mtu-net.ru mental delay/mental retardation selected by clinical geneticists, primarily Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with the from two centers. The second group consists of individuals with DD/MR incidence of 2.5% in mentally retarded girls in Russia. We have performed referred to our clinical service laboratory. In both groups, all individuals had cytogenetic studies of 70 patients (67 girls and 3 boys) with clinical picture previous G-banded karyotype analysis, with the first group at the 500-band of RTT, selected according to the criteria for diagnosis of RTTdeveloped level or higher; the banding level is unknown for most of the second group. by B. Hagberg (Hagberg et al., 1996). Collection of DNAsamples and fixed Probes developed by Vysis, Inc. were used in both studies. Seventy-one cell suspensions of RTTpatients (37 girls and 2 boys) and theirs parents patients have been analyzed in the first group, with only one abnormality (27 patients) was established for molecular studies, for example, analysis detected (1.4%). An additional 35 patients from this group will be reported of MECP2 mutations in Russian cohort of RTT patients. Among 70 at the meeting. The one rearrangement is a der(18)t(2;18)(pter;qter). A patients; 67 girls with clinical picture of RTTwere with normal female kary- reciprocal t(2;18) was detected in one of the parents. In the clinical refer- otype (46,XX); one boy was with normal male karyotype in cells of blood ral population, 5 abnormalities were detected in 124 patients (4.0%). One (46,XY) and two boys were with mosaic form of Kleinfelters syndrome of these abnormalities, i(Yp), does not explain the childs phenotype, leav- (47,XXY/46,XY) in blood and muscle cells. 24 mothers and parents of RTT ing four abnormalities that are potentially clinically significant (4/124 = girls were with normal karyotype, two mothers  with mosaic forms of Turn- 3.2%). The abnormalities detected are (1) der(18)t(10;18)(pter;qter), (2) er syndrome (45,X/46,XX) and one - mosaic karyotype del(9)(qter)de novo, (3) del(18)(q23), and (4) der(18)t(16;18) (pter;pter). In (47,XX,+mar/48,XXX,+mar). We analysed chromosome X in lymphocytes case (4), the 16p subtelomere probe is distal to the intact 18p subtelomere of 67 affected girls with clinical picture of RTTusing BrdU + Gimsa stain- probe. Parental studies have not been completed on this case. When kary- ing technique (Vorsanova et al., 1996). Specific type of inactive chromo- otypes were re-reviewed, cases (1), (2), and (4) were cryptic rearrange- some X (so-called type C) with unusual staining of chromatin in long arm ments, and (3) had a cytogenetically visible deletion. Amore detailed phe- of the chromosome X was found in 66 (from 67) girls with RTT. This tech- notypic analysis will be presented on a subset of these patients. Both nique was positively used for presymptomatic diagnosis of RTTin five girls groups show a lower hit-rate than the largest published study (7.4% + 3%; in affected families. We believe that the phenomenon of altered chromatin Knight et al., Lancet 354;1676-81, 1999). In addition to the severity of MR, conformation in inactive chromosome X could be used as laboratory test studies may also show differences in the detection rate depending on the for preclinical diagnosis of the RTT. This work was supported in parts by quality of previous karyotyping, and on the number of polymorphisms INTAS, IRSAand COPERNICUS-2000 grants. encountered. No confirmed polymorphisms were seen with this probe set in either group reported here, such as the common 2q variant as seen with P0302.FISH detection of telomeric microdeletions in children other probes. Some cross-hybridizations were noted with this probe set, with mental retardation but these have not been bright enough to present problems. I. V. Soloviev1, S. G. Vorsanova2, V. O. Sharonin2, Y. B. Yurov3 1National Centre of Mental Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; P0304. Delineation of the critical deletion region for mental Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery retardation, behavioural phenotype and microcephaly of the MH; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3National Research Center of Mental 8p23.1 deletion Health RAMS; Moscow, Russian Federation A. Moncla1, C. Missirian1, J. Mancini2, B. Chabrol3, N. Philip4 yurov@rcmh.msk.ru 1Departement de genetique medicale; Marseille, France; 2Service de Neu- Molecular-cytogenetic studies of chromosomal micro-anomalies at sub- ropdiatrie-Hptal Enfants-Timone; Marseille, France; 3Service de Neuro- telomeric chromosomal regions have been conducted by two-step fluores- pediatrie-Hpital Timone-Enfants; Marseille, France; 4Departement de cence in situ hybridization (FISH) in 407 children with mental retardation. genetique mdicale-Hpital Timone-Enfants; marseille, France Alarge set of cosmid, BAC and PAC clones, containing simple telomeric amoncla@ap-hm.fr sequences (TTAGGG)n was identified by FISH mapping. These clones We report 3 unrelated patients with deletion in the distal region of chromo- were located in the most telomeric and subtelomeric regions as well as some 8p. Two of them presented similar clinical manifestations. They were non-telomeric regions of p- and q- arms of different chromosomes. We referred respectively at age 4 and 8 years for unexplained mental retarda- used original simple two-step FISH protocol. Availability of large-insertion tion. They had a mild developmental delay with microcephaly. Both PAC probes, which contain DNAsequences, common for telomeric and, patients had a facial dysmorphism associating a round face with broad partially, subtelomeric regions of all human chromosomes, including p- and cheeks, slightly upslanting palpebral fissures, long eyelashes, small nose, q-arms, allowed us to marl all telomeric regions in one FISH study. There- and thin upper lip. Both had puffy, tapering fingers. They presented epilep- fore, first FISH study for each patient was performed with large-insertion sy and a remarkable behavioural phenotype including hyperactivity, short PAC probe, specifically marking telomeric and subtelomeric regions of all attention span, aggressive outbursts and sleep disturbance. Acongenital human chromosomes. If some chromosome arm had absence of telomer- heart defect (CHD) was present in one case. These clinical findings were ic hybridization signals, or the intensity of hybridization signal was reduced suggestive of the del8p phenotype. We confirmed this chromosomal anom- in comparison to homologues chromosome arm, we used second DNA aly by conventional chromosomal analysis in both cases. Parents chro- probe, which is strongly specific to definite telomeric region of individual mosomal analysis was normal. The third patient, referred at age 16 years, chromosome. Deletions of chromosomal material, involving telomeric was a mildly retarded boy with a tall stature. He never presented seizures regions were detected in 14 (3,4%) cases from 407 patients with severe or behavioural problems. Conventional chromosomal analysis showed an and mild forms of mental retardation and apparently normal karyotypes abnormal 8p;parents chromosomal analysis was normal. We performed a revealed by classical banding techniques. Microdeletions were detected in molecular analysis using FISH with 8p subtelomeric probe and YAC clones following chromosomal loci; 4q35.2; 5p15.33; 9q34.3; 10q26.3 (two within the 8p23.2 and 8p23.1 regions and analysis of polymorphic DNA cases); 11q25; 13q34; 16q24.3; 18p11.32 (three cases); 18q23; 21q22.2 markers. An interstitial deletion in the sub-band 8p23.1 was detected for and 22q13.33. These data demonstrate that undifferentiated forms of men- the first two patients. Acommonly deleted region of ~ 6Mb associated with tal retardation could be associated with nonspecific telomeric micro-aber- del8p had previously been described by Devriendt et al. Interestingly, our rations of different chromosomes. FISH studies using specially developed patients, exhibiting the full clinical phenotype except for CHD, carried a dif- panel of telomeric DNAprobes could be useful for identification of gener- ferent deletion of only part of the commonly deleted region with a small ally undetermined forms of mental retardation. This work was supported in overlap of ~ 600kb. Our results led us to define the minimal critical deletion parts by COPERNICUS-2000 grants. region for microcephaly and behavioural phenotype. In addition, the third patient carried a subtelomeric 8p deletion without overlap with del8p23.1, and, additional chromosomal material from subtelomeric 4p region. His160 Posters: Cytogenetics clinical phenotype is probably explained by this dup4pter. Our study con- rate of spontaneous chromosomal aberrations. Most conspicious was the firmed that the apparently terminal deletions in 8p were in fact interstitial high frequency of prophase-like cells with intact nuclear membrane ( 10%) deletions. We suggested that the subtelomeric deletion of 8p would result in lymphocyte, lymphoblastoid, and fibroblast cultures. Already 1h after 3- in a milder or normal phenotype. H thymidine application a significant percentage of these cells was labelled, indicating that the length of the G-2 phase is drastically reduced. P0305. A patient with the first microdeletion of the Wolf- Flow cytometric analysis revealed no obvious disturbances in the cell cycle Hirschhorn-Syndrome Critical Region refines the genotype- progression. Thus, all data are consistent with premature entry of the cells phenotype correlation into mitosis. To the best of our knowledge this combination of cytogenetic A. Rauch1, S. Schellmoser2, C. Kraus1, H. G. Drr2, U. Trautmann1, M. R. and clinical findings has not been reported before. It is logical to assume Altherr3, R. A. Pfeiffer1, A. Reis1 that a gene involved in cell cycle regulation is mutated in these patients. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- Nuremberg; Erlangen, Germany; 2Department of Pediatrics; Erlangen, P0308. Interphase FISH studies of replication timing at Rett Germany; 3Los Alamos National Laboratory; Los Alamos, United States syndrome using chromosome X specific DNAprobes arauch@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de Y. B. Yurov1, S. G. Vorsanova2, A. D. Kolotii2, I. V. Soloviev3 Deletions within human chromosomal band 4p16.3 cause Wolf- 1National Centre of Mental Health , Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; Hirschhorn/Pitt-Rogers-Danks syndrome (WHS/PRDS), which is charac- Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, terized by profound mental and developmental defects. Although a Wolf- Russian Ministry of Health; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3National Centre Hirschhorn syndrome critical region (WHSCR) of approximately 165 kb of Mental Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,; Moscow, Russ- has been defined based on two atypical interstitial deletions the genotype- ian Federation phenotype correlation remains controversial, due to the large deletion yurov@rcmh.msk.ru sizes of usually several megabases. We report the first known patient with Rett syndrome (RTT) is, probably, caused by mutations in the methyl-CpG a small de novo interstitial deletion restricted to the WHSCR who present- binding protein-2 (MeCP2) gene on chromosome Xq28. In RTTpatients ed only with a partial WHS phenotype consisting of low body weight for the defective MeCP2 might fail to keep other genes silent. Mutations in height and mild facial anomalies. Further hallmarks of WHS such as short- MeCP2, as well in other genes, encoding proteins that functionally inter- ness of stature, microcephaly, seizures and major mental retardation were acting with MeCP2, could be involved in pathogenesis of RTT. The dys- missing. The deletion was initially demonstrated by FISH analysis and regulated genes, which are under control of MecP2, are still unknown. breakpoints were narrowed down with a mini-FISH technique with 3-5kb Therefore, the identification of target genes whose expression is under amplicons. Abreakpoint spanning PCR assay allowed to define the distal control of MeCP2 will help to fully explain the cause of RTTand develop breakpoint as disrupting the WHSC1 gene within intron 5, exactly after an adequate treatment of RTT. FISH using chromosome X specific genomic AluJb repeat. The proximal breakpoint was not found to be associated with DNAprobes, was applied to determine the loci with altered replication and a repeated sequence or a known gene. The deletion size encompasses transcription at RTT. Randomly selected PAC clones for Xp, Xce and Xq 191.5 kb and includes WHSC2, but not LETM1. Symptoms attributable to were used. It was found that two clones from Xq28 (anonymous clone PAC this deletion are therefore low body weight for height, mild facial anomalies 24.23.0 and PAC 671D9, containing MeCP2 locus) are early replicating in and some learning and fine motor deficiencies, while seizures may be both X chromosomes and, probably, escape inactivation in late-replicating associated with deletions of LETM1. chromosome X in RTTpatients. Therefore, region Xq28 could contain the genes escaping X- inactivation and expressing from the human active and P0306.Replication Status As AMarker For Genomic Instabili- inactive chromosomes X. These results support the hypothesis (Vorsano- ty In Amniocytes Originating From Pregnancies With Bal- va et al., 1999) proposing the disturbances in dosage compensation effect anced Rearrangments due to aberrant activation of genes in inactive chromosome X at RTT A. Amiel1, E. Levi1, O. Reish2, M. D. Fejgin1 genes (di-allelic expression instead of mono-allelic). Our results indicate 1Meir Hospital; Kfar-Saba, Israel; 2Assaf Harofeh Hospital; Zrifin, Israel that MecP2 itself is under unusual epigenetic control and could escape X- alizaamiel@hotmail.com inactivation. Activation of normal allele of MeCP2 from inactive chromo- Earlier studies demonstrated a monoallelic mode of expression in some some X could reduce pathogenic effect of mutated allele at RTT. Support- pre-cancerous and invasive squamous carcinoma of the cervix as well as ed in parts by INTAS and IRSAgrants. in multiple myeloma . A high rate of asynchronic pattern has been described in; 1. lymphocytes of individuals with solid tumors as well as in P0309.Chromosome aberrations in lymphocytes of residents other malignancies. 2. amniocytes of genotypes with an extra chromosome living in buildings constructed with radioactively contaminat- 13,18 and 21. 3. lymphocytes of young mothers of a Down syndrome preg- ed rebar nancy. The asynchronic pattern was not locus specific and was found in all S. Wang-Wuu, K. D. Wuu loci analyzed. These findings suggested that the mechanism controlling Institute of Genetics, National Yang-Ming University; Taipei, Taiwan the temporal order of replication could be altered in cells with a genetic Republic of China predisposition to cancer or aneuplody. In this study we found a higher rate sww@ym.edu.tw of asynchronic pattern in genotypes carrying inversions 2 and 9 and in bal- Using the G-banding technique, we examined lymphocytes from ninety anced heritable translocations (p<0.01) and even higher rate in in cases individuals (43 males and 47 females, median age 31) living in buildings with a de novo balanced translocations (p<0.05). The process of tumor constructed with radioactively contaminated rebar. Forty-five non-exposed genesis may begin with change in cell cycle regulation which includes the control subjects (22 males and 23 females, median age 30), matched to duplication replication and segregation of genetic information. However, it the radiation-exposed individuals by sex and age, were selected for com- remains unknown whether individuals with balanced chromosome parison. At least 500 metaphases were checked for each individual. All rec- rearrangement are at increased risk of developing cancer later in life. ognizable structural aberrations of chromosomes or chromatids were recorded. After adjusting for age and smoking status, both the precentage P0307.Premature chromosome condensation in a new genet- of cells with aberrated chromosomes (PCAC) and the number of aberrat- ically determined syndrome ed chromosomes per 100 cells (NAC) were found to be significantly high- H. Neitzel1, L. M. Neumann1, D. Schindler2, A. Wirges1, K. Sperling1 er in the radiation-exposed females than in the control females (p<0.05 for 1Institute of Human Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2Institute of Human Genet- PCAC and NAC). This difference, however, was not observed in the com- ics; Wuerzburg, Germany parison of radiation-exposed vs. control males. It suggests a possible inter- heidemarie.neitzel@charite.de action between sex and radiation exposure in their effects on chromosome The entry of mammalian cells into mitosis is regulated by the activation of aberrations. Neither the duration of exposure nor the cumulative exposure an evolutionary highly conserved protein complex (cyclinB/CDK1) leading showed a significant correlation with PCAC or NAC. to nuclear envelope breakdown, chromosome condensation and spindle assembly. Premature chromosome condensation can be induced experi- P0310. Cytogenetic analysis of patients dosed with 131- mentally if the activated complex is introduced into an interphase cell. Iodine for scintigraphy of the thyroid Here, we report on two sibs of consanguineous parents, born after I. P. Aranha1, C. L. Rodrigues2, R. Corbo2, B. Gutfilen3 uneventful pregnancies in 1993 and 1995. At birth they presented with 1Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2Uni- microcephaly, cranial and body growth remain well below the 3rd centile. versidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 3Univ. Estado Neuromotor development was delayed and combined with profound men- do Rio de Janeiro/Univ. Federal do RJ; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil tal retardation. They had a normal karyotype with poor chromosome mor- aranha@uerj.br phology, normal rate of sister chromatid exchanges and a slightly elevated The radioisotope 131-Iodine has a half-life of 8.02 days and is used inPosters: Cytogenetics 161 Nuclear Medicine for scintigraphy of the thyroid with an average activity of P0313. Results of cytogenetic inspection of the persons 3.7 MBq. It is also used in other dosages for metastasis detection and in working on nuclear - chemical plant and inhabitants living in case of ablation. There are no conclusive results, yet, as to the effect of the this region dosage of 131-Iodine used in scintigraphy of the thyroid on patients. The N. Popova, S. Nazarenko, Y. Yakovleva, E. Vasilyeva objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of that dosage on chro- Research Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation mosomes from human lymphocytes. Cells from 21 patients from Hospital natasha@img.tsu.ru Universitrio Clementino Fraga Filho were placed in enriched 1640 RPMI The frequency and spectrum of chromosome aberrations in peripheral medium and incubated for 48 and 72h at 37oC. Blood was collected 24 blood lymphocytes was evaluated in workers of the Siberian Chemical hours after administration of the radioisotope. Blood cells collected from Plant (SCP) with various integral doses of external gamma-irradiation (I the same patients prior to the administration of 131-Iodine were used as group - 18-37 cGy; II group - 93-157 cGy) and in inhabitants, living in the control. Chromosomes were stained with Giemsa Gurr (2%, pH=6.8) and vicinity of SCPSeversk city (10-km zone) and in radiation safe Kargala set- analyzed under optical microscope. Of 6300 metaphases analyzed from tlement (control group). The frequency of aberrant cells in Seversk city the 48h cultures,1146 gaps and 682 breaks were found in the test group. population and two groups of SCPstaff was significantly higher in com- Of 6300 metaphases analyzed from the control group, 291 gaps and 119 parison with the control (p< 0.05). High interindividual differences in the fre- breaks were found. These results are significant in a paired t-test (p<0.05). quency of cells with chromosome damages in I and II groups of SCPwork- In the 72h cultures, of 6300 metaphases analyzed, 216 gaps and 52 ers were detected. 20% of the inspected workers belongs to a category of breaks were found in the test group. Of 6300 metaphases analyzed from high genetic risk having frequency of aberrant cells 4-fold more of sponta- the control group, 10 gaps and no breaks were found. These results are neous level. 8,5% of the inspected workers belongs to a category of the also significant in a paired t-test (p<0.05). Our results show that 131-Iodine persons with superhigh genetic risk. For them the frequency of cells with is responsible for the chromosomal alterations observed. chromosome aberrations exceeds a spontaneous level in 10 times and more. Alevel of chromosome exchange aberrations (biomarkers of radia- P0311.An approach for characterization of individual features tion effect) for the population of Seversk city and control group does not dif- of the karyotype instability. fer from a spontaneous level (about 0,1%). For the II group of SCPwork- S. R. Rushkovsky1, V. F. Bezrukov2, I. R. Barilyak1 ers it exceed at 3 times in comparison with a control level, but significant 1Ukrainian Scientific Center of Medical Genetics; Kyiv, Ukraine; 2Kyiv differences were not detected. The significantly increase of the frequency Taras Shevchenko University; Kyiv, Ukraine of chromatide aberrations in Seversk town inhabitants and both groups of rsr@bvf.carrier.kiev.ua SCPworkers was revealed (p< 0.05). It testifies for the effect of other then We suggest an approach that allows to individualize the karyotype insta- radiation factors to somatic cells in investigated individuals. bility evaluation. This approach is based on simultaneous analysis of sev- eral parameters of karyotype instability. Any person may reveal high (H) or P0314. Genetic Approach In The Study Of Some Aspects Of low (L) level of instability by each of parameters. Aseries of levels of insta- Bronchial Asthma Pathogenesis bility (H or L) of all parameters is an individual characteristics of persons V. V. Semenov, A. V. Semenov, E. S. Koshpaeva, A. P. Pigalov genome instability. Anumber of individual variants is equal 2n, where n is Kazan State Medical University; Kazan, Russian Federation a number of investigated parameters of genome instability and number 2 medbiogen@mail.ru is a number of groups (H or L) of instability. The problem of bronchial asthma is considered to be the burning question We have studied three parameters of karyotype instability (levels of chro- among childrens diseases. Available data suggest that destruction of mosomal aberrations, polyploid mitoses and diplochromosomes) under genetic stability of the cells is a key component of bronchial asthma patho- two-way cultivation of human lymphocytes. First way (52-hours cultivation) genesis. Measurement of clastogenic and anticlastogenic activity of asth- reveals immediate karyotype instability in first mitosis; second way (144- matic and nonasthmatic children blood plasma were investigated using hours cultivation) allows to detect delayed karyotype instability in fifth mito- Crepis capillaris seeds (chromosome aberrations assay). In our studies, sis. The additional information obtained under two-way cultivation allowed the plasma of 9 nonasthmatic and 13 asthmatic children aged 7-14 with dif- us to separate donors into four groups (instead of the two) of instability (LL, ferent degree of the severity of disease were examined. The results LH,HH,HL) according to their individual characters of karyotype instabili- obtained, show that clastogenic effect of plasma of nonasthmatic patients ty by each parameters. The number of individual variants that may be dis- (1.65  0.39) and asthmatic group (1.37  0.35) doesnt differ from the level tinguished with this approach is 43=64. Some individual variants were sta- of spontaneous mutation 1.14  0.31 (p > 0.05). It is pointed out that the tistically significantly more frequent and some less than it could be expect- plasma of children with asthma has the low ability to decrease the level of ed from distribution of the donors by every studied parameters. We may ethylmethane sulphonate-induced chromosome aberration, compared to explain it by two reasons; by common mechanisms that lead to different the plasma of nonasthmatic children  1.96  0.42 (p> 0.05). Thus, in our manifestations of genome instability and by selective elimination of per- investigation, the new approach for studying bronchial asthma is proposed. sons with certain individual characteristics of karyotype instability. This method (chromosome aberrations assay) may be used for determi- nation of severity of bronchial asthma manifestations. One may conclude P0312.The in vitro effects of selective and non-selective non- that destruction of normal function of antimutagenic system of asthmatic steroidal antiinflammatory drugs on the frequency of sister patients blood. Therefore, for rise of genoprotection activity of blood is nec- chromatid exchanges essary to use the drugs with antimutagenic activity. S. Ozturk1, H. Kocak2, S. Palanduz1, K. Cefle1, H. Erkal1, B. Aydil2, B. Gurkan2 P0315.Chromatide Aberrations In Lymphocytes Of Asthmatic 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Med- Children Peripheral Blood And Possibility Of Heir Correction icine, Division of Medical Genetics; Istanbul, Turkey; 2Istanbul University By Dimephosphone Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Oral Surgery; Istanbul, Turkey A. V. Semenov sozturk@istanbul.edu.tr Kazan State Medical University; Kazan, Russian Federation Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) have wide use in medical arsen_s@mail.ru as well as surgical clinics for their analgesic, antiinflammatory and According to literature data, the rise of chromosomal aberration level was antipyretic effects. In this study we investigated the in vitro effects of non- recorded in inflammatory processes. Since the asthma is related to chron- selective (naproxen) and selective (etodolac and meloxicam) NSAIDs on ic inflammatory diseases, therefore in our investigation chromosome aber- the frequency of sister chromatid exchange (SCE) in their maximum ther- ration level was studied using lymphocytes of peripheral blood of patients apeutic concentrations. SCE is a reliable test for the evaluation of DNA with bronchial asthma. The first group of asthmatic patients received the damage caused by various physical and chemical agents. We found that traditional treatment. In addition to that treatment the other group of the mean SCE frequencies in the naproxen (8 microgram/ml), etodolac (15 patients received dimepfosphone (30-50 mg/kg, per os exposed 7 days). microgram/ml) and meloxicam (2 microgram/ml) groups were 7.81  2.18, In experimental study the genoprotection activity of dimephosphone was 7.63  2.18 and 7.75  2.00 per metaphase, respectively. The mean SCE demonstrated. The mechanism of genoprotection activity of that drug was frequency in the control group was 6.89  1.82. There was no statistically manifested by activation processes of excision repair and inhibition of significant difference between the NSAIDs group and the control group in active oxygen radical. In our studies, asthmatic children with different regard to SCE frequency (p >0.05). These findings imply that the anti- severity of manifestation of disease aged 7-14 were examined. Chromo- inflammatory drugs used in this study do not have a genotoxic effect in somal aberration level from asthma patients and nonasthmatic controls vitro. was compared. According to the obtaining results, level of chromosomal changes from asthmatic tended to be higher than that from the nonasth- matic group (p < 0,001). Reduction of level of chromosomal aberration in162 Posters: Cytogenetics lymphocytes of peripheral blood of patient with light form of asthma by P0318.The Effects of Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Ana- dimephosphone-treatment was observed (p< 0.001). At the same time, logue (GnRHa = Buserelin asetate) on the Frequency of decrease of the number of lymphocytes with chromosome aberration from Micronucleus, Some Biochemical Parameters, Ovarian and children with severe of manifestations of bronchial asthma was not Uterus Histology in Rats observed (p> 0.05). A. Basaran1, M. Dikmen1, I. Degirmenci1, H. Veysi Gnes1, H. Kurt1, D. Cosan1, M. Cengiz stner1, V. Sahintrk2 P0316. In vitro genotoxic effects of cadmium (II) in human 1Department of Human Biology; Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Histology- Embryology, lymphocytes evaluated by electron microscopy in situ end- Osmangazi University Medical Faculty; Eskisehir, Turkey labelling (EM-ISEL) and sister chromatid exchange (SCE). abasaran@ogu.edu.tr M. Cojocaru1, F. Depault1, S. Chakrabarti2, F. Fortin1, N. Lemieux1 The aim of this study was made to investigate effects of GnRHa, which is 1Dpartement de Pathologie et Biologie cellulaire, Universit de Montral; a inhibitor agent of ovarian activity, on the frequency of micronucleus, Montral, PQ Canada; 2Dpartement du Travail et dHygine du milieu, some urine and blood parameters, ovarian and uterus histology. In this Universit de Montral; Montral, PQ Canada experimental study, 20 Sprague-Dawley female cycling rats, aged 2,5-3 cojocarm@magellan.umontreal.ca mounts were used. They were divided into 2 groups. Serum physiological Cadmium is a known carcinogenic metal but evidence concerning its geno- saline to the first group (Control) and 15 mg/day/rat GnRHa to the second toxic effects is conflicting. Human daily exposure to cadmium compounds group were injected subcutaneously during the experimental period. On occurs primarily through diet, drinking water and cigarette smoke. The the 26 th day urine samples were collected for 24-hours from each of the objective of this work was to study DNAdamage in human peripheral blood animals. The end of the experiment (27th day) rats were anaesthetised lymphocytes after a 2-hour in vitro cadmium chloride (CdCl2) exposure. with either and blood samples were collected, tissue samples were The induction of genotoxic effects using both the electron microscopy in removed and fixed immediately. As a result of the experiment, in the 2nd situ end-labelling (EM-ISEL) assay and the sister chromatid exchange group micronucleus frequency, SGOT and SGPT activities, creatinine (SCE) test was investigated. The inhibition of cell-cycle kinetics due to cad- clearence, urine creatinine, urea nitrogen and uric acid increased. Histo- mium(II) was also evaluated. Cytotoxicity was assessed by the Trypan logically, GnRHa increased the number of corpus luteum and primer folli- Blue exclusion test in order to select the correct doses of CdCl2 for the cles in the ovaries. In addition, gland development in uterus tissue of the genotoxic assays. The values of labelling intensities obtained by EM-ISEL 2nd group was decreased. in cells treated with slightly cytotoxic (250 uM) or non-cytotoxic (125uM, 25uM) doses were superior to the values obtained in control cells. Asig- P0319.Cytogenetic Studies of Patients with Behcets Disease nificant increase in single-strand break frequencies was observed at both G. Gullulu1, S. Oztas2, N. Astam1, I. Akyol1, A. G. Tatar2, A. Karakuzu3, A. chromosomal and nuclear chromatin level. In contrast, there was no sig- Odabas4 nificant difference between the SCE frequency in cells treated with cadmi- 1Ataturk University Medical Faculty Department of Ophthalmology; Erzu- um and the control cells. However, both the proliferative and the mitotic rum, Turkey; 2Ataturk University Medical Faculty Department of Medical indexes were significantly decreased. These results suggest that cadmi- Genetics; Erzurum, Turkey; 3Ataturk University Medical Faculty Depart- um(II), even at non-cytotoxic doses, remains an active clastogenic and ment of Dermatology; Erzurum, Turkey; 4Ataturk University Medical Facul- mitotoxic agent, but that the DNAlesions do not induce an increase in SCE ty Department of Immunology; Afghanistan frequency neither at non-cytotoxic nor at slightly cytotoxic doses. This sitkioztas@asteoclub.com project was supported by a grant of Redicy Inc. Behcets disease (MIM#109650) is an immunogenetically based multisys- tem disorder of unknown pathogenesis and mode of inheritance is not P0317. The results of 15-year cytogenetic monitoring for the clear. Behcets disease is characterized by uveitis, arthritis, orogenital groups of high priority suffered from the action of Chernobyl ulcerations and pustular skin lesions. It is most frequently seen in Turkey accident factors and Japan. HLA-B5 and its subtypes HLA-Bw51 has been found to pre- M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskij, Y. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dybskaya, L. R. dominate in cases. Recently, a triplet repeat (GCT/AGC) microsatellite Pedan polymorphism in the MICAgene was shown that its frequencies were sig- Research Center of Radiation Medicine; Kiev, Ukraine nificantly higher in the Behcets patients than they were in healthy controls. lena@leed1.kiev.ua In this study, we investigated the chromosomal abnormalities and analysed During about15 years the selective cytogenetic monitoring among the crit- sister chromatid exchange in patients with Behcets diseases. Thirty-five ical groups of Chernobyl accident victims in Ukraine have been fulfilled. patients with Behcets diseases (15 patients with uveitis and 20 patients Conventional, G-banding and molecular (FISH-WCP) cytogenetic methods without uveitis) and 20 healthy subjects as control were analyzed. The have been used for the examination of the high priority groups. In the chromosomal abnormalities and sister chromatid exchange analysis has delayed terms following the accident in all exposed groups (patients recov- been performed on lymphocytes. All patients were analysed prior to treat- ered from acute radiation sickness - ARS, clean-up workers, Chernobyl ment. We observed some chromosomal configurations that may indicate power plant personnel, persons evacuated from Pripyat in 1986, self-set- centromer association in patients, along with the increased rate of sister tlers from 30-km alienation zone, children and adults from regions of oblig- chromatid exchange. No numerical chromosomal abnormality was atory and voluntary evacuation) the frequency of chromosome aberrations observed in patients with Behcets disease. (as integral as specific for radiation exposure) significantly elevated the control levels.The increased number of radioinduced cytogenetic markers P0320. Radiation-induced chromosomal abnormalities in the (mainly stable) have been discovered in some exposed groups (patients germ cells of testicular cancer patients recovered from ARS, liquidators with stable lymphopenia, personnel of A. C. Velazquez-Wong1,2, E. Sloter1,3, F. Salamanca-Gomez2, M. L. Sarkophagus, children evacuated from Pripyat, persons living and/or work- Meistrich4, A. J. Wyrobek1 ing in contaminated by radionuclides territories) even with the help of con- 1Biology and Biotechnology Research Program, Lawrence Livermore ventional cytogenetics. Introduction in1996 of modern FISH technique National Laboratory; Livermore, CAUnited States; 2Unit of Investigation in essentially improved the possibilities of cytogenetic monitoring in terms of Human Genetics, Mexican Institute of Social Security; Mexico City, Mexi- the discovery of stable chromosome aberrations (including clones), co; 3Genetics and Developmental Biology Program, West Virginia Univer- although under as traditional as molecular cytogenetics a wide interindi- sity; Morgantown, WV United States; 4Department of Radiation Oncology, vidual variability of cytogenetic effects for the identical radiation exposure M. D. Anderson Cancer Center; Houston, TX United States had been revealed. Comparison of the results of the conventional and flu- velazquez1@llnl.gov orescence chromosome analysis showed that the discovery of transloca- Ionizing radiation is an effective treatment for testicular cancer. Incidental tions under the conventional staining with group kariotyping consisted no exposure to the healthy testis during radiotherapy (RT) has been shown to more than 29 % from the level of FISH translocations per whole genome. induce deleterious effects on spermatogenesis and semen quality. In a These data have been confirmed by the results of G-banding analysis. The study of semen quality in 10 seminoma patients, sperm concentrations calculation of the biological doses on the frequency of reciprocal translo- were significantly reduced at 60 days following RT with partial recovery cations in comparison with the official dose records and results of EPR occurring in some patients after 500 days. To investigate the long-term (tooth enamel) dosimetry showed that FISH technique can be used for ret- genetic effects on germ cells, we applied the multicolor sperm ACM FISH rospective group dosimetry under the doses above 25 cGy and for the method (Sloter et al. 2000) to semen samples from seminoma patients col- individual dosimetry in dose range ~ 50 - 300 cGy (in view of aging factor). lected before and after RT. The ACM assay detects (a) partial chromoso- mal duplications and deletions, which are the sperm products of premeiot- ic or meiotic breakage events or rearrangements, (b) chromosomal breaks within 1cen-1q12, and (c) extra or missing copies of chromosome 1. In aPosters: Cytogenetics 163 pilot study of six samples from two patients (estimated testicular dose; 38 P0324.Effects of Iodine 131 Treatment on Micronucleus For- and 55 cGy), a significant 2 to 3-fold increase in the frequency of partial mation in Patients with Tyroid Disease chromosomal duplications and deletions was detected 159-174 days fol- M. Aksoy1, B. Aslan1, H. Arikoglu1, A. B. Turhan1, M. Kaynak1, G. Tastekin2 lowing RT(P<0.01) which returned to pretreatment range 531-848 days 1Department of Medical Biology, Selcuk University, Medical Faculty; after RT. This coincided with a transient 2 to 5-fold increase in numerical Konya, Turkey; 2Department of Nuclear Medicine Radiology, Selcuk Uni- abnormalities (P<0.01). RTdid not affect the frequency of sperm with chro- versity, Medical Faculty; Konya, Turkey mosomal breaks (i.e., postmeiotic damage) at the time points surveyed. bigearslan@hotmail.com This work is important for understanding the long-term genetic effects of Radioactive iodine (131I) has been considered as a safe and effective RT on spermatogonial stem cells. [Work was conducted under the aus- treatment for thyroid diseases such as hyperthyroidism and thyroid cancer. pices of the U.S. DOE by LLNLunder contract W-7405-ENG-48 and sup- However, the side effects of this treatment were reported by different port from the Mexican Institute of Social Security.] authors. In addition, various forms of cytogenetic damages including high rate of micronucleus (MN) and chromosomal aberrations related to radia- P0321.Spectral karyotyping of Werners syndrome fibroblast tion exposure were reported. The micronucleus assay is an effective and cultures and observation of a near tetraploid clone with alternative method for evaluating genetic damages induced by chemicals exceptional growth potential and physical agents. MN assay is a sensitive, simple and fast technique to R. Melcher1, R. von Golitschek2, C. Steinlein2, M. Schmid2, H. Hoehn2 detect effects of clastogenic and genotoxic agents. In our study, MN fre- 1Department of Medicine; Wrzburg, Germany; 2Institute of Human Genet- quency in peripheral blood lymphocytes of 131I treated patients was ics; Wuerzburg, Germany analysed to detect the possible chromosomal damages related to 1) 131I r.melcher@medizin.uni-wuerzburg.de treatment, 2) in vitro culture statute and 3) the use of colchicine. It was also Werners syndrome (WS; MIM #277700) is an uncommon autosomal determined the effects of 131I in the different period, after the treatment. recessive condition characterized by many features usually associated The results obtained before treatment were compared with those obtained with aging. Patients with WS also have an elevated risk of cancer. Skin at different periods after treatment, and other parameters. fibroblast cell cultures from WS patients are usually composed of one or several clones, each marked by a distinctive, apparently balanced translo- P0325.Analysis of the interaction of papillomavirus episomes cations, designated as variegated translocation mosaicism. WS fibroblast with mitotic chromosomes cultures have a limited capacity to proliferate in vitro and a deletion muta- S. Kivi, I. Ilves, A. Abroi, R. Kurg, M. Ustav tor phenotype. In the present study spectral karyotyping (SKY) was applied Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University; Tartu, Estonia to two WS fibroblast cell lines (WLand AA) to clarify if there are subtle skivi@ebc.ee chromosomal alterations despite the gross chromosomal alterations pub- DNAviruses that possess episomal genomes, such as papillomaviruses, lished so far and to analyse if any chromosomal alterations are responsi- must maintain their genomes as stable extrachromosomal elements in ble for a growth advantage. Using the high resolution SKYtechniques, we host cells. Long-term episomal maintainance of papillomaviruses is shown discovered a new type of cyclic rearrangements and could confirm that a to be dependent on a chromatin attachment ability of viral genomes. To subset of metaphases in WS fibroblast cultures appear to maintain a nor- address the mechanisms responsible for that, we examined nuclear com- mal karyotype. Furthermore, we succeeded in establishing a subclone of a partmentalization of plasmids containing the bovine papillomavirus type 1 WS fibroblast culture (WL) that achieved an unprecedented 43 population full-length URR and URR deletion constructs in the Chinese hamster ovary doublings in vitro. This long-lived subclone has a pseudotetraploid kary- (CHO) cell line based model system. From this study we concluded that otype, with tetrasomy for all autosomes except chromosomes 4 and 6 BPV1 URR-dependent chromatin attachment is determined by viral E2 which are trisomic. Although it is too early to consider this unique subclone protein in transand its binding sites on plasmid DNAin cis. Now, using E2 immortal or transformed, the mechanism of polyploidization could have antibodies and immunofluorescence as well as FISH analysis, we have been a first step in that direction and explain the exceptional gain in growth studied the determinants of the BPV1 E2 protein that are necessary for potential. URR-dependent chromatin attachment. The analysis of different E2 dele- tion constructs confirmed the previous reports that both N-terminal trans- P0322.Autosomal fragile sites among Mentally retarded sub- activation domain as well as DNA-binding dimerization domains are need- jects; Genetic implications and review of literature ed for E2-mediated linking of the BPV1 episomes to the chromatin. Our K. R. Manjunatha1, G. K. Chetan1, R. Arathi1, G. V. Bhaskar Rao1, P. data suggest that the binding of the E2 protein to host chromosomes is Latha1, S. Padma1, S. R. Girimaji2 achieved through the interaction of the specific determinants within N-ter- 1Dept. Of Human Genetics, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro- minal domain of E2 with chromatin. These interactions guarantee the prop- sciences; Bangalore, India; 2Dept. Of Psychiatry, National Institute of Men- er partitioning and nuclear retention of the viral genomes, and are likely to tal Health and Neurosciences; Bangalore, India be separable, at least partly, from interactions involved in transactivation krmanjunatha@yahoo.com and viral replication supporting activities. Genetic screening program for mentally retarded subjects routinely carried out at our centre revealed the association of a variety of autosomal fragile P0326. Laser Pressure Catapulting; Preparation of single sites such as 1p36,2q21,2q23,2q31,2q33,3p14, cells, cell areas or chromosomes in a non-contact way 4q31,5q21,5q31,6p23,6q21,6q26,7q31,8q24, R. Burgemeister1, A. Clement-Sengewald2, G. Lahr3, K. Schtze1 9q32,10q21,10q25,10q26,12q24,13q21, 14q32 and 22q13 with a frequen- 1P.A.L.M. Microlaser Technologies; Bernried, Germany; 2Womens Hospi- cy of 2-20% of expression, even in repeated blood cultures and some of tal of the Ludwig-Maximilians University; Munich, Germany; 3Laser Labo- them are new sites, showing association with mental retardation as com- ratory and Molecular Biology, Academic Hospital Harlaching; Munich, Ger- pared with the available literature. The possible role of phenotype-geno- many type correlations leading to establishing genetic implications is attempted Renate.Burgemeister@PALM-Mikrolaser.com keeping inview of the recent literature. Pure sample preparation is one of the most thrilling tasks in modern molec- ular biology and medicine. The technique of Laser Pressure Catapulting P0323.Cytogenetic Studies In Traffic Police. (LPC) uses only the force of focused laser light to eject a selected speci- H. P. Mundluru, S. Varre, S. D. Gundimeda, P. P. Reddy men from the object slide or from a living cell layer and to directly catapult Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases; Hyderabad, India it into the cap of a routine microfuge tube. Subsequent molecular genetical sandymund@hotmail.com examinations can be carried out immediately after centrifugation of the cat- Traffic police are highly exposed to vehicular pollutants like carbon monox- apulted material into the bottom of the PCR tube. This procurement of sin- ide ,nitrogen oxides, lead oxide particles, suspended particulate matter gle cells, small homogeneous cell areas or chromosomes from different and diesel exhaust particles as they are on duty for long periods.Peripher- sources occurs in an entirely non-contact and locally confined manner. al blood lymphocytes were collected from fifty traffic police and analysed This non-contact Laser Pressure Catapulting technology avoids the dan- for chromosomal aberrations.Their age ranged from 25 to 58 years.and ger of contamination with unwanted specimen. The procurement of a spec- duration of service ranged from 2-32years.For control data blood samples imen is mandatory for the subsequent analysis of cell or chromosome spe- from 30 men who are not exposed to any pollutants and belonged to the cific genetic alterations such as in cancer research, prenatal diagnosis, same age and socio _-economic status were collected. A significant preimplantation diagnosis, cell biology or developmental biology. Any kind increase in the frequency of chromosomal aberrations like of tissue from different sources (also archival samples) and even subcellu- deletions,breaks ,gaps, dicentrics and fragments was observed in the lar structures can be captured using this laser method. There is no heat exposed group when compared to the control group. involved in this technique, and the applied laser wavelength does not affect the biological information. Wherever the procurement of homogenous164 Posters: Cytogenetics samples is mandatory for the subsequent analysis of a cell, a cell area or of various gene localizations different from HLAand these are suggested a chromosome, LPC is a key technology. LPC is the state of the art tool for to be responsible of psoriasis. But up to date only 1q, 6p21 and 17q are quick and pure sample preparation for a variety of applications - a prereq- confirmed in various studies. In our study by using cytogenetic analysis uisite for reliable genetic and proteomic analysis. and FISH with Cyclin D1 probe, the 11q13 region, that is one of the respon- sible candidate regions is inspected to determine the possible chromoso- P0327.ACase of Translocation between Chromosomes 5 and mal disorders in peripheral blood samples of 31 patients. Additionally, we 6; ( 5;6 ) evaluated the cases for the hereditary model of the disease. As the results I. V. Soprunova, A. B. Bashilina, S. V. Boulytcheva of cytogenetic and FISH analyses, the chromosomal structure and the Astrakhan Medico-Genetic Consulting Centre; Astrakhan, Russian Feder- 11q13 region were determined to be normal in all of our patients. The pedi- ation gree analysis of some cases suggested the mode of inheritance of the pso- coolworld@astranet.ru riasis as dominant, as well. The proband, an eight-month old girl was born from the first pregnancy, occurring against the background of hestosis and anemia. The probands P0330. Heterochromatic der(15) in a male infertility patient; parents are healthy; her mother is 17, Russian and her father is 22, Azer- Case report and review of the literature baijanian. The girls weight at birth was 2750 gr., her length was 50 cm., G. Bujdos1, G. Schwanitz2, E. Koltai1, A. Ehrbrecht2, R. Raff2 the head was 33 cm in circumference. During the first days after her birth 1Institute of Forensic Medicine of Semmelweis University, Research Unit; the syndrome of depression was dynamically substituted by the syndrome Budapest, Hungary; 2Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany of the central nervous system excitement. During the neurosonographical dunay@igaz.sote.hu examination there was found the lobar form of goloprozencephalia and the Chromosome analyses have been performed in a sample of infertility disgenesis of the callous body. At the age of 8 months the girls weight was patients. In the case reported, a supernumerary marker chromosome was 4000gr., her length was 60 cm., the head was 36 cm in circumference, the found by Q- and G-banding after lymphocyte culture. The male patient greater fontanelle was almost closed (0,3 * 0,3 cm). The examination dis- showed no clinical abnormalities besides abnormal spermatogenesis covered microcephalia, the cranium asymmetry, brachicephalia, flat occip- /azoospermia/. The relatives in the ascending and collateral line of the it, low forehead, hypertelorism, apicant, Mongoloid form of the eyes, wide index patient were included in the cytogenetic investigation. Three of them, flat nose bridge, long filter, low-placed dysplastic auricles, short neck, a all females, were also carriers of the der(15). They showed neither an brown spot ( 0,5 * 0,5 cm ) on the skin of the pubis. There are some symp- increased abortion rate nor decreased fertility. Molecular analysis of the toms of heavy disorders of the girls neuropsychological and physical AZF gene in the index patient gave normal results. The marker chromo- development. The child can not carry her head properly, she can not sit or some was identified by FISH as a heterochromatic deviate of chromosome stand, does not respond to the surroundings. There were signs of convul- 15. The role of heterochromatic marker chromosomes in male sterility will sion syndrome and hypothrophy. The citogenic examination by the method be discussed. of G-colouring discovered the proband having translocation between 5 and Supported by the PPP-program of DAAD/MB and the Hungarian Acade- 6 chromosomes, karyotype 46, xx,t ( 5;6 ). The mothers karyotype is nor- my of Science. mal, 46, xx. The probands father was not cytogenetically examined. P0331. Digital Photography in Cytogenetics; An Innovative P0328. The structure and shape of chromosomes in three- and Inexpensive Approach dimensionally intact interphase lymphocyte nuclei K. Singh, C. B. Jha, N. Kumar J. Lemke1, P. Ullmann2, I. Chudoba3, S. Michel1, U. Claussen1 B PKoirala Institute of Health Sciences; Dharan, Nepal 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Carl kulpra@hotmail.com Zeiss Jena GmbH; Jena, Germany; 3MetaSystems Inc.; Altlussheim, Ger- Introduction; Karyotyping involves a time consuming laborious process of many cell culture, chromosomes preparation, banding and staining. Documenta- johanneslemke@gmx.net tion requires conventional photography based on 35 mm optical camera The DNA-based high resolution multicolour banding (MCB) technique cov- and results are known only after development and printing. Commercial ers a whole chromosome with differently labelled microdissection probes imaging karyotyping equipments are available which have simplified the and thereby allows to investigate the chromosome structure in detail in all analysis but are beyond the reach of small laboratories. Here we would like stages of the cell cycle. It has been shown that normally prepared chro- to share our experience of digital imaging using video camera. Aims; To mosomes in lymphocyte interphase nuclei show a similar MCB pattern as demonstrate utility of digital imaging using simple video camera as a metaphase chromosomes. To analyse the structure and the shape of means to document karyotype. Methods;GTG banded metaphase chro- human chromosomes 5 in interphase, lymphocytes were routinely cultivat- mosomes prepared from peripheral blood of ten subjects were analyzed ed and harvested for chromosome analysis. Three-dimensionally intact both by conventional film photography and by images captured via CCD interphase nuclei were obtained by drying of the suspension on the slide video camera. Multi-frame analog videos of metaphases under simple at relative humidity of less than 7%. The nuclei were then hybridised with microscope were recorded and digitized with the help of video capture card the MCB probe set for chromosome 5. With the help of a confocal laser using PII computer. Individual frames were saved as BMPformat and were scanning microscope (LSM 510, Zeiss) it was possible to deline the axes enhanced using MGI Photosuite software. Images were printed on pho- of both chromosomes, to analyse their shapes and to localise the coloured toglossy paper using Canon inkjet printer. Karyotypes were prepared from chromosome sub-regions. Human chromosomes 5 in interphase nuclei are the photographs of same metaphases. Results; A total of 50 complete similar to metaphase chromosomes. In many cases they are cylindrically metaphases were examined. Average time consumption to printing and shaped almost as in three-dimensionally intact metaphases. In contrast to print loss due to intermediate processes were 12 hours and 6% respec- metaphase chromosomes interphase chromosomes are always bent. The tively using conventional method as against 45 minutes and 2% respec- combination of both MCB and 3D analysis using confocal laser scanning tively using video-digital method. The contrast between bands among indi- microscopy seems to be a powerfully technical combination for functional vidual chromosomes was better with conventional method. However, iden- analysis of the ultrastructure of interphase nuclei. tification of chromosomes poses no problem with either modalities. The cost involve in conventional printing was higher. Conclusion; This innova- P0329. Cytogenetics And Molecular Cytogenetic Analysis Of tive video-digital microphotography is less time consuming, inexpensive The Patients With Psoriasis and reasonably cost-effective and with some improvisation can produce H. Berkil1, B. Durak1, I. Sabuncu2, C. Ataman1, N. Basaran1 good quality photographs. Further, the technique makes storing and 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; archiving the images easier and can have wider applications in small labs Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of in developing countries. Dermatology; Eskisehir, Turkey hberkil@ogu.edu.tr P0332. Regular type of Downs Syndrome as a major indica- Psoriasis is a chronic disease of the skin characterized with silvery scales tion for early amniocentesis demercated and clear-cut borders, localized on ping-red papuls or mac- I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic ules. Psoriasis affects about 2 percent of the population. The disease Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University appears with the hyperproliferation of epidermal cells and inflammation Hospital Centre; Zagreb, Croatia resulting from infiltration of activated Thelper cells and mononuclear cells tonkicaa@yahoo.com and release of pro-inflamatory cytocines. In studies, the psoriasis suscep- Objective; To establish the existence of increasing risk for a chromosome tibility locus is restricted on a genomic sequence of 60 kb (6p21.3) on the aberration in mothers with previous child with Down syndrome. From HLAregion. Recently, genome wide scans have established the presence 16604 prenatal cytogenetic investigations, performed since 1978 untilPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 165 1999 in our centre, 831 pregnant women have had a previous fetus with comprehensive preventive program. This will form the basis of a commu- Down syndrome. Routine chromosomal investigations in cultured amniotic nity based genetic service, which is an integral part of preventive health fluid cells were performed according to well known standard procedures. care. Results; 712 women were under the age of 35 and among them 5 (0.70%) had fetus with a chromosome aberration. Four cases (3.36%) of patholog- P0335. Queensland Clinical Genetics Service Telemedicine ical karyotyp were found in a group of 119 patients over the age of 35. Con- Project clusion; The parents with a previous child with Down syndrome have an I. Meinecke1, J. C. MacMillan1, M. Gattas1, M. Loane2, R. Wootton2 increased risk for having a second affected child. Advanced maternal age 1Queensland Clinical Genetics Service; Brisbane, Australia; 2Centre for increase the risk. Online Health; Brisbane, Australia ingrid_meinecke@health.qld.gov.au P0333. Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in recurrent Queensland covers over 1.7 million square kilometres of the continent of reproductive loss Australia. The statewide genetics service, Queensland Clinical Genetics L. R. Martelli1, S. R. Pereira-Martins2, S. A. Santos1, L. A. F. Laureano3, A. Service (QCGS), is based in Brisbane where 44% of the states population S. Martinez4, J. G. Franco Jr5 live. Outreach clinics are held in 9 other cities, however for many rural 1School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao Paulo; Ribeirao patients attending these clinics often involves travelling large distances. Preto, Brazil; 2Federal University of Maranhao; Sao Luis, Brazil; 3Universi- Queensland Health has over 160 telemedicine sites to facilitate access ty Hospital, HCFMRP- USP; Ribeirao Preto, Brazil; 4Faculty of Philosophy, and support to rural patients and health practitioners. Mental health, pae- Sciences and Letters,University of Sao Paulo; Ribeirao Preto, Brazil; diatrics, and intensive care are the main users of this technology, however 5Human Reproduction Center, Sinha Junqueira Maternity; Ribeirao Preto, the potential exists for expansion into other areas of medicine, including Brazil genetics (telegenetics). In order to evaluate the effectiveness, efficiency lrmartel@rge.fmrp.usp.br and acceptability of telegenetics, we have conducted a study, comparing Chromosome heteromorphisms involving the pericentromeric region of clinical telegenetics consultations with face-to-face consultations. Patients chromosome 9 have been associated to early recurrent abortions. Howev- suitable for inclusion in the study were invited to participate and sent infor- er, results and opinions about the clinical significance of pericentric inver- mation, a survey on pre-clinic expectations and a consent form. Those sions remain contradictory. We have performed cytogenetic analysis of patients consenting to participate were randomly allocated to either a tra- 120 unrelated couples who had presented two or more spontaneous abor- ditional face-to-face clinic or to a telegenetics clinic. Post-consultation the tions due to indeterminate causes. The control group was made up of 384 geneticist and genetic counsellor involved completed a survey on their per- individuals. Chromosomal studies have included GTG, CBG, NOR and ception on the clinical session. Four weeks after the consultation partici- high resolution bandings. Ten couples (8.3%) presented a major chromo- pants had telephone follow-up by the project officer to complete a survey some aberration and 33 couples (27.5%) showed a polymorphic chromo- examining whether the patients needs were met by the consultation. At the some 9. Pericentric inversion involving the 9q region was detected in 9.1% time of abstract submission 12 patients had entered the study. Early results of the couples and in 1.3% of the samples from the control group. This find- suggest telegenetics has been a suitable method for service delivery from ing was characterized by F.I.S.H. technique using CEP 9 alpha satellite a patient and health professional perspective. (VYSIS), beta (D9Z5) and satellite III (D9Z1) DNAprobes. In all cases, the breakpoints were located in euchromatic regions, confirming the cytoge- P0336. Two siblings of familial idiopathic brain calcification netic diagnosis. The origin was maternal in 80% of the cases. Frequencies presented with cerebellar ataxia of individuals and of couples carrying inv(9) were compared to the fre- M. Watanabe quencies shown by the general population and to the frequencies reported University of Tsukuba; Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan by 11 authors, revealing a significant difference between observed and masa-wat@igaku.md.tsukuba.ac.jp expected ratios. Our results suggest a correlation between pericentric We report a family with brain calcification, predominantly in the carebellar inversions of chromosome 9 and recurrent reproductive loss. nuclei, and no evident cause such as abnormal calcium or phosphorus metabolism. The proband, a 53-year-old man, showed slowly progressive P0334.Clinical, Genetics and Environmental Studies in Birth dysarthria and gait disturbance. Upper limb diadochokinesis was impaired Defects bilaterally. The finger-to-nose test is ataxic bilaterally and worse on the left N. A. Meguid1, M. A. Awadalla2, M. E. Zaki3, G. S. Ali4, S. A. Temtamy3, A. side. His gait was awkward, wide-based, and short stepped, but was not M. Dardir3 festinating. Sensation and sphincteric function were normal.Fundic exami- 1National Research center, Head of the Department of Human Genetics; nation failed to reveal pigmentary macular degeneration. There were no Giza, Egypt; 2Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University; Cairo, Egypt; bone deformities or subcutaneous calcification suggestive of Albrights 3National Research Center, Department of Human Genetics; Giza, Egypt; osteodystrophy. Results of blood chemical tests were not remarkable; cre- 4Institute of Postgraduate Childhood Studies, Ain Shams University; Cairo, atinine, 0.7 mg/dl; urea-nitrogen, 14.2 mg/dl; calcium, 9.9 mg/dl; inorganic Egypt phosphorus, 3.2 mg/dl; magnesium, 2.7 mg/dl; free triiodothyronine, 2.4 nmeguid@email.com pg/ml; free thyroxine, 1.4 ng/dl; thyroid-stimulating hormone, 1.10 mU/ml; The present study included 2600 patients referred to our Department of intact parathyroid hormone, 11 pg/ml. He had bilateral and symmetric cal- Human Genetics, National Research Center, Giza; through 8 years study cification of the cerebellar nuclei, basal ganglia, thalamus, and subcortical period. The main aim of the present study was to classify cases of birth white matter on CT. Calcified areas showed central low signal intensity defects whether they are isolated or multiple, to identify the genetic etiolo- areas surrounded by high-signal intensities on MRI T1- and T2-weighted gy of cases and to evaluate the genetic versus environmental components images. The elder brother was asymptomatic but showed calcification of of birth defects. Patients were subjected to complete clinical and geneic cerebellar nuclei and basal gangria. Familial idiopathic brain calcification is evaluation. Construction of special computer program for data registry and a rare disorder with less than 20 previously reported families. Mental dete- search was performed. Syndrome diagnosis and identification was carried rioration, parkinsonis, and cerebellar ataxia appear in adult life and out by the use of special database programs. Our results showed that; progress gradually. genetic syndromes were the most frequent group. Genetic etiologic classi- fication of the studied cases showed that the monogenic group of disorders P0337. Incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in patients was the most predominant group (53.1% of the studied cases) and auto- with mental and developmental delays in a referred Iranian somal recessive pattern of inheritance is the most frequent pattern of inher- population . itance (34.2%). The effect of environment was detected in 3.7% of cases F. Behjati1, M. T. Akbari2, Z. O. Ashtiani2, M. Khaleghian2 emphasizing a mild impact of environmental effect in our present study. 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; Rate of consanguinity among the referred patients was 53.6%, 71% were 2Division of Cytogenetics, Medical diagnostic laboratory of Pars; Tehran, first cousins. Mental reardation represented 44.9% of all referred cases. Islamic Republic of Iran Chromosomal breaks were the most predominant structural aberrations maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk (26%) and were increased in the genetic syndromes, indicating the use of We report the cytogenetic findings in 73 patients with mental and develop- FISH to detect any cryptic aberrations. Our study supported the hypothe- ment delays out of a total of 383 cases referred for suspected chromoso- sis that consanguinty is an important risk factor in the causation of birth mal abnormalities . Routine and High resolution technique for peripheral defects, environmental factors have a definite effect in the present study blood culturing was carried out. All cases were evaluated by GTG banding and computer is an important tool in the diagnosis of genetic diseases. We (ISCN-1995) . Other banding techniques including C-NOR and Q - were concluded that, the high incidence and recurrence risk of single gene also performed . Atotal of ten metaphase spreads for each patient was defects in the present study indicates that there is a need to develop a invesigated . In mosaic cases, 30-50 cells were examined . the overall166 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology abnormality rate for all 383 cases was 16.5% . The mentally and develop- P0340. Difficulties in the early diagnosis of sporadic Carney mentally delayed referred cases comprised three major groups ; Down Complex. syndrome, failure to thrive and non -Down Syndrome mental retardation. L. G. Flores-Pea, V. Del Castillo, A. Gonzlez del Angel, R. Rodrguez, The chromosomal abnormality rate among them was 87%, 7% and 70% L. De la Torre, M. Esmer respectively. The total rate of abnormality amongst the mentally and devel- Instituto Nacional de Pediatra; Mexico, D.F., Mexico opmentally delayed cases was 8%, which is comparable to Similar studies. lauraflorespena@hotmail.com Carney complex is an autosomal dominant syndrome, charecterized by P0338. X-linked immunodeficiency, inflammatory bowel dis- lentigines, myxomatous skin tumors; and heart, breast or endocrine tumors ease and hypohydrotic ectodermal dysplasia in a large family (primary nodular adrenocortical disease, pituitary adenoma, Sertoli cell G. Knudsen1, M. Kristiansen2, K. Storhaug3, T. Abrahamsen4, J. Steen- tumors). Myxomas are the main finding suggesting Carney complex, how- Johnsen5, A. Smahi6, G. Courtois6, K. rstavik1 ever they can be mistaken as schwannomas and other bening or malignant 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Hospital; Oslo, Norway; 2Insti- tumors. Also the presence of lentigines and neurofibromas can be con- tute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo; Oslo, Norway; 3Resource fused with lesions of neurofibromatosis or LEOPARD. We report on a girl Centre for Oral Health in Rare Medical Conditions, University of Oslo; with a lentiginous syndrome, first evaluated at 6years/old due to the pres- Oslo, Norway; 4Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital; Oslo, Norway; ence of pigmented spots on buttocks, chin and legs. At age 9 years, she 5Department of Pediatrics, Telemark County Hospital; Porsgrunn, Norway; developed a mediastinal tumor which was surgically removed and diag- 6Service de Gntique, Hpital Necker-Enfants-Malades; Paris, France nosed as lymphangio-hemangio-lipoma. On the clinical examination at the gun.peggy.stromstad.knudsen@rikshospitalet.no genetic consultation she showed low nasal bridge, hipertelorism, hyper- Apossible new immunodeficiency syndrome was reported in 1978. The pigmented lip and sclera spots, high arched palate,low set ears. Her car- male patient had a transient block in the normal maturation of B cells and diologic examination disclosed cardiomiopathy. At this moment she was intractable diarrhoea, and died at age 8 months. Three diseased brothers diagnosed as having LEOPARD syndrome, but later the cardiomiopathy probably had the same disorder. Their two sisters have since had two and was discarded. Four years later she had a neurilemoma on left hand and one affected sons respectively. All seven affected boys were dystrophic at developed hypothyroidism, obesity, an ovarian teratoma, a pituitary birth. They were stillborn or died in early infancy, except one boy who died microadenoma and tall stature. Theses features were all consistent with at age 5 years. This boy developed signs of hypohidrotic ectodermal dys- the diagnosis of Carney complex. This case ilustrates the difficulties on the plasia, with thin hair, small cone-shaped teeth and oligodontia, but with no early diagnosis of the disease, mainly in casas without other affected fam- periorbital wrinkling. At age 8 months he started having serious pneumo- ily members. In the present case the definitive diagnosis was reached only coccal infections which were difficult to treat. He also developed an inflam- after the apparition of important features such as the mediastinal lym- matory bowel disease. All three obligate female carriers had small teeth phangio-hemangio-lipoma and the shwannoma of the hand. The histolog- and reported lack of sweating. One carrier had a highly skewed X-inacti- ic confirmation of the nature of these lesions proved to be an essential vation, whereas two carriers had a random X inactivation. Haplotype analy- diagnostic tool. The genetic loci of carney complex were recently identified sis showed that both affected and unaffected family members shared on chromosomes 2p16 and 17q2, therefore the molecular diagnosis can markers flanking the hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (ED1) gene. Affect- be useful in cases like ours. ed members shared markers in the regions Xp21.1-p11.4 and Xq27-qtel. A novel X-linked disorder of immunodeficiency and hypohidrotic ectodermal P0341.Preliminary Findings In The Diagnostic Evaluation Of dysplasia has been reported. This disorder is allelic to incontinentia pig- A Sample Of 103 Individuals With Pervasive Development menti, and the patients had mutations in exon 10 of the IKK-gamma Disorders (NEMO) gene. The findings in our family bear some similarity to this novel C. E. Steiner, M. M. Guerreiro, A. P. Marques-de-Faria immunodeficiency. However, no mutations in exon 10 were found. Our Unicamp; Campinas, Brazil family may represent a mutation in other parts of the NEMO gene or yet dgmfcm@unicamp.br another X-linked immunodeficiency syndrome. Pervasive development disorders (PDD) are a heterogeneous group of neurobehavioral disorders of infancy. In order to identify etiologic factors in P0339. The genetic basis of inter-individual differences in a sample of individuals with PDD, a total of 103 subjects (84 males and 19 cytokine release amongst patients undergoing cardiac sur- females) referred for autistic behavior were submitted to a protocol includ- gery with cardiopulmonary bypass -preliminary results - ing clinical evaluation, screening for inborn errors of metabolism, karyotype M. Seyfarth1, A. Roth-Isigkeit2, L. Hasselbach3, P. Schmucker2 in folic acid deficient medium, and molecular test for the FRAXAmutation. 1Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine; Luebeck, Ger- Until now, the following conditions were detected; Down syndrome (n = 3), many; 2Department of Anaesthesia; Luebeck, Germany; 3Department of untreated phenylketonuria (n = 2), Rett syndrome (n = 2), tuberous sclero- Clinical Chemistry, Medical University of Luebeck; Ratzeburger Allee 160, sis (n = 1), fragile X syndrome (n = 1), 5 other dysmorphic conditions, 2 D-23538 Luebeck, Germany non-genetic etiologies, and 2 individuals with chromosomal polymor- liu.hasselbach@medinf.mu-luebeck.de phisms. Besides those, 4 individuals presented no PDD and 3 individuals Cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) leads to a systemic had infantile psychosis. These data suggest that, in at least 15% of this inflammatory response with cytokine secretion. Cytokine release meas- sample, a main etiologic factor could be identified. Although the diagnosis urements during cardiac surgery with CPB showed a high inter-individual of a specific genetic condition do not modify the treatment of autistic indi- variability in cytokine secretion. We studied patients who underwent a car- viduals in most cases, it is of significant importance to the genetic coun- diac surgery with CPB. Previous results from our laboratory have showed seling of their relatives. For this reason, we reinforce the importance of that the inter-individual differences in IL-6 release were accompanied by careful dysmorphologic examination and complementary tests in any per- differences in the release of other cytokines such as TNF-A, IL-1 and sIL- son presenting with PDD, besides neurologic and psychiatric evaluation. 2R. This phenomenon might in part be due to variations in individual genet- ic true nature. Evidence for a relationship between genetic variations at the P0342.Congenital Anomalies on 279 necropsies of children; HLAand/or cytokine gene loci and the expression of cytokines have been Aprospective study at Ribeiro Preto, Brazil. reported elsewhere. The regulation of the expression of some cytokines is J. M. Pina-Neto1, A. Piram2, L. C. Peres3 in part genetically determined. To examine whether genetic background 1So Paulo University; Ribeiro Preto, So Paulo, Brazil; 2So Paulo Uni- might play a role in affecting individual cytokine serum levels and influenc- verisity, Faculty of Medicine; Ribeiro Preto, So Paulo, Brazil; 3So Paulo ing the degree of the inflammatory response during surgical trauma (e.g. University, Faculty of Medicine; Ribeiro Preto, So Paulo, Brazil cardiac surgery with CPB), we investigated the distribution of polymorphic jmdpneto@fmrp.usp.br elements within the promoter regions of the TNF-Aand IL-6 genes in our We analyzed prospectively 1127 autopsy of children aged 0 to 14 years samples and determined their genotype concerning the BAT2 gene performed at Universitary Hospital, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeiro Preto, involved in the HLAregion. Our preliminary data suggest that the Aallele from January 1995 to December 1998.Congenital anomalies were present at -308 of the TNF-Agene promoter region might be responsible for high- in 279 cases (24.8%); most cases were children aged 0 to 28 er release of serum TNF-Ain patients undergoing cardiac surgery with days(40.9%)and 1 to 12 months(36.2%). Sample was separate in two CPB. Regulatory polymorphisms in or near the TNF locus, i.e. allele set groups; evaluated for clinical geneticist in life or autopsy (157 cases) and 140/150 of the BAT2 microsatellite marker on the HLAregion combined not evaluated (122 cases).In the group of evaluated cases the diagnosis with the G allele at -308 of the TNF-Agene, might represent one con- can be established in 126 (80.3%) where 21(13.4%) were of single anom- struction providing a genetic background for a less sensitive response to alies, and 105 (66.8%) of multiple anomalies. In the group of not evaluat- various stimuli. Further studies involving a larger sample size should be ed cases 62 (50.8%) had the diagnosis defined, where 28 (23.0%) were done in order to confirm our preliminary results. single anomalies, and 34 (27.9%) were multiple ones.Considering thePosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 167 cases with established clinical diagnosis (188 cases), 40 (21.3%) were senting a 15% reduction. There may be a rising proportion of NTDs due to monogenic, 33 (17.6%) were chromosomal, 38 (20.2%) multifactorial, 6 underlying chromosomal, syndromic and genetic disorders unresponsive (3.2%) environmental, 54 (28.7%) were of unknown etiology, and in 17 to FAsupplementation. (9%) the etiology cannot be determined. The recurrence risk was consid- ered low in 121 cases (64.4%), moderate in 21 (11.2%), high in 28 (14.9%), P0345. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis in 300 infertile dependent of handling in 1 (0.5%), unknown in 7 (3.7%) and not defined in males of Austrian centres of andrology 10 (5.3%). The cases without diagnosis (91 cases) had the etiology and O. Rittinger the risk of recurrence considered undetemined. These data will be dis- Clinical Genetics, Childrens Hospitalh; Salzburg, Austria cussed and compared with similar studies. Financial Support; FAPESP. o.rittinger@lks.at Background; Male infertility is caused by many different exogenous and P0343. Valproic Acid Embryopathy; Report of Two Siblings endogenous factors. Today screening for chromosomal aberrations and with Further Expansion of the Phenotypic Abnormalities and deletions of Y chromosomal sequences belongs to the standard proce- a Review of the Literature. dures of andrology centers. We report on the largest cohort of infertile C. Kozma males in Austria comparing clinical data with cytogenetic and molecular The Child Development Center. Georgetown University Medical Center.; findings. Methods; Clinical examination, seminal fluid and hormonal analy- Washington, D.C., United States ses were carried out on 300 infertile males. Cytogenetic investigation was kozmac@georgetown.edu performed according standard methods (GTG-banding). For fluorescence Fetal Valproate syndrome (FVS) results from prenatal exposure to Valproic in situ hybridization (FISH) we used Yalpha satellite-(DYZ3), Y-classical acid (VPA). It is characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, a cluster satellite-(DYZ1) and Quint Essential Yprobes. Molecular analysis; we are of minor and major anomalies, and central nervous system dysfunction. In routinely screening for the presence of a total of 12Y-chromosomal regions this report, two siblings who were exposed to monotherapy with VPAare (centromer and AZF a-c) by amplification using 3 multiplex PCR mixes and described with documentation of long-term follow up. Both children had additional Yq and/or Yp single PCR if necessary. Results; Klinefelter Syn- craniofacial findings, multiple systemic and orthopedic abnormalities, an drome was the most frequent gonosomal anomaly (19 patients) followed overgrowth pattern, and developmental deficits. In an effort to further delin- by the mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,XY(15 patients). Structural aberrations eate the phenotypic features of FVS, the literature from 1978 to 2000 is included 6 translocations (one involving the Ychromosome), 13 small dele- reviewed. Atotal of 70 cases that were solely exposed to VPAwith ade- tions and 9 larger deletions (AZFb and AZFc.). The most frequent small quate phenotypic description were identified. Cases that did not have ade- deletion concerned sY153 (8 patients), 4 larger deletions started with quate phenotypic description were excluded as well as cases that were sY153. Discussion; Klinefelter Syndrome, 45,X/46,XYdysgenesis and XX exposed to VPAand other anticonvulsant treatment The clinical manifes- maleness are well known causes for infertility. Larger Ychromosome dele- tations of FVS encompass a wide spectrum of abnormalities including con- tions concerning AZFa, AZFb and AZFc cause infertility with decreasing sistent facial phenotype, multiple systemic and orthopedic involvement, probability. In small deletions the analysis of the paternal Ychromosome central nervous system dysfunction, and altered physical growth. The may help to establish causal relationsship. Frequent polymorphisms may facial appearance is characterized by a small broad nose, small ears, flat be a reason for Y-chromosome fragility as observed in our sY153-deleted philtrum, a long upper lip with shallow philtrum, and micro/retrognathia. In patients. this review, 62% of the patients had musculoskeletal abnormalities, 30% had minor skin defects, 26% had cardiovascular abnormalities, 22% had P0346.Characterization of the phenotypic and developmental genital abnormalities, and 16% had pulmonary abnormalities. Less fre- aspects of an infant with 5p duplication quently encountered abnormalities included brain, eye, kidney, and hear- N. Scribanu1, S. A. Schonberg2, J. M. Meck1 ing defects. Neural tube defects were seen in 3% of the sample. Twelve 1Georgetown University; Washington, DC United States; 2American Med- percent of affected children died in infancy and 30% of surviving patients ical Laboratories; Chantilly, VAUnited States had developmental deficits/mental retardation. While 15% of patients had scribann@georgetown.edu growth retardation, an overgrowth pattern was seen in 9%. The data from We report the cytogenetic and developmental findings in a 6 month old this comprehensive review especially the developmental outcome should African American female infant who was evaluated for a stridorous cry and be added to the teratogenic risk, which arises in association with the use dysmorphic features at birth. The proposita was the product of a third preg- of VPAduring pregnancy. nancy of an 18 year old woman and was delivered at 39 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 2.29 kg. She presented with a stridorous hoarse cry, P0344. The impact of prenatal diagnosis and folic acid (FA) poor suck, tracheomalacia, malrotation of the gut, generalized hypotonia, supplementation on prevention of Neural Tube Defects in congenital heart disease and enlarged clitoris. She was at the 5th per- British Columbia centile for height and weight. Her head, at the 50th percentile, was dispro- M. I. Van Allen1, E. Boyle2, D. McFadden3, B. Irwin4, P. MacLeod5, G. portionately large. Her anterior fontanelle was large, full, and extended to Chambers6 the metopic suture which was gaping. The proposita had a prominent fore- 1Dept. Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC head and upward and outward slanting of the palpebral fissures. The nasal Canada; 2U.B.C. Medical School; Vancouver, Canada; 3Dept. Pathology, bridge was flattened and had a prominent crease. Her ears were slightly B.C. Childrens Hospital; Vancouver, Canada; 4Spina bifida clinic, B.C. low-set, large and prominent. Her fingers and toes were very elongated Childrens Hospital; Vancouver, Canada; 5Victoria General Hospital; Victo- (arachnodactylic). Severe feeding difficulties required gavage feeding. G- ria, Canada; 6Family Practice Dept., U.B.C.; Vancouver, Canada band chromosome studies showed an inverted duplication of most of the mvallen@cw.bc.ca short arm of chromosome 5 (46,XX,inv dup (5)(p15.32p12). Maternal chro- The apparent declining rate of NTD affected births is being attributed to mosomes were normal; the father was not available for study. Fluores- prenatal diagnosis and to folic acid (FA) use. The simultaneous initiation of cence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies were performed to confirm that these preventative programs makes it difficult to assess the impact of the extra material was derived from chromosome 5 and also to determine either intervention. We present results of a descriptive, retrospective study if the cri du chat critical region was deleted as a result of this structural on the apparent incidence (stillbirths (SB) and livebirths (LB))of register- abnormality of 5p. Whole chromosome paint for chromosome 5 showed able births (i.e. >20 weeks gestation) compared to the actual incidence hybridization to the entire abnormal #5 confirming that the extra material (medical abortions (TAB), SB, and LB) of NTD affected pregnancies. We was derived from 5. The EGR1 probe to the cri du chat critical region at identified 144 NTD affected fetuses/SB/LB born between 1997 and 1999. 5p15.2 showed one signal on the normal #5 as well as a double hybridiza- During this time period the apparent incidence of NTDs was 52/133,959 or tion signal in the middle of the short arm of the abnormal #5 chromosome, 0.39/1000. The actual incidence was 144/134,041 or 1.07/1000. FAsup- indicating trisomy for this locus. The FISH result was consistent with the G- plementation was used peri-conceptionally in 38.7% (36/93) pregnancies. band findings of an inverted duplication of 5p, resulting in trisomy for most Affected pregnancies were prenatally diagnosed in 67% (96/144), with of the short arm of chromosome 5. The cri du chat region was included in 89% (85/96) of those diagnosed at <24 weeks, and 84% (81/96) resulting the duplicated portion and, therefore, was trisomic, not monosomic as in in TAB. Severe associated anomalies were present in 31% (45/144), with individuals with cri du chat syndrome. Duplication of 5p is associated with 9.5% (13/144) having chromosomal abnormalities and 15% (21/144) hav- a specific phenotype which is dependent upon the extent of the trisomic ing recognisable syndromes and MCAdisorders. Family history of NTDs region. Based on published reports, we concluded that the proposita was was reported in 12% (17/144). In conclusion; TABs following routine pre- on the severe end of the phenotypic spectrum for trisomy 5p syndrome natal diagnosis are a significant contributor to the declining incidence of which is consistent with the cytogenetic finding that virtually all of her 5p NTD affected births. FAuse is rising and is contributing to the decline in the was trisomic. At followup, it was evident that this infant had global devel- actual NTD incidence from 1/795 in 1958-84 to 1/930 in 1997-99, repre- opmental delays. Additional information on the natural history of this syn-168 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology drome will be presented. 5 had distant relative parents and all other parents were first cousins. On physical examination, 2 patients (3.5%) were entirely normal, 15 (26.3%) P0347. Deletion syndromes and ectrodactyly; phenotype had only short stature and/or skin findings and other 40 patients (70.2%) shows an hierarchy of the genes showed at least one major abnormality. The breakage study in 3 patients I. Lurie (5.3%) revealed 2 cell populations, one with normal and the other with University of Maryland at Baltimore; Baltimore, MD United States increased breakage rate. lugo15@excite.com Ectrodactyly and its equivalents are relatively common in 4 deletion syn- P0350. Case report; a newborn child with ectrodactyly and dromes; del(2)(q31), del(4)(q33qter), del(6)(q21) and del (7)(q21.3). Mani- partial trisomy 16q. festations of the defect may be different even in sibs with exactly the same P. Ilisson1, K. unap1, T. Ilus1, O. Bartsch2 deletion. Nevertheless, analysis of phenotypic picture may shed some light 1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics; Tartu, Estonia; 2Depart- on the hierarchy of the genes, involved in the origin of ectrodactyly. In ment of Clinical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Technical University; Dresden, these patients defect of each extremity may be scored from 5 (maximal Germany defect with absence of the whole limb) to 1 (equivalent forms of ectro- Piret.Ilisson@kliinikum.ee dactyly). Each person will be characterized by the sum of scores for Cases of ectrodactyly are usually sporadic, but cases of autosomal inheri- defects of both upper and (after colon) both lower limbs. In such a case it tance or demonstrating chromosomal rearrangements have also been is possible to compare 1) severity of defects of the upper and lower limbs described. So far 4 different genes or regions for ectrodactyly have been for each type of deletion, 2) general severity of limb defects in different mapped on 7q21, Xq26, 10q24, and 3q27. In addition deletions of 2q24- deletions. The results of the analysis of the reported cases (after summa- q31 and 6q16-q23 have been reported. We report a newborn girl demon- tion of all individuals scores) are shown in the Table. strating ectrodactyly of hands and feet (aplasia or hypoplasia of II-III fin- gers and toes), heart defect - hypoplasia of left ventricle, interrupted aorta; Deletion Number of cases Absolute score Mean score genital anomalies - hypoplasia of labias; and facial dysmorphic features - 2q31 11 39;35 6.7 down-slanting palpebral fissures, blepharophimosis, upturned nose, long 4q33qter 7 14; 8 3.1 philtrum, broad nasal tip, retrognathia. Standard chromosome studies of 6q21 9 28;6 3.9 blood lymphocytes showed a pathological karyotype - 46,XX,add(21)(p11). 7q21.3 13 12;54 5.1 Parental karyotypes were normal. Fluorescence in situ hybridization It can be seen that in persons with deletions of 2q31 upper and lower limbs (FISH) revealed partial trisomy for 16q - karyotype after FISH are affected with the same severity. Deletion 6q21 affects mostly upper 46,XX,add(21).ish der(21)t(16;21)(q12;p11). There are some 20 cases limbs, deletion of 7q21.3 affects mostly lower limbs. It can be presumed, about the trisomy 16q reported so far, but only one case with similar dupli- that a gene on 7q21.3 acts on later stages of embryogenesis than a gene cated region (trisomy 16q12.1-qter). To our knowledge, the association of on 6q21. Generally, the most severe defects are found in del(2)(q31), the ectrodactyly and partial trisomy 16q has not been reported previously, but smallest defects in del(6)(q21) and del (4)(q33qter). Therefore, this formal some cases demonstrated clinodactyly and flexion contractures. There- analysis can provide some information concerning hierarchy of the genes, fore, our case suggests that possibly another gene(s) causing ectrodacty- involved in development of ectrodactyly. ly in a subset of patients maps on chromosome 16q12-qter. In contrast to the other genes and regions for ectrodactyly identified so far, this possible P0348.Where to look for the genes of esophageal atresia? gene(s) or region on 16q may be predicted to cause ectrodactyly by over- O. LURYE1, I. Lurie2 expression (trisomy). 1Belorussian Institute of Herediary Disorders; Minsk, Belarus; 2University of Maryland at Baltimore; Baltimore, MD United States P0351. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis in 300 infertile olury001@umaryland.edu males of Austrian centres of andrology Phenotypic manifestations of structural autosomal imbalance (SAI) give a E. Ploechl1, G. Kronberger1, G. Sander1, M. Dunzinger2, A. Jungwirth3, E. clue to the location of genes causing congenital malformations. Data on Plas4, I. Vlasak1, O. Rittinger1 ectrodactyly, holoprosencephaly (HPE), and other defects confirmed the 1Clinical Genetics; Salzburg, Austria; 2Urologische Abteilung, KH fruitfulness of this approach. A similar analysis was performed for Barmherzige Schwestern; Linz, Austria; 3Urologie; Salzburg, Austria; esophageal atresia (EA), genes for which have not yet been mapped 4Urologie, KH Wien-Lainz; Wien, Austria (except one gene on 2p23p24 [Celli et al., 2000]). EAis a rare manifesta- e.ploechl@lks.at tion of chromosomal defects. 27 cases of SAI with EAwere found in the lit- Background; Male infertility is caused by many different exogenous and eratire. Deletions of 3 segments; del(17)(q22q23), del(14)(q32.3qter) and endogenous factors. Today screening for chromosomal aberrations and del(9)(p22pter) were associated with EAmore than once. Most likely, seg- deletions of Y chromosomal sequences belongs to the standard proce- ments 17q22q23 and 14q32.3qter harbor genes responsible for EA. The dures of andrology centers. We report on the largest cohort of infertile role of 9p22pter is questionable; in both cases with EAmonosomy 9p was males in Austria comparing clinical data with cytogenetic and molecular associated with partial trisomies for another autosome but EA was not findings. Methods; Clinical examination, seminal fluid and hormonal analy- found in any case of pure del(9p). Duplications of 3 other segments ses were carried out on 300 infertile males. Cytogenetic investigation was [dup(3)(p25p26), dup(5)(q34qter) and dup(18)(q12qter)] were associated performed according standard methods (GTG-banding). For fluorescence with EAmore than once. Minimal duplication 18q with EAwas 18q12-qter, in situ hybridization (FISH) we used Yalpha satellite-(DYZ3), Y-classical that actually does not help to localize the gene, responsible for this defect. satellite-(DYZ1) and Quint Essential Yprobes. Molecular analysis; we are Two of three persons with EAand dup(3)(p25p26) also had HPE. EAwas routinely screening for the presence of a total of 12Y-chromosomal regions not found in 16 other persons with dup(3p) and HPE and was found in one (centromer and AZF a-c) by amplification using 3 multiplex PCR mixes and of 76 persons with dup 3p without HPE. The most likely explanation; in tri- additional Yq and/or Yp single PCR if necessary. Results; Klinefelter Syn- somy 3p HPE and EAmay be different manifestations of the same tripli- drome was the most frequent gonosomal anomaly (19 patients) followed cated gene. 18 out 27 persons with EAand SAI also had congenital heart by the mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,XY(15 patients). Structural aberrations defects, 6 out 27 had anal atresia, but not a single had diaphragmatic her- included 6 translocations (one involving the Ychromosome), 13 small dele- nia. tions and 9 larger deletions (AZFb and AZFc.). The most frequent small deletion concerned sY153 (8 patients), 4 larger deletions started with P0349.Fanconi anemia in Iran; a profile sY153. Discussion; Klinefelter Syndrome, 45,X/46,XYdysgenesis and XX S. H. Sayar1, S. Tootian1, F. Farzanfar1, A. K. Hajianpour2 maleness are well known causes for infertility. Larger Ychromosome dele- 1Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; tions concerning AZFa, AZFb and AZFc cause infertility with decreasing 2Alfigen, the genetics institute; Pasadena, CAUnited States probability. In small deletions the analysis of the paternal Ychromosome sayar111@yahoo.com may help to establish causal relationsship. Frequent polymorphisms may During a period of 3 years, from November 1997 to November 2000, a total be a reason for Y-chromosome fragility as observed in our sY153-deleted of 116 patients under the age of 25 with the diagnosis of aplastic anemia patients. have been referred to our center for chromosome breakage study to rule out Fanconi anemia. Using Mitomycin-C to induce chromosome breakage, P0352. Bartsocas Papas syndrome in four children of con- we found 57 positive cases; this is indicative of a high frequency of this sanguineous parents detrimental disease in Iran and we would directly attribute it to the high rate K. Boduroglu, E. Tuncbilek of consanguineous marriages in our country that is estimated to be as high Hacettepe University; Ankara, Turkey as 30%. All patients but one were products of consanguineous marriages; kbodur@gen.hun.edu.trPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 169 Bartsocas-Papas syndrome (BPS) is the autosomal recessive form of adds to the previously known ATS-DL(Alport syndrome and diffuse leiomy- popliteal pterygium syndrome which is first described by Bartsocas and omatosis). Both contiguous gene deletion syndromes involve COL4A5, but Papas in 1972, in four children of third-cousin parents. So far, 18 patients while ATS-DLextends centromerically, ATS-MR extends telomerically with from 9 families have been reported, vast majority originating from the respect to the collagen gene. Due to relative simplicity of identification of Mediterranean region. Here, we report on a Turkish family with four affect- the second family, just by screening the literature, we suggest that this syn- ed children. The proposita, an 8-month-old female, was the eighth child of drome may be less rare than thought. Since ATS in children is confined to second-cousin parents. Physical examination showed, oral cleft, filiform microhematuria, this clinical sign may be missed or hidden by the more and cutaneous bands between the jaws, ankyloblefaron, corneal ulcera- severe phenotype such as mental retardation. We suggest that a relative tion, syndactyly of fingers and toes, popliteal pterygium and genital anom- simple analysis such as urinalysis be used to screen males with MR of alies. Radiological studies revealed synostosis of phalanges of toes and unknown etiology. fingers, and mild pulmonary stenosis. Family history showed that three previous siblings were born with similar clinical features. Although the pre- P0355.Dominant inheritance of cleft palate, microstomia and ceeding sibs had died in early days of life, the index case survived until one micrognathia year of age. F. McKenzie1, A. Turner1, S. Withers2, P. Dalzell3, S. Bhattacharjee3, M. McGlynn1, E. P. E. Kirk1 P0353. Clinical And Molecular Studies Of A Family With 1Sydney Childrens Hospital; Sydney, Australia; 2Logan Hospital; Brisbane, Severe Brachydactyly Type B (BDB) Australia; 3Prince of Wales Hospital; Sydney, Australia A. Fortuna1, M. Pinto1, M. Oldridge2, A. O. M. Wilkie2 campbrook@msn.com.au 1Instituto Genetica Medica; Porto, Portugal; 2Institute of Molecular Medi- Cleft palate without cleft lip is a causally heterogeneous condition. There cine, John Radcliffe Hospital; Oxford, United Kingdom are several reports in the literature of autosomal dominant inheritance of ana.fortuna@igm.min-saude.pt cleft palate either in isolation or associated with other features. The com- Brachydactyly type B, an autosomal dominant disorder, is the most severe bination of cleft palate, microstomia and micrognathia has been reported of the brachydactylies and is characterized by terminal reductions of the previously by Bettex et al (1998) in association with oligodontia and normal fingers and toes. We report the results of a clinical and radiological study intelligence. All the affected members of Bettex family who had karyotypes of a father and son affected with BDB. These two individuals demonstrat- done were demonstrated to have a fragile site at chromosome 16q22. We ed a severe phenotype  bifid thumbs with split or rudimentary nails, sev- report a family in which four members in two generations have microsto- eral phalanges are entirely missing ( absence of medial and distal pha- mia, micrognathia, a partial or complete cleft of the hard palate and normal langes in digits 2 and 5 ), the 3rd Lmetacarpal is short with hypoplasia and intelligence. All have been shown to have the fragile site at chromosome synostosis of medial and distal phalanges with camptodactyly and partial 16q22, suggesting the possible presence of a closely linked gene in this cutaneous syndactyly of digits 2-4 in the hands. The feet showed a broad region that is important in the development of the palate and lower face. 1st metatarsus, absent distal phalanges of digits 2-4, an additional trans- verse phalanx forming an incomplete osseus bridge between digits 2-3 and P0356.Breakpoint analysis in a SOTOS Patient with a Consti- complete cutaneous syndactyly of digits 2-4 in the feet. We designed tutional Translocation t(3;6). primers suitable for cDNA amplification of the receptor tyrosine kinase K. Kok1, T. Draaijers1, H. H. Faber1, A. Y. van der Veen1, J. Bullerdiek2, C. gene ROR2 and analysed the coding region by SSCPof restriction-digest- T. R. Schrander-Stumpel3, C. H. C. Buys1 ed RT-PCR products. Fragments showing SSCP changes were directly 1University of Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands; 2University of Bre- sequenced in the affected individuals, which enabled us to find a het- men; Bremen, Germany; 3Maastricht University; Maastricht, The Nether- erozygous 1 bp delection (2249delG), which leads to a frameshift at lands Gly750 with an arginine/ proline-rich sequence of 23 novel amino acids k.kok@medgen.azg.nl before the first stop codon. Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) hybridiza- In 1964 Sotos et al described five children with large body size and early tion was used to confirm correct identification of the mutation, and showed accelerated growth, acromegaloid features, advanced bone age, and a that it arised de novo in the father as it was not present in either of his unaf- non-progressive neurological disorder with mental retardation. Since then fected parents. This report is the most severe hand phenotype associated many cases have been reported of what is now known as the SOTOS syn- with ROR2 mutation to date. drome or cerebral gigantism. Two case reports have suggested a possible involvement of the region 3p21; one describing a 6-year-old boy with clin- P0354.Alport syndrome and mental retardation; clinical and ical features consistent with SOTOS syndrome and showing a balanced genetic dissection of the contiguous gene deletion syndrome translocation t(3;6)(p21;p21), and one describing a nonsmoker female with in Xq22.3 (ATS-MR). Sotos syndrome who -at the age of 22- died of small cell lung cancer, a A. Renieri1, I. Meloni1, F. Vitelli1, B. R. Lowry2, O. Zuffardi3, M. Rocchi4, B. tumour characterized by deletions in 3p21. Aprecise determination of the Pober5 breakpoints of an EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line from the 1Medical Genetics; Siena, Italy; 2Dept Medical Genetics Albert Childrens patient carrying the balanced translocation was obtained by fluorescent in Hospital; Calgary, Canada; 3Biol genetics, Genetics Med; Pavia, Italy; 4Isti- situ hybridizations of YACs from the regions 3p21-3p25 and 6p21-p22, tuto di Genetica; Bari, Italy; 5Dept Genetics , Yale Univ Sch Medicine; New respectively. The chromosome 3 breakpoint appeared to be in band p22, Haven, CT United States and does not coincide with any of the regions of chromosome 3 suggest- renieri@unisi.it ed to be involved in tumour development. We established a PAC contig for X linked Alport syndrome (ATS) is a semi-dominant nephropathy due to each of the breakpoint regions. Both contigs appear to contain expressed point mutation or, less frequently, to intragenic deletion of the COL4A5 sequences. The precise position of these genes relative to the breakpoints, gene located in Xq22.3. We describe two families with ATS-MR contiguous in combination with expression studies in six SOTOS patient-derived cell gene deletion syndrome in Xq22.3 characterized by Alport syndrome and lines, may provide a first indication of a possible causative relationship with mental retardation. The first family has a complex phenotype previously the clinical features of the SOTOS syndrome in general. (K.kok@med- reported as AMME (Alport syndrome, midface hypoplasia, mental retarda- gen.azg.nl). tion and elliptocytosis) and a deletion extending about 2 Mb. The second family was identified in the literature using nephropathy and mental retar- P0357.PCR-detection of the Glutatione S-transferase M1 null dation as a query. This second family has a smaller deletion of about 1 Mb. genotype in patients with sepsis, septical shock and multiple Adetailed characterization of both deletions and a comparison with a third organ failure. large deletion causing only ATS identified the critical region for mental V. Viktorov, D. Mekhdiev, V. Timerbulatov retardation. Moreover detailed analysis of gene content has suggested Bashkir Medical University; Ufa, Russian Federation putative candidate genes for mental retardation as well as for additional tvict@imail.ru phenotypic features. The three carrier females belonging to the two fami- Polymorphism at the glutatione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) gene locus lies showed ATS features only, i.e. microhematuria, suggesting that addi- have attracted much interest because the homozygous GSTM1 deletion tional phenotypic features in affected males are X-linked recessive. How- (GSTM1 0/0) seems to modify the risk for severed types of diseases. The ever, X-inactivation in the carrier females is completely skewed, possibly frequency of GSTM1 null genotype in 89 healthy individuals was 0,51. For due to a selective mechanism. This peculiar finding opens the possibility search of association between variants of clinical current of a surgical that the mental retardation, cardiopathy or elliptocytosis, are caused by infection and GSTM1 polymorphism the study of frequencies of genotypes dominant mutations in one or more genes found in the ATS-MR critical at the patients with sepsis (N = 31), septical shock (N = 46) and multiple region. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the existence of a new con- organ failure (N = 20) was carried out. The frequencies of GSTM1 null tiguous gene syndrome in Xq22.3, which we propose to call ATS-MR which genotype in different groups varied from 37,76 % in septical patients to170 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 65,29 % in septical shock patients and 54,23 % in patients with multiple 3C syndrome is a rare MCA/MR syndrome considered as an autosomal organ failure. The data of this study demonstrate that observed differences recessive condition. It associates Dandy-Walker malformation, heart in distribution of GSTM1 allele frequencies between patients with multiple defects and characteristic craniofacial features but ocular problems such organ failure and healthy individuals was not significantly (p>0,05). But the as coloboma and glaucoma, are frequent. We report three foetuses from frequency of the null genotype for GSTM1 was higher in septical shock the same sibship, two 27 weeks monozygotic twins and a 14 weeks foe- patients as compare to septical patients and healthy individuals. Our tus, who had malformations consistent with 3C syndrome. They all had a results demonstrate that the possibility of development of septical shock is Dandy-Walker malformation. The twins had characteristic dysmorphic fea- increased for individuals with GSTM1 null genotype. tures and unilateral microphthalmia with posterior coloboma. The first twin had a very unusual atrial septal malformation and the third ftus had a pul- P0358. Microcephaly,encephalopathy and intracranial calcifi- monary valve anomaly. Chromosome analysis revealed a subtle balanced cation; is there an overlap between congenital intrauterine t(6;16) (p25.2;q23) translocation in the mother and showed that all three infection-like syndrome and Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome foetuses had inherited the derivative 6 chromosome and were monosom- G. M. H. Abdel-Salam1, A. Halasz2, A. E. Czeizel3 ic for the 6p25.2-6pter region and trisomic for the 16q23-16qter region. No 1Department of Human Genetics, National Research Center; Giza, Egypt; chromosome abnormalities have been reported so far in 3C syndrome. 2EEG Department, Heim Pal Childrens Hospital; Budapest, Hungary; However patients with terminal 6p deletion share many features with 3C 3Foundation for Community Control of Hereditary Diseases; Budapest, syndrome. They may have brain defects such as hydrocephaly, Dandy- Hungary Walker malformation or cerebellar hypoplasia, cardiac malformations, ghasala@hotmail.com mostly septal defects, and ocular abnormalities, including glaucoma and Microcephaly and intracranial calcification with repeated normal TORCH coloboma, consistent with the effects of FKHL7 haploinsufficiency. More- constitute the recognized diagnostic criteria of congenital intrauterine over, the BMP6 gene is located in the 6p25 region and two 3C syndrome infection-like syndrome (Mckusick 251290) and Aicardi-Goutires syn- patients had anomalies of the sternum ossification, a feature which is also drome (Mckusick 225750). It was reported that periventricular calcification present in the BMP6 knock-out mice. These observations suggest that 3C and abnormal EEG and / or seizures characterize the former while the later syndrome could be caused in some cases by subtle chromosomal anom- is characterized by calcification of the basal ganglia, dystonic movements alies resulting in monosomy for the 6p terminal region. and chronic low grade CSF pleocytosis. The delineation between the two syndromes is not clear because of the expanding phenotype spectrum and P0361.Phenotypic effects of a 47,XXX cell line in Ullrich-Turn- the intrafamilial variability of Aicardi-Goutires syndrome and the lack of er syndrome diagnostic test that could characterize the congenital intrauterine infection- V. P. Sybert like syndrome. Here, two Hungarian siblings with microcephaly, University of Washington; Seattle, WAUnited States encephalopathy, hypotonia, spastic tetraparesis generalized cerebral flk01@u.washington.edu demyelination and intracranial calcifications are described. The elder boy Phenotype-karyotype correlations in UTS are problematic; prognostic had basal ganglia calcification while his younger brother had scattered counseling may be difficult. Analysis of individuals with different X chromo- supratentorial calcification and presented with abnormal eye movements some complements is confounded by overt or covert mosaicism. Apropor- and dystonic movements, in addition. The repeated TORCH and CSF tion (3-4%) of females with Turner syndrome are mosaic for a 47,XXX cell examinations showed normal results. The presented cases are more with line, either 45,X/47,XXX or 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX. 47,XXX alone is associat- the diagnosis of Aicardi-Goutires syndrome, however, congenital ed with a decrement in intellectual function, normal stature and normal intrauterine infection like syndrome could not be excluded because of the ovarian function. The findings in 17/505 individuals in our UTS study clinic absence of the CSF pleocytosis and the clinical variability of the two cases. who are mosaic for a 47,XXX cell line, as well as 80 published case reports This report provides evidences that there is an overlap between the two are compared with those of 227 females in our clinic with 45,X alone. Short syndromes. Difficulties in making clear demarcation between the two syn- stature is less common (48% compared with 73% in the 45,X group). dromes as well as wider differential diagnosis will be discussed. Spontaneous menses (71% vs.10%) and fertility (40% vs. .05%) were much more likely in the mosaic women. A46,XX cell line did not increase P0359.Clinical And Genetic Heterogeneity In Frontometaphy- the likelihood of menarche/fertility, but did contribute to a greater likelihood seal Dysplasia; Severe Progressive Scoliosis In Two Families of normal stature compared with those with 45,X/47,XXX. Pregnancy out- . Morava1, T. Ills2, J. Weisenbach3, J. Krteszi1, G. Kosztolnyi1 come was poor; more than ? resulted in spontaneous loss. The risk for 1University of Pcs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child Develop- cardiac and renal malformations does not differ between the mosaic and ment; Pcs, Hungary; 2University of Pcs, Department of Orthopedics; 45,X groups. Congenital edema, found in 38% of 45,X individuals, Pcs, Hungary; 3University of Pcs, Department of Pediatrics; Pcs, Hun- occurred in none with a 47,XXX cell line, although nuchal webbing is gary equally prevalent in both. None of our 17 patients has intellectual dysfunc- emorava@yahoo.com tion, compared with 9% with 45,X. Although 21% of the women reported in Frontometaphyseal dysplasia is a rare genetic syndrome affecting the the literature are mentally retarded, selection bias was present; several skeletal system and connective tissue. It is believed to be inherited as an were detected in screening of institutions or for a family history of MR. X-linked recessive trait however, descriptions of moderately affected female carriers suggest genetic heterogeneity. Prominent supraorbital P0362. Pachygyria, hypertrichosis, micromelia, dysmorphic ridges, radiologic evidence of cranial hyperostosis and flared metaphyses features and hypoparathyroidism; a new syndrome? are characteristic. Scoliosis, a rare associated finding, is usually mild and L. Basel-Vanagaite1, N. Marcus1, G. Klinger1, M. Shohat2, O. Levit1, C. familial progressive scoliosis has not been reported yet. The skeletal dys- Legum1, L. Sirota1 plasia and the associated clinical findings show significant intra- and inter- 1Schneider Childrens Medical Center of Israel; Petah Tikva, Israel; 2Rabin familial variability and the syndrome has been suggested to be an allelic Medical Center; Petah Tikva, Israel variant of the Melnick Needles osteodysplasty, an X-linked (or autosomal) baseldov@netvision.net.il dominant entity. We present two families with frontometaphyseal dyspla- The term pachygyria covers a heterogenous group of brain malformations. sia, in which also females exhibited the facial and skeletal features of the We report two siblings with a previously undescribed pattern of malforma- disease in association with progressive scoliosis. Some of the affected tions, including pachygyria, seizures, hypertrichosis, dysmorphism, members also had hearing loss and urogenital anomalies supporting the micromelia, hypoparathyroidism, and early death. The proband is a one existence of the recently suggested entity oto-frontometaphyseal- month old girl born to healthy unrelated Jewish parents. Before birth, repet- osteodysplasty syndome. itive fetal mouth movements were noted, indicating intrauterine fetal seizures, and there was marked polyhydramnios. Head circumference at P0360.Is 3C (Cranio-Cerebello-Cardiac) syndrome caused by birth was normal. Soon after birth, she developed generalised convulsions monosomy 6pter ? Report of three affected foetuses with a and apnea. Physical examination revealed multiple dysmorphic features familial unbalanced translocation t(6;16) (p25.2;q23). including double eyebrows, hypertrichosis, short nose, anteverted ears, A. Toutain1, A. Guichet1, A. Dlzoide2, F. DHermies3, C. Paillet4, C. short neck, micromelia, left simian line, bilateral clasp thumbs, bilateral Moraine1 increased distance between the first and the second toes, edematous labia 1Genetics Department, University Hospital; Tours, France; 2Foetopatholo- majora, and 11 pairs of ribs. Neurological examination revealed absence of gy Unit, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital; Paris, France; 3Ophthalmology the primitive reflexes. Metabolic studies were normal. The chromosomes Department, Hotel-Dieu; Paris, France; 4Ultrasonography Department, were normal as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization using a commer- University Hospital; Tours, France cially available probe for the Miller-Dieker critical region at 17p13.3. MRI toutain@med.univ-tours.fr studies revealed pachygyria and mild hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis.Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 171 The familys first child had the same clinical picture and was weaned off the form of vertebral malsegmentation syndromes with reduced stature result- respirator at the age of six weeks. At the age of three months, she devel- ing from axial skeleton. The main features are short, immobile neck, short oped hypoparathyroidism. She died at the age of five months. CTrevealed thorax with the patognomonic crab-like rib cage associated with multiple pachygyria with hypoplastic corpus callosum. The inheritance in this fami- vertebral defects and ribs that flare in a fan-like pattern. The small size of ly could be consistent with an autosomal recessive pattern. We suggest the thorax in newborns frequently leads to respiratory problems and death that this combination of anomalies constitutes a unique syndrome. in infancy. Inheritance is autosomal recessive. Carefully prenatal ultra- sound examination during the second trimester should done for subse- P0363. Early diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome in infants quent pregnancies. Aclinically similar disorders is Spondylocostal dysos- with methylation-specific PCR tosis (SCD). The main features are abnormalities of vertebral segmenta- W. H. Tsai1, P. L. Kuo2, S. J. Lin2 tion and of the ribs, including multiple hemivertebrae, vertebral clefting and 1Chi Mei Foundation Hospital; Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China; 2Nation- fused, hypoplastic vertebrae, rib fusions and deletions with a non-progres- al Cheng Kung University Hospital; Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China sive kyphoscoliosis. Survival is much better and neural tube defects only briant@seed.net.tw rarely occur. Both recessive and dominant autosomal inheritance has been Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is characterized by infantile hypotonia, feed- reported. Recently, mutations in the recessive form were demonstrated in ing problems, obesity, small hands and feet, hypogonadism, and mental the DLL3 gene, mapped at 19q13. Segmental spinal dysgenesis is a rare retardation. Early diagnosis of PWS is important not only for the avoidance anomaly where there is dysgenesis or agenesis of one or more vertebrae of needless diagnostic procedures but also for the consideration of pre- usually at or near the thoraco-lumbar junction. We describe here four ventive and therapeutic options. However, the presenting features of PWS cases of multiple vertebral segmentation defects, two with the classical evolve with time and are usually subtle in infancy, making diagnosis diffi- features of JLS and two other with SCD, and a case with segmental spinal cult. In order to facilitate the diagnosis of PWS early in infancy, we specif- dysgenesis associated with tethered cord. Both young infants with JLS had ically analyzed the clinical presentation of patients who were diagnosed at respiratory problems with fan-like deformities of the rib and one of them less than 1 year of age. From May 1, 1999 to April 30, 2000, 71 cases of presented also a thoracic meningomyelocele and club foot deformity. The suspected PWS were collected. Methylation-specific PCR was performed other two with the SCD, both suffer from short neck and short trunk asso- to amplify the CpG island of the SNRPN gene. Two sets of PCR primers ciated with kyphoscoliosis without any significant respiratory restriction. All were used specifically for the methylated and unmethylated versions of the patients were sporadic and parental consanguinity were present only in SNRPN gene. Of the 10 infants suspected of PWS, 7 (70%) showed the one of them. We believe that appropriate classification of these similar 174 bp maternal-specific band only and proved to be PWS. The occur- phenotypes will improve molecular research and genetic counselling con- rence of the major consensus diagnostic criteria for PWS in the seven cerning recurrence risk, management, prognosis and prenatal diagnosis. infants were as follows; neonatal and infantile hypotonia, 7 patients (100%); feeding problems in infancy, 6 patients (86%); excessive weight P0366. Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome with parental gain, 0 patients (0%); characteristic facial features, no less than 3 items consanguinity present in 2 patients (29%); hypogonadism, 4 patients (57%); global devel- J. M. Colle, J. M. Cobben, F. Poppelaars, J. M. G. van Vugt, L. Wij- opmental delay, 3 patients (43%); hyperphagia, 0 patients (0%). The aver- naendts age score according to major diagnostic criteria was 3. We conclude that Vrije Universiteit Medical Centre; Amsterdam, The Netherlands in infants with obscure characteristic features of PWS, methylation-specif- jm.collee@azvu.nl ic PCR is a useful tool for the rapid screening of PWS. We report on a male fetus with the lethal multiple pterygium syndrome (LMPS). The parents of the fetus were first cousins. Clinical features were P0364.Clinical and genetic study of neurofibromatosis type 1 hydrops, a cystic hygroma colli, facial dysmorphism, cleft palate, pterygia, in Croatia muscle hypoplasia, joint contractures, lung hypoplasia, cardiac hypoplasia H. Kapitanovic1, S. Kapitanovic2, T. Cacev2, K. Pavelic2, Z. Sabol1 and malrotation of the gut. LMPS is rare and although its pathogenesis is 1Private Pediatric Clinic; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Divi- still unknown, the absence or important reduction of fetal movements and sion of Molecular Medicine; Zagreb, Croatia jugular lymphatic obstruction appear to play a major role in the develop- kapitan@rudjer.irb.hr ment of contractures, webbing and facial features. LMPS was originally Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is the most common autosomal dominant classified as an autosomal recessive trait. An excess of males in reported disorder of humans appearing in childhood. Features defining the disease cases with LMPS and families suggestive of X-linked inheritance have led are multiple cafe-au-lait spots, multiple neurofibromas and Lisch nodules, to the conclusion, that X-linked recessive inheritance cannot be excluded but other features such as short stature, intellectual handicap, central- in (isolated) male cases. Consanguinity between parents was reported nervous tumors and other malignant diseases are also found. The gene only once in the literature. Our case is to our knowledge the second report NF1 was mapped to 17q11.2 and has been found to contain the mutations describing a fetus with LMPS and consanguineous parents and the first in NF1 patients. The mutation rate in the NF1 gene is one of the highest report of consanguineous caucasian parents. This finding supports auto- known for human genes with approximately 50% of all NF1 patients pre- somal recessive inheritance of LMPS. senting as sporadic cases. Molecular analysis and genetic counseling is limited to the identification of the specific mutation in each patient or fami- P0367. Natural History Of Wolf-hirschhorn Syndrome; A ly or to the use of DNApolymorphisms and linkage analysis. We analyzed Study Of 50 Patients 46 families with neurofibromatosis type 1. NF1 was diagnosed clinically A. Battaglia1, J. C. Carey2, A. Meloni-Ehrig3 according to the NIH criteria. Apositive family history was found in 47.8% 1Stella Maris Research Institute; Calambrone (Pisa), Italy; 2Division of (22 of 46) and 52.2% (24 of 46) of affected patients were considered to be Medical Genetics- University of Utah; Salt Lake City, UT United States; the result of a new mutation. DNAwas obtained from peripheral blood of 3Cytogenetics Laboratory- University of Utah; Salt Lake City, UT United patients and related individuals. We used PCR-RFLPand VNTR analysis States for linkage and LOH analysis in the affected families and individuals. Twen- abattaglia@inpe.unipi.it ty-four families in the Croatia population with the de novo mutation were Accurate information on the natural history of a clinical condition is of para- studied using four intragenic markers. For VNTR analysis PCR products mount importance to professionals, the families and the patient. It is par- were separated on polyacrylamide gels or were analyzed by submerged ticularly so for WHS, for which still little data are available in the literature. gel electrophoresis. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the affected individual To help delineate more accurately the natural history of WHS and to obtain revealed a gross NF1 gene deletion in 3 (13.6%) families; in 2 (67%) of better information to answer parents questions in a clinical setting, we them, the deletion was maternally and in one (33%) paternally derived. wrote out an exaustive questionnaire dealing with all the possible clinical manifestations of the syndrome and with the psychosocial development. P0365.Spondylothoracic dysplasia (Jarcho-Levin syndrome) The questionnaires were sent to the families of children with WHS, through and Spondylocostal dysostosis, the confusing vertebral their national support groups in the USA and Italy, nationwide. Of 200 malsegmentation syndromes. Report of five cases questionnaires sent out to USAfamilies, 28 came back filled out; while of N. Elioglu1, H. Bilgen2, S. Yalin3, T. Biren4 the 35 questionnaires sent out to Italian families, 22 came back filled out. 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital; Istanbul, Overall there were data on 50 patients (34 females, 16 males). 15 of the Turkey; 2Dep. of Neonatology, Marmara University Hospital; Istanbul, patients had been followed up by us from 4 months to 17 years. 35 cases Turkey; 3Dep. of Orthopedics, Marmara University Hospital; Istanbul, were detected by standard cytogenetics, other 14 required FISH, while 1 Turkey; 4Dep. of Radiology, Marmara University Hospital; Istanbul, Turkey did not show a detectable molecular deletion within the WHSCR. Our nelcioglu@hotmail.com experience with natural history greatly expands literature reports; 48/50 Jarcho- Levin Syndrome (JLS, Spondylothoracic dysplasia) is the severest (96%) had a seizure disorder; 21/50 (42%) underwent gastrostomy; 26/50172 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology (52%) had heart lesions; 18/50 (36%) had oral facial clefts; 21/50 (42%) in both patients (0,03) and control group (0,02). The 10-repeated allele in had hearing defects, that were sensorineural in 5 (10%); 30/50 (60%) had the patients and control samples (0,38 and 0,40 accordingly) was almost skeletal anomalies; 27/50 (54%) had abnormal teething; 13/50 (26%) had equal. Thus, the results of analysis of VNTR in intron 2 of the hSERTshow genitourinary tract defects. Of note, only 32/50 (64%) had severe/profound that there is a 10/12 geterozygotes descent tendency in ODApatients com- developmental retardation; while retardation was moderate in 12/50 (24%), pare to the control group first of all on the account of the 12-repeat allele and mild in 6/50 (12%). This is different from the literature, where it is con- gomozygotes frequency rising. ventionally stated that severe mental deficiency is an hallmark of WHS. Moreover, 9/50 (18%) patients were able to walk with support (between P0370. Trisomy 16q24-qter only causes typical features of age 2 and 12 years), whereas 15/50 (30%) patients were able to walk partial trisomy 16q syndrome unassisted (between age 15 months and 7 years). 6/50 (12%) patients also B. R. B. Schulze1, N. Breitbach-Faller2, G. Tariverdian1, D. Hager1, A. achieved sphincter control (by day). 11/50 (22%) patients were helping Jauch1 with food, dressing and undressing themselves, and doing household 1Institute for Human Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Childrens Hospital, tasks. 7/50 (14%) patients became self-feeders between age 4 and 12 University of Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Germany years. The 34/50 (68%) patients receiving serial EEG studies showed fair- Birgit_schulze@med.uni-heidelberg.de ly distinctive abnormalities, usually outlasting seizures. Although difficult to Although trisomy 16q was supposed to be mainly responsible for prenatal control in early years, seizures tend to disappear with age. No apparent lethality, some liveborn patients with partial trisomy 16q of varying exten- correlation was found between size of deletion and phenotypic severity. All sion have been reported. The phenotype is characterized by facial dys- the patients have a characteristic facial appearance which is the most morphism, congenital heart defects, urogenital abnormalities, failure to important clinic diagnostic sign. Aslow, but constant progress in develop- thrive and early death. Houlston et al. (1994) suggested that duplication of ment was observed in all cases during the follow-up period. In conclusion, 16q22-qter is a critical region for the facial features seen in partial trisomy our combined cases represent considerable experience, providing new 16q syndrome comprising a high forehead, prominent metopic suture, information on several aspects of this important deletion syndrome. hypertelorism, down slanting palpebral fissures, small mandible, and ear anomalies. There is little information about phenotypic severity in patients P0368. Ablepharon macrostomia syndrome; possible local- with small distal trisomic segments. To our best knowledge only three ization to 4q? patients have been reported with trisomy of 16q24-qter, the most distal M. Zenker1, U. Trautmann2, V. Kalscheuer3, C. Kraus2, A. Rauch2, A. Reis2 segment in 16q. We present two brothers with partial trisomy 16q24-qter 1Univ.-Klinik fr Kinder und Jugendliche; Erlangen, Germany; 2Institut fr and partial monosomy 1q44-qter. The clinical phenotype varies but both Humangenetik; Erlangen, Germany; 3Max-Planck-Institut fr Molekulare patients exhibit facial features described in partial trisomy 16q syndrome. Genetik; Berlin, Germany Because of clinical findings resembling Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (facial martin.zenker@kinder.imed.uni-erlangen.de dysmorphism, small stature, hirsutism) in one of the two boys FISH inves- Ablepharon macrostomia syndrome (AMS; OMIM 200110) is a very rare tigation was performed. We used a probe corresponding to the 16p13.3 condition characterized by a distinctive pattern of facial anomalies, mal- region and a paint of 16q (reference). Therefor we happened to find the formed genitalia, webbed fingers, and cutaneous abnormalities. Only 8 cryptic translocation of 16q on 1qter. The boys phenotypes show similari- case reports exist in the literature including one sib pair. AMS is listed as ties with partial trisomy 16q syndrome and less distinct symptoms of mono- an autosomal recessive trait based on one report of apparent overlap somy 1q44-qter and will be discussed in detail. We suggest, that trisomy between AMS and cryptophthalmos syndrome. Avery recent report, how- 16q24-qter only may cause typical features of partial trisomy 16q syn- ever, suggested autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expression. drome. The gene locus is uncertain. We present a male newborn with typical fea- tures of AMS; severe deficiency of the anterior lamella of both eyelids and P0371.Laboratory Findings in a Male Patient with Suspected defect of lashes, fishlike mouth with shortened philtrum, malformed nose X-Fragile Syndrome; Discovery of Mosaicism of Normal and with hypoplastic alae and nares, hypoplastic, abnormal ears, dry, patchy Methylated FMR-1 Genes skin, webbed fingers, and hypospadia. Additional findings not previously P. Battaglia1, E. De Fanti1, R. Grimau-Merino2, L. Giardina2, R. Schiavon1 mentioned in AMS were; renal anomalies (unilateral hypoplasia and con- 1Laboratory of Clinical Pathology and Molecular Biology, Legnago Hospi- tralateral pyelectasia) and cerebellar hypoplasia. By the age of one year tal; Legnago (VR), Italy; 2Department of Pediatry, Legnago Hospital; Leg- developmental delay and microcephaly became evident. Karyotyping nago (VR), Italy revealed a de novo paracentric inversion in the long arm of chromosome de_fanti_emanuela@hotmail.com 4. Preliminary results of FISH analysis confirmed the inversion. Further A15 year-old man with severe mental retardation , autism, hyperactivity investigations are under way. Our observation strongly suggests a local- and language deficit, was suspected to have X-fragile syndrome. This ization of the AMS gene within one of the breakpoint regions on 4q which patient and his family members were screened for FMR-1 gene mutations are currently under molecular cytogenetic investigation. The spectrum of with PCR technique and Southern blot hybridization using a FMR-1 clinical features in AMS is extended to renal and cerebellar anomalies. probe(pFxa1NHE,ONCOR) . The PCR analysis failed to show any abnor- However, it cannot be excluded that more than a single gene is involved in mality of FMR-1 gene in all the subjects examined. The Southern Blot our patient. The presumable causal relationship between AMS and the 4q analysis revealed the unusual presence of two alleles in a male patient; a inversion in our patient argues in favor of a dominant new mutation rather normal allele (2.8 Kb) and a methylated allele corresponding to the normal than a recessively inherited defect. allele present in females. This methylated allele is 5.2 Kb in size due to the presence of a methylated site resistant to EagI restriction. We therefore P0369. Polymorphism of the serotonin transporter gene hypothesize that a mosaicism of FMR-1 normal/FMR-1 methylated gene (hSERT) in patients with opiate drug addiction. alleles may lead to the development of X-Fragile syndrome in this male A. Gareeva, A. Galeyeva, E. Khusnutdinova patient. Examination of family members demonstrated the presence of two Institute of Biochemistry of Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Academy of Sci- normal alleles in the probands mother and a mutated allele in his grand- ences; Ufa, Russian Federation mother .These findings may represent an atypical predisposition to FMR-1 ganna@anrb.ru methylation. Since the FMR-1 full mutated allele found in the grandmother Analysis of VNTR polymorphism in intron 2 of the hSERTwas analysed for was not transmitted to her daughter, the probands mother could inherited allelic association in 160 patients in the age between 13-40 years with the the normal X chromosome, followed by a de-novo methylation mutation of 2nd stage opiate drug addiction (ODA). The decreasing tendency (P=0,06) FMR-1 in the proband. The Southern-Blot hybridization analysis revealed of the geterozygotes was determined in patients compare to the control a FMR-1 mosaicism in the presence of a negative PCR study. It is there- group first of all on the account of increasing of the fraction of the long (12- fore mandatory to employ the hybridation technique in the setting of strong repeat) allele gomozygotes. The most frequent was genotype 12/12 (0,44), clinical suspicion of FRAXAalteration even when initial PCR screening is the second was geterozygotic genotype - 10/12 (0,34) among all ODA negative. patients. The opposite results were found in the control group; the geterozygotes 10/12 were in the prevalence (0,45), when 12/12 genotype P0372.Detection of subtelomeric rearrangements by FISH in frequency was much lower (0,35). 10/10, 9/10, 9/12 genotypes frequencies patients with idiopathic mental retardation or autism. were practically equal in the both groups (for patients; 0,21, 0,00, 0,01; for E. Ostergaard, J. M. Hahnemann, H. Hjalgrim, K. Nielsen, H. M. Nielsen, control; 0,17,0,01, 0,02 accordingly). In the hSERTgene allelic allocation K. Brondum-Nielsen frequencies, any veracious differences were not found. The 12-repeated John F. Kennedy Institute; Glostrup, Denmark allele in the patients and control samples (0,62 and 0,59 accordingly) was els@kennedy.dk the most common. The shortest 9-repeated allele frequency was very low The subtelomeric regions are often involved in chromosomal rearrange-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 173 ments. They are gene rich and therefore rearrangements in these regions slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, strabismus, beaked nose, are more likely to have phenotypic consequences than rearrangements in microretrognathia, high vaulted palate, dental malpositions, 5th finger clin- other regions. odactyly and sandle gap between toes I and II. The patient didnt meet the The 41 subtelomeric regions were screened for rearrangements with fluo- clinical criteria for Seckel syndrome and a new cytogenetic study showed rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using the Chromoprobe T-Kit (Cytocell, additional material on 22q. FISH analysis revealed a de novo 22q11.23- UK). q13.2 duplication. Phenocopy of Seckel syndrome could be due to 22q Two groups of patients, all with normal standard chromosome analysis, duplication and high quality cytogenetic work up is recommended. were investigated; One group consisted of 14 patients with autism, and with at least one other relative affected with autism. DNAanalysis for frag- P0375. Evidence For 621+1g>t Mutation In Croatian Popula- ile X was normal in all and no subtelomeric rearrangements were found. tion The other group consisted of 41 patients with idiopathic MR and dysmor- J. Knezevic1, A. Milic2, I. Bari?ic3, J. Pavelic2 phic features or a family history of MR. In this group five subtelomeric 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Division for molecular medicine; Zagreb, Croa- rearrangements were found; tia; 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Division for moleculare medicine; Zagreb, A1pter deletion, resulting in a well characterized del(1)(p36.3) syndrome, Croatia; 3Childrens Hospital Zagreb, Departement of Paediatrics; Zagreb, was found in a girl born 1999. She had MR, growth retardation, and dys- Croatia morphism. etna_doo@yahoo.com In a girl born 1986 a deletion of 4p was found. Using the FISH probe for ABSTRACT Since today more than 960 mutations and 200 polymor- Wolf syndrome confirmed del(4)(p16.3p16.3). The girl had MR, epilepsy, physms in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene microcephaly, and dysmorphism, consistent with Wolf syndrome. (CFTR) have been reported. In the population of cystic fibrosis patients A previously not described derivative chromosome 9, from Croatia, delF508 is the most common mutation (70%) followed by der(9)t(9;22)(q34.2q34.3;q13.2q13.3) was found in a girl born 1999. She G542X (5.4%), N1303K (3.6%), R117H (1.8%), 1717-1G>A (1.8%) and had MR, microcephaly, an atrial septum defect, and dysmorphism. Her R1162X (1.8%). In our regular diagnostic procedure we have recently father had a cryptic balanced reciprocal t(9;22) translocation. found, for the first time, the case of the 621+1G>Tsplice mutation, placed Arecently described polymorphism of 2q was found in two patients. in the intron 4. Its incidence is 0.5% for South European countries. Our In conclusion three out of 41 (7.3%) patients with idiopathic MR were found usual laboratory procedure for detection of 15, in Europe most common, to have subtelomeric rearrangements, in concordance with the prevalence CF mutations includes PCR reaction followed by either heteroduplex or (5-10%) in previous studies. restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. In a case of 621+1G>T mutation (RFLP, MseI restriction enzyme) mutated allele P0373. Toriello-Carey syndrome; further delineation and appeared as three bands sizes of 234, 142 and 54 bp. Considering that of report of three new cases 15 mutations, for which we usually test the samples, only 6 have been I. Barisic1, B. Peter2, E. Juretic2, L. Mikecin3 detected so far, the appearance of, in Croatian population novel, 1Childrens Hospital Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Clinical Hospital Centre, 621+1G>T, mutation confirms our strategy and the necessity for testing the Dpt. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology; Zagreb, Croatia; 3Childrens Hospital large number of mutations. Zagreb, Dpt. of Paediatrics; Zagreb, Croatia ibarisic@white.kdb.hr P0376.Scoliosis, blindness and arachnodactyly syndrome of Toriello-Carey is a rare mutliple malformation/ mental retardation syndrome a large consanguineous Turkish family characterised by dysmorphic features including telecanthus/hypertelorism, M. Dundar1, K. Erkilic2, Z. Candemir1 short palpebral fissures, small nose, malformed ears, and Pierre Robin 1Erciyes University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; sequence. Affected patients also show several midline field defects; agen- Kayseri, Turkey; 2Erciyes University Medical Faculty, Department of Oph- esis of the corpus callosum, laringeal anomalies, and congenital heart thalmology; Kayseri, Turkey defect. Brachydactyly, hypotonia and developmental delay were present in mdundar@hotmail.com most reported cases . The autosomal recessive inheritance was proposed, In this report we have described an affected sib in a large consanguineous but recently X-linked or sex influenced gene disorder was suspected. We Turkish family who appears to have a new distinct dominantly-inherited report on three patients, two of whom are sibs. Presented patients show blindness, scoliosis and arachnodactyly syndrome. The proband is a 16 clinical findings typical for this condition, but also some additional traits years old boy. The parents also had another 2 affected sibs with similar expanding further the phenotypic spectrum. Affected brother and sister had clinical features. The father also has blindness, thoracic scoliosis, and severe clinical presentation with death in early infancy. The third patient arachnodactyly. On admission, the proband was 153 cm height with 76 cm with milder phenotype also showed marked somatic and developmental upper segment and 156 cm length of two arms. There was arachnodacty- delay. Specific malformation pattern observed in present patients and in ly at both fingers and toes. Forth and fifth toes bilaterally were situated in the previously reported cases suggests an early midline developmental back position. He has been suffered from progressive vision lost and stra- filed disruption, presumably caused by a developmental regulatory gene bismus since his 8 years age. Clinical examination of the eyes showed mutation. hypermetropia and microcornea, bilateral lens luxation to the degenerated vitreous. There were atrophy of retinal elements and hypertrophy of retinal P0374.Duplication of proximal 22q (q11.2-q13.2) in a 13-year- pigment epithelium. In the family, all affected individuals have blindness old boy and scoliosis with variable degree as well as arachnodactyly. Biochemical M. Addor1, V. Froidevaux2, A. Gaide1, D. Schorderet1 analysis of all family members were normal. All skeletal survey was con- 1Department of Medical Genetics; 1011 Lausanne CHUV, Switzerland; sistent with the clinical findings. Urine analysis of the family for 2Paediatrician; 2300 La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland aminoaciduria and other routines were normal. Our recent review of the lit- Marie-Claude.Addor@chuv.hospvd.ch erature, the London Dysmorphology Database (Winter and Baraitser, Isolated duplication of the proximal portion of chromosome 22q is extreme- 1993) did not show up any other known syndrome equally or approximately ly rare. Adistinct phenotype has emerged for distal partial 22q trisomy or matching the blindness, scoliosis and arachnodactyly syndrome proposed distal 22q syndrome. However, as very few cases of proximal duplication by this report. 22q are reported, there is no real consensus on the phenotype correlated to this cytogenetic anomaly. We report a 13-year-old boy, referred with the P0377.Monozygotic Twins with the DiGeorge Syndrome clinical suspicion of Seckel syndrome. Pregnancy and delivery at 38 weeks V. Krutlkov1, M. Havlovicov1, E. Kocrek1, T. Klein2, P. Goetz1 of gestation were normal ; birth weight was 2550 g (10th centile), length 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 2nd School of Medicine, was 50 cm (50th centile) and OFC was 33 cm (<10th centile). At birth, our Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Centre of Pediatric Cardiol- patient presented hypotonia, respiratory distress, cardiac murmur (small ogy and Cardiac Surgery of the 2nd School of Medicine, Charles Universi- VSD), microretrognathia and epicanthal folds. Initial routine chromosome ty; Prague, Czech Republic analysis was reported as normal, as did cerebral and abdominal US. On vera.krutilkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz radiograph of the chest, the number of rib was normal. He sat at 14 The incidence of DiGeorge syndrome is estimated as 1;4000. Most cases months, crawled at 19 months and began walking at 2 ? years. Audiologi- are sporadic, only about 4-10% of all cases are familiar. We present a cal testing at 6 years was normal. At 13 years, he presented with a history familiar case of 22q11.2 microdeletion with fenotypic differences. We have of severe mental retardation, absence of speech and lack of daily living investigated monozygotic twins from the second pregnancy of 32 years old skills, hyperactivity, postnatal microcephaly (OFC 49.5 cm <3rd centile) mother. From the first pregnancy a girl was born and died at the age of 16 and short stature (142 cm, 3rd centile) and dysmorphism. The physical days due to congenital heart (conotruncal) defect. Afenotypical stigmati- findings included short and narrow forehead, low posterior hairline, down- sation and also anal atresia were present. Twin A- despite of her sister,174 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology stigmatisation for DiGeorge syndrome not so typical, heart anomaly ( sub- and weight was 80kg . There were scars in the hands and feet due to the arterial ventricular septal defect, FOA, a.lusoria dx.) and thymic hypopla- surgical operation performed in the past for the correction of polydactyly. sia. 22q11.2 mocrodeletion was also confirmed. Twin B- typical DiGeorge An ophtalmological examination revealed pigmentary retinopathy and sub- syndrome fenotype, conotruncal heart anomaly and 22q11.2 mikrodeletion capsular cataracts. Abdominal ultrasonography showed fetal lobulation in was confirmed. Mother of the babies had typical DiGeorge syndrome stig- the kidneys. Acomplete blood count showed pancytopenia; The leukocyte matisation and mental defect, 22q11.2 microdeletion was confirmed, too. count was 3300/mm3, the haemotocrite was %33.5, and the platelet count There is a suspect that the first child had the same finding. was 126000/mm3. Bone marrow biopsy revealed dysplastyc erythtroid cells. Further laboratory investigation in regard to the other causes of pan- P0378. Brachydactyly-Symphalangism-Deafness Syndrome - cytopenia (Anti-ds DNA, blood B12 and folate levels, hemosiderinuria) a Clinical-Genetic Study of 11 Cases gave negative results. In haemotological consultation it was recommend- M. Bembea1, S. Bembea2, O. Vancsik1, C. Jurca1, M. Barbu3, G. Samuila2 ed that the patient should be followed for a possible development of 1Clinical Children Hospital; ORADEA, Romania; 2Clinical Children Hospi- myelodysplastic syndrome. The clinical and laboratory features of this tal, ORL Department; Oradea, Romania; 3Clinical Children Hospital, patient are compatible with a diagnosis of Bardet-Biedl. However, to our Department of Radiology; Oradea, Romania knowledge, coexistance of pancytopenia associated with Bardet Biedl syn- bembea@yahoo.com drome has not been reported before. Introduction; Symphalangism-Brachydactyly S. (Multiple Synostoses with Brachydactyly; WL S.; Hermanns Deafness-Symphalangism; Facio- P0381. Chromosomal aberation in a boy with Noonan syn- Audio-Symphalangism S.; 186500, MIM) is a rare entity, and diverse drome names reflect the uncertainty in the definition of the syndrome. Objective; M. Havlovicova1, V. Krutlkov2, A. Puchmaierov2, D. Novotn2, E. Correlation of 11 personally examined cases with data obtained from Kocrek2, S. Kolou?kov3, D. Zemkov4 review. Material and method; Our clinical-genetic study comprises 11 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 2nd School of Medicine, cases examined in a family where the disease has been present for the Charles University Prague; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Institute of Biology last 5 generations. Results; The cases offer a complete and well defined and Medical Genetics; Prague, Czech Republic; 3Second Paediatric clinical picture of a rare syndrome that has as definitory elements; brachy- Department of the 2nd Medical Faculty Charles University; Prague, Czech dactyly + symphalangism + progressive deafness + autosomal dominant Republic; 4Second Pediatric Department of the 2nd Medical Faculty mode of inheritance. They are surprisingly similar in what the extension of Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic finger morpholesions is concerned, but different in what the onset age and marketa.havlovicova@lfmotol.cuni.cz the deafness degree are concerned. Conclusions; As the largest and most We present a case of a boy with small growth with the finding of chromo- complete series communicated, authors propose a definition of the syn- somal aberation. We have investigated 8,5 years old boy, which was ref- drome as Brachydactyly-Symphalangism-Deafness syndrome (BSD Syn- fered to our department by the endocrinologist with the suspection of Noo- drome), in order to avoid confusion. nan syndrome. Fenotype; height before 3rd percentile, disproporcional stature, stigmatisation typical for Noonan syndrome, delayed bone age. P0379.Abdominal lipomatosis in a patient with Proteus syn- The parents and the sister of the proband have also their height below 3rd drome. percentile, but their stature is proporcional, they all have normal fenotype. C. A. Kim, I. R. Assumpcao, Y. K. L. Koda, V. M. P. Simone, M. Valente, Cytogenetic investigation of the proband 46,XY, t(2;12)(q37;q24). The W. C. Andrade, L. M. Albano, D. R. Bertola same translocation was confirmed in the probands father. Agene for Noo- Instituto da Crianca; Sao Paulo, Brazil nan syndrome is located in the 12q22-qter region. The translocation is in chong@icr.hcnet.usp.br the critical region of the gene for Noonan syndrome. We assume, that the Proteus syndrome is a complex disorder with malformations and over- translocation may be the cause of a mutation in the gene for the Noonan growth of multiple tissues in a mosaic manner. Clinical findings are very syndrome. DNAanalysis of the critical region is further proceeding in col- variable and the presence of subcutaneous lipomas, lymphangiomas or laboration with the Institute of Medical Genetics University Hospital Dres- hemangiomas is common. However, abdominal lipomatosis is very rare. den (Dr. med. Bartsch). We report one black, 2 year-old girl with abdominal lipomatosis and isolat- ed macrodactily. She was born from unrelated parents, with normal birth- P0382.Particular Aspects Of Osteochondrodysplasias During weight and length, in good conditions. Since four months of age, she pre- Puberty sented failure to thrive with progressive abdominal protusion and severe C. Jurca, M. Bembea, R. Spineanu, M. Bembea, M. Barbu, I. Vancsik, M. mal nutrition. Macrodactily of the right middle finger and left preauricular Nevelits tag were noted. Plantar surfaces of the feet were normal. Mental develop- Clinical Children Hospital; Oradea, Romania ment was normal. Abdominal ultrasound and CTshowed large lipomatosis benchea@yahoo.com with displacement of the bowel to midline. Laparotomy at age 2y2mo Puberty is characterised by rapid growth of long bones, opened epiphyses, detected giant lipomatous mass involving greater omentum and meso- increased traction on muscles insertion sites. All these contribute to the colon.The large lipomatosis resected weighted 2950g and was constituted fact that, during this developmental stage, an increase in the incidence of by normal mature adipocytes. Abdominal, pelvic, and other visceral lipo- orthopaedic problems and of medical conduct is noticed. Osteochon- matosis were reported in Proteus and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, rais- drodysplasias are part of this context. The objective of this work is to iden- ing some diagnostic difficulties between them. As recurrent abdominal tify particular aspects of osteochondral dysplasias during puberty. In order lipomatosis is already reported after a surgical resection, a follow up is to achieve this purpose, we have been studying 40 cases of osteochon- required. drodysplasias, representing 1.45% of the 2749 cases of genetic diseases and congenital malformations in the evidence of the Genetics Department P0380. A Case Of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Associated With of the Clinical Hospital for Children, Oradea. The incidence is 2.84 in Pancytopenia 10000 new-borns. Osteochondrodysplasias represent 47% of the total K. Cefle1, S. Palanduz1, S. Ozturk1, M. A. Karan2, N. B. Erten2, B. A. number of children with growth retardation at the age of puberty. The study Esen2, A. B. Sozen3, N. Serakinci4, C. Tascioglu2 comprises cases of Achondroplasia, Cleido-cranial Dysplasia, Marfan Syn- 1Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of drome, McCune-Albright Fibrous Dysplasia, Mucopolysaccharidoses, Medical Genetics; Istanbul, Turkey; 2Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Multiple Exostoses Syndrome, Multiple Sym- of Internal Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine; Istanbul, phalangism, Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome. Diagnostic, evolutive, therapeu- Turkey; 3Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Internal Medicine; Istan- tic, psychological and socio-professional aspects were taken into account. bul, Turkey; 4Danish Cancer Society, Dept. Cytogenetics; Aarhus, Den- Conclusions refer to the necessity of a particular attention that osteochon- mark drodysplasias cases that reached the age of puberty need, in an interdis- ceflek@istanbul.edu.tr ciplinary manner, including the collaboration of paediatricians, Bardet-Biedl Syndrome is characterized with polydactyly, pigmentary orthopaedists, geneticians, medical recovery services, sociologists, psy- retinopathy, obesity, mental retardation, hypogenitalism and renal abnor- chologists and teachers. malities. Herein we describe a patient with the classical findings of Bardet- Biedl syndrome associated with pancytopenia.The patient, a 43-year old P0383. Three dimensional facial analysis using stereopho- woman, had been referred to our hospital due to pancytopenia. Her histo- togrammetry. ry included obesity beginning in early childhood, blindness, and polydacty- J. S. G. Bamforth, D. Shaner, O. Beattie, A. Peterson ly which had been corrected surgically. Physical examination revealed University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada truncal obesity and small, short hands and feet. Her height was 151 cm. jbamfort@ualberta.caPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 175 Diagnosis of a dysmorphic syndrome depends both upon the ability to detect any deletereous mutation in these subjects. Apreviously unidenti- recognise an abnormal appearing face and to match that face to a known fied silent polymorphism was observed at nucleotide position 291 in exon pattern of abnormalities. This requires recognition skills and a good visual 1(GCAto GCG) without changing the encoded alanine. Our data excludes memory, often augmented by visual catalogues. Less than half of the dys- that mutations in the coding region of HOXD13 are the cause of the tripha- morphic patients presenting to our clinic will receive a diagnosis We are langeal thumb-brachyectrodactyly syndrome. investigating the possibility of using three dimensional information to assist with diagnosis of dysmorphic features. Six cameras erected on a steel P0386.Involvement of CFTR gene in Male Infertility frame are calibrated using a surveyed calibration frame. Six overlapping J. Kusic1, D. Radojkovic1, A. Nikolic1, S. Niksic2, V. Maletic3, A. Savic1 images of each face are obtained so that 30 previously marked facial land- 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering; Belgrade, marks are visualised by at least two cameras. The x, y and z coordinates Yugoslavia; 2Institute of Mental Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 3Medical of each point can then be deduced by trigonometry. Images are translated School, Department of Urology; Belgrade, Yugoslavia to a common origin and rotated to a common plane (to ensure similar ori- qwert@eunet.yu entation). Measurements are expressed in units of standard deviations The majority of men with cystic fibrosis (CF) are infertile due to a bilateral form an age appropriate norm. Distances between the landmarks can be congenital absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD). However, clinically computed and compared. We have imaged 160 faces, including three two affected CF patients present a spectrum of genital phenotypes ranging generation families and patients with the dysmorphic syndromes. We from normal fertility to severely impaired speramogenesis and CBAVD. In found that variation between landmark positions is less between siblings in men with isolated CBAVD, with none of the clinical symptoms of CF, an the same family irrespective of sex when compared with children of the increased frequency of CFTR mutations was found. The present study was same age who were unrelated. Syndrome affected patients show less left- undertaken to test whether CFTR gene may be involved in male infertility right facial asymmetry compared to normal children. Patients with the caused by reduced sperm quality. We analyzed 21 infertile men, without same syndrome (unrelated) showed no statistically significant difference in symptoms of CF, for the presence of mutations and polymorphisms within landmark position compared to normal subjects, however, they show a 17 exons (and flanking sequences) of CFTR gene. One of 11 men with variation in distances similar to siblings. This suggests that the resem- infertility due to oligospermia or non-obstructive azoospermia and 5 of 10 blance between faces of patients with the same dysmorphic syndrome is men with obstructive azoospermia had at least one mutation in CFTR gene as close as the resemblance between siblings. We are exploring more - deltaF508 (one male with obstructive azoospermia was a compound het- sophisticated shape analysis using three dimensional analysis models and erozygote - deltaF508 / 711+3 A-G). Three men with obstructive azoosper- obtaining more images of children affected with the same syndrome. mia and 2 with oligospermia or non-obstructive azoospermia had 5Tallele in Tn polymorphic site on one chromosome. Haplotype analysis of P0384. Role of the Web-Internet and Birth Defects (BD) in (TG)m/Tn polymorphic loci reveald (TG)11/7Thaplotype as the most fre- Ukraine quent one in both groups of patients. Because the frequency of mutations L. Yevtushok1, I. Baryliak2, S. Lapchenko3, T. Vihovska3, W. Wertelecki4 in our sample of infertile males (16.7%) was significantly higher 1Ukrainian-American Birth Defects Center; Rivne, Ukraine; 2Birth Defects (P=0.00138) than the expected mutation frequency in general population Ukrainian Alliance; Kyiv, Ukraine; 3Ukrainian-US Birth Defects Center; (2%) it seems likely that CFTR gene is associated with infertility due to Lutsk, Ukraine; 4University of South Alabama; Mobile, ALUnited States reduced sperm quality in some cases. In the group of men with obstructive bdp@rivne.com azoospermia the frequency of mutations was higher compaired to the Aim; Introduce international standards for monitoring, diagnosis, treatment, group of men with oligospermia or non-obstructive azoospermia suggest- prevention, and coding of BD. Method; USAID funds provided for the cre- ing that involvement of CFTR gene is much stronger in aetiology of ation of BD Centers in two regions of Ukraine (Rivne and Volyn, both obstructive azoospermia than its participation in the process of spermto- impacted by the Chornobyl disaster). Both BD Centers were provided with genesis or sperm maturation. The results of this study are also relevant Web-Internet information resources. In January 2000, population-based with regard to genetic counseling of couples treated by artificial reproduc- BD Surveillance applying international standards began. Digital cameras tive technology - the high incidence of CFTR mutations in men with were provided to neonatologists to enhance BD ascertainment and to med- obstructive azoospermia implies that they bear an increased risk for CF off- ical geneticists to enhance clinical diagnosis, care, prevention, and coding. spring and molecular genetic analysis of the CFTR gene are indicated in Illustrated clinical histories are shared on an on-going basis with Ukrainian these couples. and international experts. Results; Tele-consultations and use of electron- ic information have attracted contributions by national and international P0387.The Role of Neonatologists in Birth Defects (BD) Mon- experts toward the care and prevention of BD in relatively remote areas of itoring in Ukraine Ukraine. BD Centers have attracted students, interns, neonatologists, T. Vihovska1, O. Shevchuk2, O. Sulima3, H. Vashchylin4, W. Wertelecki5, obstetricians, other clinicians, as well as parents and support groups seek- L. Yevtushok6 ing Web-Internet access to information resources. Conclusions; Imple- 1Ukrainian-US Birth Defects Center; Lutsk, Ukraine; 2Neonatology Nation- mentation of Web-Internet strategies in rural areas of Ukraine are key al Center; Rivne, Ukraine; 3Neonatology National Center; Kyiv, Ukraine; elements that upgrade BD diagnosis care and prevention. 4Lutsk Childrens Regional Polyclinic; Lutsk, Ukraine; 5University of South Alabama; Mobile, ALUnited States; 6Ukrainian-American Defects Center; P0385. Mutational Analysis Of The HOXD13 Gene In The Rivne, Ukraine Triphalangeal Thumb-brachyectrodactyly Syndrome bdp_lutsk@fk.lutsk.ua J. Zenteno, A. Perez-Cabrera, A. Jimenez, S. Kofman-Alfaro USAID funding prompted the creation of two BD Centers with BD Monitor- Genetics Department, Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina, ing in two regions in Ukraine impacted by the Chornobyl disaster. Scarcity UNAM; Mexico City, Mexico of Medical Geneticists prompted charging neonatologists with the task to cayguash@yahoo.com ascertain BDs while the geneticists categorize, manage, and formulate The triphalangeal thumb-brachyectrodactyly syndrome is a very uncom- prevention strategies. In January 2000, eighty neonatologists began BD mon autosomal dominant limb malformation in which polydactyly and population-based surveillance in Rivne and Volyn regions. Clinical data is triphalangeal thumb(duplication anomalies) coexist with ectrodactyly and illustrated by digital images. The BD focused activities by neonatologists syndactyly (absence malformations). To our knowledge, four familial and soon prompted provincial health authorities to expand the BD registry to two sporadic cases have been described and interestingly three of these include all neonates. In addition, the health authorities are sponsoring a families were of Mexican origin, reflecting a geographic distribution of the growing number of inter-disciplinary activities to further integrate obstet- disease. To date no molecular defects have been identified as the cause rics, perinatology, neonatology, pediatrics, pathology, and other disciplines of the disease. Induced disruption of the homeotic gene HOXD-13 gene in that impact pregnancy outcomes and the prevention of birth defects. Con- mice produce a malformative pattern characterized by reduction of the clusion; One key element of Ukrainian-US BD Centers and surveillance is legth of some bony elements, loss of phalanges, bone fusions and the the role played by neonatologists who have introduced medical genetics, presence of an extra element (duplication and absence anomalies). As this teratology, and BD prevention strategies to relatively remote areas of phenotype is strikingly similar to that seen in the triphalangeal thumb- Ukraine. brachyectrodactyly syndrome, we decided to carry out molecular analysis of the HOXD13 gene (located in 2q31) in three affected members of a Mex- ican family with the triphalangeal thumb-brachyectrodactyly malformation. We perform PCR amplification of the complete coding region of HOXD13 and automated sequence analysis of PCR products. After sequencing the two exons and the intron/exon boundaries of HOXD13 we were not able to176 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0388. Sibs with Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome- Clini- with the onset age. Considering the inter-generational behavior of the cal presentation and review of the literature mutation, Costa Rica shows no difference compared to the rest of the B. Lemcke, M. Herrmann, J. Horst, I. Kennerknecht world. MD is a disease of importance at the national level. Institute of Human Genetics; Mnster, Germany lemcke@uni-muenster.de P0391.ACase Of Autosomal Dominant Form Of Emery-Drei- Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome (DMC) is a rare genetic condition with fuss Muscular Dystrophy In Bashkortostan (Russia) short trunk dwarfism, skeletal dysplasia and in part of cases associated R. V. Magzhanov1, D. Hilton-Jones2, L. Akhmadeyeva1 with mental retardation. During pregnancy and at birth there are no gross 1Bashkirian State Medical University; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Oxford abnormalities. In infancy and by early adulthood the dysmorphic signs Neuromuscular Centre; Oxford, United Kingdom become evident. Diagnostic criteria are often hypoplasia of the odontoid medic@agidel.ru process, platyspondyly, lace-like appearance of the iliac crests, dysplastic We report a family with two girls, identical twins, living in Ufa (Bashkor- heads of the humeri and femora, subluxation of shoulder and hip joints, tostan, Russia). They were born from the first pregnancy in a young non- irregularities of carpal bones. Involvement of the limb bones is predomi- consanguineous married couple (both 22 years old). The girls developed nantly proximal. Clinically a waddling gait, disproportionate dwarfism, rhi- normally until 18 months when the parents noticed difficulties in walking zomelic shortening of limbs, prominent jaw, scoliosis, sternal prominence, and both twins started to complain of fatigue. From the age of 2 years they genua valga and clawing of fingers can be observed. Cytogenetic anom- were unable to run. The disorder is progressing slowly. Contractures of the alies were excluded. elbows were first noticed at the age of 4. The limbs deformities and a Here, we report on two families of German and Lebanese origin, respec- pathognomonic posture with flexion of the elbows, scapular winging, mild tively, with one son and one daughter both affected with DMC. All probands equinovarus deformities at the ankles, limitation of the neck flexion due to developed a disproportionate dwarfism, severe mental retardation and the contracture of the posterior cervical muscles and slight lumbar hyper- speech delay. The faces became a coarse expression. Severe scoliosis lordosis are seen in both twins. The girls have muscle weakness mainly of and genua valga occured. humeral and peroneal muscles, with pelvic girdle involvement and tendon After exclusion of keratan sulfaturia the differential diagnosis of areflexia; slight elevation of muscle enzymes (2.5 times for CK); and EMG mucopolysaccharidosis type IV (Morquio) could be rejected. In addition evidence of myopathy. They present with waddling gait, difficulty climbing restricted joint mobility and mental retardation of the probands is not com- stairs and in walking on toes and they cant walk on their heels. No facial patible with the Morquio condition. Aspondyloepiphyseal dysplasia is clin- weakness, calf hypertrophy, mental and cardiac disturbances were ically similar but could be dismissed by radiological examination. X-ray with noticed. We also observed slight difficulty in walking on her heels, limita- predominantly proximal dysplasia of epiphyses and metaphyses is typical tion of dorsiflexion of feet, and mild weakness of the limb girdle muscles in and especially lace-like appearance of the iliac crests is pathognomonic. the mother of these girls. This case is a presentation of a rare condition of Those patients with DMC and regular mental development are proposed autosomal dominant form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. The DNA by several authors to be classified as Smith-McCort dysplasia suggesting studies for a mutation of the lamin A/C gene (1q11-q23) are in progress. a heterogeneity of DMC. Pictures of the affected individuals and a litera- ture review are presented. P0392. Small Mutations and Polymorphisms in the Dys- trophin Coding Region in Japanese Patients with Duchenne P0389.Rare origin of MODY2 in 7/19 de novo translocation Muscular Dystrophy. N. Misovicova, J. Volna J. Kawamura1, T. Ishihara1, R. Kato1, S. Kato2 Martin Faculty Hospital; Martin, Slovakia 1National Higasisaitama Hospital; Hasuda, Japan; 2Microbiology, School of misovic@enelux.sk Medicine, Keio University; Tokyo, Japan MODYrepresents a specific form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes melli- kawamura@esaitama.hosp.go.jp tus. The disease is characterised by an early onset before the age of 25 Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe X-linked lethal myopathy years and by autosomal dominant inheritance. Its classification into 5 sub- with an incidence of approximately 1 in 3500 male births. The primary bio- types is based on gene mutation. Our patient is a young woman treated for chemical defect in DMD is dystrophin deficiency. The dystrophin gene, diabetes mellitus since her 15th year. She has no family history for dia- which spans approximately 2.4Mb of Xp, has a high mutation rate. About betes mellitus. The chromosomal analysis revealed an apparently bal- 60% of DMD patients has a deletion mutation and 10% has duplication anced translocation between 7p and 19q. The break on 7p15 is considered mutation. Remaining one third of patients with DMD have no gross to be the locus for glucokinase gene. The both parents have a normal kary- rearrangements in the dystrophin gene identifiable by Southern blot analy- otype. Mutations in the glucokinase gene cause diabetes in kindreds with sis or multiplex PCR. These Southern-negative cases presumably resulted MODY2. There are some hypotheses to explain why patient with appar- from small mutations that cannot be detected by current diagnostic screen- ently balanced translocation have abnormal phenotype; gene disruption, ing strategies. We sequenced dystrophin coding region for small mutations position effect, submicroscopic deletion. Each of them can cause the glu- in 50 Southern-negative DMD patients by using reverse transcription PCR cokinase deficiency. The molecular genetic analysis is carried out to con- and direct sequencing, and identified 40 nonsense mutations or small dele- firm the origin of MODY2 in our patient. tions/insertions and 3 one exon skippings, all of which were unique to sin- gle patients. There was no clustering of small mutations similar to the dele- P0390.Molecular Diagnosis Of Myotonic Dystrophy In Costa tion/ duplication distribution, and no characteristic phenotypes for small Rica. mutations were observed. As a consequence of detecting small mutations F. Morales1, P. Cuenca2, R. Brian3, M. Sittenfeld4, G. del Valle4, D. Mon- in the coding region of dystrophin in 86% of DMD patients without dele- ckton5, K. Johnson5 tions/duplications, we believe that reverse transcription-nested PCR and 1University of Costa Rica; San Jose, Costa Rica; 2Universidad de Costa direct sequencing is effective to screen for small mutations in dystrophin Rica; San Jose, Costa Rica; 3Hospital Nacional de Nios; San Jose, Costa gene. Rica; 4Hospital san juan de Dios; San Jose, Costa Rica; 5University of Glasgow; Glasgow, United Kingdom P0393.Singular And Syndromatic Anorectal Malformations famorale@cariari.ucr.ac.cr C. Skrypnyk1, O. Vancsik1, M. Bembea1, D. Baloiu2, I. Vancsik3, M. M. Myotonic dystrophy (MD) is the most common type of muscular dystrophy Bembea1 in adults. Its inheritance is complex since the genetic defect causing it is a 1Clinical Children Hospital; Oradea, Romania; 2Clinical Children Hospital, unstable mutation due to the expansion of the triplet CTG at the DMPK Surgery Department; Oradea, Romania; 3Clinical County Hospital; gene on chromosome 19. The objective of this work was to achieve molec- Oradea, Romania ular diagnosis of the disease in order to improve the clinical management cristinaskrypnyk@usa.net and the genetic counseling offered to patients and their families. Two tech- Introduction; Anorectal malformations include stenosis, atresia and ecta- nical diagnostic procedures were used, Southern blot (using the p5B1.4 sia. They occur with a frequency of approximate 1;5000 newborns. They probe after DNAdigestion with EcoRI and BgII enzymes) and PCR. Fifty occur isolated or associated in different syndromes. At least 35 dysmorphic families have been localized dispersed in the whole country, 84 of their syndromes that associate ano-rectal malformations have already been members have been studied at the molecular level, obtaining the following described. Etiology may be genetic (mendelian or chromosomal) or non- results; 21 asyntomatic individuals without the mutation, four asyntomatic genetic. Study group and methods; The 11 cases of anorectal malforma- members carriers of the mutation, among the syntomatic ones, 30 have the tions that were admitted to the Clinical Children Hospital of Oradea during mutation and the others 29 belong a patients and relatives with DM-like the last 20 years (1980-1999) have been studied clinically, in a retrospec- symptons and do not have the mutation. The size of the mutation is posi- tive manner. Results; The frequency of anorectal malformations for Bihor tively correlated with severity of the symptoms and is negatively correlated county is estimated at 1;10000 new-borns. 60% of them were isolatedPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 177 anomalies, whereas 40% of them were associated in syndromes or by tions are usually absent in MFD. The typical facial features of MFD are also chance. A rare case of Townes-Brocks syndrome that associates anal present in patients with holoprosencephaly sequence (HPE-S). This clini- imperforation, polydactyly and polyotia is discussed in detail. Particular cal overlap can be explained by similar embryological origin of MFD and genetical and clinical characteristics of these anomalies are also dis- HPE-S. We report on two male patients with bilateral cleft lip and palate cussed. Conclusions; The relatively rare anorectal malformations give rise showing the facial findings of MFD or HPE-S. Additional congenital malfor- to particular problems of genetical and clinical diagnosis and of genetic mations were anal atresia in one and severe cardiac defect in the other counselling. patient. Both patients showed single maxillary incisors but the diagnosis of holoprosencephaly was excluded by brain MRI. Although uncommon brain P0394.Case report; inverted triplication of distal 3q with fea- anomalies were detected consisting of multiple white matter lesions in the tures of Brachmann de Lange syndrome and other anomalies. one and unusual enlargement and tortuosity of intracerebral blood vessels K. unap1, T. Ilus1, O. Bartsch2 in both patients. Further vascular anomalies were multiple teleangiectasias 1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics; Tartu, Estonia; 2Depart- seen in the integument in both patients. In addition to facial anomalies, the ment of Clinical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Technical University; Dresden, patients also had psychiatric problems typically seen in velo-cardio-facial Germany syndrome (VCFS). Fluorescence in-situ hybridization analysis confirmed a Katrin.Ounap@mail.ee 22q11.2 microdeletion in both. Intrachromosomal triplications producing partial tetrasomies are rare. At least 13 patients have been reported so far. Most cases involved chromo- P0397.Ring chromosomes 17 and 18 cases report. some 15q, but triplications of 2q, 5p, 7p and 13q have also been described. S. Amelina1, E. Timoljanova2, G. Gurevich1, G. Baibikova3, M. Lukashe- We report here the first case of an inverted triplication of 3q. The proposi- vich4, S. Kriger5 ta was born at term, birth weight 3175 g, length 45 cm. Clinical examina- 1Research Institute of Obstetrics and Pediatrics; Rostov-on-Don, Russian tion on her 1st day of life showed disproportionate short stature with short Federation; 2Research Institute of Obstetrics and Pediarics; Rostov-on- limbs, generalized hirsutism, peculiar face, synophrys, small upturned Don, Russian Federation; 3Research Institute of Obstetric and Pediatrics; nose, micrognathia, low set malformed ears, short and webbed neck, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation; 4State Medical University; Rostov- postaxial polydactyly of left hand, and omphalocele. Additional findings on-Don, Russian Federation; 5Research Institute of Obstetics and Pedi- included hydrocephalus, Dandy-Walker malformation, spina bifida, cardiac atrics; Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation anomaly (ventricular septal defect), and multiple renal cysts. Standard S.Amelina@rniiap.ru chromosome analysis from peripheral blood lymphocytes showed cytoge- Structural aberrations of separate chromosomes led to a wide range of netic mosaicism with an abnormal chromosome 3 (45%) and normal cells clinical effects in a man. The changes of phenotype of this pathology can (55%). The abnormal chromosome 3q was initially interpreted as a dupli- be characterized with multiple malformations in one cases and insignificant cation of 3q21-q29, but fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed deflection in physical, somatic and sexual development in the others. an inverted triplication of distal 3q / karyotype 46,XX,trip(3)(q25.3q29)[27] Approximately 2,6% of all the cases of aberrations of somatic chromo- /46,XX [32]. Parental karyotypes were normal. Partial duplications of chro- somes in live birth children compose ring chromosomes. The discription of mosome 3q have been reported previously. Interestingly, a form of the 2 children with ring chromosomes from unrelated families are presented Brachmann de Lange syndrome has been described with duplications here. Proband 1. The boy of 12 years old with border-line intellectual insuf- including the 3q26.3-q27 region in several cases. Our patient demon- ficiency has suffered with the loss of consciousness from 6 years old. He strates similar facial features and malformations and a triplication of had multiple pigmentari spots of uncertain diameter placed diffusively on 3q25.3-q29 (mosaicism). Reddy and Logan (2000) recently concluded that the skin surface. Besides, the child had short stature, stretching face, mon- triplications can be mistaken for duplications and therefore, in assessing goloid palpebral fissures and spinal hypertrichosis. Karyotype is duplications, recommended confirmation by FISH. Our case supports their 46,XY,r(17)(p12q22) Parents karyotypes are normal. Proband 2. The boy suggestion. of 14 months old was observed in connection with two-sided cryp- torchidism. Psychophysical development of this child corresponds to his P0395. Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy In Clinical Children age. During examination acrocephaly, synophrys, depressed nasal bridge, Hospital Oradea, Romania, In 20 Years epicantic folds, prominent mandible were discovered. Karyotype is 46,XY, M. Praja, M. Bembea, R. Spineanu, L. Ritli, A. Benedek, G. Miculschi, C. r(18)(p11q22). Parents karyotypes are normal. Unlike previously Cladovan, S. Cheregi described cases cryptorchidism proved to be the only manifistation of Clinical Children Hospital; Oradea, Romania these chromosome aberrations. pongo@texnet.ro In any patient who presents with muscle wasting and weakness for no P0398.Nephronophthisis and ulcerative colitis in siblings - a apparent cause and in whom there is no involvement of the central or new association peripheral nervous system, the possibility of muscular dystrophy should be S. Ala-Mello1, H. K riinen2, O. Koskimies3 entertained. The Clinical Children Hospital Oradea serves the population 1University of Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; 2The Family Federation of Fin- of Bihor county. Our study covers a period of 20 years (1977-1997). In this land; Helsinki, Finland; 3Hospital for Children and Adolescents; Helsinki, period we recorded nine clinical observations of Duchenne muscular dys- Finland trophy, which represent an incidence of 1;9700 live born male. Annual dis- sirpa.ala-mello@helsinki.fi tribution of the incidence is unequal and there are no geographical partic- Nephronophthisis (NPH) is a chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis leading to ularities. However, the study revealed two affected brothers descendent terminal renal insufficiency. The main symptoms are polydipsia and from parents living in a special social and cultural environment resembling polyuria, caused by decreased urinary concentrating ability, and anemia. a genetic isolate. Among the clinical manifestations, cardiomyopathy was The disease is heterogeneous, but usually the inheritance pattern is auto- a constant feature in four cases which evolved with progressive and severe somal recessive. In 80% of cases, the disease is caused by a homozygous intractable congestive heart failure to death. The two brothers died at 10 deletion in NPHP1 gene in chromosome 2q13. Tapetoretinal regeneration, and 13 years respectively, the interval between the two deaths being two congenital hepatic fibrosis, neurologic findings and skeletal changes may months. It was obvious that the fatal outcome of the brother had a profound occur as extrarenal manifestations with NPH. Ulcerative colitis is an inflam- emotional influence on the other child who had previous psychological matory bowel disease with chronic diarrhea, rectal bleeding and charac- depression which accompanies the disease. teristic histological findings. Its etiology is suggested to be multifactorial, consisting of genetic susceptibility and unknown exogenous factors. We P0396. Misclassification Risk of Patients with Bilateral Cleft present two siblings with NPH and ulcerative colitis and describe their clin- Lip and Palate and Features of Median Facial Dysplasia  A ical features and laboratory findings. New Variant of Del(22q11.2) Syndrome? A. Stellzig1, G. Komposch1, G. Tariverdian2, B. R. B. Schulze2 P0399.AROR2 mutation in a family with Brachydactyly Type 1University of Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Institute for Human B in the hands and normal feet Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany C. Bacchelli, F. R. Goodman, L. C. Wilson, P. J. Scambler Angelika_Stellzig@med.uni-heidelberg.de Institute of Child Health; London, United Kingdom The generic term median facial dysplasia (MFD) describes a subgroup of C.Bacchelli@ich.ucl.ac.uk patients with cleft lip and palate exhibiting characteristic craniofacial Brachydactyly Type B is a dominantly-inherited limb malformation charac- defects; (1) short prolabium, (2) absence of frenulum labii, (3) hypoplasia terised by short 2nd to 5th fingers and toes with hypoplastic or absent of premaxilla, (4) single upper central and lateral incisors of the cleft side, nails, small or absent distal phalanges, small middle phalanges and vari- and (5) deficient septal cartilage and nasal spine. Gross brain malforma- able symphalangism. Broad thumbs with bifid distal phalanges and central178 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology syndactyly may also occur. In 10 affected families, mutations have recent- P0402.Investigation of the relation between gene expression ly been identified in ROR2, a gene encoding an orphan receptor tyrosine and genetic variants of FGF2 in patients with coronary artery kinase essential for normal chondrocyte differentiation. These probably disease (CAD) exert a specific gain-of-function effect (ROR2 loss-of-function mutations P. Greiser1, U. Schagdarsurengin1, S. Schulz1, U. Mller-Werdan2, C. cause Robinow syndrome when homozygous, but no phenotype when het- Schnrer2, T. S 1, D. Rehfeld1, A. Nordwig2, L. Weidhase2, K. Werdan2, erozygous). We have reviewed a 6-generation Welsh family with limb C. Glser1 abnormalities first described by Schott in 1978 as a novel form of heredi- 1Inst. of Human Genetics & Med. Biology, University Halle; Halle, Ger- tary brachydactyly with nail dysplasia. Affected individuals have typical many; 2Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Halle; Halle, Germany moderately severe Brachydactyly Type B in their hands, with variable christiane.glser@medizin.uni-halle.de involvement of the 2nd to 5th fingers, but no thumb abnormalities or syn- FGF2 is regarded as a specific promoter for proliferation and differentiation dactyly. Their feet, however, are completely normal both clinically and radi- of endothelial and smooth muscle cells and as an important risk factor of ologically. Sequencing of the entire coding region of ROR2in the proband the atherosclerosis. We determined the FGF2 mRNA-expression in human revealed a 2247G to Atransition, predicted to convert Trp749 to a stop native monocytes, a cell system srongly involved in the fundamental ath- codon, thereby truncating the protein after its intracellular tyrosine kinase erosclerotic processes at the vessel wall, and screened for mutations. 416 domain. Four similar mutations, including a nonsense mutation in the same patients with angiographically proven severe CAD were included (83% codon, have previously been reported to cause a severe amputation-like male, mean 50.34y). All patients had associated risk factors like hyperten- phenotype in the hands and typical abnormalities in the feet. Our findings sion (47%), diabetes mellitus (22.7%), smokers (77%), cholesterol (5.8 extend the range of phenotypes resulting from ROR2mutations to include mmol/l). The gene expression was determined by use of a competitive RT- involvement of the hands alone, and suggest that the effects of individual PCR. The mutation screening was carried out by SSCPand sequencing mutations may be significantly modified by genetic background. analysis. We identified four genomic variants, all situated in exon 1, the C+242T polymorphism and the mutations C250T, G+19A, G+97C. To P0400.The first case of FRAXE mental retardation in Croatia reveal the possible effect of the polymorphic genetic variant C242Twe cal- S. Hecimovic1, R. Bago1, D. Muzinic2, D. Begovic2, K. Pavelic1 culated the mRNAfolding structure (mfold version 2.3, Zucker and Turner) 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Clinical Hospital Rebro; and found a new loop in the region of the functional important first start Zagreb, Croatia codon, suggesting a direct influence on functional properties. In accor- shecimov@rudjer.irb.hr dance with the importance of FGF2 for the atherosclerosis development FRAXE mental retardation (Xq28) is rare condition that is caused by we found significant differences dependent on the coronary risk; we iden- expansion of the CGG repeat region in the FMR2 gene. Its much more fre- tified significantly less mutation carries in the high risk patient subgroup quent form is known as FRAXAfragile X syndrome (Xq27.3). FRAXE men- who suffered from CAD before 45y (0.091 vs. 0.186, p<0.05) suggesting a tal retardation is characterized with very mild mental handicap and more protective influence of this genetic constellation. Our functional studies of atypical clinical picture compared to FRAXA. We report the first FRAXE the FGF2 gene product supported this thesis; mutation carriers had a pro- family diagnosed in Croatia. Apregnant woman (age 26, 16 weeks of ges- tective significantly decreased gene expression compared with the wild tation) was genetically counseled since one of her two brothers attended a type carriers (0.45ag/U vs. 1.054ag/U, p<0.04). special school for children with learning difficulties. DNA analysis of FRAXAand FRAXE form of the fragile X syndrome showed that she is a P0403. Cardiac evaluation of 25 Brazilian patients with full mutation carrier of FRAXE mental retardation. Close clinical examina- Friedreichs ataxia. tion detected no phenotype characteristics associated with FRAXE full L. M. J. Albano1, R. L. Moyses2, J. Wagenfuhr2, S. A. D. Nishioka3, D. R. mutation. The couple decided to perform prenatal diagnosis after 18 weeks Bertola1, S. M. M. Sugayama1, C. A. Kim1 of gestation. The sex of the fetus was determined to be male. DNAanaly- 1Genetics, Instituto da Crianca; Sao Paulo, Brazil; 2Cardiology, Instituto da sis of primary culture of amniotic fluid detected mosaicism of full mutated Crianca; Sao Paulo, Brazil; 3INCOR, Instituto de Cardiologia; Sao Paulo, and normal alleles for FRAXE locus. Linkage analysis of DXS548 and Brazil DXS1691 markers also showed that the fetus has inherited the same allele chong@icr.hcnet.usp.br as its FRAXE affected uncle. After genetic counseling the couple decided Friedreichs ataxia (FA), a neurodegenerative disorder, is the most frequent to retain the pregnancy. Our molecular and clinical data show that FRAXE form of hereditary ataxia with a prevalence of 1;50,000. We reported car- mental retardation is phenotypically very nonspecific and mild, and that diac aspects of 25 Brazilian patients with clinical diagnosis of FArelated to every woman with any mentally retarded family member should be the frequency and size of expanded GAA repeats. The cardiac study analysed for FRAXAand FRAXE loci of the fragile X syndrome. included physical examination with electrocardiogram and echocardiogram of all patients. Molecular analysis to detect (GAA)n repeat length was per- P0401. Facio-oculo-acustico-renal syndrome (FOAR) and formed by PCR, according to Filla et al. (1996). Homozygous GAAexpan- diaphragmatic hernia in a consanguineous family sion repeats were detected in 17 cases (68%) - all typical cases. In 8 V. Klamroth, M. Herrmann, I. Kennerknecht, J. Horst patients (32%) (6 atypical and 2 typical), none expansion was observed, Institut fr Humangenetik,Westflische Wilhelms-Universitt; Mnster, therefore they were not FA. All patients with GAAexpansion (100%) pre- Germany sented electrocardiogram abnormalities, but only 25% without GAA klamroth@uni-muenster.de expansion showed it. The main electrocardiogram abnormality was related The first patients with facio-oculo-acustico-renal syndrome (FOAR-syn- to ventricular repolarization (50%). Only 6% of patients referred cardiac drome, MIM 227290) were described in 1971 and showed facial anomalies signals and/or symptoms. The molecular analysis is essential to confirm with broad forehead, hypertelorism with telecanthus, short nose, severe the diagnosis of FA, however, a complete clinical and cardiac evaluation, myopia, hearing loss and proteinuria. In 1993 a diaphragmatic hernia, specially an electrocardiogram, may help us to better select the cases that exomphalos, absent corpus callosum, hypertelorism, myopia and sen- should perform these tests. sorineural deafness syndrome (MIM 222448) was published which showed striking facial similarities with FOAR syndrome. Devriendt et al. (J P0404. Genetically Determined Reproductive System Disor- Med Genet 1998,35;70f) described a male infant combining features of ders (RSD) both syndromes further suggesting that these are variations of the same J. Kristesashvili, N. Kopaliani, N. Shervashidze, N. Aladashvili autosomal recessive disorder. We report on a 2-years-old girl with the typ- Zhordania Institute of Human Reproduction; Tbilisi, Georgia ical facial appearance, severe myopia and sensorineural hearing loss of aladn@access.sanet.ge FOAR syndrome. She is the second child of a second degree cousin mar- 157 patients (ages ranging from 5 to 42 years) with different forms of RSD riage. In the first pregnancy a diaphragmatic hernia was diagnosed by were analyzed (9-intersexes; 89-phenotypically men with hypogonadism, ultrasound scan. The girl was stillborn and showed prominent front, hyper- spermatogenesis disorders and infertility; 59-phenotypicallly female with telorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge and short nose. hypogonadism, amenorrhea, delay of physical and sexual development. Based on our observations and on a review of the literature we postulate Clinical, genealogical, genetic, hormonal, ultrasound and other investiga- that the syndrome of diaphragmatic hernia, exomphalos, absent corpus tions were carried out. Standard methods were used for peripheral blood callosum, hypertelorism, myopia and sensorineural deafness and the lymphocyte cultures. G, C, and Q banding were applied for analysis. facio-oculo-acustico-renal syndrome are variable expressions of the same Results; Out of 9 intersexual patient abnormal karyotypes were found in 2 autosomal recessive syndrome. cases; 47,XXYand 46,XY/47,XXY; In one patient, a heterochromatic poly- morphism was detected; 46,XY,15p+ From 69 infertile men with azoosper- mia, abnormal karyotypes were detected in 22 patients; 47,XXY( 5 cases), 46 ,XY/47XXY (16 cases), 46,X del (Yq)(q2.21-qter)- (1 case). From 12Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 179 men with severe oligozoospermia and/or teratozoospermia, abnormal of genetic material while recombination of the chromosomes during meio- chromosomal complements were detected in 4 patients; 47,XYY(1 case), sis. 46, XY,inv(9)(q12q22)-(1 case); 45,XY,t(13;14) (q11;q11) - (1 case), 46,XX (1 case). From 8 male patients with hypogonadism and /or hypospadias, P0407. State of the art of etiological evaluation of mental gynecomastia, chromosome aberrations were detected in 5 cases; 47,XXY retardation in the Netherlands; the Maastricht experience. -( 1 case); 46,XY/47, XXY (1 case); 46,XX (2 cases) 46,XY/47,XYY (1 U. Moog1, E. E. J. Smeets1, L. M. G. Curfs1, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1, case). From 59 phenotypically female patients, 5 patients revealed andro- C. T. R. Schrander-Stumpel1, J. P. Fryns2 gen insensivity - 46,XYone familial case; 23 cases of Ullrich-Turner syn- 1Maastricht University; Maastricht, The Netherlands; 2University Hospital drome; 45,X (6 cases), 45,X/46,XX (10 cases), 46,X i(Xq) (4 cases), Gasthuisberg; Leuven, Belgium 45,X/46,Xi(Xq), (2 cases), 45,X/46,X r(X) (1 case ). 31 from 59 female ute.moog@gen.unimaas.nl patients with amenorrhea and hypogonadism revealed the karyotypes; In the Netherlands, the total number of people with mental retardation (MR) 45,X/46,XX (18 cases), 46,XY(2 cases) pure gonadal dysgenesis,46,XX - is estimated to be 120.000. About 45.000 of them live in institutions or in (11 cases.) Molecular-cytogenetic investigations were performed in 3 small group homes (partially) integrated into normal neighbourhoods, and cases to improve the reliability of the cytogenetic analysis(Institut fuer 75.000 live with their families or on their own. Knowledge of the etiology of Medizinische Genetik der Universitaet Zurich,Zuerich, Switzerland by MR is known to have advantages with regard to prognostic, therapeutic U.Wiedemann and A.Baumer) The investigations revealed the high inci- and reproductive counseling. The etiological work-up of MR forms a cen- dence of genetic causes in patients with RSD. tral part of the work of the 8 Dutch clinical genetics centers and is realized on request of the family and/or general practitioner, or as part of standard- P0405. Osteopathia Striata with Cranial Sclerosis (OS-CS); ized evaluation offered to the institutions. We present our approach to the Multiple Malformations in a Male of an Affected Mother evaluation of MR which follows an extensive protocol including pre- and H. Rott1, P. Krieg2, H. Rschke2, A. Reis1 postnatal history, physical examination focussing on dysmorphism and the 1Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany; 2St. Annastiftskranken- behavioural phenotype, laboratory testing and discussion in a multidiscipli- haus, Pediatric Dept.; Ludwigshafen, Germany nary expert team. The procedure and results are exemplified by present- hdrott@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de ing data of one of the institutions in South Netherland. We report on a family in which mother and two daughters were affected with Osteopathia Striata with Cranial Sclerosis (OS-CS). All patients P0408. An amino acid substitution in the HOXD13 home- showed striated bones and cranial sclerosis. One of the daughters gave odomain causes a novel brachydactyly-polydactyly syn- birth to a male with a dysmorphic syndrome with multiple malformations drome including severe cranial sclerosis with frontal bossing, cleft palate, thoracic F. R. Goodman1, C. Bacchelli1, C. M. E. McKeown2, P. J. Scambler1 dysplasia, skeletal malformations including bilateral syndactyly of 3. and 4. 1Institute of Child Health; London, United Kingdom; 2Birmingham Womens fingers, bilateral polydactyly of the distal phalanx of both 2. fingers, bilater- Hospital; Birmingham, United Kingdom al fibular aplasia, and anal atresia. There were, however, no bony stria- fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk tions. Karyotype was normal. Linkage analysis with X-chromosomal poly- Mutations in HOXD13are known to cause synpolydactyly but have not pre- morphic markers is in progress. This is the 13. observation of a severely viously been identified in any other congenital limb malformation. Here we affected male from women with OS-CS. These sons suffered from a char- report a 6-generation English family with a novel dominantly-inherited com- acteristic syndrome with cranial sclerosis, cleft palate, conductive or mixed bination of brachydactyly and polydactyly resulting from an amino acid hearing impairment, thoracic dysplasia, respiratory distress, and various substitution in the homeodomain of HOXD13. All 12 living affected individ- vertebral and intestinal malformations. The majority of cases deceased uals have brachydactyly of the 5th fingers and toes, with rudimentary or within the first year of live. Our patient is the first reported case with hyper- absent distal phalanges, small middle phalanges and hypoplastic or trophic pylorus stenosis and anal atresia. OMIM quotes OS-CS as an het- absent nails. Most also have similar involvement of the 3rd and 4th fingers erogeneous disorder with an autosomal dominant (*166500)and a rare X- and toes, often with shortening of the 3rd to 5th metacarpals. In addition, linked variant (311280). However, in genetic diseases striated tissue affec- four individuals have partial duplication of the 4th fingers. This pattern of tions are characteristic for genetic mosaicism, either by X-inactivation in brachydactyly closely resembles Brachydactyly Type B, recently shown to females or by early somatic mutation in males. Moreover, among all report- be caused by mutations in ROR2. The central polydactyly, however, is sim- ed family observations there is no family with convincing autosomal domi- ilar to that seen in synpolydactyly, and prompted us to search for a muta- nant segregation. Therefore, we hypothesise that all cases of OS-CS are tion in HOXD13. In affected family members, we identified a 940Ato C X-linked and there is no indication to assume genetic heterogeneity with an transversion which is not present in unaffected family members or in 50 autosomal dominat variant. unaffected unrelated controls. This base change converts a highly con- served isoleucine residue, one of the 4 key amino acids in the recognition P0406.ACase with Smith-Lemli Opitz Syndrome Presenting helix responsible for directly contacting target DNA, to a leucine. Such a 46, XY, t(7;9)(p14;q21 conservative substitution appears likely to alter rather than abolish the Z. Candemir1, M. Dundar1, Y. Ozkul1, C. Saatci1, S. Kurtoglu2 DNAbinding capacity of HOXD13, thereby perturbing the regulation of tar- 1Erciyes University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; get genes and exerting a novel gain of function effect. Studies are now Kayseri, Turkey; 2Erciyes University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pedi- under way to isolate the targets and binding sites affected. atrics; Kayseri, Turkey zcandemir@hotmail.com P0409.Molecular analysis in 74 patients with craniosynosto- Smith-Lemli Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder charac- sis terized by growth retardation, mental deficiency, ptosis of eyelids, antev- I. Weber1, M. Ninkovic2, A. R. Janecke1, B. Utermann1, M. Witsch-Baum- erted nostrils,limb anomalies, genital abnormalities including hypospadias, gartner1, H. Anderl2, G. Utermann1 micro penis, cryptorchidism. In this report, we present a proband with 1Medizinische Biologie und Humangenetik; Innsbruck, Austria; 2Univer- Smith-Lemli Opitz Syndrome showing a reciprocal translocation between sittsklinik f.Plastische- und Wiederherstellungschirurgie; Innsbruck, Aus- 7p14 and 9q21. The proband is 8 months old Turkish male who referred to tria Clinical Genetics Department for ambiguous genitalia. He had been admit- ingrid.weber@uibk.ac.at ted to the Pediatrics department for respiratory distress and genitally Craniosynostosis is a common congenital malformation occuring in abnormality. The parents are not consanguineous. On admission, he was approximately 1in 2500 live births. Most of the cases are isolated forms. 5700 gr weights, 65 cm length and head circumference of 41 cm. All of Only few cases represent well known craniosynostosis syndromes. Muta- these measurements were below the 3 percentile. Clinical examination tions in fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs)1-3 have been identified showed wide forehead, inner epicanthal folds, blue iris, strabismus, short in several syndromic forms as well as in non-syndromic craniosynostosis. nose, anteverted nares, low set and back turned-malformed ears, microg- We enrolled 74 consecutive, unrelated Austrian (58) and South Tyrolean nathia, short fingers with flexion contractures, short phallus, hypoplastic (16) patients with craniosynostosis in a clinical genetic and molecular scrotum, cryptorchidism and hypospadias. There was also motor develop- investigation of exons of FGFR1-3 genes. So far we identified FGFR2 mental delay and peripheral facial paralysis on the right side. Routine (S252W, P253R, C278F, C342S) and FGFR3 (P250R) mutations in 14 blood biochemical investigations were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography, patients (17%). The clinical diagnosis of Apert syndrome was confirmed in echocardiography, cranial CTand MR were found to be normal. Chromo- all 6 patients. In 3 out of 8 cases of Crouzon syndrome we identified a some analysis with G and C banding revealed a male karyotype with recip- mutation in FGFR2. In 5 patients with a clinical diagnosis of brachycephaly rocal translocation between 7p14 and 9q21. The parents karyotypes were (3 cases), plagiocephaly (1), and Seathre-Chotzen syndrome (1) we iden- normal. The explanation of the clinical feature of the patient should be loss tified the P250R mutation in FGFR3 causing Muenke syndrome. In each of180 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 3 families with the Muenke mutation affected family members had the had a full mutation of the FMR1 gene and four were negative since both same type of craniosynostosis. Thus FGFR mutations are a common methods showed normal results. In group two there were two females with cause of syndromic and non-syndromic craniosynostosis in our large Aus- the full mutation and 12 individuals with the pre-mutation; a normal trans- trian/South Tyrolean patient sample, too. Screening for the P250R muta- mitting male and eleven female carriers. The rest of the relatives showed tion in FGFR3 is recommended especially in cases of unclassified cran- normal results. In group three only a girl was detected with the full muta- iosynostosis. In a next step 6 families without identified mutations will be tion, the rest were normal, both at the molecular as well as the cytogenet- analyzed for linkage. ic level. P0410. Clinical presentation of adult Rett syndrome with P0413.Smith-Magenis syndrome; where genetics and behav- detectable MeCP2 deletion ioural sciences meet E. E. J. Smeets1, L. M. G. Curfs1, M. J. Descheemaeker2, U. Moog1, J. P. L. M. G. Curfs1, D. Willekens2, U. Moog1, E. E. J. Smeets1, J. P. Fryns2 Fryns2 1Maastricht University; Maastricht, The Netherlands; 2Center of Human 1Maastricht University; Maastricht, The Netherlands; 2Center of Human Genetics; Leuven, Belgium Genetics; Leuven, Belgium curfs@msm.nl eric.smeets@gen.unimaas.nl In this presentation, we emphasize the contribution of the behavioural Rett syndrome (RS) is a childhood neurodevelopmental disorder that approach in diagnosing Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS). SMS is a clini- affects females(almost exclusively) with an incidence of 1 in 10.000 to cally recognisable multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syn- 15.000. After an apparently normal period of development, acquired mile- drome caused by an interstitial deletion of chromosomeregion 17p11.2. In stones are lost at an age of 618 months and a specific neurological dis- our clinical practice, 11 subjects were diagnosed to have SMS. Data on order evolves with stereotypic hand wringing or clapping and preserved psychopathology and examination of cognitive and behavioural profiles in visual eyepointing as the most typical symptoms. Loss of speech and dys- these patients demonstrate that the behavioural phenotype serves as a tonic movement disorder together with severe cognitive deficit and epilep- useful diagnostic marker for SMS. After reviewing the published data on sy are predominant in this complex and puzzeling disorder leading over the distinctive behavioural features, recommendations are made for the decades into severe multi-impairment. In 1999, RS was shown to be indication of a diagnostic test by FISH with a probe specific for 17p11.2. caused by deletions in the MECP2 gene by Zoghbi et al.. MECP2 deletions account for up to 75% of cases with classical RS. We present 8 cases of P0414.Neuropsychological Profile In Kabuki Syndrome adult females with a deletion in the MECP2 gene. Diagnosis of RS was C. T. R. M. Schrander-Stumpel1, H. van der Vlugt2, K. J. Berndsen- made conform to the clinical criteria although it was not always easy to Peeters2, L. M. G. Curfs1 confirm this diagnosis on the basis of retrospective clinical data alone. The 1Maastricht University; Maastricht, The Netherlands; 2University of Tilburg; clinical, neurological, behavourial and habilitation data will be presented Tilburg, The Netherlands and an attempt is made to phenotype-genotype correlation. connie.schrander@gen.unimaas.nl The Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome was reported in 1981 by Niikawa P0411.Kallmann Syndrome in a Patient with t(3;14)(q29;21) et al. and Kuroki et al. in a total of 10 unrelated Japanese children with a E. F. Litvinovich1, A. Y. Savtchenko1, I. Lapoutin2, N. Gerasimenko2, G. characteristic array of multiple congenital anoma-lies and mental retarda- Stephanenko2, A. Touritsa3, O. Levtchenko3, V. Volchenko3 tion. The syn-drome is characterized by a distinct face, mild to mode-rate 1Omsk State Medical Academy; Omsk, Russian Federation; 2Regional mental retardati-on, postna-tal growth retarda-tion, derma-toglyp-hic and Medico-Genetic Center; Omsk, Russian Federation; 3State Medical Acad- skeletal abnor-malities. In Japan, the syndrome appears to have an inci- emy; Omsk, Russian Federation dence of about 1;32,-000 newborns. Outside of Japan, a growing number levtchenko77@mail.ru of patients has been recognized. In 2/3 of the non-Japanese pa-tients seri- Most cases of Kallmann syndrome are caused by mutations or deletions of ous neurologic problems were pre-sent, most notably hypot-onia and feed- the KALX gene on the Xp22.3. However, Kallmann syndrome seems to be ing problems. Behavioural characteristics and neuropsychological profile heterogeneous with at least one autosomal form. Syndrome has been are not wellknown with only a limited numbers of case reports in the liter- reported in several patients with unbalanced (Schinzel et al., 1995) or bal- ature. In close collaboration with the national Kabuki network a neuropsy- anced (Best et al., 1990; Cassamassima et al., 1993; Kroisel et al., 2000) chological research aimed at the cognitive and behavioural phenotype was autosomal rearrangements. We have observed the young man with Kall- stated. The present paper reports the results of the neuropsychological mann syndrome and apparently balanced translocation. The patient, age evaluation in a series of 10 children with Kabuki syndrome ranging in age 22, has anosmia, eunuchoid habitus, hypogonadism and hypogenitalism, from 5  11 years. absence of body hair, underdevelopment of axillary and pubic hair, short- ening of the 4th metatarsal bones, dry and flaccid skin. The results of P0415.Encephalopathy in a Person with t(2;15)(q37;q21) endocrinological investigations were compatible with hypogonadotropic A. Savtchenko1, E. Litvinovich1, I. Laputin1, T. Kulakova1, N. Gerasi- hypogonadism; very low basal LH (0.5 IU/l) and FSH (0.8 IU/l) and prepu- menko1, L. Kopylova2, A. Touritsa1, A. Scherbakov1, V. Voltchenko1, O. bertal testosterone (2.7 nmol/l). Cytogenetic study showed a balanced Levtchenko1 translocation t(3;14)(q29;q21). Therefore, the segments 3q29 and 14q21 1Omsk State Medical Academy; Omsk, Russian Federation; 2Regional should be added to the list of possible locations of autosomal gene of Kall- Medico-Genetic Center; Omsk, Russian Federation mann syndrome. levtchenko77@mail.ru Atall (185 cm) young man, age 16, presented with muscular hypotonia, P0412.Molecular Diagnosis Of Fraxa In Costa Rica. postural instability, fine tremor of fingers, nystagmus, arachnodactyly, thick P. Cuenca1, F. Morales2, I. Castro3 and long eyelashes. Papilledema was found upon examination of ocular 1Instituto de Investigaciones en Salud y Escuela de Biologa; San Jos, fundi. Abdominal diagnostic ultrasound; characters of chronic cholecystitis. Costa Rica; 2Instituto de Investigaciones en Salud y Escuela de Biologa MRT showed asymmetric internal hydrocephalus. Wilsons disease was Universidad de Costa Rica; San Jos, Costa Rica; 3Instituto de Investiga- excluded by normal content of copper and ceruloplasmin in blood and ciones en Salud y Escuela de Medicina, Universidad de Costa Rica; San urine. Content in blood serum; Alat  0,18 mol/l (N 0,1  0,68), Asat  0,5 Jos, Costa Rica mol/l (N 0,1  0,45), thymol test  2.1 units (N until 5), total bilirubin  12,8 pcuenca@cariari.ucr.ac.cr mol/l (N 8,5  20,5), ?-lipoproteins - 30 FE (N 35-55). Cytogenetic exam- Fragile X chromosome syndrome is the most frequent form of hereditary ination showed an apparently balanced translocation t(2;15)(q37;q21). mental retardation. Costa Ricas health system does not offer molecular According to the amount of chromosome imbalance, the risk of posterity assessment as part of the diagnostic tools to the patients and families. The with the developmental defects (25-28 %) and spontaneous abortions (22- objectives of this project are; 1. To investigate the presence of unstable 25 %) exists. mutations in the FMR1 gene, to determine its methylation status and the number of repetitions of the CGG triplet in affected individuals and their P0416. Clinical trial in 18 patients with features of Kabuki families. 2. To offer genetic counseling to the families. 3. To enhance the syndrome knowledge of this disorder among health personnel and special education G. S. Oliveira, E. L. Sartorato, A. Marques-de-Faria teachers. We have worked with children who had a previous cytogenetic Unicamp; Campinas, Brazil diagnosis of fra(X) syndrome (group one, N=13), their near relatives (group giso@bestway.com.br two, N=30) and with children referred to us by teachers, pediatricians and The Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) syndrome (KS), first and independently psychologists (group three, N=15). Southern blot and PCR have been described in Japan in 1981 by Niikawa et al. and Kuroki et al., is a multiple used to perform 58 molecular studies. Among the group one children, nine congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome characterized by aPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 181 peculiar facies which resembles the Kabuki theatre make-up, with long and improved diagnostic capabilities for detection of rare inherited condi- palpebral fissures and eversion of lower lids, arched eyebrows, depressed tions may bias toward neglecting other etiologies of neonatal liver failure. nasal tip and prominent ears, besides mild to moderate mental retardation, The possibility of perinatal infection as a cause of severe hyperammone- postnatal growth retardation, skeletal abnormalities and dermatoglyphic mia and fulminant hepatic failure should be kept in mind when evaluating anomalies. The incidence in Japan was estimated around 1;32,000 new- a sick neonate. borns, and the frequency of non-Japanese patients is not available, although the number of cases has been increasing each year. The etiolo- P0419.Anew case of cranio- osteoarthropathy - clinical study gy remains undetermined and most cases have been sporadic. In Brazil, C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc1, A. Vlad2, M. Covic1 there are few reports of the condition, all of them corresponding to new 1University of Medicine; Iasi, Romania; 2Childrens Hospital; Iasi, Romania case descriptions and not the result of a systematic survey. Therefore, we abcrusu@yahoo.com decided to elaborate the present study. Between June, 1998 and Decem- Cranio- osteoarthropathy is a rare AR disorder defined by hypertrophic ber, 1999, 18 patients were followed-up by a specific clinical and laborato- osteoarthropathy, clubbed fingers, painful periarticular swelling, chronic ry protocol, based upon the main characteristics of KS. Ten individuals (3 effusion in large joints and eczematous skin lesions. We present a case in females and 7 males) were confirmed as having KS. Of the remaining 8 (4 order to illustrate this rare disorder and to present some particular features females and 4 males), 3 had Noonan syndrome, 2 had Turner syndrome, recorded in this case. Our proband is the second child of a healthy, young, 1 had monosomy 18p and the other 2 did not complete their clinical eval- unrelated couple. Pregnancy and birth were uneventful. Postnatal devel- uation. Among the KS patients, 100% presented the peculiar facial aspect, opment was normal, except the early tooth eruption and frequent chest and mental retardation in different degrees, 80% had dermatoglyphic infections. We have examined the child when he was 5 years old. He pre- abnormalities, 60% had vertebral anomalies and 50% presented with short sented tall stature, astenic build with diminished muscle bulk, increased stature. The present study was similar to several others in almost all sweating, delayed closure of the anterior fontanelle (still present!), matinal aspects. Cases were sporadic, sex ratio was not deviated, and there were pain and swelling of large joints and clubbing of fingers and toes. Radi- no references to parental consanguinity or familial recurrence, which sup- ographies showed mild bone resorbtion of distal phalanges and tubular ports the hypothesis of a mutation in a dominant inherited gene, the sug- coarse long bones. Lab investigations showed anemia and oxalic cristals gested etiology of KS. This protocol seemed useful by characterizing the in the urine. Based on the clinical and radiological features we have estab- studied population and should be applied to patients with clinical features lished the diagnosis of cranio- osteoarthropathy. We have done the differ- of KS. It deserves mention that the facial characteristics may occur in ential diagnosis with infantile cortical hyperostosis and pachydermoperios- diverse conditions, leading to a possible Kabuki phenotype determined by tosis. In conclusion, we present a child with cranio- osteoarthropathy to elongated palpebral fissures, eversion of the lower lid and arched eyebrow. illustrate this very rare disorder and to present the association of early The high degree of overlapping clinical features concerning Noonan and tooth eruption, frequent chest infections, anemia and presence of urinary Turner syndrome, especially in patients with chromosome X rings, rein- oxalic cristals, features not cited in the literature until now. forces the necessity of a through evaluation when one of these conditions is considered present at initial diagnosis. More detailed studies concerning P0420. No evidence for mutations in the HLXB9 gene in the these issues and involving several genetic centers might contribute to a DNAof patients with anal sphincter dysplasia better characterization of KS. M. Hergersberg1, J. Hirsig2, A. Buchmann3, V. Schneider1, A. Schinzel1, B. Rthlisberger1 P0417.Triopia; the second case in the literature. 1Institut fr Medizinische Genetik; Zrich, Switzerland; 2Kantonsspital; D. Moretti-Ferreira1, R. L. F. Lima2, J. Murray3, A. Richieri-Costa4 Winterthur, Switzerland; 3Stadtspital Waid; Zrich, Switzerland 1Dept of Genetics, IBB- UNESP; Botucatu, Brazil; 2Dept. of Genetics, hergie@medgen.unizh.ch IBB/UNESP; Botucatu, Brazil; 3Dept. of Pediatrics&Biological Sciences, Anal sphincter dysplasia (ASDP) has been described as anteriorly or ven- University of Iowa; Iowa City, United States; 4Dept. of Cinical Genetics- trally displaced anus (OMIM 105563). Absent or incomplete fixation of the HRAC-USP; Bauru, Brazil sphincter to the coccyx are demonstratable by computer tomography as sag@fmb.unesp.br well as by intraoperative dissection of the sphincter muscles. The range of Triopia (three eyes) is a very rare condition. It was first reported by Stel- symptoms included chronic constipation, severe straining at defecation, nicki et al. (1995). These authors interpreted the presence of two globes in encopresis, and chronic paradoxical diarrhea with fecal incontinence. This the left orbit as prosencephalon duplication. We have recently assessed a congenital malformation occurs often familial, and an autosomal dominant male patient, second child of a young, healthy, non-consanguineous cou- mode of inheritance with reduced penetrance has been suggested. ple. The patient presented a complex malformation involving the central Recently, mutations in the HLXB9 homeobox gene have been described in nervous system, craniofacial structures and remarkedly the eyes. Main the DNA of patients with Currarino syndrome, an autosomal dominant clinical findings included broad and backward sloping forehead, plagio- inherited form of sacral agenesis. Because anorectal malformations are a brachycephaly, wide skull sutures, a large facial cleft extending upward to component of the Currarino syndrome, the HLXB9 gene was analyzed in the nose, a Tessier number 9 bilaterally, abnormally developed orbits with the DNAof 20 probands affected from ASDPwith several affected family two hypoplastic and colobamatous globes at right and a hypoplastic and members. The three exons of the HLXB9 gene were amplified using nine colobamatous eye at left (triopia), and low set and posteriorly rotated ears. different primer pairs, and the PCR products were analyzed by single G-banded chromosomes were normal. Molecular study of the gene PAX6 strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. There was no evi- showed no mutation. MRI revealed no duplication of prosencephalie struc- dence for mutations in this gene in the analyzed DNAsamples. tures. The gestation was uneventful without any known ingestion of terato- gens by the mother. Up to now, we have been seeking for an embryologic P0421.Achondrogenesis type IA; prenatal, clinical, radiologi- explanation for the ocular malformation presented by the patient. Support- cal and pathological study of a new case ed by; Funda o Lucentis M. Covic1, C. Rusu1, G. Iliev1, D. Mihaila2 1University of Medicine; Iasi, Romania; 2Childrens Hospital; Iasi, Romania P0418.Systemic Echovirus Infection in neonate mimicking a genetica_umfiasi2000@yahoo.com metabolic liver disease Achondrogenesis is a lethal chondrodysplasia defined by short trunk, D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, M. El-Youssef severe micromelia, normal head size and specific skeletal changes. We Mayo Clinic; Rochester, MN United States present a case of achondrogenesis type IAin order to underline the possi- dbabovic@mayo.edu bilities of prenatal diagnosis and also the importance of detailed radiologic We describe a neonate with systemic Echovirus Type 11 infection, who and pathologic examination for the final diagnosis and genetic counselling. presented with an acute hyperammonemia, rapidly progressive multisys- Our proband is the first child of a healthy, young, unrelated couple. Preg- temic failure and fatal outcome. The patient presented at age 7 days with nancy evolved with threatened abortion; at 28 weeks gestation fetal ultra- acute hyperammonemia, lethargy and hypothermia. Despite an aggressive sound scan recorded polyhidramnios, very short limbs, hypoplastic lungs, therapy including inotropic support, ammonia conjugating therapy and hydronephrosis. Therapeutic termination of pregnancy was indicated. hemodialysis, symptoms progressed and led to the fatal outcome at age 9 Physical examination of the fetus revealed; dysmorphic face, narrow chest, days. Adominant symptom of hyperammonemia in an otherwise normal very short limbs, generalized edema. Radiologic investigation showed; neonate without known risk factors was suggestive of a metabolic decom- poorly ossified skull, unossified vertebral bodies, crenate ilia, short square pensation. The patient underwent an extensive diagnostic evaluation. After long bones. Pathologic examination also revealed hypoplastic lungs and exclusion of several metabolic disorders, the diagnosis of the infectious eti- hydronephrotic kidneys with dilated ureters. Histopathologic studies ology was confirmed by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) in liver and demonstrated hypercellular cartilage with clustered chondrocytes within a spleen tissue. Increased awareness for a number of metabolic disorders diffuse matrix and PAS positive, diastase resistant granules inside the182 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology chondrocytes. Based on the clinical and paraclinical data, we have setab- ical phenotype of a 12 year old boy with a newly recognized, heterozygous lished the diagnosis of achondrogenesis type IA, AR. We have done dif- de novo mutation of COL1A1, i.e. IVS5-1G>Tin the splice-acceptor site of ferential diagnosis with other lethal chondrodystrophies (homozygote IVS5/exon 6. cDNAanalysis confirmed exon 6 skipping in COL1A1 mRNA. achondroplasia, thanatoforic dysplasia) and the other forms of achondro- In addition to the cardinal features of EDS VIIAour patient had premature genesis. In conclusion, we present this case to show the importance of rupture of fetal membranes, dentinogenesis imperfecta and recurrent rec- prenatal and pathologic examination for the complete diagnosis and cor- tum prolapse, the last feature was so fare not described in EDS VIIA. Rec- rect genetic counselling in lethat chondrodystrophies. tum prolaps is a sign of tissue extensibility seen for example in EDS I (clas- sical type). Premature rupture of fetal membranes is described in EDS VIIC P0422.Sensorineural hearing loss and the incidence of con- and EDS I, but our patient does not show sagging, redundant skin, a major nexin 26 mutations in Austria criteria of EDS VIIC. Dentinogenesis imperfecta is a well known feature of A.R.Janecke1,D.Nekahm2, A. Hirst-Stadlmann2, J. Lffler1, G. Utermann1 osteogenesis imperfecta but until last year has not been described in EDS 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Innsbruck; patients. This observation expands the clinical spectrum of EDS VIIAand Innsbruck, Austria; 2Department of Hearing, Speech and Voice Disorders, shows overlapping clinical features with classical EDS, EDS VIIC, and University Hospital of Innsbruck; Innsbruck, Austria osteogenesis imperfecta. Andreas.Janecke@uibk.ac.at Hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensory deficit and is detected in P0425. A novel mutation in exon V of the human neutrophil about 1/1000 children before 1 year of age. HLhas a genetic origin in up elastase gene; Association with Focal Segmental Glomeru- to 60% of cases and is of an unparalleled heterogeneity. Aclinical evalua- losclerosis in Black South African paediatric patients. tion and Cx26 mutation analysis were performed in 155 consecutive P. Redelinghuys, M. C. Gaillard, P. D. Thomson patients with sensorineural hearing loss in order to delineate the spectrum University of the Witwatersrand; Johannesburg, South Africa of genetically caused hearing loss. The aetiology of HLwas determined to pierre_r@mweb.co.za be hereditary in 47% of patients, either due to Cx26 mutations (18.7%), to Aims; Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) in its acute stages, is genetically caused congenital syndromes (11.6%) or to the presence of a characterised by neutrophil-mediated inflammation and glomerular injury. positive family history (16.8%). Cx26 mutations were found in 21.2% of The aim of our study was to investigate the presence of mutations in exon patients with non-syndromic HL (31.5% of familial vs. 17% of sporadic V of the human neutrophil elastase (HNE) gene in South-African paediatric cases). The mutation 35delG accounted for 46.6% of all presumed GJB2 renal patients presenting with Nephrotic Syndrome (NS). Methods;Forty- disease alleles. The second most frequent mutation was L90P (10.3%) three Black(27 boys;16 girls) and 15 White (13 boys;2 girls) paediatric having been reported with a prevalence of 0,7-3,5% in other populations. nephrotic patients were recruited from the Paediatric Nephrology Unit, Of three novel mutations, one (R143Q) was associated with dominant Johannesburg Hospital, South-Africa. These included those presenting high-frequency hearing loss. Adominant de novo mutation, R75W, was with FSGS, Minimal Change Disease (MCD), congenital NS and other observed in a patient with profound HL. Pseudodominant transmission of renal conditions. HNE exon V was amplified from whole blood DNA. Ampli- NSHLwas seen in 4 families with Cx26 mutations. Amutation 35delG car- cons were sequenced and screening extended by ARMS-PCR. Signifi- rier rate of 0,9% was observed among 672 controls from Tirol (West-Aus- cance was assessed using two-sided Chi-squared and Fishers Exact trian province). Cx26 mutations were found associated with mild to pro- tests. Results; Anovel GTC (Val190) to ATC (Ile190) transition was detect- found, and with asymmetric hearing impairment. ed in HNE exon V in 4 of 18 (22%) Black patients with FSGS as compared with asymptomatic Black controls (0%)(p=0.008). The mutation was P0423.GeneticStudiesofCoupleswithRecurrentFetal Losses absent from Black patients with other renal diseases as well as from White S. Oztas patients.Protein modelling revealed the position of the mutation to be in the Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; Erzu- substrate binding pocket of HNE where the residue plays a role in sub- rum, Turkey strate specificity. Conclusions; Anovel mutation in the substrate binding sitkioztas@asteoclub.com pocket of HNE is associated with FSGS in Black paediatric nephrotics, In this study, we aimed to determine the role of genetic factors in our region which may explain the increased prevalence of FSGS in this group. Alter- in the couples with habituel abortions and/or stillbirth to help couples with ations in HNE substrate specificity may contribute to glomerular injury. this kind of situation. In our study, we have a total of 419 people. Of this two hundred two couples (404 cases) are recurrent fetal losses, and 5 are P0426.International Birth Defects Information System (IBIS) - cordocentesis materials from pregnant women with fetal anomalies, and APrevention Tool finally we have 10 death babies with multiple malformations of the perina- W. Wertelecki tal period. The distribution of the couples with fetal losses is as followed; University of South Alabama; Mobile, ALUnited States 122 couples with habituel abortions whose abortion number vary for each wwertele@usamail.usouthal.edu case between 2 and 10, and 50 couples with up to 5 stillbirths, and 30 cou- It is self evident that the prevention of birth defects (BD) is a complex task ples with both abortion and stillbirth. While the womens ages were varying and that the World Wide Web (web) is a major communicaiton tool. Many between 18 and 42, mens ages were changing between 21 and 58 in all web information providers are organizations with missions that are nar- groups. Consanguinity rate among the parents was 25,2%. This ratio was rower than the full range of BD related issues. On the other hand, many 18,9% among the parents with habituel abortions, 36% among the parents international information consumers have limited access to and the need- with stillbirths and 33,3% among the parents with both habituel abortion ed skills necessary to expeditiously find scattered reliable BD web infor- and stillbirth. One hundred thirty five couples of 202 analysed for cytoge- mation sources. Furthermore, not-in-English materials are limited and netics. While men did not show any chromosomal aberrations, a total of 6 many web sites offer incomplete, outdated or even slanted information. women revealed various chromosomal aberration Atotal of 137 stillbirth Such considerations prompted the development of IBIS, a web site for cases or early death babies of perinatal period were recorded by 80 cou- international information consumers and dedicated to the prevention and ples. Sixty eight of 137 cases have various anomalies (49,6%). Distribution amelioration of BD. IBIS started by sharing resources of programs in of the etiology of malformations showed that mendelian disorders were Alabama, Ukraine, and Latin America. (http;//ibis-birthdefects.org/start/) 27,7% , multifactorial disorders were 16,1% and chromosomal disorders IBIS offers access to carefully selected web sites and not-in-English were 5,8%. sources. International contributors are urged to develop and post on IBIS, BD information sheets that adhere to published quality standards. IBIS P0424.Expansion of Clinical Features in Ehlers-Danlos Syn- versions in Ukrainian and Spanish are growing and versions in other lan- drome type VIIAwith a Newly Recognized COL1A1 Mutation. guages are emerging. In a six-month period, and without promotion, con- T. Neumann1, A. Eigel1, J. Horst1, I. Kennerknecht1, B. Steinmann2 sumers visited IBIS at a rate of 50000 per year. Some related satellite sites 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Westflische Wilhelms-Universitt; Mnster, have even a greater number of visitors. Organizations can contribute to Germany; 2Division of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, Kinderspital; IBIS by concentrating on web site contents related to their mission and Zrich, Switzerland linking with IBIS regarding other matters relevant to the care, prevention, thomas.neumann@uni-muenster.de and amelioration of BD. The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogenous group of inherited connective tissue disorders. EDS VII results from loss of the procollagen P0427. Terminal 22q13 deletion, recognizable phenotype or N-protease cleavage site by exon 6 skipping of COL1A1 (EDS VIIA) or incidental finding? COL1A2 (EDS VIIB), or by mutations in the pNPI gene itself (EDS VIIC). G. S. Kupchik Distinct clinical features can be observed in EDS subtypes VIIA, VIIB (both M.M.C; Brooklyn, NYUnited States arthrochalasia type) and VIIC (dermatosparaxis type). We present the clin- gabriel@pol.netPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 183 Terminal 22q13 deletions are rare. Although a few reported cases have 2000). Herewith we report on a patient with the 22q11 deletion syndrome had variable clinical findings, it appears that a recognizable phenotype in whom a Graves syndrome complicated the clinical evolution at the age which includes mild facial dysmorphism, pervasive developmental disorder of 18 years. He was born in 1980 from a 28 years old father and 24 years and hypotonia is emerging. We present a 2- year old female referred due old mother who had been previously treated for a Graves disease. At birth to multiple congenital anomalies, dysmorphic features and unexplained the diagnosis of cardiac malformation (aortic arch kinking, retro- hypotonia. After birth she was found to have an hypoplastic left pulmonary oesophageal right subclavian artery) and a posterior palatine cleft lead to artery with anomalous aorto-pulmonary vessels that required surgical cor- the discussion of a mild form of DiGeorge syndrome. There was no evi- rection. Aroutine karyotype was initially reported as normal. A22q13 dele- dence for immune deficiency or hypocalcemia. Later on developmental tion was detected incidentally when the control probe for the milestones were delayed and his school progression was delayed. His DiGeorge/VCFS region (ARSA) was found deleted. Parental karyotypes diagnosis was not reevaluated before 1998 at which time he developed have been reported as normal. Interestingly, in a recent review, 3 out of 4 evidence for Graces disease with high levels of antiTSH receptor and patients previously thought to have an isolated 22q13 terminal deletion antithyroperoxydase antibodies. 22q11 deletion was demonstrated by were found to have a cryptic subtelomeric rearrangement instead. By pre- FISH. His hematological and immunological evaluation show mild throm- senting this case and reviewing the literature, we would like to emphasize bopenia with increased mean volume, low level of IgM, decreased the need for further studies and investigation on patients presenting with response to polysaccharide vaccination antigenes, mild lymphopenia and this phenotype. decreased T lymphocyte response. Compared to our two cases with Hashimoto thyroiditis and other 22q11 deleted patients, the immunological P0428. The incidence of renal and pulmonary complications profile is similar. Thyroid dysfunction in 22q11 deleted patient is therefore during pregnancy in women with tuberous sclerosis complex quite frequent and requires regular evaluation of both the antibody profile (TSC); a survey of female members of the National Tuberous and thyroid function during follow-up, especially if there is a familial pre- Sclerosis Association (NTSA) disposition for auto-immune disease. A. L. Mitchell, M. A. Parisi, V. P. Sybert University of Washington; Seattle, WAUnited States P0430. Weaver Syndrome and Wilms Tumour in a child with almitch@u.washington.edu an Unbalanced Cryptic Translocation . 7 Individuals with Men- Adults with TSC may develop renal and pulmonary complications. Approx- tal Retardation in the One Family due to Translocation - imately 70% have renal cysts and/or angiomyolipomas (RAML), which can t(12;22)(q24.33;q13.31). lead to renal failure or hemorrhage. 2-3% develop pulmonary cysts or lym- A. M. Turner1, M. Rosier2, R. Cohn1, G. Turner3, K. Battese4, M. Yip1 phangiomyomatosis, which can cause recurrent pneumothorax and/or 1Sydney Childrens Hospital; NSW, Australia; 2Canberra Hospital; ACT, progressive respiratory insufficiency. Whether pregnancy exacerbates Australia; 3Hunter Genetics; Newcastle, Australia; 4Canberra Hospital; these risks is unknown. 113 of 420 questionnaires sent to NTSAmembers ACT, Australia for information regarding pregnancy were returned. Seven lacked sufficient A.Turner@unsw.edu.au information to confirm TSC; 3 were incomplete. 22 women had never been Afemale child was diagnosed with Weaver syndrome based on typical pregnant (11 with renal disease and 6 with lung involvement); 3 had RAML dysmorphic features and growth pattern. She had developmental delay without TSC. 49 women with renal involvement had 122 pregnancies, and and overgrowth. She was hypotonic with delay in motor and other mile- 29 without renal involvement had 58 pregnancies. Pregnancy complica- stones obvious by 12 months. By 4 months height and weight >90th per- tions included bleeding from RAMLin two, renal pain in one, and kidney centile and head large. By 7 months ht, wt >97th. Bone age was advanced stones in two. One woman without kidney disease developed pregnancy- - 18/12 at 11/12 and 3 yrs 6 mths at 1 yr 11mnths. At 3 years a Stage 1 left associated renal stones. Afifth of both groups developed toxemia. Pneu- Wilms tumour was diagnosed and successfully treated with radiotherapy mothorax occurred in 2 women. No maternal or fetal deaths occurred. and chemotherapy. There was a history of mental retardation. Her brother Among women never pregnant, renal/pulmonary complications developed was mild/mod delayed in development without dysmorphism. The mother in 36% and 33%, respectively. Limitations of the study included inability to had two normal looking brothers with moderate intellectual handicap. Kary- determine if renal involvement predated pregnancy (in many, diagnosis of otypes on all retarded individuals and parents normal. Fragile X testing of TSC was made after birth of an affected infant); and validity of self-reports. both children and uncles normal. 3rdchild (female) born with very similar While the literature reports a 21% incidence of renal hemorrhage during dysmorphic features to proband but without significant overgrowth. Repeat pregnancy (7 out of 33 pregnancies), our results suggest it is much lower. karyotypes and careful review showed mother has a balanced transloca- We recommend that women with TSC receive renal and pulmonary evalu- tion (12;22) and both female offspring have unbalanced karyotype - Der 12 ation prior to pregnancy. Pregnancies should be closely monitored. The and male has Der 22. These results confirmed by FISH. Further family presence of either RAMLor pulmonary cysts is not a contraindication to studies showed that both mothers brothers, uncle and cousin carry the pregnancy. Der 22 chromosome. This case illustrates that in retardation without dys- Pregnancy outcomes in a survey of adult women with TSC morphism, malformation or poor growth (non specific mental retardation) can be due to crytpic aneuploidy. It also shows that in a suspicious case a Post- On- renal Pulm. partum toxemia/ careful cytogenetic review can direct FISH studies appropriately. The ques- N G P SAb TAb going/ ectopic SB compli- compli- no info cations cations depres- HTN tion of whether some or all of the features of Weaver syndrome are due to sion monosomy of genes at 12q and/or trisomy of telomeric genes at 22q is pregnant + renal49 122 94 19 3 2 1 3 5/49 1/10 2 11 (23%) raised. (10%) (10%) disease pregnant - renal 29 58 50 6 1 1 0 0 1/29 1/4 1 6 (20%) P0431.Screening for Smith-Magenis Syndrome among a pop- (3%) (25%) disease ulation of undiagnosed mental retardation/developmental RAML 3 6 5 1 0 0 0 0 1/3 0 0 0 delay w/o TSC (33%) M. M. Khalifa, J. L. Struthers P0429. The 22q11 deletion syndrome ; Evaluation of thyroid Queens University; Kingston, ON Canada dysfunction, from Hashimoto thyroiditis to and increased risk mkhalifa@jhmi.edu for familial form of Graves disease. Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a MCA/MR syndrome caused by a B. Leheup1, F. Marcon2, P. Bordigoni3, P. Jonveaux4 microdeletion of chromosome 17p11.2. Individuals with SMS are typically 1Unit of Clinical Genetics CHU de Nancy-Brabois; Vandoeuvre, France; characterized by minor craniofacial anomalies, short stature, brachydacty- 2Unit of Pediatric Cardiolology CHU de Nancy-Brabois; Vandoeuvre, ly, visual and auditory impairment, behaviour problems, sleep disturbance, France; 3Department of Pediatric Hematology CHU de Nancy-Brabois; and cardiac and renal malformations. The exact incidence of this condition Vandoeuvre, France; 4Department of Medical Genetics CHU de Nancy- is unknown, but it is believed that this condition is underdiagnosed Brabois; Vandoeuvre, France because of its recent description and the lack of a pathognomonic pheno- leheup@facmed.u-nancy.fr type. To estimate the frequency of SMS among patients with mental retar- Thyroid abnormalities have been reported in association with the 22q11 dation/ developmental delay (MR/DD) we screened over 1600 DNAsam- deletion syndrome. One case of congenital hypothyroidism linked to thy- ples from patients with undiagnosed (MR/DD). Our molecular screening roid dysgenesis has been reported by Scuccimarri (). We previously protocol included Southern blotting and co-hybridization with a SMS dele- reported in two patients with the syndrome of 22q11 deletion the onset of tion specific probe and a control probe for dosages comparison. Samples Hashimoto type of auto-immune thyroiditis (ESHG Lisbon 1998). Recently suspected to have SMS deletion based on this screening were test further a case of Graves disease has been reported in a 18 year old woman with by either FISH -if fresh blood samples were obtained or by GeneScan on evidence of DiGeorge syndrome related to a 22q11 deletion (Kawamura T the DNAsamples. Two cases of SMS have been identified among this pop-184 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology ulation. Of a surprise we also identified several cases of previously undi- tion, which leads to replacement of arginine 133 with cysteine (R133C). To agnosed sex chromosome aneuploidy in this population rule out the possibility that a primer binding site polymorphism prevented the amplification of a normal allele, internal primers were also used. The P0432.X-linked Lissencephaly with Absent Corpus Callosum restriction pattern of this patient was consistent with a homozygous muta- and Ambiguous Genitalia (XLAG). Clinical, MRI and neuro- tion, which was confirmed by DNAsequencing. The gene defect was also pathological findings demonstrated in one living paternal relative. On the basis of the patients D. Bonneau1, A. Gellot2, S. Marret3, A. Laqurrire4, A. Toutain5 family history, supported by the fact that R133C is a common mutation in 1CHU de Poitiers; Poitiers, France; 2Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul; Paris, Finnish CADASILfamilies, the patients both parents must have been het- France; 3Neurologie pdiatrique; CHU Rouen, France; 4Anatomo-patholo- erozygous carriers of the mutation. In comparison with nine age-matched gie; CHU Rouen, France; 5Gntique mdicale; Tours, France ( 2 years) heterozygous CADASIL R133C patients, our homozygous bonneau@chu-poitiers.fr patient has the earliest onset (stroke), most prominent MRI-changes and Lissencephaly (smooth brain) is a group of severe malformations of the second most advanced cognitive decline (alcohol abuse possibly con- brain cortex that results from abnormal neuronal migration during central tributing to the rapid decline of the most severe affected heterozygote). nervous system embryogenesis. According to Dobbyns, lissencephaly syn- The course of the homozygous patients disease was exceptionally pro- dromes are classified into four major categories depending clinical, radio- tracted. Conclusion; In dominant diseases heterozygous and homozygous logical or pathological findings; 1) agyria-pachygyria spectrum and sub- patients should in principle be equally affected, but this rule has several cortical band heterotopia (classical lissencephaly), 2) syndromes with exceptions. Our patients disease represents the severe end of the clinical lissencephaly variants 3) syndromes with cobblestone lissencephaly and, spectrum among the age-matched CADASIL-patients. However, because 4) syndromes with lissencephaly and extreme microcephaly it is not an order of magnitude more severe, it indicates that the double (microlissencephaly). In the second group of lissencephaly variants, the dose of defective Notch3 gene causes at most a minor aggravation of the neuronal migration disorder which is close to the classical form of symptoms. lissencephaly is associated with other brain anomalies such as micro- cephaly, atypical cortex aspect, absent corpus callosum or, cerebellar P0434. Metatropic dysplasia in three unrelated patients; hypoplasia. Recently, a new malformation syndrome associating review of familial and clinical data provides evidence for the lissencephaly, absent corpus callosum and ambiguous genitalia has been existence of a single clinical entity recognized in the group of lissencepahly variants. As the initial report from D. Horn1, E. Rupprecht2, L. Neumann1, J. Kunze1, J. Pelz1 Berry-Kravis clearly demonstrated an X-linked inheritance, the disorder 1Institute of Human Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2Department of Pediatric was referred to as X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia Radiology; Dresden, Germany (XLAG). Dobyns et al. has recently refined the clinical and MRI scan crite- denise.horn@charite.de ria for XLAG including; a) lissencephaly with a posterior-to anterior gradi- Metatropic dysplasia is a rare but well delineated skeletal dysplasia. Based ent and intermediate (5-7 mm) increase in cortical thickness, b) agenesis on morphological criteria as well as life expectancy and rare familial recur- of the corpus callosum, c) intractable epilepsy with onset prenatally or dur- rence the disorder is subdivided into several categories with a different ing the first hours of life, d) hypothalamic dysfunction manifest by poor tem- mode of inheritance.We report here on three additional male patients rep- perature regulation, e) severe hypotonia from birth and f) ambiguous gen- resenting this entity. Radiologically, patient 1 and 2 represent with a simi- italia in genotypic male. The gene responsible for XLAG is not identified lar severity of skeletal changes, whereas the clinical course differs.Patient and the pathogenesis of the disease is currently unknown. We report here 3 shows relatively mild skeletal findings.The rarity of affected sibs and of three families affected with XLAG, we present the neuro-pathological find- consanguinity in the published pedigrees raises doubt about the assumed ings of XLAG in two affected males and we show that the gene is also autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. A single clinical entity with a responsible for partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum in car- wide variability, ranging from mild to perinatal lethal phenotypes, and auto- rier females. somal dominant transmission is to favor. P0433.The Phenotype of a Homozygous CADASILPatient in P0435. The combination of dyschondrosteosisi with malfor- Comparison with Nine Age-Matched Heterozygous Patients mations of genitalia. with the Same R133C Notch3 Mutation E. Timoljanova1, S. Amelina1, G. Baibikova2, M. Lukashevich3, A. Macio- M. P yh nen1, V. Juvonen2, M. Savontaus2, S. Tuominen3, T. Kurki4, J. nis1, R. Shokarev1 Rinne5, S. Tuisku6, K. Amberla7, M. Viitanen7, H. Kalimo8 1Research Institute of Obstetrics and Pediatrics; Rostov-on-Don, Russian 1Department of Medical Genetics, Vestliitto, The Family Federation of Federation; 2Resarch Institute of Obstetrics and Pediatrics; Rostov-on- Finland; Helsinki, Finland; 2Dept of Medical Genetics, Turku University Don, Russian Federation; 3State Medical University; Rostov-on-Don, Hospital; Turku, Finland; 3Dept of Neurology, Turku University Hospital; Russian Federation Turku, Finland; 4Dept of Diagnostic Radiology, Turku University Hospital; S.Amelina@rniiap.ru Turku, Finland; 5PET Centre and Dept of Neurology, Turku University Hos- Mesomelic limb shortening can be accompanied by malformations of oth- pital; Turku, Finland; 6Dept of Neurology, Keski-Pohjanmaa Central Hospi- ers organs. Dyschondrosteosisi is the most frequent form of this skeleton tal; Kokkola, Finland; 7Karolinska Institutet, Division of Geriatric Medicine; anomaly. Reduction of stature, Madelungs deformity, mesomelia of limbs Huddinge, Sweden; 8Department of Patology, Turku University Hospital; are clinically apparent. Bony exostosis, deformation of femoral and Turku, Finland brachial bones and deafness are also possible. The combinations with minna.poyhonen@vaestoliitto.fi malformations of genitalia are not described according to this patology. Background; In cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical Five children (4 girls and 1 boy) from four unrelated families were infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) multiple lacunar infarcts lead observed. All these children had the signs of dyschondrosteosisi and to cognitive decline and finally subcortical dementia. It is caused by differ- hypoplasia of genitalia resulted in delayed puberty in females. All the chil- ent missense mutations in Notch3 gene, which encodes a transmembrane dren had short stature, mesomelic limb shortening, Madelungs deformity. receptor protein Notch3. We describe the first homozygous CADASIL Hypoplasia of genitalia in girls was demonstrated by hypoplastic uterus patient in comparison with nine age-matched ( 2 years) patients het- combined with gonadal dysgenesis in one case and with hypoplastic erozygous for the same R133C mutation. Clinical details and pathology; A ovaries in another one. Two-sided cryptorchidism has been diagnosticated 52-year-old male, whose deceased father and two paternal uncles had a in a boy since birth. Karyotypes of children were normal. In four cases history of similar cerebrovascular disease. His mother had died at the age short stature, mesomelia and Madelungs deformity were inherited from of 31 of tuberculosis without known neurological disease. His grandfather mothers and in one case from father. Heredity of mesomelia and and one maternal aunt had died of stroke. The patient has not had Madelungs deformity were corresponded to autosomal dominant type. migraine. He had his first stroke at 28 and a recurrence at 37 years of age. The other types of malformation of genitalia were not observed in these CT revealed periventricular white matter hypodensities. Neurological families. These parents had healthy sibs; 2 girls and 2 boys didnt show deficits and psychiatric symptoms progressed, and cognitive decline any skeleton anomalies and malformations of genitalia. However we cant became manifest around the age of 45. Eight years later the patient was exclude an accidental combination of dyschondrosteosisi and malforma- moderately demented scoring 19 in MMSE. CADASILdiagnosis at the age tion of genitalia. This finding shows the importance of detailed evaluation of 52 was based on characteristic MRI changes, granular osmiophilic of genitalia in patients with dyschondrosteosisi in order to prevent disoders material around the degenerative smooth muscle cells in dermal arteries of sexual development. and identification of the R133C mutation. Genetic analysis; Exon 4 of the Notch 3 gene was amplified by PCR. PCR product was digested with MspA1I restriction endonuclease to detect the C475Ttransversion muta-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 185 P0436. Inherited constitutional translocation from a pheno- Genetic Syndrome in Pediatrics, International postgraduate course as a typically normal mother to her son with Prader-Willi pheno- new entity entitled Multiple exostoses in the skull , facial, ear and thoracal type. asymmetry, unilateral macrodactyly. Is it a new entity?. We believe that L. P. N. L. Neagu1, C. D. C. Geormaneanu2, E. M. E. Tomescu1, A. G. A. this case is different from the previously described patients of Proteus syn- Lungeanu2 drome and other related syndromes. She displayed fully penetrant expres- 1InstituteA. Rusescu for Mother and Child Care; Bucharest, Romania; sion of congenital hamartomateous pathologies. Molecular studies of sim- 2National InstituteV.Babes for Research in Pathology and Biomedical ilar cases will clarify either the presented case is a separate entity or a Field; Bucharest, United States genetic heterogeneity. genetica@vbabes.ro In 1988, a male of 5 years old who is the second child of a familly was P0439. Dominantly inherited spontaneous pneumothorax is reffered for karyotype investigation, because of his phenotye suggesting highly penetrant when studied with HRCT of Prader-Willi syndrome. Verry suggestive features are;neonatale hypo- K. Aittomaki1, M. Somer1, P. Tukiainen2 tonia with failure of thrive, hyperphagia and severe obesity, hypogo- 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics; Helsinki, Finland; 2Dept. of Pulmonary Medi- nadism, short arms and feet, mental retardation. Ussing GTG-banding a cine; Helsinki, Finland translocation between 13-15 chromosomes was revealed, and so the kristiina.aittomaki@hus.fi karyotype was 45, XY,t(13;15). The same constitotional translocation was Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in 7.4;100 000 males and 1.2;100 000 detected in mothers blood lymphocites, who is a phenotypically normal females and predominantly affects young males. In addition to being spo- carrier. The probands father seems to have a microdeletion 15q11-12 as radic, spontaneous pneumothorax is known to occur in patients with Mar- could be evaluated by GTG-banding. The molecular mechanizme both fan and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV. However, there is also an inher- for translocation and for microdeletion, have to be elucidated by FISH ited form of spontaneous pneumothorax without any other symptoms or technique. signs of connective tissue disorder. This autosomal dominant form of spon- taneous pneumothorax has a low penetrance both in males and females. P0437. Correlation of morphological and molecular genetic It has been estimated that only 50% of male and 20-35% of female gene findings in thanatophoric dysplasia carriers actually develop pneumothorax. We have identified a large Finnish R. Okhowat1, R. Wieser1, C. Fonatsch1, H. Rehder2 pedigree in which spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in three successive 1Institut fr Medizinische Biologie, Universitt Wien; Wien, Austria; 2Institut generations with several obligatory gene carriers who have not had any fr Medizinische Biologie, Universitt Wien; Institut fr Klinische Genetik, symptoms of lung disease. To study whether they actually have bullous Philipps-Universitt Marburg; Marburg, Germany lung lesions we have studied several family members with high resolution Roberta.Okhowat@univie.ac.at computerized tomography (HRCT). Of the 7 people studied so far, only one Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is the most common lethal skeletal dyspla- (a male aged 27 yrs) seems to be unaffected. All others (family members sia with an incidence of 1 in 20.000. Typical features are micromelic short- who have experienced pneumothorax or are obligatory carriers) have bul- ening of limbs, trident hands, platyspondyly, macrocephaly, short ribs with lous lung lesions. These bullae are located anywhere in the lung and not narrow thoracic cavity resulting in respiratory failure and characteristic X- particularly in the apical areas. We propose that the risk of having sponta- ray findings with cupped spur-like irregular flaring of metaphyses. TD has neous pneumothorax is at least partly dependent on the location, that is, if been subdivided into two different subtypes. TD1 is characterized by the bullous lesions are inside the lung, the risk of rupture and pneumotho- bowed long bones with telephone receiver appearance of femurs and usu- rax is low. If, however, the bullae are on the surface of the lung, the risk is ally without craniosynostosis, whereas TD2 shows straight femurs and a higher. So far the HRCTfindings in this family are 100% penetrant. We clover leaf skull. In both types, mutations in the FGFR3 gene were identi- conclude that spontaneous pneumothorax in some families is inherited as fied. We present our radiological, morphological and molecular genetic an autosomal dominant trait. Although the penetrance of actual sponta- findings in three fetuses with TD of 22, 27 and 24 gestational weeks. Two neous pneumothorax is low, particularly in women, the penetrance of bul- of them either showed typical TD1 or TD2 symptoms . The third fetus dis- lous lung disease studied with HRCTis high, perhaps 100%. played curved femurs as well as a clover leaf skull with craniosynostoses of the lambdoid, sagittal and partially of the coronal sutures. Mutation P0440.MECP2 mutation in mild, non-specific X-linked mental analysis of the FGFR3 gene identified in the TD1 and TD2 cases the char- retardation family acteristical transitions, A1118G (exon 10) for TD1 and A1948G (exon 15) A. Verloes1, B. Cherif2, S. Briault3, J. Chelly2 for TD2. In the third case, we identified an Ato G transition at nt 1118 in 1Sart Tilman University Hospital; Lige, Belgium; 2INSERM U129-ICGM. exon 10, representing a point mutation characteristic of TD1. This result CHU Cochin; Paris, France; 3CHU de Tours, Service de Gntique, Hopi- was confirmed by restriction analysis exploiting a Bsg I site created by this tal Bretonneau; Tours, France mutation. Our results are in agreement with the findings of Tavormina et al. alain.verloes@chu.ulg.ac.be (1995) who claim that the classification of thanatophoric dysplasia into TD1 Awide spectrum of usually severe neurodevelopmental phenotypes has and TD2 is dependent on the presence or abscence of curved femora been observed in patients with mutations in the methyl-CpG binding pro- rather than of craniosynostoses. Further cases will have to be examined in tein 2 (MECP2) gene, located in Xq28; typical and milder/atypical Rett syn- order to more closely define possible differences in the craniosynostosis drome (in females and males), Angelman-like neurodevelopmental pheno- patterns of the TD1 and TD2 clover leaf skulls. type, and severe non specific mental retardation affecting male patients. We found an Arg to Trp substitution (R167W) in 4 retarded males of a 4 P0438.ANew Hamartomateous Syndrome Characterised By generation XLMR pedigree. The substituted residue, located 4 amino acids Facial-thoracal Asymmetry, Multiple Osteomas , Left Sided downstream to the methyl-CpG-binding domain, is conserved across Hemihypertrophy, Caf Au Lait Spot ; a 22 Year Follow-up species. The mutation occurred in a region where only nonsense muta- S. Balci, A. Kayikcioglu tions (leading most likely to a drastic loss of function) have been described, Hacettepe University; Ankara, Turkey leading to a Rett phenotype. The four studied males present the same neu- mehmet@gen.hun.edu.tr rodevelopmental features ; mild mental delay (IQ > 50 ; 3/4 can read and We present a 24 year old girl with multiple hamartomateous lesions whom write, albeit with difficulties), talkative, friendly personality (3/4), obesity had been first admitted to the genetic department as an 18 months old (3/4), non progressive neurological anomalies consisting of brisk reflexes child. The prominent features of the case were a macrodactylic left thumb in the lower limbs (4/4) and essential tremor (3/4). One of the boys had and index finger, multiple cranial and facial osteomas, macrocephaly and severe behavioral problems. Among obligate carrier women, at least 2 a caf au lait spot of 1 cm on the neck. The left tonsil was found to be present with essential tremor, and normal intelligence. The phenotype in enlarged. Radiological examination revealed osteomas of the skull as well this family probably represents the mildest expression of MECP2 mutation as advanced bone age of the left hand, enlargement of the left 11th rib, recorded in man. It clearly raises the hypothesis that MECP2 could play a increased corpus hight on the left part of the 12th dorsal vertebra which major role in non specific MR, and could become the second gene (with caused scoliosis. Computerised tomography displayed dilated ventricles FRAXA) that would be necessary to screen systematically in patients with on the left side. The case had been followed up for 22years and during this unexplained, non syndromic MR. period she underwent tonsillectomy, excisional biopsy of an osteoma and amputation of the index finger. Histopathologic examination of the left ton- P0441.Hypomelanosis of Ito - Natural History of 12 Patients sil was consistent with hamartomateous hyperplasia, osteomas displayed H.Santos, A. Medeira, I. Cordeiro roughened lamellae of bone and bone marrow which was rich in fat cells. Servio Gentica, Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal The chromosome analysis from peripheral blood was 46, XX. This case heloisa.santos@ip.pt had been previously presented in 1982 Firenze, Italy; Identification of Hypomelanosis of Ito (HI) was first described by Ito in 1952 in a patient with186 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology hypopigmented lesions in a zig-zag pattern on the trunk and linear pat- penetrance of the myotonic dystrophy mutation by adult life and indicating tern along the arms. Since then many cases are reported mostly present- the importance of careful clinical assessment in relation to presymptomatic ing extracutaneous anomalies. High variable clinical manifestations, spo- testing. radic occorence and the frequent finding of chromossomal mosaicism suggested that HI is a cutaneous marker of genetic mosaicism. We report P0444.The macrocephaly-hamartoma syndromes; Aneed for the clinical evolution of 12 HI sporadic patients seen in the last 17 years in better diagnostic criteria in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba-Syn- our Clinics. Diagnosis done between 3 months and 17 years. All present- drome ed extracutaneous manifestations including (2 cases) exuberant fibromas M. Hoeltzenbein1, M. Poetsch2, B. Kleist3, S. Weigel4, I. Weinke5 on accidental scars. The typical hypopigmented lesions were present in all 1Institut fr Humangenetik; Greifswald, Germany; 2Institut fr Rechtsmedi- the patients but they faded with the age in the older. Chromossomal zin; Greifswald, Germany; 3Institut fr Pathologie; Greifswald, Germany; mosaicism was found on fibroblasts in 3 of 11 patients analysed. Compar- 4Universittskinderklinik; Greifswald, Germany; 5Sozialpdiatrisches Zen- ing groups with and without mosaicism we found that all the mosaic trum; Greifswald, Germany patients present an evident and constant asymmetry but the mental devel- Hoeltzen@uni-greifswald.de opment is not worst namely 2 of these 3 adults patients having a normal Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba-Syndrome (BRR) and Cowden Syndrome intelligence are attending the university. The importance of more clinical (CS) are rare autosomal-dominant diseases belonging to the group of and cytogenetic data in the genetic counselling of patients with HI must be macrocephaly-hamartoma syndromes. Germline mutations in the putative emphasized. tumor supressor gene PTEN have been found in 80% of patients with CS, but only in 50-60% of patients with BRR. In few families CS and BRR are P0442. Clinical,cytogenetic and molecular analysis of two both observed, so that many features of BRR-Syndrome are also consid- families with FRAXE mutation; implications for genetic coun- ered as major and minor criteria for CS. We describe a 6-year-old boy with selling and prenatal diagnosis mild mental retardation, who was seen for evaluation of muscular weak- M. I. Tejada1, P. Botella2, M. A. Lpez Arztegui3, F. Mozo de Rosales4, M. ness. Because of the additional presence of lipomas and a mild macro- Lpez Valverde4, M. L. Onaindia1, M. Molina1 cephaly BRR was suspected. Mutation analysis revealed a heterozygous 1Genetic Unit, Basurto Hospital; Bilbao, Spain; 2Dept. of Paediatrics, missence mutation G389Ain the PTEN-gene, thus confirming diagnosis of Txagorritxu Hospital; Vitoria, Spain; 3Genetic Laboratory, Cruces Hospital; BRR. The mutation was found in DNAfrom leucocytes as well as in DNA Baracaldo, Spain; 4Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Basurto Hospital; isolated from a lipoma. The mutation G389Ahas already been described Bilbao, Spain in a family with CS and is located in exon 5, a hotspot for CS mutations. itejada@hbas.osakidetza.net Our patient does not fulfill the recently revised diagnostic criteria for CS (J. FRAXE full mutations are rare and appear to be associated with mild men- Med. Genet. 2000; 37;828-830) used for selecting patients suitable for tal retardation and with a fragile site in Xq28. This is due to an abnormal molecular analysis. The low mutation detection rate in BRR patients could expanded GCC repeat, adjacent to a methylated CpG island proximal to either be due to genetic heterogeneity or to the uncertainty concerning the the FMR2 gene. As part of a routine diagnosis, all individuals referred to us exact phenotype and clinical spectrum of BRR. More patients with macro- for Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) study, and tested FRAXAnegative, were cephaly, muscular weakness and presence of lipomas should be screened studied for FRAXE mutation. Among 485 index case patients, 2 were iden- for mutations in the PTEN-gene in order to determine the phenotypic vari- tified with the FRAXE full mutation, both with cytogenetic expression of the ability and try to establish diagnostic criteria for BRR. fragile site (29 and 23% respectively) and with no history of mental retar- dation. One of them has an autistic disorder with severe MR an a dysmor- P0445.Syndrome of ectodermal dyplasia, agenesis of corpus phic face similar to FXS. The second one is a nearly normal man with nor- callosum, primary hypothyreoidism and mental retardation; mal phenotype but who had learning difficulties at school when he was a an entity? child. Their families were also studied, with a total of 16 members at risk I. Kennerknecht1, M. Herrmann1, T. Neumann1, H. Stnder2, J. Horst1, H. tested. We found 6 of them normal (3 men and 3 women) and 10 carrier Traupe2 women (4 premutated and 6 fully mutated). None of these women present 1Institut fr Humangenetik; Mnster, Germany; 2Zentrum fr Dermatologie; any type of mental impairment. The last sample studied was a fully mutat- Mnster, Germany ed female foetus that was spontaneously aborted after obtaining chorionic kennerk@uni-muenster.de villi for prenatal diagnosis. Although the GCC expansion was greater than We present a 2 year old boy born at term by cesarean section after an 0.8 kb, it was unmethylated in the majority of the tissues studied by us. So, uneventful pregnancy; birth weight was 3.080 g, length 52 cm, head cir- even though molecular study of FRAXE mutation is now available, further cumference 37 cm. The non consanguineous parents, 32 and 36 years, studies are nedeed for the purpose of genetic counselling and prenatal are healthy and the family history is negative. The boy showed cranio- diagnosis. facial dysmorphism (dolichocephaly, frontal bossing, low set ears, and retro-, microgenie), signs of ectodermal dysplasia (sparse and fine hair P0443.Eight years experience of direct molecular testing for with microscopically kinky and irregular hair shaft partly curved by different Myotonic dystrophy in Wales thickness of the cuticula; late and irregular dentition with one splitted inci- P. Harper1, S. Fokstuen1,2, L. Meredith1, L. Myring1, D. Ravine1 sivus, clinically reduced sweating), hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, eye 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College of Medicine; fundus with peripheral pigment anomalies, primary hypothyreoidism, and Cardiff, United Kingdom; 2Current address; Division of Medical Genetics, lateral fistula of the neck. At the age of 2 years severe psychomotoric and University Hospital; Geneva, Switzerland mental retardation was obvious. Other findings such as chromosome SivFokstuen@gmx.ch analysis (46,XY) and bone age were normal. Ectodermal dysplasias (ED) Since the identification of the specific gene defect in 1992 direct molecular forms a large and complex nosologic group (Pinheiro and Freire-Maia testing for the Myotonic dystrophy mutation has developed as a wide- (1994), AJMG 53;153ff). Reports of ED with CNS malformations and/or pri- spread service in clinical practice. Between 1992 and 2000, the Molecular mary hypothyreoidism are rare. There is one other report with two unrelat- Diagnostic laboratory of the Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff has per- ed patients showing the same symptoms as our patient (Silengo et al. formed a total of 526 tests; 292 of these have been for the population of (1998) AJMG 35;157ff). Together with our observation we suggest that this Wales (population 2,9 million). 213 of the samples from Wales were is one entity. referred by clinical geneticists and 79 by other medical specialists, mainly paediatricians and neurologists. Data on the reason of referral, the pedi- P0446.Phenotype of a terminal dup(4)(p15.3-16.3) with sever- gree and clinical status as well as the outcome of testing were available for al facial features of MPS 1 282. As no test result showed an equivocal repeat size, direct mutation M. Tschernigg,E.Petek, P.M.Kroisel,W.Emberger,H.Zierler,K.Wagner analysis for myotonic dystrophy can be considered as a very accurate and Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Graz; Graz, specific test to differentiate normal and disease associated alleles. There Austria were 200 diagnostic investigations on symptomatic patients (103 abnor- michaela.tschernigg@kfunigraz.ac.at mal), 78 presymptomatic tests (16 abnormal, 62 normal) and 4 prenatal We report on a 3 year old female patient with a de novo inverted duplica- diagnosis (2 abnormal, 2 normal). In 117 symptomatic patients with a neg- tion of the distal segment of the short arm of chromosome 4 corresponding ative family history only 33 proved to have the mutation, reflecting the lack to the following karyotype; 46,XX,dup(4)(p15.3-16.3). This leads to a par- of specificity of clinical symptoms in myotonic dystrophy. Anormal result tial trisomy 4p(15.3-16.3). Most striking clinical findings are; microcephaly, was also found in 9 out of 77 symptomatic patients with a positive family deep-set eyes, short pug nose, full cheeks, low-set hairline, bilateral simi- history. Only 7 of the 16 individuals with an abnormal presymptomatic test an crease as well as clinodactyly of upper and lower limbs and a psy- result showed no clinical abnormality on examination, supporting the high chomotor retardation (being able to sit with 12 months and to walk with 24Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 187 months) with no speech development so far. Facial appearance is some- left 2nd toe, broad foot with deep creases on the soles, soft tissue tumor what coarse, as was already described for 4p duplications. The proposita on the right knee, varicose veins, cutis marmorata. Ultrasound examination described here shows some similarities to MPS I patients, resulting in a at 26 weeks of gestation was normal. Patient 2 was first seen as infant storage disease like facial expression. It is interesting in this context that because of macrocephaly, hemihypertrophy and cutaneous hemangiomas. the IDUA- (alpha-L-iduronidase) -gene is mapped to this duplicated region At 9 years of age she showed macrocephaly (OFC 60.5), hyperostosis of and could be responsible for some of those facial abnormalities. The the skull, severe asymmetry of the face, broad depressed nasal bridge, development of this facial appearance will have to be documented for a hypertrophy of the right half of the tongue, cutaneous hemangiomas, long time evaluation and also biochemical studies of enzyme activity will hepatosplenomegaly, rightsided hemihypertrophy, right arm and leg were be achieved. Aprecise breakpoint characterization by high resolution chro- longer than the left. Patient 3 at birth demonstrated hemihypertrophy. At 11 mosome banding, whole chromosome painting as well as by using site years of age he showed asymmetry of the face, mild hypertrophy of the specific YAC probes was performed. No deletion, but a duplication of the right 3rd and 4th fingers and left 3rd and 4th toes, soft tissue tumors on the very distal Wolf-Hirschhorn-critical region was demonstrated. Aphenotype- lumbar region and on the right femur, cutis marmorata, leftsided hemihy- genotype correlation analysis in combination with an extensive literature pertrophy, his left arm and leg were longer than the right ones. We discuss review was undertaken to allow a further delineation of partial trisomy 4p. wide spectrum of manifestations and severity of PS on the basis of our findings in comparison to the literature data. P0447. The Mercedes Benz syndrome; variant of Crouzon syndrome? P0450.Identification of a novel 14 bp deletion in Cx32 Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee1, S. G. Kant1, J. M. Vaandrager2, E. A. J. Peeters3, A. H. Weirich-Schwaiger1, S. Kiechl2, A. R. Janecke1 Clement-de Boers3, M. H. Breuning1 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University of Innsbruck; 1Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2University Innsbruck, Austria; 2Department of Neurology, University-Hospital of Inns- Hospital Rotterdam; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 3Medical Center bruck; Innsbruck, Austria Haaglanden; Den Haag, The Netherlands Helga.Weirich@uibk.ac.at y.hilhorst@kgc.azl.nl CMTX is an X-linked dominant hereditary motor sensory neuropathy with Acase is presented with the clinical picture of the Mercedes Benz syn- slow nerve conduction velocity (NCV). Affected males exhibit a moderate drome, characterised by premature closure of the lambdoid sutures and to severe phenotype, whereas females usually have a mild neuropathy. the posterior part of the sagital suture. As far as we know no patients with The course of the disease is progressive over many years but does not Mercedes Benz syndrome are reported in the literature with a mutation in decrease lifespan. CMTX is associated with Cx32 mutations in most one of the fibroblast growth factor receptor genes causing craniosynosto- cases. Cx32 maps to Chromosome Xq13 and codes for a Gap junction sis. Mutation analysis in our patient revealed a mutation in the FGFR2 beta-1 protein which is found in central and peripheral myelin. We gene previously described in 2 Crouzon families. The clinical phenotype of sequenced the whole Cx32 coding region contained in one single exon of those patients was not described however the Crouzon syndrome is known a female index patient. Thereby we identified a novel deletion of 14 bp, to have a very variable expression. Our hypothesis is that the Mercedes comprising nucleotides 829 to 843. Family history revealed X-linked dom- Benz syndrome is a variant of Crouzon syndrome. Mutation analysis in inant inheritance in the three generation family with 5 affected males and other patients diagnosed as having the Mercedes Benz Syndrome is pend- 5 obligate carriers. Onset of clinical symptoms in affected persons was ing. within the second decade of life with gradual progression. The mutation 829 del 14 bp is associated with a highly variable degree of clinical involve- P0448.Translocation 2q;12q; Arare Chromosomal Aberration ment in female carriers. Associated to Turner Symdrome A. C. Bertoncin1, J. I. F. Neri2 P0451.Prader - Willi syndrome - case report. 1Uniararas - Unio das Faculdades da Funda o Hermnio Ometto; Z. Krumina,B. Maliseva, I. Balode, R. Kamerade, I. Grivina, R. Lugovska Araras, Brazil; 2Ambulatrio de Gentica Clnica - Hospital e Maternidade State Medical Genetics center; Riga, Latvia Jundia; Jundia, Brazil clinic@gc.bsg.lv bertocin@yahoo.com.br Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a disorder of chromosome 15. The cardi- Excepting in the cases of hematologic diseases (e.g. leukemia), transloca- nal features are neonatal and infantile central hypotonia, improving with tions involving chromosomes of the groups Aand C are relatively uncom- age, feeding problems in infancy, excessive weight gain between 1 and 6 mon, especially among the chromosomes 2 and 12. Turner syndrome years of age, generalised obesity, hypogonadism, hyperphagia, develop- (TS), not rarely, can be associated to others aberrations involving autoso- mental delay. The most common serious complication is NIDDM. We pres- mal chromosomes or even situations of reciprocal translocation between ent a patient with PWS, where diagnosis is confirmed by FISH technique the chromosome X and other autosomal. However until moment no case first in Latvia. The proband is the second child in the family, born at 36 of TS was reported associated to a translocation 2;12. We report the case weeks of gestation (weight 2900g, height 50 cm). Till 3rd months of life he of a seven years old girl with severe mental retardation, short stature, was tube-fed, had hypotonia and poor weight gain was till 1,5 years, after- microcephaly, up-slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, low-set and wards rapid gain with excessive weight. At the age 11 appeared fatty liver posteriorly rotated ears with mild microtia, anteverted nares, short and flat symptoms. At the examination proband (13 years old) had many clinical philtrum, narrow palate, pectus excavatum, hypoplastic nipples, short findings characteristic for PWS; general obesity (106 kg), height 154 cm, broad neck with low hairline, brachydactyly with short four to five hypogonadism, small hands and foot, strabismus, myopia, speech articu- metacarpals bilaterally, palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis, increased skin lation defects, thick saliva. He had moderate mental retardation and sleep pigmentation in all lower part of the body, anteriorly placed anus and disturbances. Standard chromosome analysis on cultured lymphocytes hypoplasia of genitals. Among others clinical and laboratorial investiga- (GTG banding) revealed changes of 15(q11q13), after with FISH technique tions, we detach the normal hematologic evaluation and the karyotype the microdeletion was confirmed. It was the first time in Latvia when FISH 45,X,inv(9)(p11q12)t(2;12)(q23;q24). Parents karyotypes were normal. As is used to find out microdeletion. nor all the features observed in the patient can be referred to TS, a revi- sion of the clinical picture and of the chromosomal aberrations involved P0452.Birth Defects Monitoring (BDM) in St.Petersburg; Real- was done and discussed. ity or Rhetoric? M. O. Mkheidze P0449. Proteus syndrome; clinical manifestations in three The Medical Academy for Postgraduate Education (MAPE); St.Petersburg, individuals. Russian Federation I. Naumchik, N. Rumyntseva, R. Chmel mkheidze@netscape.net ; mmkheidze@yahoo.com Institute for Hereditary Diseases; Minsk, Belarus To Frau Dorothea Buchberger and Dr. Robert Buchberger St.Petersburg is lazjuk@bcsmi.minsk.by a city of about 4.5m of citizens. The number of babies with congenital Proteus syndrome (PS, MIM; 176920) is a rare congenital hamartomatous anomalies was 123 - 150 per 10,000 births (1986,1997). To identify all syndrome comprising hemihypertrophy, asymmetrical overgrowth of differ- cases of malformed infants and fetuses is complex, intricate, long-term ent parts of the body in association with various cutaneous abnormalities, process. Data observed are very responsible and BDM must be done cor- and subcutaneous masses. We report the clinical data of three unrelated rectly. Are our physicians well educated in this field? This question is the patients with normal intelligence. All parents were healthy and unrelated. aim of this study. Materials, methods. 194 of the physicians (gynecologists, Patient 1, a 28-year-old pregnant women, third child of 36 years old par- obstetricians-50%, micropediatricians-12%, pediatricians-32%, different ents, at birth showed hypertrophy of right leg. Examination demonstrated specialists-6%) were interviewed with the help of 3 questionnaires. The rightsided hemihypertrophy, face asymmetry, gigantic right 2nd finger and first questionnaire contains 4 positions focused on monitoring. There are188 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 12 specific terms for phenotype description in the second. The third ques- P0455.Goldberg  Shprintzen Syndrome In Three Children Of tionnaire includes 50 questions associated closely with medical genetics Consanguineous Italian Parents and dysmorphology. Results. The first and the second questionnaires M. Giovannucci Uzielli, E. Lapi, A. Cecconi, G. Ricotti, L. Ombroni, E. demonstrate unsatisfactory knowledge of human genetics and dysmor- Andreucci, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, L. Giunti phology. The mean marks of the both tests were below 50 %. 4 out of 12 Genetics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Univer- terms are absolutely unknown. All doctors think that BDM is very important sity of Florence, A.Meyer Children Hospital; Florence, Italy project and deals with medical genetics. Nobody says that he (she) is well uzielli_ml@unifi.it educated in these medical fields. All doctors consider that it is necessary Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome (OMIM 235730) is a very rare genetic dis- to have special short training course before their participation in BDM. The order; an Autosomal Recessive mode of inheritance was suggested, based genetic basis of BDM, the intensive free fortnights course, has been upon two sibs in one pedigree with unaffected parents, and two consan- organized by our Department, but only 19 doctors decided to use this lucky guineous pedigrees. Common clinical features in reported subjects were chance. The main conclusion of this investigation consists in the fact that severe mental retardation, microcephaly, distinctive face, and Hirschprung BDM has weak basis for successful realization in St.Petersburg. disease (HSCR). Coloboma of the iris and neurological abnormalities were not always present; submucous cleft palate was only reported by Goldberg P0453.Acrofacial dysostosis and midline defects in two male and Shprintzen in the first description. We report the clinical data observed foetuses ; a new X-linked recessive syndrome ? in three children (two females and one male) of consanguineous parents. O. Boute1, A. Moerman1, A. Coeslier1, L. Devisme2, S. Manouvrier1 The similarity of some clinical aspect to the phenotype of the Cornelia de 1Hopital Jeanne de Flandre; Lille, France; 2Hpital Calmette; Lille, France Lange syndrome seems very interesting. One further child is presently oboute@lille-chru.fr being studied; a young girl, born to non-consanguineous parents of unre- We report on two male foetuses, whose mothers were sisters. Both preg- lated families, referred to our Centre for the molecular analysis of MECP2 nancies were medically terminated because of ultrasonographic detection gene on the basis of a natural history apparently suggestive for Rett syn- of similar multiple malformations including severe limb defects. The foe- drome; in this patient we didnt find mutations of the MECP2 coding region. tuses aged 20 (case 1) and 24 weeks (case 2) gestation respectively pre- We recently started a wide molecular genome screening in the first family, sented with; 1) severe intra-uterine growth retardation, 2) abnormal face for the identification of a Goldberg-Shprintzen locus, and we will present reminiscent of mandibulofacial dysostosis, 3) transposition of great vessels the preliminary results. with pulmonary atresia and ventricular septal defect, 4) bifid thymus, 5) sin- gle median kidney and absent gall-bladder, 6) scoliosis, 7) bilateral asym- P0456. Evidence for autosomal recessive inheritance in the metric radial aplasia and oligodactyly. Additional findings were in case 1; infantile spinal muscular atrophy variant with congenital frac- omphalocele, absent diaphragm and abnormal larynx with tracheo- tures. esophageal fistula; and in case 2; humeral and fibular aplasia. No cerebral W. Courtens1, A. Johansson2, B. Dachy3, F. Avni4, N. Telerman-Toppet3, abnormality was observed in both foetuses, in particular they had no E. Vamos1, H. Scheffer5 hydrocephaly. The chromosomes were normal in both foetuses and their 1Department of Medical Genetics, Brugmann University Hospital; Brussels, parents. Therefore the patients, cousins through their healthy mothers, had Belgium; 2Department of Neonatology, Childrens University Hospital a lethal acrofacial dysostosis with midline defects. Several diagnoses Queen Fabiola; Brussels, Belgium; 3Department of Neurology, University could be discussed; a severe form of NAGER acrofacial dysostosis, anoth- Hospital Brugmann; Brussels, Belgium; 4Department of Paediatric Radiol- er case of the lethal acrofacial dysostosis described by Rodriguez et al ogy, Childrens University Hospital Queen Fabiola; Brussels, Belgium; [1990], or the association of NAGER and VACTERLsyndromes. However 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen; Groningen, none of these hypothesis could explain the X-linked recessive inheritance. The Netherlands Furthermore absence of cerebral malformation in both patients allows wcourten@ulb.ac.be excluding a VACTERL+ hydrocephaly association even if this association We report on a female newborn with a severe acute form of SMA, con- has been described in association with branchial arch defects. Then we genital bone fractures, camptodactyly of fingers and toes, bilateral hip dis- suggest that our patients present with a new form of X-linked recessive location and congenital heart defect, with early lethal outcome. DNAstud- inherited acrofacial dysostosis. ies showed the absence of homozygosity for a deletion of exons 7 and 8 of the SMNt gene. A new lethal syndrome consisting of infantile spinal P0454. A newborn Down syndrome baby-boy with a partial muscular atrophy (SMA) and multiple congenital bone fractures in 2 sibs isochromosome 21q has been suggested in 1991. Recently, another infant with a form of SMA N. Horelli-Kuitunen1, A. Nissn1, A. Slunga-Tallberg1, M. Grsbeck2, H. and congenital fractures, was reported, thus validating the suggestion of a Koillinen3, R. Salonen4 distinct and rare form of SMAassociated with congenital bone fractures. 1Medix Laboratory services Ltd; Espoo, Finland; 2Kymenlaakso Central Autosomal recessive inheritance was suggested in the original report, but Hospital; Kotka, Finland; 3Family Federation of Finland; Helsinki, Finland; no history of consanguinity was noted in the second. X-linked inheritance 4Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland could however not be excluded since those three affected infants were nina.horelli-kuitunen@medix.fi male. Since our case is a female, an X-linked inheritance can be exclud- We report a newborn baby with Down syndrome caused by partial isochro- ed. Since she was furthermore born to first cousin parents, it suggests an mosome of chromosome 21q. The chromosomes of the baby were studied autosomal recessive inheritance in this rare variant of SMAtype 1 with con- based on clinical findings - such as low nasal bridge, palmar simian creas- genital fractures. We further conclude that this SMA variant, with early es, upslanting palpebral fissures, loose skin of the neck and muscular lethal outcome, is probably not linked to 5q. hypotonia - typical for Down syndrome. The karyotype of the baby turned out to include a normal chromosome number, but a partial isochromosome P0457. Robinow Syndrome; Report of a case with bilateral, 21q; the karyotype was 46,XY,i(21)(q22). FISH procedure using locus spe- postaxial hexadactyly and review cific probe for band region 21q22.13-22.2 revealed one signal in the nor- B. Weissenrieder1, D. Schmitz1, R. Sauter2, G. Wolff1 mal chromosome 21 and two signals in the isochromosome 21. Therefore, 1Institut fr Humangenetik; Freiburg, Germany; 2Kinderabteilung St. Hed- the so far known critical region for Down syndrome was trisomic in the wig am St. Josefskrankenhaus; Freiburg, Germany genome of this baby. The chromosome analysis of the parents showed a weissenr@humangenetik.ukl.uni-freiburg.de normal karyotype for the father, but an abnormal karyotype for the mother Introduction; Robinow syndrome is a short stature syndrome with charac- containing an inverted chromosome 21; the karyotype was teristic facies, mesomelic limb shortening and hypoplastic genitalia. Both 46,XX,inv(21)(p11.2q21). FISH procedure with the same locus specific autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance have been probe as mentioned above revealed only one specific signal in each chro- reported. The autosomal recessive cases seem to have more severe mosome 21. The partial isochromosome 21q of this baby must have result- brachymelia, and in addition digital anomalies and costovertebral segmen- ed through crossing over in the meiosis during gamete formation. This tation defect. The gene mutated in the autosomal recessive form has been case shows an elevated risk for Down syndrome for a carrier of an invert- mapped to chromosome 9q22, a region that overlaps the locus for autoso- ed chromosome 21. In the near future the specific genes causing the phe- mal dominant brachydactyly type B. Recently, the ROR2 gene has being notype of Down syndrome will be revealed and gene tests will help to con- identified as mutated in brachydactylia type B and is regarded as a candi- firm diagnosis also in these rare cases. date gene for recessive Robinow syndrome. Reported mutations suggest that a loss of activity of ROR2 causes recessive Robinow syndrome. Case report; We report on a 15-month-old girl with classical Robinow Syndrome. The girl is the first child of healthy, non-consanguineous parents. The fam- ily history is inconspicuous. Clinical examination of the father revealed aPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 189 notched tongue, dental anomalies, a preauricular tag on the left side, clin- P0461. Progeroid disorders-two new unrelated cases odactyly II and V, and a double mammilla on both sides. Clinical symptoms N. Rumyantseva, I. Naumchik, V. Kulak in the child include short arms and legs, characteristic face with hyper- Institute for Hereditary Diseases; Minsk, Belarus telorism, frontal bossing, triangular mouth, midface hypoplasia, dental lazjuk@bcsmi.minsk.by abnormalities, notched maxilla, micrognathia and macrocephalus. In addi- Progeroid syndromes is a heterogeneouse group of rare genetic disor- tion, the girl had bilateral postaxial hexadactyly, a symptom which has not ders, common characterized by premature senility signs. Growth failure, been described in Robinow syndrome before. An X-ray excluded a cos- mental retardation, malformations, clinical course, vital prognosis are vari- tovertebral segmentation defect. Achromosomal analysis showed a nor- able. We present clinical data of two new patients with normal intelligence mal female karyotype. Mutation analysis of the ROR2 gene is in progress. and progeroid pictures. Patient 1; a 43-year-old female looked healthy till Conclusions; Aliterature review shows that this is the first case of Robinow the age of 38 years. She was married, had a healthy son. Examination Syndrome with hexadactyly. Microsymptoms of this syndrome in first showed scoliosis, reduction of subcutaneous tissue, marked wrinkling skin degree relatives have not yet been described. Therefore, we cannot decide of face and neck, thinning greying hair, heart failure. No cataracts, diabetes whether the polydactyly is indicative of dominant or recessive inheritance. mellitus were found. Decreased replicative life-span of cultured skin fibrob- It is not clear whether the symptoms in the father can be interpreted as lasts were revealed. Werner syndrome was suspected. Patient 2; a 18- microsymptoms of autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome. The lack of year-old girl (W=42kg, H=155cm, OFC=54cm) was born at term (G2; P2) costovertebral segmentation defects in the child argues against autosomal with BW 3500g, BL52cm to unrelated healthy young parents. Her elder recessive inheritance. These questions will only be resolved by further brother was healthy. She looked normal at birth till the age of 6 years. molecular analysis of this syndrome. Senility signs were noted in early childhood, showing progressing, but not Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome appearance. Short stature, failure to thrive, P0458.Patients with Turner syndrome (TS); point of view of a hypotrichosis, bird face, protruding eyes, beaked nose, progressive loss policlinic endocrinologist of subcutaneous tissue, atrophic changes of skin and muscles, thin limbs N. Gladkova1, M. O. Mkheidze2 with scleroderma-like lesions, prominent joints, flexion contractures, hyper- 1Childrens out-patient Dept. N 38; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; keratosis on the soles, heart failure, large abdomen, hepatosplenomegaly, 2The Medical Academy for Postgraduate Education (MAPE); St.Peters- diabetes mellitus, diminished sexual development were observed at follow burg, Russian Federation up examinations. No cataracts were recorded yet. Laboratory and skin mkheidze@netscape.net biopsy results will be presented. Is it Werner syndrome with early onset or TS is a sex chromosome aneuploidy with its incidence of about 1; 3000 live new juvenile form of progeroid disorder? Wide variability of Werner syn- female births in St.Petersburg. All of them are registered by Municipal Cen- dromes phenotype and differential diagnosis will be discussed. ter of Medical Genetics (MCMG), but they have constant health service at their district out-patient Department. The objectives of this study were (1) P0462. Williams syndrome unmasking autosomal recessive to summarize our patients data and (2) to determine their necessities. We Chronic Granulomatous Disease used self-report survey methodology. The questionnaire was designed to D. Donnai1, K. A. Metcalfe1, P. Bolton-Maggs2, T. Segal3, M. Tassabehji4 solicit information about the proband - parents health and lifestyle habits. 1St Marys hospital; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Alder Hey Childrens There are 69000 children, aged from some days to 16 years, under obser- Hospital; Liverpool, United Kingdom; 3University College Hospital; London, vation of policlinic endocrinologist. Eight of persons, aged from 6 to 16 United Kingdom; 4University of Manchester; Manchester, United Kingdom years, have TS. It is only the one case of TS recognized at the maternity kaym@central.cmht.nwest.nhs.uk hospital. The rest were not diagnosed till 6-13 years old. The parents of our Williams-Beuren syndrome (WS) is a developmental disorder caused by a probands are young in years (at the moment to conceive the mothers were hemizygous microdeletion of ~1.5Mb at chromosomal location 7q11.23. 22- 25 years old and the fathers were 23-27). 50% of the couples reported Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare inherited condition disor- that they had been exposed to environmental hazards. Data of the Cyto- der characterised by chronic and recurrent infection. In CGD the failure of genetic Laboratory of MCMG are following;45,?{4}; 45,?(30)/46,??(8),9ph; phagocytic cells to produce superoxide upon the ingestion of microorgan- 47,???(60)/45,?(40); 46,X,del (X)(p11); 46,X,del(X)(q10).The main prob- isms, due to a lesion in a membrane-associated NADPH-oxidase, leads to lems of our respondents are financial difficulties, problems of social reha- an enhanced susceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections. Although bilitation and interpersonal communication. Sometimes they feel them- defects in the X chromosome-linked cytochrome account for the majority selves like children neglected and forgotten. We suppose that it is neces- of CGD patients, up to 35% are due to an autosomal recessive disease. Of sary to join hands with these families and organize special center for them. these, greater than 90% have been shown to be defective in the synthesis The best health service and social support of TS patients and their families of a 47-kDa cytosolic component of the oxidase (p47-phox/NCF1 gene) must become the principal purpose of this center mapping to the WS critical region at 7q11.23. We have identified a patient with WS and CGD who has a molecular lesion in both copies of the NCF1 P0460.Some family cases of ophthalmic pathology gene. Molecular analysis of somatic hybrids from this patient showed that O. K. Janvareva, M. O. Mkheidze the NCF1 gene is encompassed within the WS deletion on one chromo- The Medical Academy for Postgraduate Education; St.Petersburg, Russ- some 7 homologue. PCR analysis of the genomic DNA using ARMS ian Federation primers specific for a common dinucleotide deletion (detected in ~90% of mkheidze@netscape.net p47-phox deficient CGD cases) at a GTGTtandem repeat in exon 2 iden- Modern medical genetics has begun to make a significant contribution to tified this mutation in the NCF1 gene on the other chromosome 7 homo- the diagnosis of ophthalmology. This study accentuates the great impor- logue. The resulting frameshift leads to a premature stop codon further tance of cooperation between an ophthalmologist and a medical geneticist downstream. This study describes the first case of a WS patient with CGD to diagnose hereditary diseases. Four families with different rare hereditary and provides an easy method for the rapid detection of CGD patients diseases are under our observation. Goldmann -Favre disorder (MIM homozygous for this common NCF1 mutation. 268100) was diagnosed in 2 sisters, aged 10 and 11 years, and their moth- er, aged 32.This disorder is characterized by hyaloideoretinal degeneration P0463. An apparently balanced 2;16 translocation co-segre- with retinoschisis and early hemeralopia. Stargardt disease, juvenile mac- gating with macrocephaly and autistic like features and some ular degeneration, (MIM 2482000) was observed in 2 unrelated families. phenotypic overlap with Goldenhar Syndrome There are 2 affected brothers with onset of this disease at 7 and 8 years in T. R. P. Cole1, R. Negrycz2, S. Larkins3 the first family. We revealed a brother and a sister suffered from the same 1Clinical Genetics Unit; Birmingham, United Kingdom; 2Child Health Direc- disorder in another family. All parents arent affected. Crouzon disease, torate North Staffordshire Hospital NHS Trust; Stoke on Trent, United craniofacial dysostosis, (MIM123500) was diagnosed in a father, aged 30 Kingdom; 3West Midlands Regional Genetics Service; Birmingham, United years, and his daughter, aged 3 years. The disease is characterized by Kingdom cranial synostosis, hypertelorism, bilateral exophthalmos, external strabis- trevor.cole@bham-womens.thenhs.com mus and some other facial dysmorphic features. Both father and his We report a father (AB) and son (MB) with a balanced translocation daughter suffer from partial optic atrophy. To make a diagnosis and genet- 46,XY,t(2;16)(q21;q13) and distinctive features. Neither the translocation, ic prognosis and to use an adequate treatment we apply special methods nor the phenotype is present in ABs parents. At birth, MB had an imperfo- of investigation suitable for ophthalmology and medical genetics. Now we rate anus, talipes, an ASD, a limbic dermoid, dysplastic ears with a flat top continue to work on the pedigrees of our clients to reveal new cases or mild to the helix and prominent lobes, and pre auricular tags. In childhood, a features of the diseases among their relatives. Our cooperation improves pervasive developmental disorder with specific communication and behav- quality of health service and enriches our experience and erudition. ioural difficulties was noted and a diagnosis of Aspergers syndrome (AS) was subsequently made. He has relative macrocephaly, (OFC 97th centile,190 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology height 10th centile). AB has similarly shaped ears, anal atresia, short bands. We report on another case with SOD, similar digital anomalies and stature and relative macrocephaly. Although never diagnosed with Asperg- multiple angiomas. This girl was the first child of young healthy parents. ers, AB recalled childhood behavioural similarities to his son. The pheno- Clinical examination at birth at 37 weeks of pregnancy (length 46 cm, type overlaps with a branchial arch syndrome (BAS) and the additional fea- weight 2740g, OFC 32 cm) revealed multiple angiomas, plagiocephaly, tures, including the limbic dermoid are similar to Goldenhar syndrome. high forehead, strabismus, and horizontal nystagmus. Hands abnormali- Goldenhar is not typically associated with macrocephaly or AS and there- ties included bilateral hypoplasia of the fifth finger affecting the second and fore this could be a separate association with the alternate breakpoint. The third phalanx, bilateral syndactyly of the fourth and fifth finger, and a con- macrocephaly/ autistism association has been recognised in recent years, striction on the first phalanx of the second left finger. She sat at 9 months including autosomal dominant macrocephaly (ADM). Literature review did of age and could not walk at 17 months of age. Height and weight were  not identify reports of BAS in association with these candidate loci and 2 standard deviations. Investigations revealed SOD, optic nerve hypopla- indeed chromosome 22 abnormalities are described with Goldenhar like sia, normal chromosomes, and isolated growth hormone deficiency. The phenotypes. However cases with anal and cardiac abnormalities and 16q pathogenesis of SOD with digital anomalies is unknown. It is unlikely that deletions have been reported. ADM has been reported with PTEN muta- random phenomena could produce similar defects in all 4 patients. All tions but not with linkage or chromosome abnormalities at 2q or 16q, how- cases were sporadic and no parental consanguinity was known. Further ever, sib pair analysis has suggested that proximal 2q could be a candidate reports will help delineating this association as a new entity. loci for an autism susceptibility gene. P0467. Tetrasomy 18p; Syndrome definition based on 6 new P0464.The Meier-Gorlin syndrome; Report of eight additional cases and literature review cases and review T. Eggermann1, E. Prott2, K. Eggermann1, M. Cohen3, S. Stengel- E. M. H. F. Bongers1, J. M. Opitz2, A. Fryer3, P. Sarda4, R. C. M. Hen- Rutkowski4, U. A. Mau5 nekam5, H. van Bokhoven6, B. C. J. Hamel6, N. V. A. Knoers6 1Institute of Human Genetics; Aachen, Germany; 2Institute of Human 1Department of Human Genetics University Medical Center Nijmegen; Genetics; Essen, Germany; 3Kinderzentrum; Mnchen, Germany; 4Institut Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical fr Medizinische Genetik; Mnchen, Germany; 5Department of Medical Genetics; Salt Lake City, United States; 3Mersey Regional Clinical Genet- Genetics; Tbingen, Germany ics Service; Liverpool, United Kingdom; 4Department of Medical Genetics; teggermann@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de Montpellier, France; 5Department of Pediatrics and department of Clinical Isochromosomes of the short arm of chromosome 18 [i(18p)] are the most Genetics, Academic Medical Centre; Amsterdam, The Netherlands; frequent isochromosomes in humans. They can be detected in a non- 6Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen; mosaic state by conventional cytogenetic analysis in cells of different tis- Nijmegen, The Netherlands sues, confirmation is carried out by FISH. The majority of i(18p)s originates e.bongers@antrg.azn.nl from maternal meiosis II, followed by a postzygotic transverse centromere The Meier-Gorlin Syndrome (MGS) or Ear, Patella, Short stature syndrome misdivision. Children with tetrasomy 18p show consistent features sug- (EPS;MIM 224690) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, characterized gesting a characteristic phenotype. However, the aberration is rare and the by the association of bilateral microtia, a/hypoplasia of the patellae, and clinical picture remains unprecise and not well known. Published reports severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation. Twenty-one cases have mention psychomotor and mental retardation, muscular hypertonia, micro- been reported in literature thus far. Here, we report on eight patients and cephaly, facial asymmetry, high-arched eyebrows, epicanthus, strabism, compare them with previously described cases. One of the present cases short palpebral fissures, small pinched nose, prominent upper lip, micro- had previously undescribed genital anomalies. There is a difference in genia, low-set/malformed ears, scoliosis/kyphosis, long fingers with con- facial characteristics between patients reported in early infancy and those tractures and feet malformations. To define the tetrasomy 18p phenotype described at older age; follow-up of patients is needed to substantiate this more precisely, we collected data of 6 children with supernumerary i(18p) changing facial phenotype. We recommend radiographic survey of the investigated in our institutions as well as 34 literature cases for which clin- patellae in patients at older age to investigate the weight of absent or ical data were available. A frequency based spectrum of clinical and hypoplastic patellae in the diagnosis of the syndrome. Based on the strik- anthropological features is elaborated. Regarding the developmental and ing similarities of specific morphological skeletal findings, Lacombe et al. behavioural phenotype, the results of video analyses performed in three of (Ann Genet, 1994;37;184-191) suggested that the MGS might be a human the 6 children will be given. equivalent to the short ear (se) murine disorder. The murine se phenotype is caused by homozygous mutations in Bone Morphogenetic Protein 5 P0468. Clinico-genetic markers of the bronchial asthma for- (BMP5). Molecular genetic studies including testing of candidate genes in mation MGS are presently being performed. e.bongers@antrg.azn.nl N. Kovalchuk Ivano-Frankivsk State Medical Academy; Ivano-Frankivsk, Ukraine P0465.Considerations on comorbidity in neurofibromatosis sluchyk@il.if.ua O. Brumariu, I. Miron, C. Rusu, M. Munteanu The study is aimed to evaluate the cytogenetic markers and the life quali- Childrens Hospital; Iasi, Romania ty in patients suffered from bronchial asthma (BA). 154 patients were brumariu@mail.dntis.ro enrolled in the study; 73 of them had non-allergic asthma, 81  mixed We present ten cases of neurofibromatosis type 1 diagnosed in the formed; 74  the disease of average severity and 80  severe course of Nephrology and Oncology Clinic of Iasi Childrens Hospital in order to dis- bronchial asthma. The control group included 40 healthy persons of the cuss different types of complications of this disorder. All the cases accom- same age. Clinical symptoms, the data of spirometry and pykflowmetry plished the diagnostic criteria and were confirmed by the geneticist. Most were studied. The specific AQ20 questionnaire was used for life quality complications were oncologic, nephrologic, ophtalmologic and dermato- evaluation. logic, but some other rare complications are discussed. Familial cases are The object of the cytogenetic research were epitheliocytes of mucous presented, with a comparison of the clinical expression in different affect- membrane of the oral walls and peripheral blood limphocytes. Somatic ed personswithin the same family. Aprotocol for the management of the cells kariogram indice changes were revealed in patients with BA(chrom- affected families is presented. In conclusion, we underline the importance atization index, sex chromatin, nucleolar and pathologically altered nuclei) of the complete examination and investigation of the patients with NF1 and testifying to violation of genome functional status. Decrease of chromatin their families, many of them presenting complicated forms of the disorder. transcription activity by 18  23%, increase of pathological nuclei number by 1.5  2.1 times, presence of heteropicnotic X-chromosome in males in P0466. Septo-optic dysplasia and digital anomalies; Another 14.8  18.3% of cells have been determined. Variations of indexes depend- observation ed on the severity of the disease. M. Ouache-Chardin1, V. Cormier-Daire1, J. Amiel1, F. Monceaux2, D. While making metaphase analysis of perypheral blood lymphocytes we Genevive1, D. Teillac3, A. Munnich1, L. Faivre1 have determined that in patients with hereditary tendency to BAthe level 1Dpartement de Gntique; Paris, France; 2Service dEndocrinologie of chromosome abberations prevailed over those in the control group by Pdiatrique; Paris, France; 3Service de Dermatologie Pdiatrique; Paris, 1.4  2.1 times. France Positive correlation between life quality improvement, indices of external lfaivre@hotmail.com respiration and cytogenetic markers have been revealed. Septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) is defined by a variable combination of absence of the septum pellucidum, optic nerve hypoplasia, and pituitary anomalies. SOD is extremely rare in syndromes. Interestingly, SOD has been reported three times with digital anomalies suggesting amnioticPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 191 P0469.The Description Of ACase Of AChromosome Translo- puted tomography were performed. The first case was characterized by cation renal and lower limbs asymmetry, which became worse with the evolution; A. Turitsa1, T. Kulakova1, I. Laputin2, G. Stefanenko2, E. Grusdeva2, E. a lipoma and hyperchromic lesions appeared. Although she had not filled Litvinovich1, S. Tokarev1 the main diagnostic criteria and had lost the follow-up, the hypothesis of 1State Medical Academy; Omsk, Russian Federation; 2Regional Genetic PS was kept. The second case presented progressive overgrowth of the Center; Omsk, Russian Federation feet, hemangioma, lipoma, skin thickness and hyperpigmentation, with pinicola@mailru.com cerebriform appearance of the soles, confirming the diagnosis of PS; feet The balanced and unbalanced translocation can pass from parents to chil- amputation was required. The third patient presented overgrowth of the dren and be a cause of a family accumulation of multiple developmental foot comprising metatarsal region; no other lesions were observed during defects because the chromosome apparatus is damaged. It leads to the a 5 years follow-up; PS diagnosis was disregarded and the hypothesis of violation of gene distribution to embryonic cells. Child T., was born in isolated gigantism of the foot was considered. This report reinforces the Omsk, by the 1st pregnancy. Mother is 20, father is 21. Genealogy is not need of a multidisciplinary approach, criterious evaluation and follow-up on complicated. Ultrasound on 34 week of pregnancy shows the indirect signs patients with the initial diagnosis of PS. of chromosome violation in fetus. The delivery was artificial on 39 week. The child had the signs of an arrested prenatal development; the mass is P0472.Clinical and genetical aspects of Williams-Beuren syn- 2000 g, the body length is 43 cm, the chest circumference is 28 cm, the drome head circumference is 32 cm. Phenotype; the parietal-occipital part of a G. von Beust1, A. Wessel2 head is plate, the frontal tubercles are protruded, the face cranial part pre- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Ger- vails brain one. Slight prognathy, the nose is beak-shaped, its end is many; 2University of Goettingen / Cardiology; Goettingen, Germany forked. The bridge of the nose is thick. The filter is short. Eye abnormali- h.woehler@t-online.deWas ties; microophtalmia and cataract. Mouth is small and round, lips are thin, The suspected diagnosis of Williams-Beuren syndrome, which is a retar- palate is of an arch-form, ears are low-set. The left ear is of a cup-form. dation syndrome with great clinical variability, was cause for comparison of Neck is short with pterygoideae plicae. There is also right ren hypoplasia; molecular genetic, molecular cytogenetic analysis to clinical symptoms. sacral sinus. Neurosonography showed agenesis of a corpus callosum. The results of the genetical analysis of a microdeletion of the elastin gene Karyotype of a child; 46, XX, der (13) t (6;13) (p21;q34) mat. region on chromosome 7 were compared to the clinical symptoms. Are there any differences between symptoms in case of deletion or non-dele- P0470. Waardenburg Syndrome Type 2 in a Turkish Family. tion? How informative are the molecular genetic, molecular cytogenetic Implications for the Importance of the Pattern of Fundus Pig- analysis? 44 patients with suspected diagnosis of WBS were examined mentation using molecular and molecular cytogenetic methods. The clinical symp- A. Muellner-Eidenboeck1, E. Moser1, H. Frisch2, A. Read3 toms as general symptoms, heart anomaly, dysmorphic signs and unusu- 1Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital; Vienna, Austria; 2Pae- al neurobehavioural features were reported during clinical investigation in diatric Department, University Hospital; Vienna, Austria; 3University standardized questionnaires. The genomic DNAof the patients and their Department of Medical Genetics, St.Mary Hosp.; Manchester, United King- parents was analyzed using microsatellite markers. In some cases (e. g. dom uninformative microsatellite studies) we also used fluorescence in situ andrea.muellner-eindenboeck@akh-wien.ac.at hybridization (FISH) with an elastin gene probe and performed a conven- Waardenburg syndrome type 2 (WS2) is a heterogenous disorder, in about tional chromosome banding analysis. 15 patients had a microdeletion. 4 10% of patients MITF gene mutations could be found, but for most cases patients had a deletion of the paternal allel and 7 patients showed the dele- the genetic basis is as yet unknown. The diagnostic criteria for WS2 tion of the maternal allel. The polymorphisms were of limited informative- include congenital sensorineural hearing loss, pigmentary disturbances of ness. In 2 cases microsatellite analysis was not able to determine whether the hair and of the iris, but pigmentary anomalies of the fundus are not con- the paternal or the maternal allel had been lost. In 2 cases the microsatel- sidered. ATurkish family with 2 of 3 sons showing clinical symptoms of lite analysis was uninformative so that FISH analysis was performed. All WS2 was investigated both clinically and genetically. Special attention was FISH analysis performed had an informative result. 80% of the children paid to the pattern of fundus pigmentation in relation to the severity of sen- with a microdeletion of chromosome 7q11.23 showed the typical dysmor- sorineural hearing loss. Genomic DNAsamples were tested for mutations phic signs, 70% exhibited the typical WBS behaviour pattern, 50% had a in the PAX3 and MITF genes. None of the individuals had dystopia can- specific heart anomaly. In contrast, in the group of children without a thorum, which is consistent with the clinical picture of WS2. One boy had chromsomal microdeletion only 30-40% showed typical dysmorphic signs, complete iris heterochromia with a brilliant blue iris on the left side. He and only 10% had a typical heart anomaly and none of them showed specific his brother had severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and fundus pig- behavioural changes. We found no indication to association of specific mentary anomalies with areas of hypopigmentation next to areas of dense symptoms with paternal versus maternal origin of the deletion. The FISH hyperpigmentation. The mother showed pigmentary mottling in the periph- analysis combined with a conventional chromosome banding analysis is ery of the fundus only. Ophthalmological and audiological evaluations of very informative for diagnostic values. The results are compared to data of the other family members were within normal limits. Single strand confor- literature. Children with developmental retardation and WBS dysmorphic mation polymorphism analysis of the PAX3 and MITF genes showed no signs and an unusual behaviour should be examined by molecular cytog- anomalies. Due to the conspicuous picture of pigment distribution one netic FISH analysis. If a microdeletion of band 7q11.23 is found a special might suggest that the clinical symptoms in WS2 could be the conse- cardiologic examination should be offered. quence of a disorder in melanocyte distribution in the respective target tis- sue. The genetic basis, as yet unknown in most cases of WS2, might be P0473.Promotion of Birth Defects Prevention Alliances found in a very late step of the pigmentation pathway. I. Baryliak1, I. Kharytonova1, W. Wertelecki2 1Ukrainian Birth Defects Center; Kyiv, Ukraine; 2University of South Alaba- P0471.Proteus syndrome ; Afrequently misdiagnosed condi- ma; Mobile, ALUnited States tion. bariliak@usch.kiev.ua. D. A. Teixeira, G. S. Oliveira, A. P. Marques-de-Faria Birth Defects (BD) Prevention Alliances at regional (Alabama), National Departamento de Gentica Mdica - Universidade Estadual de Campinas; (Ukraine), and International levels (World Alliance of Non-Governmental Campinas, Brazil Organizations for the Prevention of Birth Defects or WANGOPBD) provide artedan@yahoo.com a basis for two generalizations and a recommendation. Abroad definition Proteus Syndrome (PS) is a rare and complex hamartomatous condition, of BD as any structural or functional anomaly caused by genetic or envi- characterized by overgrowth of multiple tissues with partial gigantism and ronmental factors that impact embryonal, fetal, and child development asymmetry of the limbs and viscera, connective tissue nevi, hemangioma- facilitates communications with healthcare planners and providers. In ta, lipomata, lymphangiomata, epidermal nevi and hyperostoses. It is high- Ukraine, such risk factors as chronic low-dose ionizing radiation from the ly variable and appears to affect patients in a mosaic manner. This could Chornobyl disaster, iodine poor soils, low consumption of folic acid, and explain the significative variability and misdiagnosis. Usually it is confused high consumption of alcohol are then perceived as causes of BD. Empha- with the Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, hemihyperplasia with multiple lipo- sizing that mental retardation, malformations, congenital syphilis, and mas and other conditions. Herein, we describe 3 girls, all sporadic cases, childhood cancers ofter are BD, stresses the crucial role genetics and ter- with the initial diagnosis of PS, which were reviewed taking into account atology in public health. The idea that every child has the right to be born the diagnostic criteria proposed by Biesecker et al.[Am J Med Genet free from preventable BD generates strong empathy. This goal helped to 84;389, 1999]. Aroutine clinical evaluation, including dermatologic assess- forge BD Prevention Alliances linking a variety of parental support groups ment, imaging studies with ultrasound, plain skeletal radiographs and com- with a variety of professionals and opinion makers. An Alliance confers a192 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology stronger voice to what my have been a number of small advocacy cousis was a consistent finding in our series of patients.According to the groups. BD Alliances are strengthened by resource centers we call Omni molecular analysis the pair of twins and 6 other cases had maternal dele- BD Centers. The Centers offer a common ground shared by lay and pro- tion and 2 cases had paternal deletion while the rest were either normal or fessional members. The main components are information materials, tech- non informative.We could not demonstrate any relationship between the nicalandstaffassistance,conference facilities,and access to the Web. size of the deletion and the phenotype. The absence of genes other than elastin which probably contribute to the variability of the phenotype P0474. Discordance of dental anomalies in monozygotic remains to be determined. twins with beta-thalasemia E. Severin, I. Ioachim, S. Colceriu P0477. Variable expression of Microcephaly, Colobomatous Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy; Bucharest, Romania Microphtalmia, Short Stature and Psychomotor Retardation severin@rnc.ro Syndrome in consanguineous Omani family. Apair of 16 years old monozygotic twins (MZ) with beta-thalasemia was A. Rajab1, H. Hamamy2, S. Antonorakis3, K. Sperling4 studied.The male twins were discordant for several dental anomalies of 1Ministry of Health, Sultanate of Oman; Muscat, Oman; 2WHO; Geneva, permanent dentition and concordant for a few genetic traits; ABo blood Switzerland; 3Geneva Univercity; Geneva, Switzerland; 4Charitee; Berlin, group system, Rh blood group, HLAhaplotype and beta-thalasemia. One Germany twin showed a supernumerary tooth known as paramolar on the right max- drarajab@omantel.net.om illary molar region and delayed eruption of permanent teeth;the co-twin has Colobomatous Microphtalmia is a common malformation, is anatomically, normal number of permanent teeth and timing of eruption. In their family clinically and etiologically a heterogenous disorder. Microphtalmia has the anomalies of permanent teeth have been established only in the been reported in more than 150 syndromes with overlapping clinical find- proband. Comparison between monozygotic twins have provided strong ings in association with chromosomal and monogenic traits. We report five support for the idea that MZ do not share all their alleles;they are geneti- girls from consanguinous Omani family, with variable expression of multi- cally similar, but not identical.Discordance of anomalies may reflect differ- ple congenital anomaly syndrome of Microcephaly, Colobomatous ences in developmental timing, differences in susceptibility to one or more Microphtalmia, Short Stature, Severe Psychomotor Retardation, Congeni- teratogens, or random events occuring within very complex programs of tal Heart Defects and 46 XX karyotype. Molecular analysis is currently in teeth development. progress for better understanding this Syndrome. Detailed clinical findings and literature review will be presented. P0475. Complex Phenotype of a Patient with an appearently balanced de novo Translocation Y;22 - Anew Syndrome? P0478. Congenital generalized fibromatosis associated with P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1, U. Binder2, K. Wagner1, H. Zierler1 birth defects; a third patient 1Institute of Medical Biology & Human Genetics; Graz, Austria; 2St. Anna A. Bottani1, V. Desmangles2, J. F. Egger1, M. A. Brundler3, A. M. Calza4, Children Hospital; Vienna, Austria R. Pfister2 peter.kroisel@kfunigraz.ac.at 1Division of Medical Genetics; Geneva, Switzerland; 2Department of Pedi- Here we report on a 20 year old male patient with an complex combination atrics; Geneva, Switzerland; 3Division of Clinical Pathology; Geneva, of phenotypic anomalies. He was born at term as the first child of a healthy Switzerland; 4Department of Neurosciences & Dermatology; Geneva, unrelated couple following an uneventfull pregnancy by caesarian section Switzerland because of macrocephaly OFC 37.5 cm (> 90 centile), birth weight 3.6 kg bottani@cmu.unige.ch and length 52 cm. Facial dysmorphic findings as macrocephaly, hyper- Congenital generalized myofibromatosis (CGF) is a rare condition charac- telorism, antimongoloid slant, malformed protruding ears of normal size, a terized by widespread firm nodules in the skin, muscles, bones and inter- short nose with broad nasal bridge and full lips were noticed. He shows nal organs. Histologically, the lesions consist of cells which have both mus- several additional anomalies like mental and growth retardation and cle and fibroblast characteristics. Etiology of CGF is unknown. Most cases anaemia. He currently is 156 cm tall (<< 3 centile), weight 52 kg (< 3 cen- are sporadic and are not associated with other malformations and/or men- tile) and OFD of 62.5 cm (>> 97 centile). Cytogenetic analysis revealed a tal retardation. Exceptional familial cases compatible with autosomal Y;22 translocation with breakpoints on the short arm of both chromosomes recessive or dominant inheritance have been reported. Only two patients with no further anomalies. The karyotype 46,X,(Y;22) (p11.2;p11.2) de have been described with CGF and associated birth defects (Spraker et novo was also confirmed by FISH analysis using whole chromosome paint- al., J Am Acad Dermatol 1984; 10; 365-371; Michel et al., Eur J Pediatr ing and locus specific probes. Parental karyotypes are normal and pater- 1990; 149;251-252). We report a third patient with CGF and congenital nity was confirmed by microsatellite analysis. He does not show anomalies malformations. The newborn female was the only child of non-consan- of inner organs, except a moderate hepatomegaly. Most of the standard guineous parents. The mother had congenital unilateral cataract. Delivery laboratory parameters are normal, but anaemia is treated with EPO since occurred at 41 weeks of gestation after an uneventful pregnancy. Birth a few month successfully. Because no gene related to the phenotype is measurements were in the normal range. Examination in the neonatal peri- mapped to the chromosomal breakpoint at Yp11.2 and involvement of a od revealed facial dysmorphism (coarse face, epicanthic folds, long genein22p11.2ishighlyunlikely,we are now focussingoncloningthebreak- philtrum, macrostomia), a posterior cleft palate and a malplaced anus. In pointinYp11.2inanefforttoapproachthe complex phenotype of the patient addition, numerous (approx. 50) subcutaneous firm nodules, varying in that well may represent a new syndrome. diameter from 0.2-4 centimeters, were found scattered over the whole body. Histopathological examination of one nodule allowed the diagnosis P0476.Williams Syndrome. The Greek experience of CGF. Echocardiography showed multiple intramyocardial round struc- H. Fryssira1, S. Amenta1, L. Thomaidis2, A. Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, C. tures, as well as a small perimembranous ventricular septal defect. Xrays Metaxotou1 revealed a clavicular pseudarthrosis and multiple lytic lesions of long 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine; Athens, Greece; bones. Blood and skin karyotypes were 46,XX. Despite treatment with 21st Dept. of Pediatrics, Athens University; Athens, Greece interferon, vincristine and actinomycine, the child died at the age of 3 efrysira@cc.uoa.gr months of respiratory failure. Autopsy confirmed the widespread involve- Williams syndrome is a well recognized but not fully understood neurode- ment of muscles, bones and internal organs. Given the probably non-ran- velopmental disorder, involving both connective and central nervous sys- dom recurring association of CGF with various congenital malformations tems. The distinctive cognitive profile may represent a prototype to unrav- and the familial occurence of some cases, one can postulate that this con- el the relationship between the genes and the behavior. dition is most likely caused by a mutation in a (yet unknown) gene acting In the present study we collected blood from 25 W.S children,aged from 4 very early in development and cell differentiation. months to 21 years. All cases were non familial while two patients were monozygotic twins. All children underwent detailed clinical, developmental, P0479.Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva - a report of two cardiological, neurological and laboratory investigation. Diagnosis was cases confirmed by FISH. Their follow up continued for five years. Molecular E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, J. Anastasovska analysis for the detection and the origin of deletions in all children and their University Childen Hospital; Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of parents was performed using the intragenic polymorphic markers D7S613, Macedonia D7S489B and D7S1870 .Our results showed a higher incidence of pul- valid@mt.net.mk monary stenosis than what appears in the literature. Severe hypertension Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva FOP) is a condition described cen- was noticed in more than half of our cases and caused selective abortion turies ago, but exact pathogenetic mechanism is still not well understood. in a first trimester pregnancy.Another patient had severe hypertension due FOP is characterized by ectopic soft tissue calcification that progresses to renal artery stenosis which led to brain hemorrhage and death. Hypera- always in the same direction; from cranial o caudal. Neck, spine and shoul-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 193 ders are described as most common sites for this heterotopic ossification. the additional X. Studies investigating the relationship between skewed X- The second feature of FOPis malformed great toe, which leads to proper inactivation and the ND profile of boys with XXYmay further clarify the vari- diagnosis early after appearance of the first swellings. Most of the cases ability of function in boys with XXY. are sporadic, but in some families autosomal dominant inheritance is described. Some authors suggest that mutations in the bone morpho- P0482.Evaluation Of Clinical And Cftr Status Of Vas Deferens genetic protein 4 gene or its promotor are responsible for ossification in Agenesis In Infertile Men the abnormal tissues. The first case is a girl, which is the first child of unre- S. Murat1, E. Yilmaz2, H. Samli3, N. Imirzalioglu4, M. Bahce4, S. Kahra- lated parents. Swellings, 4 at a time appeared at the age of 2 months at man5 the dorsal occipital region and neck. The size of these swellings was dif- 1Afyon Kocatepe University; Afyon, Turkey; 2Hacettepe University, Depart- ferent;1-3cm. The child had typical short and malformed great toes; also ment of Medical Genetics; Ankara, Turkey; 3Afyon Kocatepe University, minor coxal congenital dysplasia. Biopsy of the tissue was performed to Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics; Afyon, Turkey; exclude malignancy, and the presence of normal fibroblasts, fibrocytes and 4GATA, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics; Ankara, collagen fibers were found. These swellings started to resolve several Turkey; 5Memorial Hospital, IVFCenter; Istanbul, Turkey months later, with just a slight reminiscence of them. The time will show msamli@tr.net whether it is a phase of remissions, or a different condition. The second Congenital absence of the vas deferens is an uncommon anomaly that patient is a 7-year-old boy, with ectopic calcifications first found in the may effect male fertility. About 1,5% of infertile men have bilateral congen- shoulders, and consequently the disease proceeded along the spine and ital absence of vas deferens. Advances in genetics and the advent of the arms. The appearances of the swellings were painful, and the child reproductive techniques have revolutionized the aspect of the reproductive developed restricted mobility of the arms and spine in a period of a few potential of these men. Polymerase chain reaction amplifications of years. Additional malformations were present; one-phalangeal short great genomic DNAwas used to amplify each of the CFTR exons and their flank- thumb, and fused cervical vertebrae. Both of the children had no positive ing regions. Four common CFTR gene mutations were assayed (F508, family history. None of the family members in the two families had abnor- 1677-D TA, Poly-T, M470V). To elucidate other urogenital anomalies and mal or short thumbs. We can conclude that two of the cases were sporadic, CFTR mutations that accompany the absent of vas deferens, we report 60 representing a fresh mutation of the disease. azoospermic men and 1 asthenoteratospermic man with unilateral or bilat- eral absence of vas deferens. Sixty-one patients with unilateral or bilateral P0480.Microdeletion of chromosomal region 22q11 and dys- absence of vas deferens applied to our IVF clinic due to male factor infer- morphic features in children with conotruncal heart defects tility between 1996-1999. Mean age of the patients were 34.45,8 (S.D.), M. Derbent, Z. Yilmaz, V. Baltaci, A. Saygili, B. Varan, K. Tokel and mean infertility time was 8.55.3 years. Major urogenital anomalies of Baskent University, Faculty of Medicine; Ankara, Turkey vas deferens, seminal vesicle and epididiymal anomalies were detected. muratder@superonline.com No DTA nad Poly-T mutations were detected in our patient population. Chromosome 22q11 deletion causes DiGeorge syndrome, velocardiofacial F508 mutation was detected in 4% and M470V mutation was detected in syndrome (VCFS) and conotruncal anomaly face syndrome. Cardiac out- 13% of patients. Twenty-four patients underwent sperm retrieval procedure flow malformations are frequently main findings of these syndromes. The for intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI); 7 MESA, 12 PESA, 3 TESAand aim of this study was to determine the incidence of 22q11 deletion in chil- 2 TESE procedure were carried out. The number of sperm retrieved with dren with conotruncal heart defects and to evaluate additional dysmorphic these procedures were between 20.000/mLand 15million/mLdifferentiat- findings in these patients. Cardiac catheterization had been performed in ing according to the type of procedure. Thirty-four patients have a history 30 patients (age; 3 days-9 years) with conotruncal heart defects. The of previous scrotal exploration and testicular biopsy. Reevaluation of these patients were also examined by a pediatrician and clinical geneticist. Their preparations revealed 14 normospermatogenesis, 7 hipospermatogenezis, blood samples were obtained for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 9 complete or incomplete maturation arrest and 1 tubular hyalinization. analysis with LSI DiGeorge/VCFS region probe. Cardiologic diagnosis of Other urogenital anomalies are common for men with unilateral or bilater- them were as follows; tetralogy of Fallot; 7 cases, double outlet right ven- al absence of vas deferens. CFTR gene mutations which are known to be tricle; 8 cases, transposition of the great arteries; 8 cases, truncus arterio- frequent among these patients could not be detected in our patient group. sus; 3 cases, other conotruncal defects with malalignment ventricular sep- Vasal agenezis can occur without evidence of CFTR defects. Sperm tal defect; 4 cases. Twenty children were found to be dysmorphic. FISH retrieval from these patients is almost always possible for assisted repro- analysis of these 20 patients demonstrated 22q11 deletion in 7 cases. Only ductive techniques. two patients without dysmorphic features had 22q11 deletion. In this study, the details of conotruncal heart defects and dysmorphic findings of our P0483. Rett Syndrome; Phenotype Expansion and Broaden- patients were presented. ing Parameters for Diagnosis and DNA Testing Resulting From the Availability of Mutation Analysis. P0481. Neurocognitive Profile of Young Children with XXY L. R. Shapiro1,2, H. G. Taska2, R. V. Scott2, D. F. Kronn1,2 (Klinefleter syndrome) 1New York Medical College; Valhalla, NY United States; 2Westchester C. A. Samango-Sprouse1, P. Law2 Medical Center; Valhalla, NYUnited States 1George Washington University; Washington, DC United States; 2Johns lrskicker@msn.com Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD United States The diagnosis of Rett Syndrome prior to the availability of mutation analy- cssprouse@aol.com sis by sequencing the MECP2 gene was based on rigid clinical criteria; XXYoccurs 1;500 & the facets of the neurodevelopmental(ND)profile of females who had normal development until 6-18 months of age with sub- the young child with XXYhave not been well desribed in a large sample. sequent regression characterized by loss of speech and loss of purposeful There were 52 subjects with XXYprenatally diagnosed. Comprehensive use of hands, microcephaly, seizures, autistic behavior, ataxia, hyperven- ND assessments were completed using standardized tools to determine tilation and stereotypic hand movements. 4 patients (16, 4, 3.5, 3 years the level of functioning in the five areas of development. The mean age old) who were found to have a MECP2 mutation exhibited an inconstant was 13m(r=2-48m). Parents were well educated with 25% having post- phenotype with incomplete clinical criteria; all (4/4) had regression follow- graduate degrees. Data was segregated and analyzed using Hottellings t- ing normal initial development with loss of speech and stereotypic hand test at p<.05 level. Speech(EL=85.7[sd=12.8],p<.001)& motor(PDI= movements; (2/4) seizures; (2/4) loss of walking;(0/4) microcephaly; (2/4) 88.46[sd=12.39],p<.001)delays were significant with normal autistic behavior;(2/4) ataxia and (1/4) hyperventilation. The absence of cognition(MDI= 97.6[sd=12.8]). 50% of the boys had abnormal muscle microcephaly resulted in delay of diagnosis in 3/4 of the patients because tonus in the trunk & extremeties. This profile is highly suggestive of an a number of physicians felt that microcephaly was a requisite criterion. infantile presentation of developmental dyspraxia(IDD),a motor planning While additional patients will be necessary to fully appreciate the changing disorder with speech, motor and attention conmpromised. This large study phenotype of Rett Syndrome, the diagnosis should be considered and on XXYwho were prenatally diagnosed reveals an infantile presentation of MECP2 gene sequencing for mutation analysis done when a developmen- a learning disorder which may be an predictive of an increased risk for edu- tally delayed female had normal early development followed by regression cational difficulties. Further follow-up will determine the incidence of learn- with the loss of speech, especially in the presence of stereotypic hand ing disablilties and the predictive factors from these early findings. Prena- movements. tal counseling with families should discuus the possibility IDD, normal cog- nition and need for EI evaluation that are focused on specific weaknesses. This study further defines the natural history of a sex chromosome disor- der in early childhood years. Further studies are warranted to investigate if there are any correlations between ND performance and parental origin of194 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0484.Acromegaly in a patient with Turner syndrome, a rare lish XLI diagnosis, STS activity was determined in leukocytes using 7-[3H]- disorder. dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate as a substrate. It was also performed G. Castieyra, M. Guitelman, J. Herrera, S. Copelli, S. Fiszlejder, M. amplification of both extremes of the STS gene by PCR and FISH analysis Zeller, A. Oneto of the STS gene. STS activity was undetectable in the patient (0.00 Division of Endocrinology, Hospital Durand, Cedie, Buenos Aires; pmol/mg protein/h) and very low in the mother (0.35 pmol/mg protein/h vs Argentina 0.79 pmol/mg protein/h of the normal control). No amplification of the 5 castineyra_gra@yahoo.com and 3 ends of the STS gene were observed in the patient. FISH analysis Acromegaly and Turner syndrome is not a frecuent clinical finding. We was positive for XLI in the patient and for XLI-carrier in the mother. FAV present a case of 23 years old, is the first daughter of non consanguineous spectrum has been associated with several entities but this is the first parents, family history is unremarkable. Clinical endocrinological cytoge- report in the literature in which FAV spectrum and XLI are present in the netics and molecular studies are analyzied. Physical examination show same family height 153(pc10) weight66(pc75), HC 61(+4SD). The phenotype is Turner Syndrome excluding facial features like overbite and nasal bone hypertro- P0487. Clinical Variability in Neonatal Progeroid Disorders; phy and prognatism. Acanthosis nigrans and hirsutism are clearly evident More Than One Disease and stature is in the 90pc for TS. Hormonal levels (IRMA;RIA);GH26ng/ml, J. Hou IGF1 400ng/m, insulin 200ugU/ml, FSH68mUI/ml, E2 15pg/ml, Chang Gung Childrens Hospital; Taoyuan, Taiwan Republic of China Androstened. 2,9ng/ml, DHEAs 3000ng/ml, To 0,85ng/ml, PRL10ng/ml, houjw741@adm.cgmh.com.tw 17OHP4 1,2-ng/ml, Dynamic test OGGTshow not inhibition of GH.ACTH Several progeroid disorders of childhood onset have been reported. plus DXM8 inhibit the adrenal steroids. MR; an intrasuprasellar tumor with Among them, a specific type presenting as an old-man appearance since bilateral cavernous sinus expantion. US; absent gonads and hypoplasic birth was named as neonatal progeroid syndrome(NPS). Since the first uterus. RX; Cervical fusion (C1-2-3). Karyotype ( lymphocytes) ; case of NPS(Am J Med Genet 1995;69;195-6), another 4 neonates with 45X/46,X,del (X) (q22-q ter)in 40% and 60% of cells respectively. DNA similar features were found in Taiwan. They all have progeroid (leukocytes); any sequence of SRYgene, centromere and heterochromat- face(pinched appearance with hypoplasia of the lower half of the face), ic region of Ywas detected by PCR. To our knowledge is the second case prominent scalp veins, frontal bossing, small beaked nose, and severe reported. Clinical findings, indicate the prevalence of the 45,X line, stature growth retardation. Thorough endocrinological and metabolic investiga- may be influence by the presence of some genes in the Xq and GH tions were performed in those patients and the results disclosed; hypothy- excess. The metabolic efects are potencialy altered, insulism resistance, roidism or hyperthyrotrophinemia(4/5), very low level of insulin-like growth and the elevated levels of GH and IGF1 may act in the adrenal receptor factor I(3/5), hypolipidemia(4/5), and a specific organic aciduria(2/5). The producing an increment of adrenal androgens. The understanding of associated anomalies included; laryngomalacia(4/5),cardiac defects(2/5), genetic factors would be of great value and is our next step. Clinical course neonatal teeth(2/5), congenital glaucoma and achondroplasia(1/5), and and dificulties in clinical managment will be present. contractural arachnodactyly in all patients. The karyotyes wre all normal. However, chromosomal breakage test showed markedly increased break- P0485. Homozygosity for a Novel MSH2 Mutation in a Child age rates in 3 patients, suggesting the role of DNArepair defects in such with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia and Multiple Caf-au-lait premature ageing disorders. More than one disease may account for the Spots. clinical variability of neonatal progeroid disorders. G. E. Graham1, D. Whiteside2, S. E. Andrew2, K. Booth1, D. R. McLeod1 1Alberta Childrens Hospital and University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Cana- P0488. Heterozygous and homozygous inheritance of the da; 2University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada Y90H mutation in the PAX3 gene in a Turkish family with gail.graham@crha-health.ab.ca Waardenburg syndrome (WS-I) and Klein-Waardenburg syn- MLH1 and MSH2 heterozygotes develop HNPCC when somatic loss of the drome (WS-III) wild-type allele produces faulty mismatch repair (MMR). Until recently, the M. Yksel-Apak1, T. Tkel2, A. Ghanbari1, H. Kayserili1, M. Emiroglu3, G. consequences of homozygosity for germline mutations in human HNPCC Hafiz3, O. Uyguner1, B. Wollnik1 genes were unknown. In 1999, Ricciardone et al. and Wang et al. report- 1Division of Medical Genetics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University; ed a total of five offspring from two consanguineous matings whose par- Istanbul, Turkey; 2Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, ents were MLH1 mutation carriers. DNAwas available from four of the five Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University; Istanbul, Turkey; 3Ear, Nose, children. Two were homozygous for a nonsense MLH1 mutation and the and Throat Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University; remaining two were homozygous for a missense MLH1 mutation. Four of Istanbul, Turkey the five met the clinical criteria for a diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis type I. wollnik@superonline.com All five had been diagnosed with leukemia or lymphoma, four below the Auditory-pigmentary syndromes are caused by the absence of age of 3, and one also developed a medulloblastoma. Since hematological melanocytes from the skin, hair, eyes, or stria vascularis of the cochlea. malignancies can occur in the setting of NF type 1, the authors speculated Examples with patchy depigmentation are Waardenburg syndromes (WS) that the NF1 gene was particularly susceptible to mutations resulting from which are usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Type 1 faulty MMR. We now report the first instance of germline homozygosity for Waardenburg syndrome (WS-I) is caused by heterozygous loss of function a truncating MSH2 mutation in a 2-year-old boy of East Indian/Fijian par- mutations in the PAX3 gene. Klein-Waardenburg syndrome (WS-III) is a ents who has multiple caf-au-lait spots and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. very rare condition and represents an extreme presentation of WS-1, with The mutation is a novel G->Atransition in a splice site that is predicted to additional extremity abnormalities. We present a 4-year old Turkish child result in exon 11 skipping, a frameshift and a premature stop codon in exon with typical features of Klein-Waardenburg syndrome including dystopia 12. Our patients parents are 22 and 27 years of age and are not knowingly canthorum, partial albinism, hearing impairment, and upper-limb defects. related. Neither have been diagnosed with malignancies in the HNPCC The child was born to a consanguineous marriage and both parents were spectrum and neither has features of NF1. affected with WS-I. We screened the entire coding region of the PAX3 gene for mutations and identified a novel missense mutation, Y90H, in P0486. A family with the association of the Goldenhar syn- exon 2 of PAX3 gene within the paired box domain. Both parents with WS- drome and X-linked ichthyosis I were heterozygous for the mutation and the child with WS-III was R. Rivera1, E. Dueas1, S. Kofman1, L. M. Gonzalez1, M. Valdes2, S. homozygous. This is the second report of a homozygous PAX3 mutation Cuevas1 causing the WS-III phenotype. Homozygous PAX3 mutations in the 1Hospital General de Mexico; Mexico DF, Mexico; 2Instituto Nacional de Splotch mouse, a mouse model of Waardenburg syndrome, have lethal Ortopedia; Mexico DF, Mexico neural tubes defects, but we could not observe any neural tube abnormal- sergioa@servidor.unam.mx ity in our patient. Clinical and molecular analysis in 4 additional Turkish Goldenhar syndrome is an entity classified into the facio-auriculo-vertebral families with WS-1 showed the clinical variability of the WS-I phenotype (FAV) spectrum. Although the inherited pattern is uncertain, there are sev- among and within WS-I families. Further, we have identified 4 novel muta- eral reports with dominant and recessive autosomal traits. X-linked tions in the PAX3 gene in these families. ichthyosis (XLI) is an entity characterized by dark, regular, adherent scales of skin on abdomen, neck, back and extremities. XLI is due to the defi- ciency of the steroid sulfatase enzyme (STS). The STS gene is located on Xp22.3. Most XLI patients present large deletions of the STS gene and flanking sequences. We report a 25 year female with clinical characteris- tics of the FAV spectrum and her son of 7 years of age with XLI. To estab-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 195 P0489.Clinical description of a new patient with de novo par- matches clearly patient our phenotype The pending). are probes sub- tial trisomy 7q identified by SKY telomeric and 4p- (FISH 46,XY. male, normal, was Karyotype year. 1 age A. B. Caliebe1, M. Kautza1, J. I. Martin-Sobero1, A. Holthausen2, R. at valve urethral a because operated He heterotopy. crossed with ectopic, Siebert1, W. Grote1 kidney right normal. examination Opthalmological dysfunction. ear middle 1Department of Human Genetics; Kiel, Germany; 2Neuropediatric Hospital; loss hearing mild had delayed. severely development Motor absent. other Kiel, Germany canal, inguinal in high palpable testis One thin. short very penis hypoplas- caliebe@medgen.uni-kiel.de tic scrotum sparsness. flaring lateral arched were eyebrows> The male proband was first seen at the age of six months because of developmental delay and facial dysmorphism. He had progressive macro- P0492. The Medical Genetic Examination Of Children With cephaly, dysplastic deep set ears, depressed nasal root, and anteverted Congenital Laryngeal Patology. nares. There were genital anomalies (undescended right testis, hypoplas- I. L. Soldatski1, V. G. Solonichenko2 tic scrotum, hypospadia glandis, and a micropenis). The boy exhibited cen- 1Moscow Medical Academy; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2N.F.Filatov tral strabism. Head control had not been achieved at that time, he smiled Children Hospital; Moscow, Russian Federation since the eighth week and had just learned to transfer objects from one ysoldatsky@mailru.com hand to the other. The propositus is the second child of healthy non-con- The genetic factors can play important role in the forming pathology of sanguineous parents, born at term after an uncomplicated pregnancy. breathing system, but hereditary diseases of larynx is a very seldom Chromosome analysis on peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed addition- pathology. We performed medical-genetic examination in 54 childrens al chromosome material on the distal part of the long arm of one chromo- families with congenital stridor in the Clinic of Reconstruction Surgery of some 11 in 20 metaphases analysed. The parents karyotypes were nor- Larynx and Trachea for Children of Sechenovs Moscow Medical Academy mal. Spectral karyotyping (SKY) suggested the material of unknown origin with the aim of specification of hereditary background and its influence on attached to chromosome 11 to be derived from chromosome 7. FISH with the clinical picture and on the results of the treatment. The age of the chil- whole chromosome painting probes for chromosomes 7 and 11 confirmed dren at the moment of entering to the clinic was from 21 days to 3years. addition of chromosome 7 material to chromosome 11 due to an unbal- We performed to every child the examination of larynx during direct micro- anced translocation t(7;11). According to the G-banding pattern, the frag- laryngoscopy and tracheoscopy. The diagnosis of laryngomalacia was ment of chromosome 7 translocated to chromosome 11 comprised the dis- determined in 30 patients, the paralysis of vocal folds - in 10, laryngeal cyst tal part of the long arm, from 7q34 to 7qter. Pure partial trisomy 7q has so - in 5, congenital laryngeal membrane - in 3, tracheomalacia  in 6. Syn- far rarely been described. Macrocephaly, dysplastic pinnae, micropenis, dromological diagnosis (Aarskog, Ehlers-Danlos, Pierre Robin, Noonan, and undescended testis in boys, and moderate till profound retardation Weaver and Down syndromes) was found in 7 (13.0 %) patients. The iso- seem to be features of this syndrome. When re-evaluated at the age of thir- lated defect of larynx without manifestation from other organs and systems teen months head control had been achieved and the propositus could roll were found in 12 (22.2 %) patients. The rest 35 patients (64.8 %) had the over. combination of development organs defects in several systems, not inducted by one another, which are possible to mark as multitude congen- P0490. Split hand/split foot, iris coloboma, hypospadias and ital defects of development. So, the medical - genetic examination is may subfertility; a new developmental malformation complex? be necessary part of the preoperative preparation of children with congen- J. Giltay1, D. Wittebol-Post2, H. VanBokhoven3, P. Kastrop4, T. Lock5 ital stridor. 1University Medical Center Utrecht; 3508 AB utrecht, The Netherlands; 2FCDonders Institute of Ophthalmology; Utrecht, The Netherlands; P0493.Bilateral anophtalmia and esophageal atresia 3Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen; B. Gilbert1, C. Menetrey1, S. Odent2, L. De Lumley1, V. Belin1 Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Division 1CHRU Dupuytren; Limoges, France; 2CHU Pontchaillou; Rennes, France of Obstetrics, Neonatology and Gynaecology; Utrecht, The Netherlands; gilbert@unilim.fr 5Dept of Urology; Utrecht, The Netherlands Only few cases of associations of esophageal atresia with anophtalmia j.c.giltay@dmg.azu.nl have been observed since Rogers in 1988. We report on the seventh case. A 35-year-old male was referred for fertility treatment. Semen analysis At birth, this girl presented with these two malformations. Her face looked revealed a teratozoospermia. Apart from the wish for fertility treatment the dysmorphic, pear-shaped, with a large forehead and a small chin. In pro- patient wanted to be informed on the risk of transmitting his hand and foot file, her nasal-root was not very well-marked, and her nucha was smooth. abnormalities to his possible progeny. The abnormalities consisted of split The ears seemed to be low implanted, and her front fontanel was very hand/split foot on the left side, a hypoplastic 5th ray of the right hand and small with overlapping sutures. Her chromosome testing on leukocytes a hypoplastic 1st ray of the right foot with a small cleft between the first and and fibroblasts was normal. On the fourth day of her life she died of gen- second ray. His medical record further revealed several surgical correc- eral failure. Post-mortem necropsy confirmed complete bilateral anoph- tions of a glandular hypospadias and eye abnormalities which consisted of talmia and type III esophageal. There were no other malformations. To our a complete iriscoloboma of the left eye in an atypical position (cranio-tem- knowledge, this observation is the 7th case of anophtalmia and poral) and a coloboma of the papilla in the right eye. So the hand, foot and esophageal atresia association. Moreover among males, external-genitals eye abnormalities appear to be more severe on the left side. Family histo- abnormalities are described. SHAH proposed to call this association ry revealed no abnormalities which could be related to the findings in our Anophtalmia-Esophageal-Genital syndrome (AEG syndrome). All of the patient. The symptoms appear different from those described in Hand- cases whose pictures has been published, presented a similar dysmorphic Foot-Genital Syndrome, moreover an iriscoloboma would not fit in this face. As regards embryology, those two malformations appear at the same diagnosis. Since split hand/split foot can be caused by mutations in the p63 moment of embryonic life. There are, as in hypospadias, a midline abnor- gene, mutation analysis of this gene was performed. However, sequencing mality. The homogeneous character of those seven reported cases and the of the majority of the exons did not reveal a mutation. So far, we do not fact that they are midline abnormalities, plead in favor of a genetic origin. have a diagnosis or an explanation for this malformation complex. In coun- Some genes are known to be responsible for anophtalmia in animals; Eye- selling this patient we felt we could not exclude a recurrence risk of 50% less 1 and 2 in the mouse, and ANOP1 and 2 in the rat. In our patient, no for his progeny. mutation of SIX 3 gene (the human equivalent of the animal Eyeless) was found. P0491.Malpuech syndrome; case report and review W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse, C. M. L. van Dael, A. J. van Essen P0494.Clinical Spectrum And Natural History Of Adams- Oliv- University Hospital Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands er Syndrome; Report Of Two New Cases w.s.kerstjens@medgen.azg.nl E. Lapi, A. Cecconi, L. Ombroni, E. Andreucci, G. Ricotti, M. Giovannucci Malpuech syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome with growth Uzielli retardation, mental retardation, cleft lip and palate, hypertelorism, ptosis of Genetics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Univer- the eyelids, urogenital anomalies including renal agenesis, undescended sity of Florence, A.Meyer Children Hospital; Florence, Italy testes and micropenis and caudal appendage and/or sacral increased skin uzielli_ml@unifi.it pigmentation. We report an 8 month old boy, adopted from Brasil, with Adams-Oliver Syndrome (OMIM 100300), also reported as Congenital bilateral cleft lip and palate. His length was 58 cm (<<-2SD), weight 5.5 Scalp Defects with distal limb reduction anomalies, is a rare genetic disor- kg(<<-2SD), OFC 42 cm (normal if corrected for length). His hair was der, transmitted as Autosomal Dominant Trait. We report two new unrelat- sparse and wooly. He had a broad forehead, downslanting palpebral fis- ed cases, both males; a newborn and a young boy aged 8 years, referred sures, ptosis and telecanthus, ICD 3.2 cm (> P97); OCD 6.9 cm (< fami- to our Centre for a genetic evaluation. Two major features suggested us lies. 6 from cases reported 11 the review We syndrome. Malpuech of that the diagnosis; scalp and limbs defects. Scalp defect, represented by196 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology extensive aplasia cutis of the scalp affecting the cranial vault without an formation associations. For better understanding their correlation to devel- underlying defect of skull bone, was present at birth in both patients, with opmental field defects the data from a teratological series of heart malfor- progressive spontaneous healing. The degree of limbs anomalies is differ- mations have been analysed in detail. For that, 563 postmortem examina- ent in the two childrens. Duplication of first finger with very short phalanges tions of children with at least two malformations were used, which have and small or absence of fingers and toes nails were obvious in the new- been performed in the Institute of Pathology of the former Medical School born; short distal phalanges and small toenails represent the limb defects of Erfurt. 250 (44,4%) of them had congenital heart defects. The necropsy in the young boy. Other clinical features, characteristic of Adams-Oiliver reports of 202 with selected heart malformations have been analysed for syndrome were also present in both patients, mild mental retardation the presence of associated defects. Statistical calculations were performed included in the eight years old boy. We consider important to report these using the Fisher exact test. The following results could be ascertained; - new cases of Adams-Oliver Syndrome, because it is a rare genetic disor- Truncus arteriosus communis, transposition of the great vessels, double der, with variable clinical expression, but well distinct from other syn- outlet right ventricle and cor bi- or triloculare, particularly in combination, dromes sharing some of the clinical features; first of all scalp and limbs are significantly more frequent than other heart defects associated with defects, associated with chromosomal abnormalities, transmitted as asplenia, trilobed left lung, situs inversus or ambiguus and malrotation. - Mendelian traits, or apparently caused by non-genetic factors. Aortic coarctation in our study is associated with diaphragmatic hernia and (not significant) polysplenia. - Ventricular septal defect is significantly asso- P0495. Pitfalls in genetic counseling; Identification of large ciated with esophageal atresia and CNS- malformations - The pattern of repeat expansions in SCA7, responsible for the fatal infantile associated malformations in Fallots tetralogy is similar to that of ventricu- SCA7 phenotype in two sibs. lar septum defects, but the number of cases is to small to draw final con- T. Kleefstra1, C. Frenken2, H. Kremer3, R. Sinke4, M. Ausems4, B. v/d clusions. The results show, that the analysis of the pattern of associated Warrenburg3, N. Knoers1 malformations of teratological series are more useful for the investigation 1Human Genetics, UMC St Radboud; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2Neu- of malformation associations than single marker malformations. rology, CWZ; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 3Neurology, UMC St radboud; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 4Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht; Utrecht, P0498. Molecular characterisation of a cryptic 2q37 deletion The Netherlands in a patient with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy-like phe- t.kleefstra@antrg.azn.nl notype. Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCAs) are clinically charac- N. Chassaing1, P. De Mas1, M. Tauber2, G. Bourrouillou1, P. Calvas1, E. terised by progressive cerebellar ataxia, with an onset usually after child- Bieth1 hood. Based on additional clinical characteristics and age of onset, Hard- 1Purpan hospital, department of genetic; Toulouse, France; 2Children hos- ing suggested a classification of ADCAs in type I, II and III.Genetic map- pital, department of endocrinology; Toulouse, France ping studies in ADCAfamilies have detected fourteen genetic loci (SCA1- bieth.e@chu-toulouse.fr 8 and SCA10-15) and nine of the corresponding genes have already been The Albright hereditary osteodystrophy(AHO)-like syndrome has been cloned. ADCAtype II is characterised by progressive pigmentary macular recently defined as a rare dysmorphic syndrome including brachymetapha- degeneration in association with cerebellar ataxia and is caused by pato- langism and mental retardation. This phenotype occurs in Albright heredi- logical repeat expansions (37 to 306 repeats) in the SCA7 gene. The rarely tary osteodystrophy but unlike it, the level of the Gs alpha protein is not documented infantile SCA7 phenotype, characterised by additional extra- reduced in AHO-like syndrome. To date as few as 20 patients with these neurological manifestations and a rapid progressive course, is due to clinical and biochemical features have been published, and for the majori- enormous repeat expansions on paternal disease transmission. We report ty of them a cytogenetically visible deletion of chromosome 2q37 has been upon a family, in which the onset of ataxia and subsequent detection of the observed. We report a new case of typical AHO-like syndrome with normal SCA7 muation in the proband retrospectively explained the fatal illness karyotype. Using the polymorphic marker D2S125 we found in this patient resulting in early death in two children. Post-mortem analysis of the SCA7 loss of heterozygosity suggestive of a de novo deletion of maternal origin. gene in the offspring revealed repeat expansions of 325 and 460 repeats, This hypothesis was confirmed by FISH analysis with a telomeric 2q probe. the largest ever reported. We discuss the infantile SCA7 phenotype and Genetic analysis using a series of microsatellite markers of the 2q37 region comment on the problems encoutered in differential diagnosis and genetic allowed us to map the centromeric end of the deletion within an interval of counseling. about o,5 megabase delimited by D2S2338(present) and D2S2253(delet- ed). This is to date the smallest 2q subtelomeric deletion observed in asso- P0496. Heart Congenital Malformations In Children Genetic ciation with a typical AHO-like phenotype. These data contribute to refine Diseases Clinical And Epidemiologycal Aspects the AHO-like critical region and prompt to study positional candidate genes M. Porumb1, M. Bembea1, R. Spineanu1, S. Porumb2, C. Skrypnyk1 linked with the expression of this phenotype (in progress). 1Clinical Children Hospital; Oradea, Romania; 2Clinical CountyHospital; Oradea, Romania P0499.Adducted thumb-clubfoot syndrome in sibs of a con- mporumb@usa.net sanguineous Austrian family The goal of our study was to follow the prevalence of the heart diseases, T. Mller1, K. Unsinn1, A. Kreczy2, I. Baldissera3, I. Ganer1, N. Neu1, G. the type of heart malformations in genetic diseases and their influence on Utermann4, A. R. Janecke4 the infantile morbidity and mortality in Bihor County-Romania. Material and 1Department of Paediatrics, University-Hospital; Innsbruck, Austria; Method; The study included 361 patients with an average age of 8.80+(-) 2Department of Pathology, University-Hospital; Innsbruck, Austria; 5.30 with limits 1-day-20 years presenting genetic disorders with possible 3Department of Ophthalmology, University-Hospital; Innsbruck, Austria; heart involvement. Results; Heart involvement of the genetic diseases was 4Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, University; Innsbruck, found in 134 (37.11%) patients, from which 44 (32.84%) cases survived Austria and 90(67.16%) cases died, 123(91.7%) patients presented congenital th.mueller@tirol.com heart diseases with left-right shunt, in 10 (2.77%) patients progressive Recently, a dysmorphogenetic syndrome featuring adducted thumbs, heart involvement being present. Heart abnormalities with left-right shunt clubfeet, and distinctive facial dysmorphism was first distinguished in two were more frequent and severe in chromosomal abnormalities (104 cases- cousins of a large consanguineous Turkish family. We report two male sibs 76.61%). They represented determinant cause for decease in 36 (26.86%) with the same condition, the product of a fourth cousin marriage of an Aus- cases by irreducible heart failure and favoring cause for decease in 30 trian family. The patients presented with facial dysmorphism comprising (23.38%) cases. Conclusions; The vital prognosis of the chromosomal broad and bossed forehead, widely patent anterior fontanel, telecanthus, genetic diseases is influenced by the presence of congenital heart dis- downslanting palpebral fissures, deep-set ears, arachnodactyly, severely eases, especially by the lesions on left-right shunt type. They represent adducted thumbs, and clubfeet. Our observations confirm that the adduct- determinant and favoring cause of the infants decease. ed thumb-clubfoot syndrome most likely represents a distinct autosomal recessively inherited phenotype. P0497.Heart malformations in developmental field defects; a teratological series P0500.Caudal Regression And Holoprosencephaly Recurring H. Metzke1, U. Kohl2, W. Meerbach3 Among Sibs 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Catholic D. P. Cavalcanti1, R. Barini2, F. Luiz2, K. Andrade2 Hospital St. Nepomuk; Erfurt, Germany; 3Institute of Pathology, Klinikum 1UNICAMP; Campinas - SP, Brazil; 2UNICAMP; Campinas, Brazil Erfurt GmbH; Erfurt, Germany denisepc@unicamp.br hmet@mti-n.uni-jena.de Although autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested as the ori- Congenital heart defects are frequently observed in syndromes and mal- gin of caudal regression, most cases are sporadic or associated withPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 197 maternal diabetes. Classically, the spectrum includes imperforate anus, presented short limbs with hands and feet malposition, narrow thorax, sacral agenesis, and sirenomelia. To the best of our knowledge the asso- microcephaly, retrognathism and similar visceral anomalies. Skeletal radi- ciation of holoprosencephaly and caudal dysgenesis in a child who does ological anomalies were similar ; shortness of long bones with wide meta- not have a well-known syndrome has been described only in two unrelat- physes;skull, ischio-pubic rami and vertebraes lack of ossification;round- ed children. In this work, we describe a family in which holoprosencephaly ed aspect of iliac wings; flare clavicles; costal anomalies and short first associated with caudal dysgenesis in the first child is recurring in the fetus metacarpal. In family 1, they were two girls of non consanguineous par- of the present gestation. The propositus, a male infant was born of young, ents. Case one was diagnosed as a unclassified chondrodysplasia punc- healthy, and non-consanguineous parents, with no family history of similar tata because of carpal and tarsal punctuations and died at 2 days of life of birth defects. The pregnancy was complicated by influenza in the first heart failure. For case 2, the pregnancy was interrupted at 25 gestational trimester. The baby weighed 1050 g and died after 15 minutes. He pre- weeks in front of prenatal findings suggesting a recurrence. Autopsy sented alobar holoprosencephaly, severe ocular hypotelorism, proboscide, revealed corpus callosum agenesis, pulmonary malsegmentation, inter- microstomia, solitary left renal cyst, anus imperforate, hemivertebra in L2, ventricular septal defect, biliary fibroadenomatous and didelphis uterus. hypoplasia of iliac, irregularities in all middle phalanges of the fingers, and Standard karyotype were normal. In family 2, they were two female ftus- sacral agenesis. His karyotype was normal (46,XY). Six months after es, for whom pregnancy was interrupted at 26 and 25 gestational weeks. proposituss birth the mother became pregnant. A20 weeks prenatal ecog- Parents were consanguineous. Prenatal ultrasonography revealed short raphy also showed holoprosencephaly and sacral agenesis. The recur- limbs, malposition of hands and feet, narrow thorax, microcephaly and cor- rence of the same pattern in sibs in the present family suggests a syn- pus callosum anomalies. Autopsy confirm these findings and revealed liver dromic picture, probably from autosomal recessive origin. and biliary anomalies for both. To our knowledge this type of lethal chon- drodysplasia had never been described, and we suggest that these P0501. Smith-Magenis syndrome - early diagnosis in Slovak patients present a new lethal polymalformative chondrodysplasia with origin patient autosomal recessive inheritance according to familial genealogy. D. Durovckov Slovak Postgraduate Medical Academycademy; Bratislava, Slovakia P0504.Poland - Moebius Syndrome darina.durovcikova@faneba.sk M. Kuklik During the past few years in several forms of behavioral phenotypes such Charles University Prague 2nf Faculty of Medicine, Czech Republic; as Prader-Willi, Williams and Smith - Magenis syndrome (S-M sy) chro- Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic mosomal microdeletion has been confirmed by FISH method in our depart- jan.handzel@lf1.cuni.cz ment. Only one of them Smith-Magenis syndrome (deletion 17p11.2 ) has The author summarizes hitherto experience with the clinical and genetic been shown to be associated with self injurious behavior, mild dysmor- characteristics of Polands and Moebius syndrome. Poland  Moebius syn- phism and various neurologic signs. According to this characteristics in our drome is an overlapping disruption spectrum of inborn defects affecting the patient the first investigation was aimed to metabolic disease exlusion. The face and extremities. Five selected case-records with this disease and the male child ,aged 2 ,was reffered to geneticist because of psychomotoric sequence of the Poland  Moebius are presented. For establishment of a retardation and stereotypy in behaviour of unclear etiology. Hypotonia, fail- more accurate symptomatology, and irreplaceable is held by anthropomet- ure to thrive, sleeping problems and delopmental delay was evident from ric examination; for objectifying the assymetry of the chest the so called the beginning. The self-injurious behaviour was manifested at the age of cyrtogram, the chest circumference recorded by means of a wire, is valu- 20 months.Other features included plagiocephaly, cerebral cortex atrophy, able. From the aspect of genetic counselling preconception care is always coloboma of optic disk, telecanthus, protruding tongue, poor dentition, thin provided to mothers from families with reproductive intentions, as well as marmorate skin with ligament laxity and decreased sensitivity to pain. The ultrasonographic examination of the fetus in area of assumed acral symp- recognition patterns of behavioral phenotypes in different age categories tomatology (signaling phenotype). In two families ultrasonography was enabled us to confirm the diagnosis in early infancy. used for prenatal diagnosis. Invasive prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis was employed in a family with Moebius syndrome. In these families der- P0502. A Case Of Spondylometaphyseal Dysplasia  matoglyphs have certain common characteristics, such a tendency Sedaghatian Type towards simple patterns. In the wider family of one of our patients we V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, K. Aristidou1, G. Stylianidou1, E. detected in a cousin Parkes  Weber  Klippel  Trenaunays syndrome, Spanou Aristidou2 which may indicate common vascular predisposing factors. 1Arch. Makarios III Pediatric Hospital; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2The Cyprus Insti- tute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus P0505.Mutation analysis in a large cohort of Rett patients and vanast@spidernet.com.cy genotype-phenotype correlation. We report a girl with congenital skeletal changes, severe neurological F. Laccone1, P. Huppke2, M. Meins1, M. Held2, F. Hanefeld2, W. Engel1 deficit and dysmorphic features. At birth she was noted to be hypotonic and 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Ger- have dysmorphic features (midface hypoplasia, hypertelorism, long palpe- many; 2Neuropediatric Department, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, bral fissures and low posteriorly rotated ears among others). Her radiolog- Germany ical findings were characteristically metaphyseal widening, cupping, flaring flaccon@gwdg.de and splaying, rhizomelic shortening of both upper and lower limbs and Mutations in the MECP2 gene (Methyl-CpG-binding protein) have recently abnormally shaped talus and calcaneous. These features were consistent been reported causing Rett syndrome, an X-linked dominant neurodevel- with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia  Sedaghatian type. Spondylometa- opmental disease. We investigated 302 sporadic cases of Rett syndrome physeal dysplasia  Sedaghatian type is a lethal skeletal dysplasia and by direct sequencing. 55 different mutations were found in 201 patients. there are no cases reported in the literature that have survived beyond the We provide evidence for the existence of several hot spot regions and of a age of 160 days. Our patient survived to the age of four years. During her deletion prone region located at the 3 most region of the gene. Nine of 10 lifetime she was severely developmentally delayed and over time devel- recurrent mutations were located in either the methyl CpG binding domain oped seizures and other neurological sequelae. We believe this case is of (MBD) or in the transcriptional repression domain (TRD) and all missense interest as it charts the natural history of this rare disorder. mutations were located in one of these functionally important domains. With more than 60% there was a high frequency of truncating mutations P0503. New reccurent lethal chondrodysplasia with micro- (nonsense mutations along with frame shift mutations). We are comparing cephaly and associated anomalies in two distinct sibships. the genotype to the phenotype of our collective. First results seem to show A. Coslier1, S. Manouvrier1, O. Boute1, A. Moerman1, G. Grn2, A. L. that truncating mutations cause a more severe phenotype than the mis- Delezoide3, L. Dewisme4, M. Le Merrer5 sense ones, which on turn are more severe than deletion mutations. Com- 1Gntique Clinique, Hpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU; Lille, France; paring the mutation rate in the group of children until the age of 4 years, 2Service de Gyncologie-Obsttrique, CH de Troyes; Troyes, France; there is a predominance of children without mutations (36 out of 101) ver- 3Unit de Foetoplacentologie, Hpital Robert Debr; Paris, France; 4Ser- sus children carrying a mutation (31 out of 201) (p < 0.01). These findings vice dAnatomie et cytologie pathologiques, Hpital Calmette, CHRU; Lille, mirror most probably the difficulties of an early correct diagnosis. The France; 5Dpartement de Gntique, Unit de Gntique clinique, Hpital detection rate in our collective was 66,6%. However in classical cases the Necker; Paris, France detection rate is > 80%. Our findings show that the majority of German Rett acoeslier@yahoo.com patients carry mutations in the MECP2 gene confirming the suggested We present an undescribed reccurent lethal chondrodysplasia associated locus homogeneity for the disease. with microcephaly, distal arthrogryposis, biliary anomalies and midline defects in four patients belonging to two unrelated kindred. The four cases198 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0506.Prevention of Orofacial Clefts with high doses of Folic chogryphoses. The acquired chromosomal abberations were caused in our Acid patients probably by essential exposures to environmental influences. The L. Timar1, A. Sarkozi2, A. Czeizel3 most important tasks in patients with chromosomal breakages are; early 1National Centre of Public Health; Budapest, Hungary; 2Founnd. of Comm. diagnosis and special oncological preventive program. Contr. Hered. Dis.; Budapest, Hungary; 3Found. of Comm. Contr. of Hered. Dis.; Budapest, Hungary P0509.About Different Phenotypes and Similar Genotypes in saljot@mail.datanet.hu the CBFA1-Gene In 1982, Tolarova found a reduction in the recurrence rate of isolated cleft U. Baumert1, I. Golan1, M. Preising2, D. Mig3 lip (CL) with or without cleft palate (CP; CL+ CP) after periconceptional 1Department of Orthodontics, Center for Craniofacial Genetics, University supplementation with a multivitamin including a very high dose (10 mg) of of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany; 2Department of Paediatric Oph- folic acid. The Hungarian randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of peri- thalmology, Strabismology, and Ophthalmogenetics, University of Regens- conceptional supplementation with a multivitamin including a physiologic burg; Regensburg, Germany; 3Department of Orthodontics, University of dose (0.8 mg) of folic acid did not show any preventive effect on the first Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany occurrence of isolated CL+ CPand CP. However, the general evaluation uwe.baumert@klinik.uni-regensburg.de of congenital abnormalities in the Hungarian Case-Control Surveillance of Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare autosomal dominant generalized Congenital Abnormalities indicated, among others, a reduction of isolated bone dysplasia characterized by high penetrance and variable expressivi- CL+ CPand CPafter the use of high dose of folic acid in the critical peri- ty. Mutations in the alpha 1 subunit of the core-binding factor(CBFA1; now od for the development of these congenital abnormalities in the 12-year RUNX2) have been correlated with this disorder. Each of our CCD-patients dataset between 1980 and 1991. We hypothesized that the prevention of was examined genetically and phenotypically in order to perform geno- orofacial clefts by folic acid has a dose-dependent effect, and this hypoth- type-phenotype correlations. We identified two heterozygous mutations in esis was tested in 2 recent Hungarian datasets, in a prospective cohort two index cases; R190Q and G146R with the latter shown to segregate in study, and in contrast, in the 17 years dataset of the Case-Control Surveil- a family with variable expressivity. While the father showed all classical lence of Congenital Abnormalities, between 1980 and 1996. symptoms, the son exhibited a less severe manifestation of the phenotype that was exemplified by dental anomalies only. The R190Q mutation was P0507.Restricted expression of T cell receptor gamma chain found in a patient previously misdiagnosed based on clinical evidence as gene rearrangement in multiple sclerosis patients having Rubinstein-Taybi-Syndrome (RTS). However, clinical reevaluation D. Januszkiewicz1, M. Pernak1, J. Rembowska1, H. Hertmanowska2, J. showed a phenotypical variety of CCD. Zhou et al. (Hum Mol Genet 8; Lossy3, M. Wender4, J. S. Nowak1, J. S. Nowak1 2311-2316, 1999) originally correlated the mutations R190Q and G146X 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, with the classical phenotype due to haploinsufficiency. Both mutations Poland; 2Department of Neurology; Poznan, Poland; 3Academy of Medical affected the runt domain of the protein and both were shown to complete- Sciences; Poznan, Poland; 4Neuroimmunological Unit; Poznan, Poland ly abolish DNAbinding. Our cases show that, due to the variable expres- janusz@man.poznan.pl sivity of certain mutations of the CBFA1 gene, CCD cannot be explained Presence of alfa/beta and gamma/delta T lymphocytes in demyelinating by haploinsufficiency alone as exemplified by the T200Amutation reported lesions in multiple sclerosis (MS)suggests, that they are responsible for by Zhou et al. This mutation was correlated with variable expressivity, but local destruction of nervous tissue. This T cells may have autoimmune in contrast to our findings, the manifestation of CCD was intensified in potential and are thought to play important role in progression of MS. Lim- passing from father to son. In our patient cohort, the mutations R190Q and ited junctional diversity of TCR gamma gene may indicate on in vivo clon- G146R were both correlated with non-classical phenotypes and/or variable al expansion of selected gamma/delta Tlymhocytes, which can be consid- expressivity. Therefore, we agree with Zhou et al. that the clinical expres- ered as antigen driven (auto)immune response.Our previous work showed sivity of these mutations is altered due to hypomorphic effects or genetic restricted TCR delta chain gene repertoire on the DNAand RNAlevel in modifiers. peripheral blood of MS patients. The aim of this study was to analyze the TCR gamma chain gene rearrangement on the RNAlevel and to compare P0510. Craniofacial Treatment Management of Cleidocranial to that on the DNA.TCR gamma gene rearrangement has been analyzed Dysplasia (CCD) in MS patients and healthy individuals using primers specific for V gamma I. Golan1, U. Baumert1, H. Wagener2, H. Niederdellmann3, D. Mig4 1-4 subfamilies and J gamma 1/2 genes(DNA level)and specific for V 1Department of Orthodontics, Center for Craniofacial Genetics, University gamma 1-4 and C gamma genes (RNAlevel). In almost all MS patients of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany; 2Department for Oral and Maxillo- and healthy individuals poli- or oligoclonal V1-, V2-, V3-, and V4-J gamma facial Surgery, Center for Craniofacial Genetics, University of Regensburg; gene rearrangements have been observed. Comparison of TCR gamma Regensburg, Germany; 3Department for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, chain gene rearrangements on DNA and RNA level showed, that the University of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany; 4Department of Ortho- majority of TCR gamma rearrangements are not expressed. The V2-C dontics, University of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany gamma gene rearrangement was predominantly observed in MS as well in ilan.golan@klinik.uni-regensburg.de healthy individuals.The rearrangements of V1-, V3-, and V4-C gamma Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare autosomal dominant generalized have been seen only in individual cases. Contrary to normal individuals, in bone dysplasia characterized by a widely variable expressivity. Anomalies MS patients the TCR gamma rearrangements on the RNAlevel were most- of the membranous and enchondral bone as well as dental characteristics ly oligoclonal.It could be concluded tha oligoclonal pattern of TCR V2-C have been reported. Homozygous mice mutants show a complete lack of gamma gene rearrangement at the RNAlevel along with increase of acti- bone development. Mutations in CBFA1 (now RUNX2), a master gene of vated gamma/delta T cells, i.e. expressing HLA-DR and CD25 strongly the runt-domain family, were identified as the etiological factor of this dis- argue for significant role of gamma/delta lymphocytes in the pathogenesis order. While the dental system shows an almost constant affection in all of MS. CCD cases, major skeletal symptoms like clavicular hypoplasia are not always expressed. The reason for dental affection cannot be explained by P0508.Orofacial findings in chromosomal breakage diseases mutations in the CBFA1 gene. Based on 15 CCD-Patients treated in our J. Handzel1, M. Kuklik2 clinic and over 200 reviewed publications, we describe our treatment 1Charles University Prague; Prague 2, Czech Republic; 2Charles Universi- approaches for various dentofacial symptoms. These include supernumer- ty; Prague, Czech Republic ary teeth, persistence of deciduous teeth, retained tooth germs leading to jan.handzel@lf1.cuni.cz a reduced chewing ability, cysts, and the risk of pathological mandible frac- Chromosomal breakages are caused by inborn insufficiency of enzymatic ture. The craniofacial expressions are, according to the patients point of systems repairing mutations of chromosomal DNA. These diseases repre- view, the main cause for the reduction in quality of life. By interdisciplinary sent a serious precancerous state and in patients (and also in carriers) of treatment involving an orthodontist, dentist and maxillofacial surgeon, a these genetically determined diseases there is a greater incidence of onco- well-functioning permanent dentition as well as an aesthetically satisfying logical cases. Following immunodeficiencies are associated with chromo- facial appearance can be achieved. Due to the rareness of the disease, somal instability; Ataxia teleangiectatica, Bloom syndrome, xeroderma pig- general treatment guidelines are difficult to define. Most of the reports pub- mentosum, incontinentia pigmenti, Nijmegen breakage syndrome, Jadas- lished in the literature are single case reports, not allowing statistically sig- sohn  Lewandowski syndrome etc.. This group of pathological conditions nificant conclusions. Therefore, CCD-patients should be advised as soon could be already described as chromosomal breakage diseases. The as possible by a qualified orthodontist to determine the optimal starting authors are describing two cases where chromosomal instability were time to achieve the best individual treatment. accompanied either by bizzare odontodysplasias and incontinentia pig- menti or by severe oligodontia, dyskeratosis congenita and ony-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 199 P0511.Spinal neurofibromatosis caused by a point mutation tion in this family showed that the degree of skewing of the inactivation pat- in exon 33 of the Neurofibromatotis type 1 gene tern correlated with carriage of the disease allele and also the severity of D. Kaufmann1, G. Assum1, B. Bartelt1, R. Mller1, B. Schmoll1, S. the phenotype in carrier females (1 moderately skewed and 4 extremely Wieland-Lange1, H. Gtz1, M. Wolf1, K. Kunzi-Rapp1, R. Fahsold2, C. skewed patterns in carriers, 2 random patterns in non-carriers, 4 uninfor- Hein1, W. Vogel1 mative results). An unaffected male was also shown to be recombinant at 1University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 2Gemeinschaftspraxis Prager & Junge; the BGN locus narrowing the candidate interval to a 3.1 cM region within Dresden, Germany Xq28. This region contains in excess of 60 described genes. Identification dieter.kaufmann@medizin.uni-ulm.de of the disease gene will allow direct examination of the hypothesis of We describe a 32 old female with numerous paraspinal tumors. The allelism, not only with regard to OPD1, but also other phenotypically relat- tumors were detected in routine NMR looking for the reason for a lumba- ed syndromes such as Melnick-Needles syndrome and frontometaphyseal go. Histological investigation of one of these paraspinal tumors excised dysplasia. showed a schwannoma. Clinical examination showed no other symptoms related to Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) or type 2. In her family no other P0514.Natural History of Spondylothoracic Dysplasia patients are known. Investigation of DNAderived from a skin excision for a A. Santiago-Cornier1, N. Ramrez-Lluch2, J. R. Acevedo-Ramos3, S. NF1 mutation by EMD and sequencing revealed in a point mutation in NF1 Arroyo4, A. Mrquez5, E. Rosado6, M. Warman7 exon 33 (T6200C, L2067P). This alteration does not seems to be not a 1Ponce School of Medicine, Genetics Division; Ponce, PR United States; polymorphism as shown by investigation of about 1000 other NF1 patients. 2Department of Ortopedics, Ponce School of Medicine; Ponce, PR United The mutated allele was expressed equally on mRNAlevel as shown by States; 3University of Puerto Rico-Arecibo, Dept. of Nursing; Arecibo, PR quantitative competitive RT-PCR. In contrast the amount of neurofibromin United States; 4Mayaguez Medical Center, dept. of Radiology; Mayaguez, was reduced clearly in cytoplasmic lysates of the fibroblasts of this patient PR United States; 5Ponce School of Medicine, Dept. of Radiology; as shown by immunoprecipitation and western blotting. To our knowledge, Mayaguez, PR United States; 6Ponce School of Meidicne, Genetics Divi- this is the first case of a patient with spinal neurofibromatosis without other sion; Ponce, PR United States; 7Case Western Reserve University; Cleve- NF1 or NF2 symptoms carrying a NF1 mutation. land, OH United States scornier@PSM.edu P0512. Rett Syndrome; clinical manifestations in males with Spondylothoracic dysplasia (MIM#277300) is an autosomal recessive dis- MECP2 mutations, germline mosaicism and implications for order with high prevalence in Puerto Rican population that has been genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis described as a lethal condition. Since Jarcho and Levin described it in A. Orr-Urtreger1, B. Ben Zeev2, C. N. Schanen3, H. Wolf1, N. Brandt2, N. 1938 has been referred to as Jarcho-Levin syndrome (JLS), costovertebral Ginot4, R. Shomrat1, Y. Yaron1 dysplasia and spondylothoracic dysostosis among other terms. We have 1Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; Tel Aviv, Israel; 2Sheba Medical Cen- prospectively characterized 20 patients with spondylothoracic dysplasia, ter; Ramat Gan, Israel; 3UCLASchool of Medicine; Los Angeles, CAUnit- taken detail medical histories, performed physical examinations, pedigree ed States; 4Meir General Hospital; Kfar Saba, Israel analysis, spine x-rays, spinal 3-D reconstructive CT scans, virtual bron- aviorr@tasmc.health.gov.il choscopies and pulmonary function tests (PFTs). Numerous vertebral Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by segmentation and formation defects were found. Characteristic vertebral cognitive and adaptive regression with autistic features, loss of acquired shapes that has not been described in the medical literature before was skills like speech and hand usage, stereotypic hand movements, epilepsy, also found. Eight out of these 20 patients has been born during our study ataxia and deceleration of head growth that almost exclusively affects and four have survived to 3,18,24,38 months respectively. The cause of females. Even before the causative gene for this syndrome was identified death in disease patients was respiratory insufficiency secondary to restric- , pedigree studies indicated that it was likely to be an X-linked dominant tive lung problems and pneumonia. Age of the remaining patients ranges disorder, with presumed lethality in males. Nonetheless, there were a few from 8 to 41 years. PFTs performed on individuals older than 6 years descriptions of males suspected of having Rett syndrome. These include showed a restrictive pattern that do not seems to exacerbate as patient sporadic cases meeting the clinical inclusion criteria, sporadic males with progresses in age. Mortality in our kindred was 50% of the identified new- Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY), and males with severe neonatal borns with JLS. This is an important finding since the vast majority of the encephalopathy in known Rett syndrome families. With the recent discov- JLS patients cited in the medical literature died in early newborn or child- ery that the MECP2 gene on Xq28 is the gene responsible for most cases hood periods. Their intellectual capacity and development is normal in all of Rett syndrome, it is possible to molecularly assess cases suspected of cases. This is the largest kindred of patients with JLS described in the having male Rett syndrome by direct sequencing analysis. We describe medical literature and so forth has allowed us to established a detail phe- the first 4 cases of molecularly confirmed cases of Rett syndrome in Israel. notype and natural progression of the disease. A genome-wide linkage One of the families presented here consists of a female having classical analysis is currently undergoing to determine the locus (i) of JLS in Puerto Rett syndrome and a male sibling with severe neonatal encephalopathy. Rican population. Molecular analysis revealed that both sister and brother have the same MECP2 gene mutation, however their mother does not, suggesting P0515.Trisomy 13, analysis of 4 cases germline mosaicism. The case emphasizes the point that maternal K. Kaczanowska, J. R. Kowalczyk, M. Babicz, A. Gaworczyk, M. Lejman germline mosaicism may lead to affected female or male offspring, which Dept of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Cytogenetic Laboratory; should be taken into consideration during genetic counseling regarding Lublin, Poland recurrence risks, and suggests that prenatal diagnosis may be warranted agaworczyk@poczta.onet.pl in siblings of apparently sporadic cases of Rett syndrome. It also highlights Among the chromosomal abnormalities that can be differentiated by their the importance of molecular diagnosis in every case of idiopathic neonatal spectra of clinical findings  trisomy 13 (incidence 1; 5000) is associated encephalopathy in males. with a very high risk of spontaneus death in utero and early death in infan- cy. The presence of an additional genetic material derrived from an extra P0513. Linkage of the Gene for Otopalatodigital Syndrome copy of chromosome 13 determines characteristic phenotypical features Type 2 (OPD2) to Distal Xq28; Support for Allelism with OPD1 usually found in children with this syndrome. Purpose; We report on 4 S. P. Robertson, M. Oldridge, S. Walsh, A. O. M. Wilkie cases of trisomy 13. All children were diagnosed at the birth. Clinical exam- Institute of Molecular Medicine; Oxford, United Kingdom ination; clinical examination revealed the presence of craniofacial dys- steve.robertson@imm.ox.ac.uk mophism as well as hexadactyly in all four patients. Additionally anoph- Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 (OPD2) is an X-linked dominant condi- thalmos was observed in two patients. Another two had occipital region tion characterized by campomelia, cleft palate, craniofacial dysmorphism skin depletion. Cytogenetic study; cytogenetic evaluation revealed simple and variable combinations of solid organ malformations. Carrier females trisomy 13 in two cases and Robertsonian translocations [t(13;13) and can have skeletal anomalies, cleft palate and deafness. OPD2 is hypothe- t(13;14)] in another two. Outcome; both newborns with simple trisomy sised to be allelic to OPD1, based on clinical similarities and segregation (patient 1 and 2)died within 2 months . Children with translocation trisomies pattern. The gene for OPD1 has been linked to a >10cM region within (patient 3 and 4) are still alive at the age of 2 months and 3 years respec- Xq28, but no linkage analysis of OPD2 has previously been reported. We tively. This work was supported by the Polish Committee of Scientific have performed a linkage study on three generation Maori family segre- Research  KBN4P05E 081 18 gating OPD2 in an effort to localize a candidate interval for the responsible gene. The distal Xq28 markers DXS1073 and DXS1108 showed perfect segregation with the disease allele, with two point lod scores of 2.41 and 2.71 respectively, and a multipoint lod score of 3.31. Studies of X-inactiva-200 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0516. Impact of full and Partial blindness (Genetically and tal retardation born after an uneventful pregnancy with normal birth meas- Non-Genetically) on academic performance of the visually urements, Apgar score 10/10. At the age of 8 month she developed an oli- handicapped students goepilepsy. Speech development was severely retarded. There was no D. Choudhury, S. K. Bandyopadhyay malformation of inner organs. Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed Research and Development Wing, Calcutta Blind School; Calcutta, India a terminal deletion of chromosome 8p , 46,XX,del(8)(p22) or a putative sde4701@vsnl.com derivative translocation chromosome, 46,XX,der(8;?)(p22;?), respectively. Astudy was undertaken to find out the effect of genetically and non-genet- 24 colour multiplex-FISH analysis demonstrated the loss of chromosome ically groups of full and partial blindness of the visually handicapped stu- 8p material, without any hint of interchromosomal exchanges. FISH with dents in West Bengal with regard to their academic performance. The data subtelomeric probes, a microdissected subtelomere-probe (generously contained 47 students of partial blindness and 78 students of full blindness provided by Dr. J. Trent, NIH), a subtelomeric PAC- and cosmid-probe, from Calcutta Blind School and also 17 students with normal vision form revealed the loss of telomeric material for chromosome 8p and confirmed Behala High School in the region of East Calcutta of West Bengal . All of a terminal deletion in this child. The parents had normal karyotypes, 46,XX the students were followed up from the Class-1 (1985) to the Class-X and 46,XY. Thus, in contrast to earlier reports, this case does not give evi- (1995) according to their academic (educational) performance. The edu- dence of genes in 8p23.1 responsible for heart defects. cational qualification of the Teaching Staffs and the Syllabus of the Class of the School are similar in both of Calcutta Blind school. Pedigree, family P0519. Non 5q-linked variants of infantile spinal muscular income, family size, mothers education and fathers education are alos atrophy (SMA) taken for the purpose of the study. Among the partial blindness of the stu- K. Zerres1, B. Wirth2, S. Rudnik-Schneborn3 dents, 85% students belonged to geneticalluy group and rest of the stu- 1Insitut fr Humangenetik; Aachen, Germany; 2Institut fr Humangenetik; dents are non-genetically group. Similarly 77% and 23% students have no Bonn, Germany; 3Institut fr Humangenetik; Aachen, Germany vision (full blind) as causes of genetically and non-genetically factors kzerres@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de respectively. With the localization and identification of the SMN-gene in proximal SMA Genetically group indicates blindness either partial or full by congenital or the definition of non-5q linked SMA variants became possible. At least other causes of genetics. Non-genetically group means partial or full blind- three variants have been identified so far. Their genetic basis is still ness due to causes of accident encephalitis, typhoid, dipthria etc. The sta- unknown for the majority of cases. Among more than 1000 cases analyzed tistical analysis revealed that no significant difference are to be found for diagnostic purposes, the following cases could be identified; SMAwith between the students of genetically group and non-genetically group of the (olivo)pontocerebellar hypoplasia; The phenotype known as PCH-1 is partial blindness with regard to their academic achievement. According to characterized by severe muscle weakness and hypotonia starting in many educational performance of the students the students of genetically group cases prenatally or at birth with a shortened life span often not exceeding of full blindness were found to be statistically non significant with the stu- a few months. We report on 5 families with a severe phenotype, however, dents of non-genetically group of full blindness. 3 patients had a milder disease course with first symptoms around the first In addition, the partial and full blind students have not significant differ- birthday. In 3 families linkage with 5q-markers could be excluded, none ences with that of the normal vision of students in respect of their educa- showed the typical deletion of the SMN1 gene. Diaphragmatic SMA; This tional presentation. entity is usually characterized by initial respiratory insufficiency due to diaphragmatic palsy often followed by a distally pronounced weakness and P0517.Molecular genetic of Neurofibromatosis 1 wasting. We report 10 families without SMN1 deletion. One responsible J. Kadlecov1, B. Ravukov1, P. Kroupov2, A. Vesel2, I. Val ?kov1, R. gene (SMARD) could recently be localized on chromosome 11. SMAand Gaillyov1 neurogenic arthogryposis; This is a heterogeneous group including non 1University of Childrens Hospital; Brno, Czech Republic; 2Faculty of Sci- progressive and non hereditary forms, while in other patients congenital ence, Masaryk University; Brno, Czech Republic contractures are a consequence of anterior horn cell loss leading to pro- jkadl@atlas.cz gressive weakness. We report on at least 15 cases of different phenotypes Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) of von Recklinghausen is a common auto- without SMN1 deletion. With the exception of a severe X-linked type, the somal dominant disorder, characterized by peripheral neurofibromas, cafe genetic localization is still unknown. The definition of distinct clinical phe- au lait spots and Lish nodules of the iris. The high mutation rate at the NF1 notypes is a prerequisite for the disclosure of the underlying genetic locus results in a wide range of molecular abnormalities. We have scaned defects. Knowledge of further genes causing neurogenic muscular atrophy 7 different exons of the NF1 gene using DNAsingle strand conformation is of great interest for elucidating the complex pathogenesis of anterior polymorphism (DNA-SSCP) and denaturing/temperature gradient gel elec- horn cell disease. Therefore, we are interested in DNAstudies of further trophoresis (DGGE/TGGE) methods (Gasparini P. et al., 1996) in series 60 families with different SMAvariants. NF1 patients. Six different mutations have been detected (one in the exons 6, 12b, 31, 37 and two in the exon 29). To date, majority of the reported P0520. Facial Dysmorphism and quasidominant inheritance NF1 mutations are predicted to resulted in protein truncation, but very few in Cenani-Lenz syndrome studies have correlated the causative NF1 mutation with the effect at the S. A. Temtamy mRNAlevel. We have applied a whole NF1 cDNAscreening methodology National Research Centre; Cairo, Egypt in our study and we have used a rapid and efficient strategy to screen the stemtamy@intouch.com entire NF1 coding region by cDNA-SSCP analysis, followed by DNA Cenani-Lenz syndrome is a rare specific syndactyly/synostosis syn- sequencing.The identification of mutations in our NF1 patients using the drome(MIM 212780).While most reports described autosomal recessive cDNA-SSCPmethod indicates that this approach is very powerful in the inheritance,one report described affected father &daughter.No facial dys- search for mutations in the NF1 gene and is extremly useful for the molec- morphism was previously noted.We studied 2 families; in the 1st an affect- ular diagnosis of NF1, especially for sporadic cases as have been predict- ed female had a previously affected brother & her father was said to have ed by Ars et al., 2000. References; Gasparini P. et al., Hum Genet 1996, been similarly affected.Extensive inbreeding in this family suggests qua- 97;492 - 495 Ars E. et al., Hum Molecular Genetics 2000, Vol. 9, No. 2; 237 sidominant inheritance.In the 2nd family there was history of a similarly - 247 affected sib who in addition had genital anomalies and cleft palate.Parents were normal first cousins.Both probands had similar facial dysmor- P0518. Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic find- phism;high,broad,bulging forhead,hypertelorism depressed nasal ings in a patient with 8p-syndrome. bridge,downslanting palpebral fissures,short nose,short&prominent philtru- B. Zoll1, I. Bartels1, S. Langer2, M. R. Speicher2, R. Boehm3 mand malar hypoplasia.The present report suggests for the first time facial 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Ger- dysmorphism & quasidominant inheritance in Cenani-Lenz syndrome many; 2Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, University of Munich; Munich, Germany; 3Neuropediatrics Department, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Germany bzoll1@gwdg.de Molecular cytogenetic methods have assisted in characterizing critical regions in chromosomal deletion syndromes. Deletions of the distal part of chromosome 8p (del 8p) are suspected to have a strong association with congenital heart defects, microcephaly and unusual behavior. A critical region for heart defects was tentatively assigned to 8p23.1. Here we report on a female child with facial dysmorphisms, mild motor and moderate men-Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 201 P0521.Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR) Genet- only one; phenotypes overlap widely. Thus, we reviewed all of these cases ic Polymorphism; A Possible Restrictive Relationship of (presumed) C syndrome to reevaluate their nosological standing. Pay- Between C677T Mutation With Lower Neural Tube Defects ing tribute to causes and symptoms, we present a decision tree of how to (NTD) make the diagnosis, which may help to distinguish between the C syn- J. I. C. F. Neri1, V. R. Arruda2, D. P. Cavalcanti3 drome and other entities with trigonocephaly. In the remaining cases of the 1Universidade Estadual de Campinas; Campinas, Brazil; 2Hemocentro - so-called C phenotype (Reynolds, 1989), further heterogeneity is sug- UNICAMP; Campinas, Brazil; 3Dpto de Gentica Mdica - FCM - UNI- gested on the basis of several sets of individuals sufficiently similar to each CAMP; Campinas, Brazil other and sufficiently different from the C-propositi. Thus, for clinical and jineri@uol.com.br methodological reasons it makes sense to create several C syndrome- A number of studies have demonstrated two common polymorphisms like groups to test the hypothesis of heterogeneity. The recently published (C677Tand A1298C) in the gene encoding MTHFR associated with NTD. severe cases (Bohring et al., 1999) which may turn out now as a 3p sub- The majority of the papers showing a link between a mutation in the telomeric duplication (McGaughran et al., 2000) are a striking but not the MTHFR gene and NTD deal only with spina bifida. However, besides spina only example. bifida, NTD includes anencephaly and encephalocele, all considered being consequence of an incomplete closure of the neural tube. It has been sug- P0524.Different localisation of point mutations in the ligand- gested an alternate hypothesis; NTD of the upper type (anencephaly, binding domain of androgen receptor allows differentiation encephalocele and thoracic spina bifida) may have different pathogenesis between Complete and Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syn- from those of the lower type (lumbosacral spina bifida). In this work we drome describe a study of mutations C677Tand A1298C in MTHFR gene in a M. Ignacak1, M. Niedziela1, S. Zajaczek2, W. H. Trzeciak1 total of 119 families with at least one fetus/child affected by NTD and 302 1University of Medical Sciences; Poznan, Poland; 2Pomeranian Medical normal controls. The results show that 15.1% of probands are homozig- University; Szczecin, Poland otes 677TT. There was no significant difference among parents and con- mignacak@eucalyptus.usoms.poznan.pl trols (c2(3)=1.59; p=0.66). The frequency of 4.2% of the 1298CC genotype The androgen receptor (AR) is a transcription factor that binds ligands and among probands was no different of parents and controls (c2(3)=1.20; regulates expression of genes involved in sexual differentiation and main- p=0.75). Asignificant difference in the frequency of homozigote 677TTwas tenance of the male phenotype. Different mutations in the AR gene are observed between upper and lower NTD (c2(1)=6.53; p=0.01) and responsible for a wide spectrum of phenotypic abnormalities in 46XYindi- between lower defects and controls (c2(1)=8.05; p= 0.004). There was viduals, resulting in a. clinical condition called androgen insensitivity syn- more alleles 677Tamong lower NTD than upper NTD (c2(1)=4.84; p=0.02) drome (AIS). We studied the AR gene in two 46XYphenotypic females. and controls (c2(1)=4.57; p=0.03). Combined heterozygosity One exhibited typical symptoms of complete form of AIS (CAIS), while the 677CT/1298AC was not found as a risk factor in the present study. How- symptoms in the second girl were milder. Direct sequencing of the amplifi- ever, combined homozygosity 677TT/1298CC was closely inexistent. cation products in first patient revealed C2718Ttransition in exon 6, creat- These results suggest that the polimorphism 677TTin the MTHFR gene ing a stop codon in position 786, in place of Arg codon. It has been previ- seems to be associated only with lower NTD. ously established that this mutation results in complete loss of ligand bind- ing ability and is responsible for clinical symptoms of CAIS. The examina- P0522. Multiple Malformations including short Stature, Anal tion of exon 6 in the second girl revealed G2754C transversion causing Atresia, upper Limb Defect, cardiac Malformation, Hearing Gln798Glu substitution and might trigger partial form of AIS (PAIS). It was Impairment and mild mental Retardation in Combination with found that mutation in the AR gene localised less than 40 nt downstream primary Immunodeficiency in a 31 year old Patient from nt 2718, might affect ligand binding to a lesser extent and cause M. Krei-Nachtsheim1, D. von Bubnoff2, T. Bieber2, M. M. Nthen1 change in the patients phenotype from CAIS to PAIS. Supported by grant 1Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany; 2Department of Dermatol- No 4 PO5E 058 18 form the Polish Committee for Scientific Research. ogy; Bonn, Germany kreiss@mailer.meb.uni-bonn.de P0525.Esophageal atresia and amniotic band-like hypoplasia We report on a 31 year old male patient with multiple anomalies and an of fingers in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV increased susceptibility to infections. Malformations include right upper H. Y. Kroes1, G. Pals2, A. J. van Essen1 limb defect (peromelia), congenital heart defect (ventricular septal defect), 1University Hospital Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands; 2Free Uni- imperforate anus, short stature (1.55 m), strabismus divergens and hear- versity Medical Centre; Amsterdam, The Netherlands ing impairment (neurosensory). Minor anomalies are hypospadia glandis, h.y.kroes@medgen.azg.nl cryptorchidism, scoliosis and inguinal hernia. There was mild developmen- EDS IV, or the vascular type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, is a connective tal delay and mild mental retardation. No similar anomalies were reported tissue disease predominated by vascular phenomena, the most serious in the patients family, except for one brother, who had an atrial septal complications being rupture of large arteries or bowels. Congenital anom- defect that had been corrected in childhood. Cellular anomalies include alies are rare in EDS IV. Mutations in the COL3Agene, resulting in an functional impairment and deficiency of T-helper cells, low serum IgM-level abnormal structure of collagen III, are the cause of EDS IV. and mild thrombocytopenia. Specific laboratory investigations showed no We describe a mother and son with EDS IV. The mother was born with evidence of Fanconi anemia, DiGeorge-Syndrome, Townes-Brocks-Syn- hypoplasia of digiti II-V with amniotic band-like circular constrictions on the drome and Wiskott-Aldrich-Syndrome. Some of the manifestations seen in right hand, a clubfoot on the right, and macrocephaly, according to the neu- our patient are part of the VACTERL-association and the Oculo-Oto-Radi- rologist as a result of normal pressure hydrocephaly. After the delivery of al-(IVIC-)Syndrome. However none of these syndromes can explain the her son she had severe spontaneous haemorhage from a ruptured left spectrum of anomalies seen in our patient suggesting a new syndrome. subclavial artery. She died two months later of massive dissection of the thoracic and abdominal aorta. Her son was born with a esophageal atre- P0523.Reevaluation of the nosological standing of the C syn- sia, and macrocephaly due to communicating hydrocephaly. drome. Protein analysis in fibroblast of the mother for collagen III abnormalities A. Bohring1, J. M. Opitz2 was normal. 1Dept. of Pediatrics, Ostholstein Kliniken Eutin; Eutin, Germany; 2Dept. of However, DNA-analysis of the COL3Agene revealed a pathogenic muta- Pediatrics and Human Genetics, University of Utah; Salt Lake City, UT tion (388GT, Gly130Arg) in the mother, that was also found in the son. We United States will discuss the possible relationship between the congenital anomalies in Abohring@aol.com our patients and EDS IV. Besides, we want to stress that normal collagen Nearly 30 years ago (1969) Opitz et al. reported on 2 sibs with a new, pre- III protein analysis does not exclude EDS IV. viously apparently undescribed syndrome of multiple congenital anom- alies. These sibs had a characteristic appearance with trigonocephaly, flat P0526.Netherton Syndrome; Report of One Case nose, strabismus, epicanthal folds, multiple bucco-labial frenula, short S. Lin, M. Tu, C. Chuang, B. Chen stature, postaxial hexadactyly, joint contracture/dislocation/crepitation, and MacKay Memorial Hospital; Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China loose skin. The syndrome was named the C syndrome. To date, about 40 zsplin@ms2.mmh.org.tw published and about 30 unpublished cases are known to us for consulta- Netherton syndrome (NS, MIM 256500) is a rare autosomal recessive dis- tion. Agene causing C syndrome is not known. Defining syndromes on the order characterized by congenital ichthyosis, a specific hair-shaft defect basis of propositi is fraught with many problems and frequently leads to (trichorrhexis invaginata), and atopic manifestations. Infants with this syn- truncation of the phenotype to its severest form. Moreover, more than 70 drome often fail to thrive. The clinical features may be variable and they conditions are described with trigonocephaly, of which the C syndrome is change gradually from birth on. As a results, diagnosis of this disorder in202 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology early childhood is difficult, and the first tentative diagnosis may mistake it P0529.Identification of 6 new mutation in the fibrillin-1 gene for other congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. We report on a 2 years of 31 unrelated patients with Marfan syndrome old Taiwanese girl who was diagnosed with NS at age of 15 months. She K. Rommel, M. Arslan-Kirchner, J. Schmitdke had generalized erythroderma with desquamation and intermittent oozing Institut fr Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany since birth, and it changed to ichthyosis linearis circumflexa in late infancy. rommel.kathrin@mh-hannover.de Atopic manifestations are present, including eczema-like rashes, allergic The Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder, conjunctivitis, urticaria, allergic rhinitis, high serum Ig E (422 IU/mL) level characterised by phenotypically variable manifestations in skeletal, ocular, and hypereosinophilia (1080/cmm). Skin biopsy showed parakeratosis of and cardiovascular systems. To date, over 190 Mutations have been iden- the epidermis and a dense lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the upper dermis. tified in the fibrillin-1 (FBN 1) gene, the gene implicated in the aetiology of Her scalp hair is sparse and brittle, and showed characteristic bamboo MFS. (Human Gene Mutation Database; hair picture by microscopy. Her body weight gain is poor (< 3 rd %ile). http;//www.uwcm.ac.uk/uwcm/mg/hgmd0.html) Here we report 3 missense Medical treatment only alleviates her clinical symptoms slightly. Since NS mutations, one splice site alteration and two mutations causing gene was mapped to 5q32 by Chavanas, et al. recently, linkage analysis is frameshifts; a 16-bp deletion and a single nucleotide insertion. Two of the performed on the family. We will show our preliminary data at the confer- missense mutations occur in calcium-binding epidermal growth factor like ence. (EGF) domains, resulting in the substitution of tyrosine by cysteine (Y1101C) and threonine by isoleucine (T1908I) in the exons 26 and 46 P0527.Molecular characterisation of a ring 22 chromosome in respectively. One missense mutation (V449I) replaces a valine residue by a patient with severe language delay. A contribution to the isoleucine in the non-calcium binding epidermal growth factor like domain refinement of the telomeric 22q deletion syndrome. of exon 11. The frameshift mutation 1903del16bp leads to a premature P. De Mas1, N. Chassaing1, Y. Chaix2, G. Bourrouillou1, P. Calvas1, E. termination codon (PTC) in exon 17, while the frameshift mutation Bieth1 8025insC is causing a PTC in exon 64. Finally, we identified a splice site 1Purpan Hospital, department of Genetic; Toulouse, France; 2Children alteration; 4817-1G/Tchanges the splice acceptor consensus sequence in Hospital, department of Neurology; Toulouse, France intron 38, most probably leading to the skipping of exon 39. bieth.e@chu-toulouse.fr Several studies have reported cases of ring 22 chromosome in patients P0530.Otocephaly with multiple malformations without situs with mental retardation characterised by severe language delay and some inversus or holoprosencephaly dysmorphic features. Here, we report the case of a 7 years old boy with C. Schiffer1, C. Sergi2, M. Schiesser3, J. Zschocke1, G. Tariverdian1 these phenotypic and chromosomic conditions. The propositus was the 1Institute of Human Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany; 2Institute of Patholo- unique affected case of a non-consanguineous family. Amild motor devel- gy; Heidelberg, Germany; 3Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology; Heidel- oppement delay was observed from 12 months (first steps at 17 months). berg, Germany In contrast, the speech developpement was more severely affected, with christiane_schiffer@med.uni-heidelberg.de by the age of 7, language limited to only few words. Behavioral problems Otocephaly (agnathia) is a rare developmental field complex with struc- were also noted as hyperactivity, short attention span and aggressive out- tural defects limited to the craniofacial region. It can occur alone or in bursts. The only minor dysmorphic findings were a broad nasal bridge, association with a variety of malformations, most frequently holoprosen- long lashes, a dental malocclusion and a hight arched palate. The cytoge- cephaly and situs inversus. We report of a fetus with otocephaly and a pre- netic analysis revealed a ring 22 chromosome with normal parental kary- viously undescribed malformation pattern lacking both holoprosencephaly otypes. Using a combination of fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and and situs inversus. The parents were non consanguineous, and there were genotypic analysis, we were able to detect a telomeric deletion on the ring no evidence of infection or exposure to teratogenic factors during preg- 22 chromosome occuring beyong the mapped marker D22S39. Further nancy. Ultrasound examination at 30 weeks gestation revealed polyhy- molecular investigations are in progress to map more precisely this dele- dramnion and fetal malformations. Amniocentesis was performed; sponta- tion and to attempt to characterise the 22q critical region involved in lan- neous fetal death occurred five days later. Subsequent examination (length guage developpment. This is, to date, the first characterised deletion of a 34 cm, 3rd centile, weight 810 g, 3-10th centile) showed otocephaly with ring 22 chromosome in a patient with mental retardation. Similar pheno- very deep set, dysmorphic ears, nearly complete absence of the mandible, type being previously described in patients with telomeric 22q deletion, we microstomia, hypoplasia of the tongue, and blind ends of nasal and oral considere, on the basis of our data, that ring 22 chromosome may be a cavities. There was no holoprosencephaly or situs inversus. Both kidneys contributive approache to the 22q telomeric deletion syndrome. and ureters were absent, and there was anal atresia. Skeletal malforma- tions included bilateral club feet, multiple rib fusions with dysgenesis of the P0528. The Clinical, Cytogenetical and Molecular Studies in thoracic spine and os sacrum. The umbilical cord contained one artery and Polish Families with Sterility or Repeated Early Pregnancy one vein. Laboratory investigations showed normal chromosomes and Loss. excluded microdeletion 22q11.2. The pathogenesis of otocephaly and the J. Kocki, S. Bakalczuk, G. Jakiel, L. Putowski, I. Korszen-Pilecka, B. associated malformation pattern is as yet unknown but is thought to repre- Kwiatkowska-Drabik, J. Wojcierowski sent a developmental field defect involving the first branchial arch. Evi- Medical University of Lublin; Lublin, Poland dence indicates that it may be due to a range of chromosomal, monogenic kocki@hipokrates.am.lublin.pl and teratogenic factors. Female fertility depends upon; normal anatomic development permitting coitus, cervical mucus favorable for sperm transport, normal ovarian func- P0531. Neurofibromatosis-Noonan Syndrome (NFNS)- Case tion, lack of tubal obstruction, normal tubal function and normal hormones reports and review of the literature function. The selected causes of infertility in males there are; abnormal A. Buske1, K. Lehmann2, D. Kaufmann3, S. Rudnik-Schneborn4, S. Tin- gamete formation - spermatozoon abnormalities or chromosomal abnor- schert5 malities, cryptorchidism, androgen insensivity syndromes, hypo- or hyper- 1Institut fr Medizinische Genetik, Charit, Humboldt-Universitt Berlin, gonadotropic disorders, oligospermia or azoospermia and environmental Germany; Berlin, Germany; 2Institut fr Medizinische Genetik, Charit, factors. Cytogenetic studies were performed in 72 maried couples with Humboldt-Universitt; Berlin, Germany; 3Abteilung fr Humangenetik, Uni- sterility or repeated early pregnancy loss. Peripheral blood lymphocytes versitt Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 4Institut fr Humangenetik, Universitt were stimulated by phytohemagglutynine for 72 hours. After 2 hours col- Aachen; Aachen, Germany; 5Institut fr Medizinische Genetik, Charit, cemid exposure, harvesting, slide preparation and G- or Q-banding were Humboldt-Universtitt; Berlin, Germany performed by standard procedure. Ten patients showed chromosome annegret.buske@charite.de changed; 1; 46,Xi(X)/45,X; 2; 47,XXY; 3; 46,XY,t(2;16)(q13;p12); 4; Since Allanson et al. (1) described four individuals with the co-occurrence 46,XY,t(2;16)(q13;p13); 5; 46,XX/46,XXt(1;X)(q41;q28); 6; of the Noonan syndrome and manifestations of neurofibromatosis type 1 46,XY,der(13q;14q); 7; 46,XY,r(22); 8; 46,XX/47,XXX; 9; (NF1), more than 30 patients are reported in the literature. As discussed 46,XY,t(2;15)(q22;q26); 10. 47,XXY. We examined CFTR gene mutation in from Carey (2) it is still debated if the Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrom a group of men with oligo- or azoospermia by INNO-LiPACystic Fibrosis (NFNS) represents a true syndrome or simply a variable manifestation of procedure, there was based on the reverse-hybridization pronciple. In this NF1. We want to present two patients with the Neurofibromatosis-Noonan group of patients we diagnosed 4 carriers of cystic fibrosis. The good phenotype. The first patient is a 22-year-old woman with fully expressed genetic counseling has practical importance for the affected families with NF1 and with the additional features; pulmonary stenosis, ptosis of the sterility or repeated early pregnancy loss. This paper was supported by eyelids, short stature and mental retardation. The underlying mutation in Polish Commitee of Scientific Research. Grant no 4 P05E 06416. the NF1-gene is identified; a stop-mutation in exon 13; C2041T. The sec- ond patient is a 18-year-old woman. She has multiple caf-au-lait-spotsPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 203 and a pulmonary stenosis, a short stature and facial features typical of P0534.Familial Form Of Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Of Noonan syndrome. She has neither Lisch nodules nor neurofibroma. How- Hands And Feet Type Cockayne- Touraine, Associated With ever, in the MRI there was a lesion indicative of a glioma of the medulla Translocation 5;13 oblongata. Her mental development is normal. Amutation in the NF1-gene B. Dimitrov1, E. Simeonov1, A. Durmishev2, A. Andreev1, I. Boneva1 is not yet identified, but the analyses are still in progress. AFISH analysis 1Section of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Hospital; Sofia, Bulgaria; could exclude a large deletion of the NF1-gene. In both cases there is no 2Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Medical Faculty; Sofia, Bul- family history of NF1 or Noonan syndrome. We want to discuss the clinical garia and molecular findings in these patients. Reference; 1 Allanson JE, Hall emil@medfac.acad.bg JG, Van Allen MI (1985); Noonan phenotype associated with neurofibro- Epidermolysis bullosa is a group of hereditary dermatoses in which mild matosis. Am J Med Genet 21; 457462. 2 Carey JC (1998) Neurofibro- mechanical trauma or other causes lead to blistering of the skin. First matosis-Noonan Syndrome  editorial comment. Am J Med Genet 75; Am Cockayne (1938) described the type with bullose eruption of the feet and J Med Genet 21; 263-264. Readett (1961) reported a family in which 14 members in 5 generations were known to have localized epidermolysis bullosa similar to those P0532. Determination of microdeletions in AZF regions on Y observed by Cockayne. Cartledge and Myers (1943) reported an affected chromosome by PCR in infertile man family from West Virginia where blistering occured only on the hands and C. F. Sargin1, S. Berker Karauzum1, A. Manguoglu1, G. Luleci1, S. Kar- feet and mainly in warm weather after continuous walking or labor with aveli2, H. Glkesen2, T. Erdogru3 hand tools. The clinical findings varied widely in severity from severe gen- 1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology eralized blistering from birth to temporary blistering of feet in summer. and Genetics; Antalya, Turkey; 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Bouwes Bavinck et al. (1987) reviewed the clinical features of the Cock- Department of Pathology; Antalya, Turkey; 3Akdeniz University, Faculty of ayne-Touraine form of dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. The clinical fea- Medicine, Department of Urology; Antalya, Turkey tures showed considerable interfamilial variation. They described an exten- toraman@hipokrat.med.akdeniz.edu.tr sively affected family with autosomal dominant dystrophic EB; at least 4 Cytogenetic studies on idiopathic infertile men have shown structural members of the family also had congenital localized absence of skin as defects on Y chromosome. These findings suggest that Y chromosome seen in Bart syndrome. The autors describe an affected family with dys- contains the genes regulating spermatogenesis. Recently the genes trophic epidermolysis bullosa on the hands and feet in 4 generations. Two responsible for spermatogenesis which are located at intervals V and VI of members of the family, father and son, have been investigated personally. Yq.11.23 regions have been cloned and named as Azoospermia Factor The blistering started immediately after birth and progressed slowly to a Lokus (AZF) by the use of molecular techniques. In this study, we studied phase of dystrophic scars and areas of atrophy. The bullae were localized 38 infertile men. The infertility etiology of twenty three of these patients had on hands and feet, showing worsening in summer. In addition to the skin been defined as idiopathic, while varicocele, infection, obstruction, and lesions, the nails were dystrophic too. Cytogenetic analysis showed toxic agent exposure was given as the reason for infertility in seven, three, translocation (5;13) (q13; q3.34) in affected persons. Clinical and genetic four and one patients respectively. Twenty six patients had azoospermia heterogeneity of the disease will be discussed. and twelve had oligospermia. SY84 and SY86 primers of AZFa zone, SY127 and SY134 primers of AZFb zone, SY255 and SY254 primers of P0535.Paucity of cancer among Down syndrome-associated AZFc zone and SY14 primers of SRYgene were used as internal controls deaths in the United States and target DNAsamples were amplified by multiplex PCR method to deter- Q. H. Yang1, S. A. Rasmussen1, J. M. Friedman2 mine the presence of microdeletions in q11.23 region of Ychromosome of 1Birth Defects and Pediatric Genetics Branch, CDC; Atlanta, GAUnited 38 infertile men whose karyotypes were cytogenetically normal (46,XY). States; 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia; Amplification by SY254 and SY127 has not revealed any visible bands in Vancouver, Canada one of the cases (2.6%), indicating deletions in AZFb and AZFc (DAZ qyang@cdc.gov gene) regions. Recent studies have shown that the risk of many solid tumors is decreased among people with Down syndrome. We used Multiple-Cause Mortality P0533. Microcephalic primordial dwarfism and brain perisyl- Files compiled from U.S. death certificates for 1983 to 1997 to examine the vian dysgenesis ; a unique association. occurrence of major categories of malignant neoplasms among more than S. Andries1, W. Dobyns2, E. Rebuffat3, F. Christiaens3, L. Van Maldergem1 17,800 Down syndrome-associated deaths. Proportionate mortality ratios, 1Centre de Genetique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Genetique; which measure whether a specific medical condition is more or less likely Loverval, Belgium; 2Dpt of Pediatric Neurol, University of Chicago; Chica- to be listed on death certificates on which Down syndrome is also listed go, IL United States; 3Dept of Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalier du Val de than in all deaths, was used to test for associations. We found that persons Sambre; Auvelais, Belgium with Down syndrome were 1.5 times (95% CI 1.4-1.7) more likely to have secret.genet@ipg.be leukemia listed on their death certificates than persons without Down syn- Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism is a heterogeneous drome, confirming this well-recognized association. However, death certifi- group of very rare skeletal dysplasias determining severe growth retarda- cates from persons with Down syndrome were much less likely to list tion of prenatal onset. It may be associated with brain dysgenesis such as malignant neoplasms other than leukemia (PMR = 0.09, 95% CI 0.08- neuronal heterotopias. Perisylvian dysgenesis is a rare cortical dysplasia 0.10). PMRs for almost all major classes of malignant neoplasms were sig- with variable neurological dysfunction. We describe a 3 yr-old female child nificantly lower than expected. For example, the PMRs for prostate cancer, born to unrelated Caucasian parents. Severe intrauterine growth retarda- ovarian cancer, breast cancer in females, cancers of the lung and airways, tion was detected by ultrasound during the pregnancy. Birthweight was and cervical cancer were all less than 0.1. Strikingly low PMRs for malig- 1,645 g (- 4 SD) with a length of 41 cm (- 4 SD) and head circumference nancy were associated with Down syndrome at all ages and in both gen- of 28 cm (- 8 SD). Placental infarcts and fibrosis were observed. Propor- ders. Possible explanations for the paucity of cancers among Down syn- tionate severe global short stature, microcephaly and mild dysmorphic drome-associated deaths include decreased susceptibility of cells from signs were noted. There was left arm hemiparesis. Karyotype was 46,XX. people with Down syndrome to tumorigenesis and/or reduced exposure to Clinical course was relatively mild with respect to severe (-8 SD) micro- environmental risk factors such as tobacco and certain occupational expo- cephaly, but there was major failure to thrive and delayed milestones (sat sures. at 12 months, walked at 24 months, said a few words at 20 months). Growth parameters are still at - 6 SD for weight and length. Askeletal sur- P0536.Styckler Syndrome vey indicated several of the signs described by Majewski in the so called M. Lima, L. Ramos, M. Martins, C. Mota, A. Fortuna primordial osteodyplastic dwarfism type II such as plastyspondyly and mild Instituto Genetica Medica Jacinto de Magalhes; Porto, Portugal vertebral clefting, narrow pelvis with dysplastic iliac wings, short humeri linil@esoterica.pt and femora with metaphyseal flairing. MRI showed asymetric perisylvian Stickler syndrome (MIM108300) is a autosomal dominant disorder with polymicrogyria involving most of the right hemisphere which was most characteristic ophthalmological and orofacial features, deafness and arthri- severe in the right perisylvian region and sparing the right mesial occipital tis. Very similar features are also found in Marshall syndrome (MIM lobe. We suggest the patient has a hitherto undescribed association of 154780) but these patients more often have short stature and abnormali- osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism and perisylvian polymicrogyria. ties in cranial ossification and retinal detachment occurs less frequently. High myopia, retinal detachment and abnormalities of vitreous gel archi- tecture are a pathgnomonic feature of the Stickler syndrome. The majority of families with This syndrome have mutations in the COL2A1 gene. One mutation causing Stickler syndrome and one causing Marshall syndrome204 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology have been detected in the COL11A1. Anull-allele mutation in the COL2A1 gene led to a typical phenotype of Stickler syndrome. Clinical details of our P0540. Prader-Willi Syndrome with a partial deletion 3q and patients (11) and families are discussed with emphasis on differential diag- 15q due to a de novo t(3;15)(q28;q12) in a patient with 45 nosis. chromosomes. C. Windpassinger, E. Petek, W. Emberger, H. Zierler, K. Wagner, P. M. P0537.Moebius Syndrome;clinical And Genetic Evaluation Kroisel C. S. Canton1, R. I. Ortiz de Luna2, C. Garcia Delgado2, F. Flores2 Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Graz, Austria 1Servicio De Genetica Complejo Hospitalario Metropolitano De La Caja De windpass@kfunigraz.ac.at Seguro Social; Panam, Panama; 2Servicio De Genetica Hospital Infantil Here we report on a 6 month old male patient with a rare variant of Prad- De Mxico, Federico Gmez; Mexico, Mexico er-Willi Syndrome (PWS). Birth weight 3,2 kg, length 50 cm were within the celiacanton@hotmail.com normal range but due to his head circumference (OFC) of 37 cm a cae- We report the most frequently anomalies was found in 77 patients with sarian section was performed. In most cases PWS is caused by an inter- Moebius Syndrome, studied in the period of January 1970 to october 1998 stitial deletion of the proximal segment of chromosome 15q, a maternal in Hospital Infatil de Mexico, Federico Gomez. The patients were found disomy 15q11-13 or more rarely due to an imprinting centre mutation. In limbs anomalies in 80.52%, orofacial in 58.44% and ophtalmological in addition structural chromosome aberrations, like translocations, inver- 44.16%. sions, isochromosomes or rarely ring chromosomes that lead to a deletion In 53.25 % we noted exposition to external chemical agent, in this case or a duplication of the PWS critical region were described in PWS patients. very interesting Montanoa tomentosa in 9.09% of the total. (Zoapantle An unbalanced translocation 3;15 was found by high resolution banding of the Mexican Herbolaria). and FISH analysis leading to the following karyotype; 45,XY,- Cytogenetic studies in 24 patients found 8.33% abnormal and the blink 15,der(3)t(3;15)(q28;q12) de novo. Since this findings suggested the pres- reflex were abnormal in all the patients studied. ence of PWS in the patient, molecular analysis was performed. Diagnosis was confirmed by methylation-specific PCR, Southern Blot and FISH P0538. Mt 3298 A -> G mutation in a patient with diabetes, analysis using the D15S10 probe. The patient thus represents a rare case deafness, mental retardation and seizures. of PWS combined with an additional deletion of the terminal segment of L. Van Maldergem1, P. Hilbert1, N. Ribai2, S. Noel2, Y. Gillerot1 chromosome 3. This certainly is an unique observation, but is of general 1Centre de Genetique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Genetique; interest to study combinatorial effects of PWS with autosomal deletions Loverval, Belgium; 2Dept of Neurology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire A. others than of chromosome 15. The most striking phenotypic findings of Vesale; Montigny-le-Tilleul, Belgium the patient at an age of 6 month were hypotonia, macrocephaly (>90 cen- vmald@skypro.be tile) with frontal bossing, retrognatia, preauricular tags, strabismus diver- Mitochondrial diabetes encompasses the previously described spectrum of gens, flexions anomalies of the upper limbs, and bilateral club feet, how- 3243 and 1555 mutations of the Mt tRNAgenes. Recently a Japanese ever a more detailed description will be presented. study identified an additional tRNALeu mutation at position 3298 in a sub- set of diabetic patients. We describe a patient with a combination of insulin P0541. Autosomal Recessive Duodenal Atresia Of Membra- dependent diabetes mellitus, late onset deafness, epilepsy, a poren- nous Type cephalic cyst and mental retardation. He also exhibited some widespread, T. Krustev, I. Iazova, M. Stefanova bluish skin lesions. Ahistory of neonatal asphyxia was recorded. Since Medical University; Plovdiv, Bulgaria there was an association of diabetes and deafness a search for tRNA brigite@plovdiv.techno-link.com mutations was performed. A heteroplasmic 3298 A -> G transition was Congenital duodenal membrane (CDM) has been classified as a type of identified in more than 80 % of DNAextracted from peripheral lympho- duodenal atresia. It occurred mainly sporadically and several cases in fam- cytes. This result confirms that mutation 3298 determines mitochondrial ily have been observed. Here we describe a membranous type of duode- diabetes. However if we assume that mental retardation and porencephal- nal atresia in two sibs, a sister and a brother, following third and fourth ic cyst are not only due to perinatal brain insult, this report may also pregnancy of consanguineous parents. The first pregnancy in the family expand the spectrum of clinical signs and symptoms associated with this ended with a spontaneous abortion in a first trimester and the second mutation. This would be similar to the 3243 mutation which can determine resulted in a healthy girl. Both affected children showed isolated duodenal mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like atresia having normal karyotype. They were successfully operated using episodes in some cases, deafness only or deafness and diabetes in oth- duodenojejunostomy. An autosomal recessive type of inheritance was sug- ers. This finding indicates that the 3298 mutation may represent another gested. example of mitochondrial unpredictable clinical expression. P0542.Private Syndromes In Genetic Counselling P0539. Non random X chromosome inactivation in CHILD E. Simeonov, B. Dimitrov syndrome Section of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Hospital; Sofia, Bulgaria P. Vabres1, P. Amati-Bonneau2, D. Hamel-Teillac3, Y. De Prost3, M. Lar- emil@medfac.acad.bg regue2, D. Bonneau2 Genetic counseling in pediatric genetics is involved mainly in providing 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Poitiers; Poitiers, France; 2CHU; genetic information to families with children affected of mental retardation, Poitiers, France; 3Hopital Necker Enfants Malades; Paris, France neurologic deterioration and multiple congenital anomalies, caused by p.vabres@chu-poitiers.fr chromosomal aberrations, single gene defects and dysmorphic syndromes CHILD syndrome is an X-linked male-lethal condition with congenital limb of other etiology. Four undescribed up to now nonchromosomal MCAsyn- hemidysplasia and ichtyosiform nevus, in which mutations of the 3 beta dromes have been observed over the last several years. 1. 7 year old hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene have been reported. Functional brother and 4 year old sister with dysmorphic face, Dandy-Walker malfor- mosaicism due to X chromosome inactivation has been suggested as an mation, pronounced muscular hypotonia, severe, progressive mental explanation to unilateral limb hypoplasia and patchy skin involvement. We retardation and chronic renal insufficiency. 2. Newborn girl, who died at 3 studied X inactivation in two patients with CHILD syndrome. One patient, months with dysmorphic face, hydrocephaly, bilateral cataract, nail aged 14, had a mild phenotype with keratosis palmoplantaris, ichtyosiform hypoplasia, ambiguous genitalia and severe developmental delay. 3. Two epidermal nevus of the neck and inguinal folds (ptychotropism), and com- sisters of 10 and 8 with slightly dysmorphic face, mild mental retardation plete agenesia of one finger. Both parents were unaffected. The other /IQ 60 and77/, growth retardation and hypo/aplasia of lachrymal /no tears/ patient, aged 22, had a more severe phenotype with hypoplastic right and salivary /dry mouth/ glands. 4. Brother of 8 and sister of 10 months superior and inferior limbs, extensive ichtyosiform nevi with axillae and with growth retardation, progressive mental retardation, dry, coarse, brittle groin involvement, scarring alopecia and linear keratosis palmoplantaris. hair and renal tubular acidosis. The observed disease states are discussed Polymorphism at the HUMARAlocus was studied on DNAfrom blood lym- from the point of view of differential diagnosis and whether or not they rep- phocytes and affected keratinocytes. Non random inactivation of the same resent new unreported entities. X chromosome (paternal X in the first patient) was found on affected skin and blood. Skewed X inactivation in peripheral blood lymphocytes is known to occur in other X-linked male lethal disorders. In incontinentia pig- menti, it is a consequence of selection against cells expressing the lethal allele. In CHILD syndrome, the cause for skewed X inactivation is unknown. Interestingly, X inactivation in blood lymphocytes is not correlat- ed with disease severity, as complete skewing was found in both cases.Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 205 P0543.Radiological manifestations of SHFM cause. Case report; We present a 3-year-old girl, the second child of P. Tsipouras1, S. Sifakis1, M. Arici2, D. Viljoen3, P. Beighton4 healthy, non-consanguinal parents. At birth physical examination showed 1Dept Pediatrics, Div Human Genetics, University of Connecticut Health dysmorphic features; low-set dysplastic ears, microphthalmia, slightly Center; Farmington, CT United States; 2Dept of Radiology, University of upsalnted palpebral fissures, bulbous nose, small mouth and microg- Connecticut Health Center; Farmington, CT United States; 3Dept Human nathia. Cardiac ultrasound scan showed atrial septal defect, ventricular Genetics, University of Witwatersrand; Johannesburg, South Africa; 4Dept septal defect and open ductus Botally. Motor development was slightly of Human Genetics, University of CapeTown; Cape Town, South Africa retarded. At the age of 3 years her Denver developmental screening test sifakis@excite.com result approached the developmental level deemed appropriate for her Aim; Split Hand Foot Malformation (SHFM) is characterized by genetic het- chronological age. GTG banded preparations of the patient obtained from erogeneity and phenotypic variability, while frequently is a syndromic man- cultures of peripheral blood samples showed 47 chromosomes in all the ifestation. Although SHFM implies the existence of a cleft in an affected spreads. The patients karyotype was 47, XX,+13/47,XX,+21. Atotal of 75 limb, numerous other abnormalities are considered under this term. Our metaphase spreads was analysed out of which 65 cells were 47,XX,+21 objective was to describe the phenotypic spectrum of SHFM for a more and 10 were 47,XX,+13. Conclusions; Agirl child with facial dysmorphism, accurate delineation of this condition. Subjects-Methods; We reviewed 31 congenital heart disease and mosaicism of two trisomic cell lines, trisomy limb radiographs of 17 individuals with non-syndromic SHFM. Totally 12/17 13(13%) and trisomy 21(87%) is reported. To our knowledge, trisomy individuals had some sort of kinship, and 6 of them were members of the 13/trisomy 21 mosaicism has not been previously reported. Wadoma tribe in which high frequency of SHFM has been reported. Results; Eleven individuals displayed SHFM anomalies in 20 affected P0546. Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in Croatian Cystic hands, with bilateral involvement in 9 cases. Hand abnormalities included; Fibrosis Patients hypoplastic, dysplastic, absent phalanges (#11) or metacarpals (#10), R. Gjergja1, I. Barisic1, S. Hecimovic2, G. Tanackovic2, J. Sertic3, J. Kneze- triphalangeal thumb (#5), articulation between metacarpal heads (#4), vic2, A. Milic2, K. Pavelic2 abnormal growth plates (#4), bone or soft tissue syndactyly (#3), clin- 1University Children s Hospital Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Institute Rudjer odactyly (#2), transversely grown bones (#2). Twelve individuals had Boskovic; Zagreb, Croatia; 3University Hospital Rebro; Zagreb, Croatia SHFM in 22 affected feet, with bilateral involvement in 10 cases. They romana.gjergja@zg.hinet.hr included; aplastic, hypoplastic, dysplastic metatarsal heads (#22) or pha- BACKGROUND; Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common recessive disor- langes (#22), mid tarsal row dysplasias (#10), clinodactyly or toes abnor- der caused by mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conduc- mal angulation (#9), articulation between metatarsal heads (#3). In 4/17 tance Regulator Gene (CFTR). The distribution of over 800 different CFTR cases there was a single limb involvement, while in 6/17 of the both hands mutations depends on the ethnic and geographic origin. OBJECTIVE; To or feet. In 5/17 cases all limbs were affected. Conclusion; Our results may determine genotype-phenotype correlation in Croatian CF patients in order assist clinicians and radiologists in the accurate identification of SHFM to establish weather patients with different genotypes showed differences cases, avoiding the nosological confusion that frequently exists. These of phenotypic expression in pancreatic and pulmonary disease. METH- observations could also be useful in the elucidation of the underlying devel- ODS; The clinical diagnosis od CF was made according to the high sweat opmental mechanisms. chloride values,chronic pulmonary disease, pancreatic insufficiency and Pseudomoans colonisation. The molecular analysis of the 16 most com- P0544. Congenital Laryngotracheal Webs and Early Onset mon CFTR mutations (according to the data from Cystic Fibrosis Genetic Colorectal Carcinoma in a Family with Three-Generation Analysis Consortium) was performed. RESULTS; The analysis of 98 chro- Transmission of Del(22q11.2) mosomes revealed the frequency of deltaF508 in 59% of Croatian patients. J. Larsen Haidle, K. Keppler-Noureil, A. B. Kanis, A. Muilenburg, J. Welch, R117H was present in 4%,G542X in 3%, 1717-1G-A(3%), N1303K (2%), Q. Qian, L. Yang, S. Patil G85E (1%), and R1162X (1%). Further analysis of remaining CF alleles is University of Iowa; Iowa City, IAUnited States planned. All deltaF508 homozygous patients had a severe phenotype; an joy-haidle@uiowa.edu early age at diagnosis, high sweat chloride values, pancreatic insufficien- Microdeletion of chromosome 22q11.2 has a wide phenotypic spectrum cy, similar severity of lung disease. Severity of the clinical course in with variable associated anomalies. Familial transmission of this deletion deltaF508 heterozygous patients depended on another mutation present in in two-generations has been reported previously. To our knowledge, we CFTR gene; heterozygotes with N1303K, G542X, 17171G-A, R1162X and report the first three-generation transmission of del(22q11.2) in one family G85E had severe CF phenotype with pancreas insufficiency, but variable who had unique findings of congenital laryngotracheal webs (CLW) and pulmonary disease. The heterozygous patients with R117H mutation early onset colorectal carcinoma. The proband, a 53 year-old white female, revealed mild or severe clinical course with variable pancreatic phenotype presented with psychiatric illness and mild mental retardation. As a new- but consistent mild pulmonary disease. born, she was diagnosed with a ventriculoseptal defect and severe respi- ratory problems secondary to a CLW. She was diagnosed with adenocar- P0547.Congenital malformations of the central nervous sys- cinoma of the sigmoid colon at 41 years. Her daughter presented with tem in spontaneous abortion apparent hypertelorism, while her grandson had a CLW, hoarse voice, I. Dimofte1, T. Poalelungi1, A. Popa1, D. Balaban1, L. Enache2, V. Broas- hypertelorism, ventriculoseptal defect, and anal stenosis. All three individ- ca1, S. Nedelcovici1 uals had del(22q11.2). CLW are rare defects that may occur alone or in 1Faculty of Medicine; Constanta, Romania; 2Faculty of Medicine; Iasi, association with other anomalies. Two families with CLW, congenital heart Romania disease, and short stature have been reported. However, analysis for revarsarea@lycos.com del(22q11.2) was not performed. These findings suggest that CLW may be Sumary; A study of 2620 pregnancies ending in spontaneous abortion caused by the deletion. The early onset of colorectal malignancy in our revealed a CNS defect in 3.6% of embryos an fetuses, and 3% of all com- case is of interest. Recently, an unidentified putative tumor suppressor plete conceptuses. The type of malformation observed varied with the ges- gene involved in colorectal carcinoma has been localized to 22q. The loss tational age at expulsion, encephaloceles being predominant in earlier of heterozygosity for alleles on certain chromosomes, including 22q, has specimens, while more typical anencephalus and spina bifida were more been identified in nealy 50% of colorectal tumors. Further studies are common among later abortions. Chromosome abnormalities were found in needed to assess whether individuals with del(22q11.2) are at increased 40% of abortuses with CNS defects, but were almost entirely confined to risk for developing this malignancy. those which were still at the embryonic stage of development. 53 % of the later were chromosomally abnormal, which is the same as the proportion P0545.Trisomy 13/trisomy 21 Mosaicism In AGirl Child found among embryos without a CNC malformation. Using published life- B. Peterlin1, J. Babnik2, K. Writzl1, M. Debevec1 tables of recognised pregnancies it was estimated that the prevalence of 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, anencephalus, spina bifida or related malformation (other than hydro- UMC Ljubljana; Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gyne- cephalus), without a chromosome anomaly is 5.3 per thousand concep- cology, UMC Ljubljana; Ljubljana, Slovenia tuses at the begining of the eight week of gestation. By comparing this with borut.peterlin@guest.arnes.si the prevalence in total births, it was further estimated that only 24% of Background; Trisomy 13 is in 90% a lethal condition in the first year of life. thesearebornalive,with54%abortingspontaneouslyand22%beingstill- The clinical outcome associated with mosaic trisomy 13 is less clear and born. can range from severe mental retardation and birth defects to normal inteligence. Chromosomal mosaicisms with two autosomal trisomies are exceedingly rare. Double non-disjunction or anaphase lag or non-disjunc- tion and anaphase lag during early embryonic mitotic division could be the206 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0548. A mosaic ring chromosome 4 in a fetus with Wolf- with palpebral ptosis, 1 central core disease, 1 enchondromatosis, 2 with Hirschhorn phenotype - molecular and cytogenetic analysis high CPK, and 1 had Kabuki Make-up Syndrome, a previously undescribed A. Kocks1, S. Endele1, B. Schrder1, R. Heller1, M. Makrigeorgi-Butera2, association. Upon a thorough clinical review by a clinical geneticist, includ- C. Staedler3, H. Schfer3, A. Winterpacht1 ing complete pedigrees from all families, we found, among the non-syn- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; dromic patients on admission, the Kabuki patient, a Noonan family and a 2Department of Neuropathology, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Ger- probable myotonic dystrophy patient, mother of two affected siblings. We many; 3Institute of Pathology, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany state that clinical geneticists working together with pharmacologists can be endele@uke.uni-hamburg.de of great help to diagnose previously unnoticed genetic conditions in fami- The molecular basis of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), also deletion 4p lies with known pharmacogenetic diseases like MH and also to select with- syndrome, has not yet been elucidated. However, on the basis of geno- in those families the best subjects for further mutation studies on the RYR1 type-phenotype correlation studies and through molecular analysis of chro- gene and others involved on the malignant hyperthermia phenotype. mosomal breakpoints on chromosome 4p the critical region has been nar- rowed to an interval of 165 kb between markers D4S43 and FGFR3. Sev- P0551. Craniofacial,orodental and neurological findings in a eral candidate genes are being tested for their role in WHS by us and oth- syndromic case with Hypomelanosis of Ito. ers using cloning techniques and mouse knock-out models. The study of C. F. Salinas, G. S. Pai dysmorphological and histopathological features in affected human fetus- Medical University of South Carolina; Charleston, SC United States es with well characterized chromosome 4p deletions is an additional strat- salinasc@musc.edu egy to gain insight into the developmental pathology of WHS. Hypomelanosis of Ito (HI) is a pigmentary dysplasia characterized by lin- To this purpose, we present the case of an aborted fetus (17thgestational ear streaks and swirls of depigmented skin. In many cases of HI, skin week) with Wolf-Hirschhorn phenotype; pronounced growth deficiency, depigmentation is the only abnormality, but in 70% of reported HI cases complex cardiac defect, leftsided diaphragmatic hernia, aplasia of the gall- there are other associated anomalies. These include mental retardation, bladder, and typical craniofacial manifestations (bilateral cleft lip and neural, skeletal and ocular anomalies. The status of orodental abnormali- palate, ocular hypertelorism with broad base of nose, low-set ears). Con- ties in the syndromic cases of HI has not been adequately described. A ventional karyotyping revealed a mosaic ring-chromosome 4 with break- 29 year old male followed since he was 10 years of age is presented. He points tentatively assigned to r(4)(p16q33). We report on the breakpoint shows a constellation of abnormalities, some of them have not been pre- mapping using FISH probes from subtelomeric regions 4p and 4q, probes viously reported. The clinical findings include short stature, asymmetric for the WHS critical region and for 4q33. An attempt was made to correlate face and body, right microcornea, bilateral juvenile cataracts, hearing loss, the cytogenetic and molecular data with the histopathological findings. We localized alopecia, hypodontia, hypoplastic teeth, retention of primary propose that a thorough work up of human aborted fetuses with WHS is an teeth, migratory glossitis, mal-occlusion, prognathism, prominent chin, and important strategy to complement data obtained from other approaches linear streaks and swirls of depigmented skin involving the arms, trunk, and (including mouse knock-out models) in order to understand the molecular face. Recently, he developed glaucoma of the left eye and his vision has basis of this syndrome. deteriorated rapidly. At 27 years of age he has developed seizures and the MRI shows structural brain anomalies. He is of normal intelligence. Inde- P0549. Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome; report of a patient pendent chromosome studies of 20 and 100 cells from peripheral blood I. Medica1, N. Teran2, J. Sep?i?3, S. Risti?4, B. Brajenovi?4, B. Peterlin2 and of 30 and 100 cells from biopsies of hypomelanotic and normal skin 1Outpatient Paediatric Dept; Pula, Croatia; 2Division of Medical Genetics, showed a normal 46,XYmale karyotype. Cytogentic analysis of cultured Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Univ Medical Centre Ljubljana; Ljubl- corneal cells showed significant karyotypic mosaicism; jana, Slovenia; 3Dept of Neurology, Univ Medical Centre Rijeka; Rijeka, 45,X[7/30]/46,X,Y,+mar[3/30]/47,XY,+20[4/30]/47,XY,+5[2/30]/46,XY[14/30]. Croatia;4Dept of Biology,School of Medicine, Univ Rijeka; Rijeka, Croatia It is no clear if this corneal mosaicism is associated with the observed clin- igor.medica@pu.tel.hr ical findings or,if it is a coincidental finding as it has been reported by Pet- Background; Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome is an autosomal recessive dis- tenati MJ et al., 1996. It should be noted that the lack of mosaicism in the order characterized by hypogonadism, alopecia, diabetes mellitus, mental skin biopsy has been reported in about 25% of HI cases. The presence of retardation and electrocardiographic abnormalities. The combination of depigmentation of the skin and the lack of hair follicles in the depigmented endocrine and neuroectodermal abnormalities has been reported as dis- skin of the chin sugguests that this is due to genetic alterations expressed tinctive familial syndromes. The number of variants of the alopecia-mental in the dermal cells. To our knowledge, this is a new finding that supports retardation-hypogonadism syndromes represent a clinical problem in dif- the hypothesis of dermal changes for HI. Although a specific syndrome has ferential diagnosis. Case report; In a 52-year-old woman from a consan- not yet been recognized for MCAassociated with HI, the severity and wide guine pedigree we observed mental retardation, short stature, alopecia spectrum of the findings in our case suggest the existence of such a syn- with absence of eyebrows, hypogonadism, primary amenorrhea and dia- drome. The natural history of this case demonstrates the late onset of sev- betes mellitus. Other manifestations include problems of limited mobility of eral clinical manifestations, such as seizures, glaucoma, loss of vision, upper extremities. Adeceased cousin also had a similar phenotype. The brain anomalies, and the progressive nature of the disorder. diagnosis of Turner syndrome and congenital myotonic dystrophy were suggested by referring physicians, however clinical, neurophysiological, P0552. Joubert Syndrome; Genetic Studies in Families of cytogenetic analysis and molecular genetic testing for myotonic dystrophy French-Canadian Ancestry with a Common Founder excluded the two syndromes. Conclusion; Comparing the phenotype of our A. Badhwar1,2, F. Andermann3, S. Mercho1, M. Labuda2, I. Blair4, B. patient to similar cases in the literature, the features suggest that she has Rosenblatt5, M. Shevell5, P. Chance4, M. Pandolfo2, E. Andermann1 Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome. Other manifestations, such as problems of 1Neurogenetics Unit, Montreal Neurological Hospital and Institute; Montre- limited mobility of upper extremities, are previously undescribed as symp- al, PQ Canada; 2Centre Hospitalier de l Universit de Montral, Notre tomatic of the syndrome. The report of this patient with Woodhouse-Sakati Dame Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 3Department of Neurology and syndrome, a rare but distinctive disorder, is to our knowledge the third Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Hospital and Institute; Montreal, PQ described in the literature. Canada; 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington; Seattle, WA United States; 5Montreal Childrens Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada P0550. Unravelling Genetic Conditions Associated To Malig- abadhw@po-box.mcgill.ca nant Hyperthermia; AStudy Of 25 Families Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal-recessive disorder involving agen- A.A.P.S. Santa Rosa1, R.T. Sudo2, J. C. Cabral de Almeida1, J.C. Llerena1 esis or dysgenesis of the cerebellar vermis and brain stem abnormalities. 1Instituto Fernandes Figueira/FIOCRUZ; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2Depto. de Characteristic clinical features include facial dysmorphia, episodic hyperp- Farmacologia - Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, nea alternating with apnea, ataxia, early developmental delay, mental Brazil retardation, and oculomotor abnormalities. The molecular basis of JS is dandara@msm.com.br unknown. Linkage to chromosome 9q34.3 demonstrated in one affected Since 1993 the Malignant Hyperthermia Center of the Department of Phar- Omani family (Saar et al. Am J Hum Genet 1999;65;1666-1671) was macology has received 121 patients to perform the caffeine/halothane test recently excluded in our cohort of 26 North American pedigrees. To date, it according to the American Protocol (Larach, 1994). 11 patients were sent appears that the broad phenotypic variability present in JS, combined with to evaluation for having clinical/genetic conditions associated to a greater suggested genetic heterogeneity, has greatly compromised the genome- risk for developing malignant hyperthermia (MH). Among the other 110 wide scan for a gene(s). Establishment of a genetically homogeneous pop- patients, 32 had presented a suspected MH crisis themselves and 78 had ulation may help to identify one of the genes for this disorder. In the pres- a positive familial history. The familial cases were arranged in 25 families. ent study we have identified seven French-Canadian families with JS and Among the 66 positive patients, there were 2 with Noonan phenotype, 9 carried out a genealogical study. We have constructed a pedigree of 400Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 207 people spanning 11 generations, linking the original family described by depressed nasal bridge, prominent ear lobules, short neck with redundant Joubert et al. in 1969 with two additional families of French-Canadian ori- nuchal fold, deep-set hyperconvex nails, rocker-bottom feet, small penis gin. We were able to establish that all three families trace back 9 genera- and generalized hirsutism. Pelvicaliectasis was present with vesico-ureter- tions to the same founder who immigrated to Quebec, Canada from the al reflux. Skeletal radiographs showed broad ribs and scoliosis. Cranial province of Perche, France in 1634. Based on this information we expect MRI demonstrated agenesis of the corpus callosum, enlarged ventricles to find all or most of our affected individuals to be homozygous around the and loss of convolutions. Along with coarsening features, he developed disease locus. We genotyped our families with polymorphic markers spasticity, progressive contractures and global delay. Seizures developed (D9S164, D9S1818, D9S114, D9S1826, D9S158, and D9S1838) on at 6 weeks, with a markedly abnormal EEG. Ametabolic work up was per- 9q34.3. Results indicated that they were not linked to the chromosome formed, including skin, bone marrow and liver biopsies. The latter demon- 9q34.3 locus. This indicates that one, or more major loci for JS are yet to strated a dilatation of the cisternae of the rough endoplasmic reticulum with be identified. Agenome-wide scan is underway. Clinical heterogeneity is no evidence of storage material. Isoelectric focusing of transferrins was characteristic and broad in JS and evident within Joubert sibships and spo- suggestive of an abnormal glycosylation pattern, however the proportions radic cases. Identifying a gene(s) involved in JS would allow conclusive were not typical of that seen in Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation diagnosis using genetic markers, thereby differentiating it from other con- (CDG). Further investigations are underway to elucidate the significance of genital malformation syndromes of similar phenotype but varied and differ- these results. ing etiology. Characterization of the underlying mutations would lead to genotype-phenotype correlations and the eventual development of thera- P0555.Clinical characteristics in the congenital familial long pies. QT syndrome. The value of genetics in prognosis evaluation S. Chuprova1, M. Shkolnikova1, E. Zaklyazminskaya2, A. Polyakov2, O. P0553. Unusually mild tuberous sclerosis in a large French- Evgrafov2 Canadian kindred 11- Federal Center of Childrens Arrhythmias; Moscow, Russian Federa- D. M. DAgostino1, F. Dubeau1, A. Al-Asmi1, S. Bourgoin2, M. Labuda2, F. tion; 2Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation Andermann1, D. J. Kwiatkowski3, M. Pandolfo2, E. Andermann1 stver@online.ru 1Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Cen- The long QTsyndrome (LQTS) is a cardiac disorder characterized by a tre Hospitalier de l Universit de Montral; Montreal, PQ Canada; prolonged QT interval and life-threatening tachyarrhythmias, which may 3Brigham and Womens Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States give rise to recurrent syncope or sudden cardiac death. The long QTsyn- dagoust@hotmail.com drome is a heterogenic clinical and genetic entity. Five genes have been Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized identified for cardiac potassium (KCNQ1-LQT1, HERG-LQT2, KCNE1- by development of hamartomata in a variety of tissues and organs. Intel- LQT5, KCNE2-LQT6) and sodium (SCN5A-LQT3). Sixty unrelated Russ- lectual handicap, epilepsy and abnormal behavioral phenotypes derive ian families (122 patients with Romano -Ward syndrome and 3 patients from hamartomatous brain involvement. Other involved organs are skin, with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome) were clinically evaluated using kidneys and heart. The disease is caused by a mutation in either TSC1 medical histories, ECGs, Holter recordings with the heart rate variability (9q34) or TSC2 (16p13.3). The two gene products probably interact as (HRV). An exercise test (treadmill) was performed in 52 long QTsyndrome tumor suppressors. One third of TS cases are familial equally represented patients. We have tested all the patients for mutation in 4 genes; KCNQ1 between TSC1 and TSC2. The majority of sporadic cases are found to (exons 2,6,7), HERG (exons 6,7), KCNE1 and KCNE2 using PCR-SSCP have TSC2 mutations. Although the disease phenotype appears to be analysis. Asingle mutation was found in KCNQ1 in 6 families (R174H in milder in TSC1 mutations than in TSC2, there is a great deal of overlap. one family-2 patients, G314S in two families-7 patients and A341V in three The phenotypic variability between sporadic and familial cases has not families-7 patients). been clearly defined. We describe a large 4 generation family from Mont Clinical and ECG Characteristic in 6 families with LQTS Laurier, Quebec, showing an exceptionally mild form of TS. The proband R174H 2G314S 3G314S 4A341V A341V 2A341V 4 was ascertained at the Montreal Neurological Institute and a detailed fam- pts pts pts 1pt pts pts ily history obtained. Two field trips were carried out on the extended fami- Age,yrs 2521 2413 2414 16 2413 1716 ly to examine the relatives and to collect blood samples for molecular Sex (M/F),n 0/2 2/1 2/2 0/1 0/2 3/1 Pts with genetic studies. All available family members underwent a structured ques- 2 (100%) 2 (67%) 3 (75%) 0 2 (100%) 3 (75%) syncope tionnaire and a thorough clinical examination including fundoscopy and sudden death, 0 0 0 0 0 1 (25%) Woods lamp test. Previous medical information was reviewed. Sixty indi- pts viduals were evaluated. These included 15/25 living family members with Pts with LCTS 0 0 0 0 1 (50%) 1 (25%) epilepsy. In most cases, this was well controlled by medication and QTc, ms(lead55518,4 48240,0 44838,2 547 54011,3 49723,9 II) became milder or resolved at older ages. All assessed individuals with Pts with n QTc 0 1 (33%) 2 (50%) 0 0 0 epilepsy had skin lesions such as hypopigmented macules (more than Pts with three) and/or ash-leaf shaped spots on the limbs and trunk. Additional 12 syncopeon 0 0 0 0 2(100%) 2 (50%) family members only had skin lesions. No facial angiofibromas or periun- propr. gual fibromas were noted. Fundoscopy was normal in all. Avilable neu- LCTS = left cervico-thoracic sympathectomy propr.-propranolol n QTc = roimaging studies showed no lesion in 7 individuals, subependymal gian QTc <440 ms The phenotype was less severe in G314S mutation than cell astrocytoma in one and subependymal nodules in another. This fami- A341V. The phenotype probably varies by specific mutation. Phenotypic ly contributes to define the spectrum of the TS complex. Molecular genet- heterogeneity is also caused by variable penetrance and expressivity. ic studies are underway to assess the chromosomal assignment of the phenotype and to perform mutation analysis P0556.Using OMIM as a decision support system in the diag- nostic process of malformation syndromes P0554. Is Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome a Metabolic Disorder - F. von Luebken, J. Kunze, J. Pelz Investigations in a Newly Diagnosed Patient. Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany H. M. Bedford1, A. Feigenbaum1, B. Ngan1, L. Seargeant2, M. M. joerg.pelz@charite.de Nezarati1 An increasing number of malformation syndromes makes it difficult for the 1Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto; Toronto, ON Canada; clinician to reach a diagnosis. OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in 2Health Sciences Centre; Winnipeg, MB Canada Man) was tested as a decision support system for the diagnostic process melanie.bedford@utoronto.ca of patients with malformations. We used the data of 99 patients with differ- Schinzel-Giedion Syndrome (SGS) is a rare, presumed autosomal reces- ent clinically confirmed syndromes and searched in OMIM for differential sive condition, characterized by midface hypoplasia, coarse features, as diagnoses by using the signs of the respective patient in all possible com- well as multiple skeletal, cardiac and genitourinary abnormalities. Those binations in the search string. Two different search strategies were tested; surviving beyond the newborn period develop seizures, spasticity, and are (1) utilisation of all signs of the patient, (2) usage of those signs, that a clin- severely developmentally delayed. An underlying metabolic condition has ical expert considered to be important for diagnosis. All 99 syndromes were been hypothesized given the clinical features, in combination with the described in and presented by OMIM. With one sign used for a search the demonstration by serial magnetic resonance brain imaging of a progres- number of differential diagnoses varied from no diagnosis at all to 1512. sive neurodegenerative process in one patient. Investigations to date have With strategy (1) 29% of all signs were not used for the description of the not detected an inborn error of metabolism. We report a male patient with respective syndrome in OMIM, while this was 7% with strategy (2). The a pattern of malformations consistent with SGS. Features included micro- number of differential diagnosis decreased with the number of signs used cephaly, large anterior fontanelle, splayed sutures, midface hypoplasia, in combinations using the AND-junction. By utilising combinations of two208 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology signs the list of differential diagnoses was reduced to an average of 10 for toms and/or slightly altered behaviour may be indicative of a life threaten- the 1st strategy. Parallel the number of tests yielding no results increased ing disease in PWS individuals. On this basis, we suggest that parents and to 21 percent. For the 2nd strategy 3% of the searches using two signs health professionals inform the Hospital staff nearby about the features of gave no results. OMIM was an acceptable tool in both strategies although reduced pain perception and of lack of vomiting in PWS. Post mortem it has not been developed as a decision support system in the realm of investigation and molecular confirmation of diagnosis should be provided. malformation syndromes. Our results show, that the application of OMIM is Future work to investigate the physiology of pain perception and gastric sometimes tedious; a consultation of OMIM seems to be useful in the diag- function in PWS is recommended. nostic process of malformation syndromes, however. P0560.Cri du Chat National Association - Report of a Brazil- P0557.Angelman syndrome - impact of a genetic disorder on ian experience patients and their families P. Ramos1, M. Ramos1, H. Buchmller2, R. L. Chaves3 S. Holz, J. Kunze, J. Pelz 1Associa o Nacional Cri du Chat; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2Funda o Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany Oswaldo Cruz; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 3Hospital Universitrio Pedro joerg.pelz@charite.de Ernesto - Universidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Astudy was conducted to gather information about the physical, mental paularam@ig.com.br and social health of patients with Angelman syndrome (AS) and about their Cri du chat (CDC) is a genetic disorder caused by the lost of genetic mate- influence on the family life focussing on social aspects. Personal or tele- rial of chromosomes 5 short arm (5p-). The syndrome affects 1;50.000 phone interviews were conducted using a structured questionnaire. 203 children born and takes place at the moment of conception. The objective parents of 127 children (60 girls,67 boys) with AS were contacted with the of this work is to relate the experience of a group of parents and profes- help of the Angelman e.V and participated in the study. Average age of the sionals who joined themselves to create a national association, whose goal patients was 9 years (range 3 to 25). - The parents of 93 patients reported is to find as much CDC patients as possible. In three months since the a variation of the reaction to pain in their children; for 96 children, espe- foundation, we have promising results. We have already a home page cially the older ones a good local orientation was described, which proofed (www.criduchat.com.br) that has been working as a reference to families to be much better than had been anticipated due to the mental retardation and professionals interested in CDC. We have localized 30 patients within of the children. - More than 90% of the families disclosed a high impact of Brazil with different ages. All these people are registered and their charac- the AS children on the family life. In about 70% of all cases at least one of teristics filed. Empirically, we can already ascertain that there are too many the parents had to stop working or could not work as much as they had differences between those older and the younger, due to the investment liked to do because of the caring for the diseased child. In about half of all made in early stimulation. Indeed, among the younger the information cases friendships were lost. 25% of the families were not satisfied with the plays a special role in the search of the best therapy. We also could financial situation, nearly 40% reported problems with the health insur- observe that the association, with its role of centralizing and propagating ance, about half of all interviewees informed about problems with the information, has been contributing to the recovery in the treatment of the administration. All had to change furnishing of their homes to build up a older. As a conclusion, we can say that the formation of such association safe environment for their AS child. The care for a chronically ill child is crucial to aid the parents, to increase CDC peoples quality of life and deserves high efforts on part of the parents, therefore an urgent demand represents a concrete option to change the history of CDC patients in exists for a better social support of the families caring for an AS child. Brazil. P0558. Three Unrelated Cases With 5 Alpha-reductase Defi- P0561. Chromosome abnormalities in children with mental ciency retardation associated with dysmorphia M. Stefanova, L. Grozdanova O. Miljanovic1, M. Kaludjerovic2 Medical University; Plovdiv, Bulgaria 1Instutute for childrens diseases; 81000 Podgorica - Montenegro, margarit@plovdiv.techno-link.com Yugoslavia; 2Milmedica; Budva, Yugoslavia Three unrelated cases with 5 alpha-reductase deficiency, a very rare form oljam@cg.yu of male pseudohermaphroditism are reported. By the time of their puberty About 15% of children with mental retardation (MR) have pathological they appeared girls although their genitalia showed clitoromegaly and their changes in chromosomes, associated with expressive dysmorphic signs in behaviour were estimated as masculine by their parents. All three were their phenotype. The aim of study was to assess the frequency of chromo- identified during puberty, when their sexual development evolved in a male some abnormalities in children with MR and expressive dysmorphic sings. direction. Male body structure and skin hair pattern as well as voice The cytogenetic analyses were done for children with MR and high dys- changes and male-like genitalia were formed. Hormonal tests revealed a morphic score (equal or > 7). The Waldrop protocol for the assessment of very low level of dihydrotestosterone with abnormaly high level of follicle- dysmorphology was used. Asample of 217 children with MR was exam- stimulating hormone whereas serum testosterone and luteinizing hormone ined. Chromosome abnormalities were found in 59,5% of children with levels were in a normal male range. Both of the patients have chosen to expressive dysmorphic signs and MR, predominantly in those from the change their formal gender whereas the third decided not to. group with severe and deep MR. Only 4,3% of the group with easier forms of MR, had chromosome abnormalities (autosome and gonosome abnos- P0559.Gastric Dilatation and Gastric Necrosis - Health Risks rmalities were found in equal number). In the group with severe and deep to Individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome MR, all pathological changes were found on autosomal chromosomes A. Schulze1, O. Grnne2, A. Vesterby Charles3, H. Ki r4, K. Brndum- (16,5% children from this group). Leading chromosome abnormality was Nielsen5 trisomy of 21 chromosome, present in 6,9% children with MR, with refer- 1Odense University Hospital; Odense, Denmark; 2Ringkbing Hospital; ence to 15,2% of children with severe and deep MR. Ethiologic basis of Ringkbing, Denmark; 3Department of Forensic Medicine, Aarhus Univer- MR in children with expressive dysmorphic signs, are mostly chromosomal sity; Aarhus, Denmark; 4Department of Pathology, Svendborg Hospital; abnormalities, specialy in the group with severe and deep MR. Assess- Svendborg, Denmark; 5Department of Medical Genetics, The John F. ment of dysmorphic score by Waldrop protocol is simple, quick and aplica- Kennedy Institute; Glostrup, Denmark tive method useful as a criteria for cytogenetic analyses and revealing of ahmschulze@mail.tele.dk MR ethiology. Two individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) due to deletion of 15q11-q13 died after a short period of minor symptoms of gastroenteritis. P0562. Hypertelorism in clinical diagnosis - an example of The first case is a 26-year old female who experienced loss of appetite and pattern recognition in clinical genetics feelings of discomfort prior to an episode of unexpected vomiting and sub- A. von Schwerin, J. Kunze, J. Pelz sequent collapse. Laparatomy revealed gastric necrosis and rupture. The Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany second case is a 32- year old male who complained of feeling unwell with evaparadies2000@yahoo.co.uk loss of appetite for a period of 48 hours. He suffered diarrhoea and vomit- The diagnosis in dysmorphology is to a large extent not in the realm of ing and subsequently collapsed. Adilated stomach with necrotic patches molecular genetics or cytogenetics. The clinical practice requires experi- were noted at post mortem. Four other cases of PWS (all female) have ence and observation competence by the practitioners. They are confront- been reported with symptoms of gastroenteritis associated with gastric ed with quantitative morphological variation and clinical signs, which rupture and/or gastric necrosis. A diagnosis of PWS was made at the together result in a complex phenotype. There are no simple (mechanical) molecular level in each case (Wharton RH et al. Am J Med Genet (1997) relations between signs and diagnosis. We examined the components of 73;437-41). Two of these individuals survived after a subtotal gastrectomy, the visual diagnostic act choosing hypertelorism as an example. The eye the other two died. These findings illustrate that minor abdominal symp- distances in the portraits of 20 adults were manipulated with the help ofPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 209 computer programs. For each face we produced a series of 20 pictures 13/21, 14/22 and 15 and a probe for rDNA, all labelled in different color with a systematically increasing eye distance. The variant pictures of all combinations. Until now we analyzed eight marker chromosomes with the faces were arranged in a randomised order into 4 catalogues. 70 students, acro-mix. Half of them were unidentifiable with M-FISH because there was 10 advanced students in paediatrics and 12 clinical geneticists had to no staining with whole chromosome painting probes. The advantage of this decide for seven traits whether these seemed to be normal or not. The new hybridization mix is a very rapid and precise identification of ESACS judgements on traits which were not modified vary for each face unspeci- even if the metaphase quality is poor. For a rapid work-up in prenatal diag- ficly and to a small degree. Those on the eye distance show an overall nosis we propose to use a combination of both M-FISH and the acro-mix, characteristic relation to the degree of the modification of the individual to decipher the composition of an ESAC. face, whereas the judgements on the identical eye distance in different faces are diverse. Additionally we found only a small concurrence between P0565.Study on phacomatoses in St. Petersburg; looking for the judgements of the probands and the objective measurements of the co-operation eye distance which are used in anthropometrics. By multivariate analysis T. A. Ledatscheva we showed that different parts of the individual faces influence the judge- St. Petersburg Centre for Medical Genetics; St. Petersburg, Russian Fed- ments to different degrees. In particular the form of the midface is strong- eration ly related to the process of making up someones mind about the eye dis- petergen@peterlink.ru tance. Finally there are no striking differences between the judgements of We have initiated studies on incidence rate and clinical heterogeneity of the different groups of probands. Diagnosis of hypertelorism is a process the syndrome in 5 million population of St. Petersburg. CT, MRT, EEG, and of pattern recognition. Nevertheless (or just therefore) the clinical judge- chromosome analysis have been used. The most frequent form was Reck- ment of the practitioner works well. All attempts to make diagnosis more linghausen neurofibromatosis; 94 patients from 71 families. CTwith sub- intersubjective will have to take these results into account. sequent histology revealed optical nerve gliomas (2 cases), astrocytomas (2 cases), epindimoma of CNS (1 case), acoustic nerve neurinoma (1 P0563.Use of new modified PCR-based methods for rapid dif- case) and some another tumours. Ataxia-teleangiectasia (Louis-Bar) was ferential diagnostics of myotonic dystrophy in 10 patients without family traits of the disease. One of them had a chro- M. Falk, R. Gaillyova, M. Vojtiskova mosomal aberration (48,XX,+6,+8,t(7;14)(q36;q11). Klippel-Trenaunay- DepartmentofHumanGenetics,University Hospital;Brno,Czech Republic Weber syndrome was revealed in 7 patients (3 of them were from one fam- 9835@mail.muni.cz ily). Typical encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis (Sturge-Weber syndrome) In present time neurology recognized more than 300 neuromuscular disor- was in 22 patients ( from 19 families). We observed a family with 5 female ders. Their fenotypical manifestation is extremly variable and clinical fea- patients of pigment incontinence (Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome). The cuta- tures may overlap among them. So there are a strong interest for devel- neous changes were localized on lateral surfaces of the trunk and extrem- opping molecular methods which facilitate unequivocal differentional diag- ities. The disease had X-linked dominant type with lethal effect for the male nostics. Recently we have focused on myotonic dystrophy (MD), one of the fetuses. The analysis of the main clinical symptoms showed early mani- most frequent neuromuscular disease of adult age. The molecular base of festations of different forms of phacomatoses, high frequency of family MD is the expansion of CTG trinucleotide repeat in dystrophia myotonica cases, increased risk of the neoplastic processes. The early diagnosis pro- protein kinase gene (DMPK) which is located on the 19q13.3. Clinical pic- vides an opportune medical genetic family counseling, improves recog- ture of MD is very variable including all the spectra of forms, from the very naizing of tumours, and follow up of patients. Proposals of joint investiga- mild old-age form to the very serious and often fatal congenital one. To tions of clinical heterogeneity and clinico-molecular correlation in the syn- improve the diagnostics we have introduced and modified PCR methods drome are warmly welcome. for precise measurement of fyziological and premutation range allels and for rapid detection of expanded pathological alleles [1]. Reliability and P0566.Duyggve-Melchior-Clausen Disease and Smith-McCort fidelity of three PCR methods were demonstrated on the group of MD-pos- Dysplasia - Report of five affected children itive control samples provided us by reference laboratories. Using sug- L. Neumann1, J. Pelz1, H. Weber2, E. Fastnacht2, A. Leenen3, S. Lyding4, gested PCR protocols we have shown the allelic frequency of the CTG F. Majewski5 repeats on the group of MD patients in correlation with control one. In MD 1Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany; 2Zentrum fuer Kinder und patients amplified alleles range from about 100 CTG to more (unlimited) Jugendmedizin; Luedenscheid, Germany; 3Pediatric Radiologie, Charite CTG repeats. The 5 CTG allele was presented only in 5%, still much lower Campus Virchow; Berlin, Germany; 4University Childrens Hospital; Dues- than for control individuals (about 40%). Clinically affected subjects were seldorf, Germany; 5Institute of Human Genetics; Duesseldorf, Germany correctly identified by introduced PCR methods and confirmed by South- luitgard.neumann@charite.de ern blot analysis as recommended [2]. In 1962 Dyggve, Melchior and Clausen published 3 mentally retarded sibs [1] Falk M. et al.; J. Biomol. Struct. and Dyn. 17 (2000), pp. 1161-1162 with a peculiar bone dysplasia resembling Morquios disease. Smith and [2] Mol. Gen. Service Guidelines, CMGS (1997) (UK MG NEQAS SC ed. McCort, in 1958 were the first to describe patients with this pattern of bone D. Barton) changes and normal intelligence. Both conditions share identical radiolog- ical signs Spinal cord compression due to atlantoaxial instability is a seri- P0564.Anew approach for a rapid and unequivocal identifi- ous and preventable complication of both disorders. We provide the first cation of marker chromosomes report of a Turkish patient with the rare skeletal dysplasia, Smith-McCort S. Langer1, C. Fauth2, S. Uhrig2, C. Maierhofer2, M. Speicher2 Dysplasia (SMC), and the first report of a Georgian (Russia) sibpair with 1Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics LMU Muenchen; the related Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen disease (DMC). Early detection in a Muenchen, Germany; 2Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics; 14 month old Lebanese girl of DMC with mild skeletal findings is demon- Muenchen, Germany strated. We found some further features in this condition, such as delayed langer@fish.med.uni-muenchen.de puberty in a 15 year old patient. Anal prolapse, observed for the third time, Supernumerary marker chromosomes are small extra chromosomes in one of our patients seems to be a feature associated with the condition. (ESACS) that are unidentifiable by cytogenetic banding analyses alone Different degrees of mental retardation within one family were noted. due to their small size and lack of distinct banding pattern. The incidence Hyperactive behavior in one patient with DMC is reported here for the sec- of marker chromosomes has been estimated in different studies to range ond time. Morphological criteria such as phenotype, radiological and elec- between 0.4/1000 and 1.5/1000. Precise identification leads to a better tron microscopical findings do not allow differentiation of DMC from SMC. understanding of the origin of these chromosomes and their effect on the The presence of mental retardation in all cases of DMC, sometimes phenotype. However, a detailed characterization of ESACs is a diagnostic accompanied by microcephaly, and its absence in all cases of SMC is a challenge. The majority of marker chromosomes is derived from acrocen- discriminating factor. There is no overlap of both conditions in any family of tric chromosomes and consists merely of heterochromatin. In these cases, the literature nor in our familial patients. This finding together with the geo- 24-color karyotyping techniques, such as M-FISH, are not helpful as graphic distribution, the uniform autosomal recessive mode of inheritance hybridisation to ESACs composed of only heterochromatin would be in DMC and the heterogeneous situation in SMC, leads us to assume that expected to be completely suppressed, because of the addition of Cot1- these conditions are separate entities. DNA. However, a diagnosis based on a missing signal is problematic in cases of a poor hybridization efficiency. Thus, we generated a special hybridization mix, termed acro-mix. We developed a strategy for the simultaneous hybridization of whole chromosome painting probes and repetitive DNAprobes. The acro-mix consists of painting probes for chro- mosomes 13,14,15,21, and 22, of centromere probes for chromosomes210 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology P0567.Clinical outcome of BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing normal. Walk was delayed, first words appeared at 3 years. Facial dys- A. Kempe1, K. Rhiem1, K. Bosse2, T. Bauknecht1, B. Wappenschmidt1, J. morphia was present at birth ; brachycephaly, flat occiput, ears floppy, Schmolling1, R. K. Schmutzler1 large and posteriorly angulated, hypertelorism, ocular proptosis, strabis- 1University of Bonn, Dep. ObGyn; Bonn, Germany; 2University of Bonn, mus, hypoplasia of the middle part of the face, flat palate, pectus excava- Inst. of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany tum, scoliosis, bilateral dislocation of the radial heads, hammer toes and andrea.kempe@uni-bonn.de hallux valgus, pes planus, arachnodactyly, camptodactyly and Steinberg Introduction; Genetic predisposition is responsible for 5% of all breast can- sign. Skin was thin without scars but with numerous sub-cutaneous cer cases. Mutation carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 (breast cancer sus- hematomas. Laurent was operated on twice for bilateral inguinal and crur- ceptibility genes) have a life time risk of 80-90% to develop breast cancer al hernia. He had a mitral valve proplase. CT scan showed ventricular and of 20-40% to develop ovarian cancer. The last 3? years we counseled enlargment. In the following years Laurent was operated on for his feet 615 women from 453 families with a family history of breast and ovarian deformities several times. Mental retardation improved dramatically. cancer in our breast cancer clinic. Material and Method; We analyzed the Puberty was delayed until 18 years. At 24 years of age he was still thin, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 119 families by direct sequencing and dolichocephalic, scalp hair were fine and sparse, the facial dysmorphic fea- DHPLC. All individuals were counseled by an gynecologist, psychologist tures were still obvious. Pectus excavatum was still severe and thora- and geneticist. All women were offered a intensive breast and ovarian can- columbar scoliosis mild. Feet deformities improved, joints were less hyper- cer screening program (self-examination, clinical examination, mammog- mobile. Psychomotor development is quite normal. His main concern was raphy, MRI, ultrasound of breast, vaginal ultrasound and serum-CA125 the minimal subcutaneous fat and fragility of skin. Echocardiography was starting at age 25). Prophylactic surgery was discussed as an option normal. He is working as a cuniculiculturer. He has a driver licence and he depending on the individual situation. Results; 569 women participated in is now engaged. Anormal brother and sister were born. Etiology of the the screening program (compliance 92%). We detected 30 breast cancers Shprintzen  Goldberg syndrome is unknown, all cases were sporadic but cases. All incident cases were diagnosed in an early stage of cancer the family reported by Ades et al. (1995). No defect in the fibrillin gene was before spread (pTis or pT1, pN0, M0). Four women requested prophylac- found in this patient. tic bilateral mastectomy and 20 prophylactic oophorectomy. We identified BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations in 39 families (19 of them being unclassified P0570.Hemoglobin D Los Angeles in a family from Brazil variants). A predictive genetic testing was performed in 34 unaffected C. Bonini-Domingos1, G. Leoneli2, W. Silva Jr3 women; 28 women were tested negative (proven noncarriers) and could be 1UNESP; So Jos do Rio Preto, So Paulo, Brazil; 2UNESP; So Jos do reassured. Six women were tested positive (proven carriers). In 80 families Rio Preto, SP, Brazil; 3HEMOCENTRO; Ribeiro Preto, SP, Brazil BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations were excluded. Conclusions; Our preliminary bonini@bio.ibilce.unesp.br results indicate that women from high risk families may benefit from Many beta globin gene defects leading to hemoglobinopathies are known. increased surveillance and prophylactic therapy. Aspecial screening pro- Most of these hemoglobin variants have been identifies at the protein level gram helps to identify early stages of breast cancer. Further studies are by alkaline electrophoresis, but the underlying molecular defect has not needed to prove a reduction of mortality rates. Acknowledgement; This been determined for many hemoglobinopathies. Advanced molecular work was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe. genetic techniques offer the possibility of identifying the under lying muta- tions in these variants. Hemoglobin D - Los Angeles is the most common P0568.Artificial neural networks and diagnosis of malforma- D - hemoglobin. We have analyzed Afamily with a beta thalassemia sus- tion syndromes pect and founded a hemoglobin variant similar to hemoglobin S at alkaline G. Graetschel, J. Pelz electrophoresis. In the analyses by HPLC on the Bio - Rad variant auto- Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany mated analyzer we found a sample whit retention time similar to hemoglo- evaparadies2000@yahoo.co.uk bin D - Los Angeles, confirmed by DNAanalysis. Computer programs which can be used as an aid to diagnose multiple con- genital malformation syndromes have been used for many years. These P0571. Differential gene expression analysis in Normal vs. programs are based either on algorithms which define a diagnosis by a set Trisomy 21 cells with identical genetic background. of phenotypic components all having the same weight or on algorithms S. Deutsch1, L. Bartoloni1, V. Doucas1, M. Vasquez1, S. Daoun1, D. based on a concept of Bayesian statistics. Athird and new approach for Bricarelli2, R. Lyle1, S. Antonarakis1 this field are artificial neuronal networks (ANNs), which are popular as clas- 1University of Geneva; Geneva, Switzerland; 2Istituto Gaslini; Genova, Italy sification mechanisms in medical decision support systems. As a software samuel.deutsch@medecine.unige.ch tool we took the commercially available shell ORKA, which is suitable for Down syndrome (DS), the most common cause of mental retardation, is building up feedforeward ANNs trained using backpropagation of errors. caused by the presence of three copies of chromosome 21 (HC21). DS We used data from 234 patients representing individual examples of 21 dif- individuals suffer a wide range of complex phenotypes most of which are ferent established syndromes. For the description of the cases the num- variably expressed and incompletely penetrant. It is not clear how the pres- bers of symptoms were limited to 55. After the export of the patient data to ence of a third copy of HC21 leads to DS, and the number of genes and ORKAthe data of 161 patients were used for the training of the ANN, the pathways actually involved in DS phenotypes is unknown, in spite of the remaining 73 patient data-sets were used to test the diagnostic abilities of recent determination of the entire sequence of HC21. In order to explore the different ANNs. Adiagnosis was yielded in 96% of all tests. The per- further this question we are studying the global gene expression differ- centage of correct diagnoses suggested by the ANNs without concurrent ences between normal and trisomic cells by macroarray filter hybridisation. differential diagnoses was 23%, taking all tests during which the correct There are several problems associated with this type of approach, the diagnosis was produced among other diagnoses amounted to 68% - only most challenging of which is that patients and controls show inherent (poly- in 11% of all tests the correct diagnosis was calculated with a small prob- morphic) variation in gene expression which is unrelated to their disease ability. The application of ANNs during the diagnostic process of malfor- status. In order to overcome this problem, investigators have traditionally mation syndromes is promising, also one shortcoming is that different sets pooled several samples or used inbred animal models to reduce polymor- of training data produce models with different generalisation accuracies. phic variation. In our study we have separated normal vs. trisomic 21 The value of a ANN is to a great extent influenced by luck, instinct and fibroblasts from a mosaic DS patient, having thus isolated cell lines that are experience of the developer. 100% (46, XY) and 100% (47, XY, +21) but are otherwise genetically iden- tical. RNAfrom these cell lines has been hybridised to filters of human P0569. Shprintzen-goldberg Syndrome Followed Up During cDNAs and gene expression differences are currently being analysed. 24 Years These results may provide further insight on how this common chromoso- Y. Alembik1, C. Stoll2 mal imbalance affects the transcriptome, and which pathways and genes 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Hpital de Hautepierre; Stras- are likely to be involved in the development of DS phenotypes. bourg, France Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr Several patients with marfanoid features and cranio-stenosis have been reported. Shprintzen and Goldberg put these features together and named the syndrome which bears their names. Natural history of this syndrome is unknown. We had the opportunity to follow up a patient with this syndrome during 24 years. Laurent was born after a normal pregnancy and a normal delivery. Father (27 years old) and mother (24 years old) were normal and unrelated. At birth weight (3.300 g), height (50 cm) and OFD (34 cm) werePosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 211 P0572. Patient with polymalformation syndrome diagnosed in the homologous mouse gene Nsdhl. We describe NSDHL-mutants as Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome observed in 16 CHILD patients from 12 families (15 females and one V. Brysova1, D. Valik2, A. Mikuskova2, J. Uteseny2 male). None of the changes in NSDHLwas detected in 100 control per- 1Childrens hospital Brno; Brno, Czech Republic; 2Childrens hospital; sons. Thus CHILD syndrome is added to the list of developmental defects Brno, Czech Republic caused by an enzymatic deficiency in cholesterol biosynthesis. In spite of vbrys@med.muni.cz the fact that the murine Nsdhl mutations affect similar protein regions as Background; Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is a syndrome of multiple con- the human ones, one mutation is even completely identical, the striking lat- genital malformations with growth retardation, severe mental retardation, eralization of the skin defect occurs in humans only. The lateralized microcephalia, genital anomaly and unfavorable life outcome. Biochemical hypoplasia might result from the absence of NSDHLfunction in organizer basis of the syndrome is deficient cholesterol synthesis caused by mal- cells determining one side of the body. We conclude that CHILD syndrome function of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, which was mapped to the identifies a gene that plays a pivotal role at an early stage of human devel- chromosome 11q12-q13. This leads to accumulation of a toxic metabolite opment when the formation of the primitive streak confers bilateral sym- 7-dehydrocholesterol, which subsequently associates with the family of metry on the embryonic disk and left right asymmetry is determined. sonic hedgehogssignaling proteins important during embyogenesis. Case report; the index case described was a full-term boy of physiological P0575. Nonsyndromic childhood hearing loss; mutation pregnancy. Because of perinatal asphyxia he was one week in incubator. analysis of GJB2 and audiological findings Hypotonia and degenerative sings were observed early after birth and his L. Sbaiz, A. Sedita, A. Gomez, E. Cocco, S. Bosso, L. Leone, G. Restag- psychomotorical development soon became delayed. Aclinical diagnosis no of SLO syndrome was made. Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Childrens Hospital Regina Margherita; Methods; HPTLC was developed for identification of 7-DHC. Serum was Torino, Italy deproteinized with acetone, 25 l put of Merck Kieselgel 60 plate and chro- restagno@tin.it matographed twice in hexane+ethylacetate 10+1.5. A blue fluorescent Mutations in the gene for connexin 26 (CX26), GJB2, are a major cause of product visible at 360nm of 7-DHC was developed after derivatization with autosomal recessive inherited and apparently sporadic non-syndromic sulphuric acid. Subsequent DNAanalysis of mutations in 7-DHCR gene congenital hearing loss (locus DNFB1). The frameshift mutation 35delG is (W151X, V326L, IVS8nt1g-c, L109Pand R446Q) was done. the most represented in Caucasoid populations, with a variable relative fre- Results and Conclusions; Diagnosis of SLO was established by identifica- quency. We have analyzed 88 unrelated patients affected by sensorineur- tion of 7-DHC in serum of the index case by a new HPTLC method and al deafness with various degrees of hearing loss. Audiological characteris- confirmed by DNAanalysis with following results; proband V326L/V326L, tics were investigated and the entire coding region of GJB2 was father V326L, mother V326LAt the age of 6 years, patient clinical condi- sequenced. GJB2 mutations were present in 37 (56%) of 66 cases of tions appear stable. Currently, high-cholesterol therapy is being adminis- severe/profound deafness, while three GJB2 mutations were found in 22 tered. patients with moderate deafness (13%). The most common mutation is 35delG, accounting for 66% of all deafness alleles. The mutation V95M P0573. Clinical features of Waardenburg syndrome type I and E47X were detected four and two times,with a relative frequency of 5 (WSI) in a family with missense mutation in PAX3 gene and 2.5% respectively. Other mutations (L90P, 290-291 insA, 334 delAA, T. Markova W24X, E119del) were detected once. We also found six allele variants of ENT and Speech Research Institute; St Petersburg, Russian Federation unknown significance (V37I, F83L, R127H, V153I and the novel alleles hospDA@hospDA.yar.ru Q80Pand M162V) all in heterozygosity in deaf patients but also in normal- WSI is a well recognizable owing to facial features and pigmentary anom- hearing subjects. While the search of mutations in CX26 is fundamental for alies of hair, eye and skin. The freguency of sensorineural hearing loss is genetic counselling, the goal is now to clarify the role of the missense only 20% of cases. mutations of unknown significance in the pathogenesis of hearing loss. We have consulted 9-year old girl with unusual appearance for WSI. Girl This will allow to appropriate genetic counselling with valuable prognostic arrived from the area to the cochlea implantation. She initially showed and therapeutic informations. broad nasal root and congenital profound hearing loss. We have suspect- ed the dystopia canthorum which was confirmed by index W calculation P0576. The Laboratory Diagnosis Of Rare Hemoglo- (index W= 2.42). Girl was only with her mother who was healthy. Mother binopathies In Brazil just said that the child looks like her father and his mother who had normal A. R. Chinelato1, M. G. Ginabreda2, C. R. Bonini-Domingos3 hearing. After detailed clinical examination we have found small depig- 1UNESP- Sao Jose do Rio Preto; Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil; 2DLE; Rio mented spots on the fingers of girls right hand. Neither heterochromia iri- de Janeiro, Brazil; 3UNESP; Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil des nor white forelock nor other skin pigmentary changes was found. archinelato@ig.com.br Probands DNA sample was tested in Molecular Genetic Laboratory in The diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies is of growing importance, particulary Manchester (professor A. Read) and a missense mutation in the paired because of an increasing requirement for antenatal diagnosis of significant domain in exon 2 of PAX3, G48R, was found. Futher we have had an disorders of globin chain synthesis. The identification of hemoglobins is opportunity to examine probands father who had only broad nasal root, often presumptive, based on a characteristic electrophoretic mobility or dystopia canthorum (index W=2.46) and unilateral hearing loss which he other characteristics in an individual of appropriate ethnic origin. Brazil is a had hidden. His family had a history of typical facial features in three gen- country with a special ethnic characteristic. The hemoglobinopathies diag- erations without hearing loss and pigmentary anomalies. This case confirm nosis has a considerable importance, and reflects racial composition and the importance of the clinical examination of each family members and geographic origin. Scientific, sanitary, social and cultural factors explain a DNA-diagnosis in such case. quantitative and qualitative subestimation of the structural variants of According this observation and our previous results each family with WSI hemoglobin. The cellulose acetate electrophoresis is an easy, fast and has individual characteristics with variable expressivity of clinical features, reproductible method to identify abnormal hemoglobins. We have analyzed but facial features such as dystopia canthorum, broad nasal root are blood samples with mobility as hemoglobin S detected on cellulose always appear in WSI patients. acetate, by HPLC on the Bio- Rad variant automated analyzer methodolo- gy and Isoelectric focusing. Applications of these methods greatly aided in P0574.CHILD syndrome; molecular analysis defining the different hemoglobinopathies. like hemoglobin Korle-Bu, G- K. Grzeschik, D. Bornholdt, A. Koenig, H. Engel, R. Happle Philadelphia and D- Los Angeles. Accurate identification of hemoglobin Philipps Universitaet Marburg; Marburg, Germany variants is important not only to understand the clinical course, but also, in grzeschi@mailer.uni-marburg.de some cases for proper clinical management, especially in those cases CHILD syndrome (Congenital Hemidysplasia with Ichthyosiform nevus and involving hemoglobin S. The determination of rare variants may also assist Limb Defects) is an X-linked dominant male-lethal trait characterized by an in family studies or genetic counseling. inflammatory nevus affecting usually one side of the body with strict mid- line demarcation, associated with ipsilateral hypoplasia of the brain, lung, P0577.Elevate Fetal Hemoglobin In Blood Donors. kidney, heart, limbs, and skeletal structures. Recently, we found CHILD P. J. A. Zamaro1, W. A. Silva-Jr2, C. R. Bonini-Domingos3 syndrome to be caused by mutations in the gene NSDHL[NAD(P)H steroid 1UNESP- So Jos do Rio Preto; So Jos do Rio Preto, Brazil; 2Hemo- dehydrogenase like protein] encoding a putative 3-hydroxysteroid dehy- centro; Ribeirao Preto, Brazil; 3UNESP; So Jos do Rio Preto, Brazil drogenase that functions in a late step of cholesterol biosynthesis. This Paula.z@lycos.com human gene maps to Xq28. Two murine X-linked dominant male-lethal Fetal hemoglobin is produced in a sub population of erythrocytes termed traits, bare patches (Bpa) and striated (Str) are associated with mutations F-Cells and is the predominant hemoglobin in fetal life and early infancy.212 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology During the first year of life, fetal hemoglobin is gradually replaced by hemo- 3,370,079 and was authentically differed from a control group globin A, and only small amounts of fetal hemoglobin can be found in adult (3,150,019; t-5,23; p<0,01). The height of a distalsprout zone of a femoral life; fetal hemoglobins levels were shown to be increasing in some subjects bone from the internal and outside parties was accordingly 6,620,38 and with hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin and beta thalassemia. We 3,320,21. The varus deformation of the lower extremities changed from found blood donors whit high levels of fetal hemoglobin on cellulose 150 up to 162 degrees. 12 men had the structure of necks changed, and acetate electrophoresis screening and confirmed by the alkali denaturation 17 patients had the structure of internal departments of distal metaphyses method and HPLC on the Bio- Rad variant automated analyzer. The fami- of a femoral bone changed. ly studies and DNAanalysis will be made, to evaluate which molecular Thus, the characteristic picture of the metaphysaric chondrodysplasia of mechanism are envolved in these cases. the Shmid type was characterized with the varus deformation of the lower extremities, change of structure of necks and distal metaphyses of a P0578. Y chromosome microdeletions and cystic fibrosis femoral bone, presence of the metaphysaric index of a femoral bone with- mutations in infertile men in the limits of 3,370,079 and almost double excess of height of a sprout R. Gaillyov, J. Kadlecov, B. Ravukov, I. Valskov, J. Sojkov, I. zone from the inside in the area of the distal end of a femoral bone. Crha University Hospital; Brno, Czech Republic P0581. Machado-Joseph Disease in the Azores Islands (Por- gaillyova@fnbrno.cz tugal). Clinical features and CAG repeat length Our collaborative study with the Centre of Assistant Reproduction starting T. Kay1, M. Lima2, J. Vasconcelos1, C. Silva2, J. Santos1 from the 1998 year was focused on the group of 159 infertile men as can- 1Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo; Ponta Delgada, Portugal; 2University of didates for ICSI and IVF programme. Cytogenetic examinations have the Azores; Ponta Delgada, Portugal detected chromosomal abnormalities in 16 infertile men. Chromosomal neurazor@mail.telepac.pt abnormalities have represented 10% of pathological cytogenetic findings. Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a neurodegerative disorder associated Recently, the number of reports documented the prevalence of Yq with a CAG repeat expansion in a gene or chromosome 14q32.1. Arecent microdeletions in infertile men. We have examined the group of 143 infer- survey of MJD in the 9 islands of the Azores (Portugal) identified 103 tile men with karyotype 46,XY on the microdeletion DNA test in locus cases, which represents a prevalence of 1 in 2309 individuals. In the Yq11,23 for DAZ (deleted in azoospermia) gene and found microdeletions Azorean island of Flores, the disease has its highest world-wide preva- in specific fragments sY277, sY283 (AZFc region) with prevalence of 18% lence (1 in 103 people affected). To evaluate the clinical characteristics, in 44 azoospermic or severe oligospermic series patients from our tested onset and disease duration with reference to CAG repeat length, we per- group. Recently DNAanalyse of 12 cystic fibrosis transmembrane con- formed a detailed clinical analysis of 20 Azorean patients. The age of onset ductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutations in group 159 of infertile men was inversely correlated with the repeat length, confirming previous find- demonstrated genotype F508/nonF508 in 6 patients (4 were included in ings. Repeat length in the expanded allele did not overlap that of normal the azoospermic series). Also it was analysed a DNAvariant (the 5Talele) allele. The relationship between the number of CAG repeat units and sev- in a noncoding region of intron 8 CFTR gene that caused reduced levels of eral clinical finding was extensively studied. The influence of the normal the normal CFTR protein. It has detected the 13 men carrying 5Tallelic allele on disease presentation was also analysed. The results obtained fur- variant, one man was homozygote for genotype 5T/5T, two men with geno- ther document the importance of the repeat length in the phenotypic vari- type F508/5Tin relation to the congenital absence of the vas deferens. ation of MJD. Our results of the complex screening programme in infertile men from the Moravia region demonstrate in 27% causes that chromosomal and gene P0582.Anovel mutation in the EDAR gene in an autosomal disorders make a significant contribution to spermatogenic imparment. form of anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia S. A. Wisniewski, K. Kobielak, A. Kobielak, W. H. Trzeciak P0579.Haemophilia; Assessment of the carrier status in Indi- University of Medical Sciences; Poznan, Poland an females by pedigree analyses. whatsupdoc@go2.pl M. Singh, P. P. Singh, H. Kaur The most common variant of ectodermal dysplasia is its anhydrotic form Department of Human Biology, Punjabi University; Patiala, India (EDA) mostly caused by mutations in two genes; EDAgene, localised on s_puneet@angelfire.com the X chromosome, and EDAR gene localised on chromosome 2. The Eighty five families of haemophiliac patients of India (Haemophilia A=75, affected individuals exhibit symptoms of anodontia or oligodontia, deficien- Haemophilia B=10) were examined to assess the carrier status of the cy of sweat glands and hypotrichosis. EDAis caused by improper interac- females in this pedigree dataset. The probability values of the females for tions between the cells of ectodermal and mesenchymal origin during being carrier were calculated by the Bayesian method. It was observed embryogenesis. This interaction depends on protein products of EDAand that 45 mothers were proven carriers and 40 probable .The transmission EDAR genes, belonging to TNF family of ligands and receptors respec- was of familial nature in 45 families with 37 families having well established tively. DNAwas isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes of 16 individu- history of the disorder whereas, in the remaining 8 the trait showed up in als. Fragments of DNAcorresponding to exons 1 through 9 of EDAgene propositus and his brothers i.e. only in one generation. The remaining 40 and exons 1 through 12 of EDAR gene were amplified by PCR using spe- were categorised as isolated cases where the propositus was the only cific primers. The fragments that exhibited aberrant banding patterns in haemophiliac affected. On the basis of type of mutation, 22 cases were SSCPanalysis were sequenced using an automated DNAsequencer. In 5 observed to be due to de novo mutations in haemophiliac and the rest 18 patients mutations in the EDAgene were detected. In one of the remain- were the cases where there was an equal chance of mutation taking place ing patients sequence analysis demonstrated a novel T1109C transition in either in the mother or in the propositus itself.The probability values of 425 exon 12 of EDAR gene, resulting in Val370Ala substitution in the death females in 37 familial cases were calculated and a wide range of probabil- domain of EDAR protein. However, in 10 affected individuals sequence ity values fluctuating from 0.0295 to 1 was observed. analysis demonstrated no mutations in both EDAand EDAR genes. It was postulated that about 30% of the cases of anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia P0580. Early radiologic attributes of metaphysaric chon- results form mutations in the gene encoding the ligand (ectodysplasin A), drodysplasia and the receptor (EDAR). The remaining 70% of the cases were probably Y. Ignatyev due to mutations of the other recently described genes; XEDAR and NFkB Omsk State Medical Academy; Omsk, Russian Federation essential modulator (NEMO). Supported by KBN grant 4PO5A05417 rozhdestvensky@omsknet.ru Late diagnostics of hereditary diseases of a skeleton results in delayed and P0583. First Molecular Analysis of a Family with Spinocere- wrong treatment and is the reason for invalidized complications. bellar ataxia type 7 in Iran The roentgenograms of the lower extremities of 22 children 2 and 3 years S. Khazaeli1, A. Lofgren2, M. A. Molavi3, Z. Noorparast1, K. Karhrizi3, Y. old are examined with the purpose of revealing early radiology differential Shafeghati3, C. Van Broeckhoren2, H. Najmabadi3 attributes of the metaphysaric chondrodysplasia of the Shmid type. 1Rasht Genetic Counseling Center, East; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran Roentgenogrammetric parameters of were offered for the objectivization of 2Dept of Biochemistry, University of Antwerp; Antwerp, Belgium; 3Universi- the research data; a cervicodiaphysial index (the relation of a neck diame- ty of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran ter of a femoral bone to of a diaphysis diameter of a bone), a metaphysar- maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk ic index (relation of width distal metaphysis of a femoral bone to a diame- The dominant autosomal ataxias are a group of neurodegenerative disor- ter of its diaphysis). The cervicodiaphysial index on the average was ders caused by expanssion of a CAG triplet repeates in different genes. equaled to 1,380,035 and authentically was not differed from that param- Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7(SCA7) is a degenerative disorder which eter of a control group. The metaphysaric index was on the average affects the retina. The trinucleotide repeates in normal individual rangesPosters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology 213 from 7 to 16, in affected persons the repeats can exceed over three hun- P0586. Congenital leukaemia or transient myeloproliferative dred. Here we are reporting the first family of SCA7 in Iran. Their mother disease (TMD) in a neonate with mosaicism for trisomy 21 ; a has mild syptoms including mild ataxia with bilateral macular degenerative case report changes and abnormal cerebellar atrophy in MRI. Her three children are C. Walczak1, I. Mller-Hansen2, P. Lang2, P. Schlegel2, H. Kendziorra3, H. affected, one of them is a 39 year old man who has PMD (pigmentary mac- Enders1, A. Dufke1 ular dystrophy) with cerebellar ataxia and his children died due to rapid 1Department of Medical Genetics; Tuebingen, Germany; 2University Chil- fatal course of early onset disease. Another is a 37 year old man who has drens Hospital; Tuebingen, Germany; 3Institute of Pathology; Tuebingen, cerebellar ataxia and bilateral optic atrophy with blindness. The last one is Germany a 25 year old woman who has PMD and cerebellar ataxia. The others are andreas.dufke@uni-tuebingen.de normal. Eight members of the family were analysed for the repeats. 6 out The prognosis of congenital leukaemia is poor even with chemotherapeu- 8 had the expanded repeats ranges from 40 to 50 in one of the alleles. 2 tical treatment. Transient myeloproliferative disease (TMD) is charac- members of the family had normal range of repeats for both alleles. terised by spontaneous remission with complete clinical recovery. TMD is often associated with Down syndrome or a trisomy 21 cell line. At the ini- P0584. Mutation analysis in families with X-linked tial stage TMD is clinically indistinguishable from congenital leukaemia. We adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) and ornithinkarbamoyl- report on a girl born at 30 weeks gestation to a 36-year-old mother. Cae- trasferase (OTC) deficiency sarean section was performed because of fetal distress and pre-eclamp- L. Dvorakova, G. Storkanova, R. Dobrovolny, M. Hrebicek, S. Kmoch, E. sia. The neonate presented with hydrops, anaemia and a high white blood Hruba, E. Kostalova, J. Zeman, M. Elleder cell count consisting mainly of CD34+/CD56+ blasts. Without the use of Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, , 1stFaculty of Medicine and chemotherapy complete clinical recovery was observed within the first few General Faculty Hospital; Prague, Czech Republic months of life. Chromosome analysis of cultivated peripheral blood lym- ldvor@lf1.cuni.cz phocytes revealed 80% of cells with trisomy 21. The ratio of trisomic cells In families with gonosomal recessive disorders a reliable detection of car- in peripheral blood decreased as the frequency of blasts went down. Ret- riers is crucial. Mutation analysis is widely accepted to be a most effective rospective analysis on archived tissue sections from placenta, fetal cord diagnostic approach for identification of heterozygotes. We have set up and fetal membrane respectively, showed disomy for chromosome 21 in methods for mutation analysis of X-ALD and OTC deficiency. As the muta- connective tissue with infiltration of trisomy 21 cells. Cytogenetic and mol- tions are usually private, we start the analysis by direct sequencing of PCR ecularcytogenetic investigation of cultivated skin fibroblasts revealed a or RT/PCR products amplified from probands gDNA or cDNA. Subse- small proportion of trisomy 21 cells, confirming constitutional mosaicism for quently, family members are genotyped by specific PCR-RFLPassays. X- trisomy 21. The girl shows no phenotypical symptoms of Down syndrome. ALD is characterized by impaired peroxisomal very long chain fatty acids Our case supports the reserved use of chemotherapeutical agents in con- beta-oxidation. We have analysed 12 X-ALD patients from 11 unrelated genital leukaemia with the presence of a constitutional trisomy 21 cell line families and found eight novel mutations in ALD gene. In one family muta- despite the lack of phenotypic evidence for Down syndrome. We discuss tion analysiswas used for prenatal diagnosis. OTC deficiency is the most our case with respect to comparable cases in the literature. common inborn disorder of the urea cycle. In three patients with neonatal form of OTC deficiency we have identified two novel nonsense mutations P0587.Autosomal Dominant Interstitial Pulmonary Fibrosis and one published missense mutation. Mutation R277W, which was E. G. Lemire1, R. Chibbar2, K. Ramlall1, R. P. Skomro3, E. Cutz4 reported previously, was found in four unrelated patients with late onset 1Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, SK Canada; form of OTC deficiency. We screened 55 family members for the mutations 2Dept. of Pathology, University of Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, SK Canada; found in probands and identified three presymptomatic boys and 24 het- 3Dept. of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, SK Canada; erozygotes. In three cases the mutations found in probands were not 4Division of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Cana- detected in DNAisolated from leukocytes of their mothers - obligatory het- da erozygotes. In the case of these mothers we strongly recommend genetic lemiree@sdh.sk.ca counseling and prenatal diagnosis in future pregnancies as the discrepan- Familial cases of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) were first described in cies observed, cannot be explained only by mutation de novo but, more the article by Donohue et al. (Pediatrics 24;(1959);786-813). They sug- likely, by gonadal mosaicism . gested that there was a genetic basis to familial IPF and proposed an auto- somal dominant mode of inheritance with reduced penetrance. We have P0585.Effects of cytoplasmic DNAon the men infertility identified three descendants with pulmonary disease from one of the orig- M. Houshmand1,2, F. Sharifpanah1,3, A. Saremi2 inal IPF families reported by Donohue et al., (1959). The proband is a 3- 1National Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology; year-old female who presented at age 17 months with failure to thrive, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Sarem Medical Centre; Tehran, Islamic chronic respiratory symptoms and hypoxemia. Alung biopsy revealed a Republic of Iran; 3Islamic Azad University Research and Science Branch; picture of cellular/desquamative interstitial pneumonitis. Her younger Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran brother also presented in infancy with persistent respiratory distress. Alung massoudh@nrcgeb.ac.ir biopsy taken from him showed similar histological findings to his sister. The Mitochondrion is one of the intracytoplasmic organells that it is called as children have a 45-year-old maternal great uncle with chronic interstitial cell energy generator. Mitochondrion contains circular double-stranded lung disease secondary to presumed IPF. This individual has recently DNA(mtDNA) with 16,569 bp in length. mtDNAis very condense and it undergone a lung transplant and the pathological findings are pending. contains 37 genes (2 genes for mt-rRNAand 22 genes for mt-tRNAand 13 The family history was extensively reviewed and has uncovered 8 addi- genes encoding oxidative phosphorylation proteins, that need for most tional confirmed or presumed cases of IPF affecting descendants in four important biochemical role of mitochondrion). Every mitochondrion approx- different generations. The pattern of inheritance is consistent with autoso- imatly has 2-10 copies of mtDNA. There is 100 to 1000 mitochondria in mal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity. Asecond autosomal every cell, depending on to cell function. Sperm contains between 70 to dominant IPF family has been identified through a search of the hospital 100 mitochondria which take plase in midpiece region. Mitochondria are records. The pedigrees on these two families will be presented and the major source of energy production for mobility of sperm. By reason of mito- pathological findings will be reviewed and compared. chondrial sensitivity role for ATPproduction and extremely mobility and fer- tility of sperm, every defect on mtDNAcan cause diseases such as Neu- P0588. Autosomal dominant porencephaly with cerebral rospermia and Asthenozoospermia. To date, has recognized different dele- palsy tions in the mtDNAsuch as 7599 bp and 7345 bp and 4977 bp deletions B. G. Kousseff that later deletion indicate most frequencies in the low-mobility and immo- University Of South Florida; Tampa, FLUnited States bility of sperm and infertility in men. The purpose of this study are detec- bkoussef@hsc.usf.edu tion of deletions in the mtDNAof sperm and correlation between deletions As many as 60% of the children with cerebral palsy (CP) do not have a and infertility in man. Sperm semens was used for DNAand Multiple PCR documented pre-. peri- or neonatal cause. We report a three-generation method was used to extraction detect deletions in infertile men as well as family with CP(see pedigree). The proband III-3 was born by uneventful healthy controls. 5 Kb deletion was found in one infertile man. 5 Kb dele- vertex delivery with a birth weight of 3010g, length 51 cm and head cir- tion (common deletion) was reported in aging, age of patients is important cumference 32 cm. Episodes of apnea and reduced right extremities to detect this deletion. movements led to brain CTand MRI. They showed asymmetric lateral ven- tricles due to porencephaly of the left periatrial area. EEG was normal. III- 1 was diagnosed as having right spastic hemiparesis at age three months. CTshowed similar porencephaly. Subsequently, mild microcephaly devel-214 Posters: Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology oped and at age 5 years, she has limited speech. Her chromosomes were P0591.Heteroplasmy for the A1555G mutation in mitochondr- normal 46, XX. I-1 had right spastic hemiparesis diagnosed during infancy. ial DNAin Spanish families with non-syndromic sensorineur- He is of normal intelligence and his MRI showed left porencephaly, com- al hearing loss promising the frontoparietal white matter. This pedigree suggests a hered- I. del Castillo1, M. Villamar1, M. Moreno-Pelayo1, L. Romero1, C. Martn1, itary developmental porencephaly due to faulty neuron migration and lead- B. Arellano2, R. Ramrez-Camacho2, C. Morales3, J. Solanellas4, F. ing to CP. The trait appears to be autosomal dominant with reduced pene- Moreno1 trance; II-1 and II-2 are asymptomatic with pending MRI. There are a few 1Hospital Ramn y Cajal; Madrid, Spain; 2Hospital Puerta de Hierro; reports of similar families. Seizures and bilateral porencephaly were addi- Madrid, Spain; 3Hospital Sierrallana; Torrelavega, Spain; 4Hospital de tional manifestations in some of the affected individuals. By adding this Valme; Sevilla, Spain family to the reports, a trait of proencephaly with CPis established. idelcastillo@hrc.insalud.es Several mutations in the human mitochondrial genome result in non-syn- P0589.Differential radiodiagnosis of rachitislike deseases of dromic sensorineural hearing loss. Among them, the A1555G mutation in children the gene encoding the mitochondrial 12S ribosomal RNAconfers suscep- Y. Ignatyev, T. Mulik tibility to the ototoxicity of aminoglycoside antibiotics, but it also causes Omsk State Medical Academy; Omsk, Russian Federation non-syndromic hearing impairment in absence of exposure to these antibi- rozhdestvensky@omsknet.ru otics. In this work, we have found the A1555G mutation in 64 out of 345 The analysis of an X-ray research of bones of 152 children aged from 2 to families with non-syndromic hearing loss, so confirming the high frequen- 16 years with rachitislike diseases; a phosphatic diabetes (84 men), a renal cy of this mutation in the Spanish population. In most of the cases, the tubular acidosis (36), an illness of DeTony-Debre-Franckony (25), a vita- mutation was found in homoplasmy, but in five families heteroplasmy was min D-dependent rachitis (7) was done. detected. The percentage of mutant copies was determined in a total of 16 All patients were divided into three groups depending on the hardness of heteroplasmic individuals, and it ranges from 4% to 97%. In 14 of these disease display. There were 101 (66,4 %) child with moderately expressed individuals the hearing level was normal for middle frequencies (500 to displays in the first group, 4 patients (27 %) with the average hardness of 2000 Hz), but a significant loss in high frequencies (4000 and 8000 Hz) display in the second group and 10 men (16,6 %) with serious changes was observed in individuals with a percentage of mutant copies higher than were referred to the third group. 70%. In some but not all of the families the percentage of mutant copies The varus deformation of the lower extremities, osteoporosis of the hyper- correlates with the severity of the hearing loss. Our results indicate that trophic type, advancing of an osteal age on 2-3 years were defined in the other factors (age and genetic background, i.e. putative nuclear modifier first and second groups of the patients with the phosphatic diabetes. genes) may also modulate the phenotype associated to the A1555G muta- Patients from all three groups with the renal tubular acidosis were distin- tion. guished by valgus deformation of the lower extremities, lagging of the osteal age and atrophic osteoporosis. P0592.Clinical benefits of identification of a novel mitochon- The first and the second groups of children with the illness of DeTony- drial DNAmutationinapatientwithfocalcryptogenicepilepsy. Debre-Franckony were characterised with valgus deformation of the lower M. Diegoli1, I. Sartori2, M. Grasso3, A. Pilotto3, E. Porcu3, L. Pillitteri3, M. extremities, atrophic osteoporosis and moderate lagging of the osteal age. Versino2, A. Tartara2, E. Arbustini3 The resorption of a cortical layer of a diaphysis of tubular bones was 1Institute of Pathology, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 2IRCCS Institute of determined in the third group side by side the expressed osteoporosis. Neurology, C.Mondino; Pavia, Italy; 3Cardiovascular Pathology, Molecular In the first and the second groups of patients with the vitamin D-dependent Diagnostic and Research Transplantation Laboratories, IRCCS Policlinico rachitis were defined varus deformations, hypertrophic osteoporosis, con- San Matteo; Pavia, Italy forming of osteal age to Passport age, and there was a tendency to lag- diagnostica.molecolare@smatteo.pv.it ging of the osteal age in the third group. A58 year old female comes to our attention for focal cryptogenic epilepsy. Thus, the realization of differential diagnostics is possible at mild and aver- She was treated with valproic acid and during this therapy she developed age hardness of displays of rachitislike diseases. At a serious degree of mental slowing and stroke-like episodes, characterized by ataxia, nystag- disease, authentic differential radiologic attributes of various forms of rachi- mus and cephalea; an increase of rest lactacidemia was recorded. She tislike diseases are absent. was addressed to the molecular analysis with the clinical hypothesis of a Melas syndrome. We identify a novel heteroplasmic mutation C8393Tin P0590.AStudy on the Clinical Variation of Bilateral Childhood ND5 gene (CCC->TCC; Pro->Ser). Heteroplasmia was assessed with Cataracts in South India RFLPAva II enzyme on DNAfrom blood and skeletal muscle; the quanti- S. T. Santhiya1, D. Rawlley1, S. Manohar1, A. Ramesh1, P. Vijayalakshmi2, tative densitometric evaluation showed 85% and 95% mutant in blood and P. Namperumalsamy2, J. Graw3, P. M. Gopinath1, J. Loster3 muscle DNArespectively. Three unaffected siblings carried the mutation, 1Dr. ALMPGIBMS, Univ. of Madras; Chennai, India; 2Aravind Eye Hospital tested in blood DNA. The mutation was absent in 150 consecutive normal and PG Inst. of Ophthalmology; Madurai, India; 3Institut fr Sugetier- controls and present in one of 160 patients screened for dilated cardiomy- genetik, GSF; Neuherberg, Germany opathy. One homoplasmic polymorphism (G1719Ain 16s rRNA) was also drawlley@yahoo.com identified in the same patient. Given that the mutation is heteroplasmic, Atotal of 3244 children of age group 0-15 yrs presenting severe visual absent from normal controls, only found in 1 disease control, and the impairment or blindness were registered at Aravind Eye Hospital, S. India amount of mutant segregates with affected tissue, we suspected that this during November, 1995 through July, 1996. Of these, Bilateral Childhood mutation is likely to play some pathogenetic role in the disease. After the Cataracts (BCCs) accounted for 19% (611/3244) representing nonsyn- identification of the mutation, the patient withdrew valproic acid with an dromic (N=468) and syndromic (N=143) cases. Of the eleven phenotypes immediate and persistent (6 months) clinical benefit. registered, lamellar, total and nuclear were the most frequently encoun- tered clinical entities. Age at appearance amongst non-syndromic BCCs P0593. Folate pathway gene alteration in patients with leber were mostly developmental betweeen the age group 1-15 yrs, while it was optic nerve syndrome (LHON) congenital/infantile (0-1 yr) in phenotypes such as total, nuclear and ante- S. Aleyasin, M. Ghazanfari rior polar BCCs. Lamellar and posterior polar were most often develop- National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology; mental. About 70% (426/611) of the BCCs reveal a probable genetic basis Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran and in 28% (171/611) the aetiology was undetermined. Fifty two percent of sogand@nrcgeb.ac.ir the syndromic BCCs were associated with ocular anomalies with micro- Leber optic atrophy is due to atrophy of the retinal ganglion cell and nerve cornea being the most frequent anomaly followed by microphthalmos and fiber layers as well as of the optic nerve. The penetrance of the disease is buphthalmos/glaucoma. Among nonocular associations delayed mile- estimated to be 20% for men and 4% for women. Many characteristic fea- stones/mental retardation was most common. Both ocular and nonocular tures of LHON, such as the long latency to onset, the acute nature of the malformations were present in about 26% of the BCC probands. Few of vission loss and clinical involment confined to the optic nerve are not the syndromal cases include those of Marfan (N=6), Down (N=1), Haller- explained adequately. The effect of common mutation (677 C to T) of the mann-Strieff (N=1) and Bardet Biedl (N=1) syndromes. Thus the clinical methylenetetahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene have been studied in profile of the BCC phenotypes documents clinical variation and the under five unrelated leber patients live in different regions in IRAN. The patho- lying genetic heterogeneity in this ethnic group. genicity of any mtDNAmutaions have been fairly known but a definitive cause and effect relationship between an mtDNAmutation and a clinical phenotype can be difficult to establish. Different mutations can be associ- ated with the same phenotype, the same mutation can be associated withPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 215 different phenotypes. Both LHON disease and folic acid methabolism prob- Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr lem can be involved in common neurodegenrative symptomes such as Ultrasound scans in the midtrimester of pregnancy are now a routine part Alzhimer disease but the relationship of mtDNAdisease such as LHON of antenatal care in most European countries. Thanks to registries of con- and MTHFR mutation has not been studied before. This study is uniqe in genital anomalies, a study was undertaken in Europe. The objective of the studing this mutation amoung LHON patients and showing the pervalence study was to evaluate prenatal detection of congenital anomalies by rou- of 100% of heterozyous mutation of 677 C to Tsubstitution in five studied tine ultrasonographic examination of the fetus. All congenital malforma- LHON patients. The mechanisms underlying this phenomenon in these tions suspected prenatally and all congenital malformations, including patients are at the present time not very well known. However, these chromosome anomalies, confirmed at birth were identified from the Con- observations may be useful for study of LHON pathogenesis. genital Malformation Registers, including 20 registers from the following European countries ; Austria, Croatia, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, P0594. Fetal cells in maternal blood as a screening test for Lithuania, Spain, Switzerland, The Netherlands, UK and Ukrainia. These fetal aneuploidies registries are following the same methodology. The study was performed A. Mavrou1, A. Kolialexi2, A. Antsaklis3, A. Koratzis4, C. Metaxotou5 between July 1996 and December 1998, including 709,030 pregnancies. 1Medical Genetics Athens University School of Medicine; Athens, Greece; At delivery, 8126 babies/fetuses were diagnosed with abnormalities. The 2Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine; Athens, Greece; percentage of detection was variable for the diverse categories of congen- 3Ist Dep of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Athens University; Athens, Greece; ital anomalies;it was high for neural tube defects (NTD) 96.4% and 68.6 4Dep. of Obstetrics & Gynecology,Patras Universitya; Patras, Greece; for spina bifida, but low for ventricular septal defect and for atrial septal 5Medical Genetics, Athens University school of Medicine; Athens, Greece defect (ASD), 6.7% and 7.9%, respectively. The detection rate was higher ariamav@hol.gr for multiply malformed children (for example four times higher for ASD). Anti ? hemoglobin chain antibody has been used to detect fetal nucleated Detection rate varied between European countries according to the poli- red blood cells (NRBCs) entering maternal circulation during pregnancy. In cies used ; no routine scan, 1, 2 or 3 routine scans varying from 17.9% (no a previous study we demonstrated, however, that women carriers of ?-tha- routine scan) to 55.6% (3 routine scans). The rate of pregnancy termina- lassemia produce themselves during pregnancy an increased number of tion was high for central nervous system anomalies (54.5%) and chromo- ?+ NRBC making it difficult to distinguish between fetal and maternal somal anomalies (53.1%) and low for renal anomalies (23.5%) and con- NRBCs. Use of Ab against embryonic hemoglobin ? may increase speci- genital heart defects (11.9%). Overall 25.0% of all pregnancies were ter- ficity for fetal NRBCs. In the present study NRBCs were isolated by MACS minated after prenatal detection of congenital anomalies. This study from 20ml peripheral blood of 50 pregnant women carriers of ? tha- showed that many fetuses with major malformations can be identified pre- lassemia trait, 27 in the first and 23 in the second trimester of pregnancy. natally in routine practice. Because policies, methods and techniques con- NRBCs were next identified immunocytochemically using anti ? or anti ? tinually change, ongoing surveillance of prenatal diagnostic services is monoclonal antibodies (MoAb). FISH was performed in 22 cases known to vital. carry male fetuses with X/Ychromosome specific probes. The mean num- ber of NRBCs isolated with anti ? was 51 (range 14-158) in the 1sttrimester P0597.Prenatal Diagnosis Of Limb Reduction Deficiencies By and 52 (range 22-153) in the 2nd. Using anti ? an average of 12 (range 3- Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination In Europe 23) NRBC were identfied in the 1stand 5 (range 3-10) in the 2ndtrimester A. Wiesel1, C. Stoll2, A. Queisser-Luft3, U. Froster3 of pregnancy. When anti ? was used all cells identified were XY. In contrast 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Service de Gntique Mdicale, when anti ? was used FISH identified both XX and XYNRBCs. Our results Hautepierre; Strasbourg, France; 3The EUROSCAN Working Group; demonstrate that since anti ?MoAb shows increased specificity for fetal Strasbourg, France NRBC it should be preferentially used in the first trimester of pregnancy to Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr imrove prenatal diagnosis from fetal cells isolated from maternal circulation Ultrasound scans in the midtrimester of pregnancy are now a routine part and facilitate distinction between fetal and maternal NRBCs, especially in of antenatal care in most European countries. Using data from registries of women carriers of ? thalassemia. congenital anomalies a study was undertaken in Europe. The objective of the study was to evaluate prenatal detection of limb reduction deficiencies P0595. Detection of fetal apoptotic cells in maternal periph- (LRD) by routine ultrasonographic examination of the fetus. All LRDs sus- eral blood during pregnancy pected prenatally and all LRDs, including chromosome anomalies, con- A. Kolialexi1, G. Tsangaris2, A. Mavrou1, A. Antsaklis3, F. Tzortzatou2, V. firmed at birth were identified from 20 Registries of Congenital Malforma- Touliatou1, C. Metaxotou1 tion from the following 12 European countries ; Austria, Croatia, Denmark, 1Medical Genetics, Athens University School of Medicine; Athens, Greece; France, Germany, Italy, Lithuania, Spain, Switzerland, The Netherlands, 21st Dep. of Pediatrics, Athens Univesity School of Medicine; Athens, UK, Ukrainia; these registries are following the same methodology. During Greece; 31st Dep. of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Athens University School of the study period (1996-98) there were 709.030 births, including 7758 Medicine; Athens, Greece cases with congenital malformations. Two hundred fifty cases of LRDs with ariamav@hol.gr 63 (25,2%) termination of pregnancies were identified including 138 cases In a previous study we demonstrated that apoptosis increased according with isolated LRD, 112 cases with associated malformations, including 16 to gestational age accounting partly for the presence of free fetal DNAin cases with chromosomal anomalies and 38 cases with non chromosomal maternal plasma and serum. Using simultaneously TUNEL assay and recognized syndromes. If more than one LRD was present the case was FISH analysis we identified the fetal origin of part of the apoptotic cell pop- coded as complex LRD. The prenatal detection rate of isolated terminal ulation but very few TUNEL+ cells showed hybridization signals since they transverse LRD was 22,7% (22 out of 97), 50% (3 out of 6) for proximal were in a late apoptosis stage and nuclei were distorted. In the present intercalary LRD, 8,3% (1 out of 12) for longitudinal LRD and 0 for split study apoptotic cell population was identified immunocytochemically using hand/foot; for multiply malformed children with LRD those percentages Annexin V, a marker of cells in an early stage of apoptosis. Apoptosis was were 46,1 (30 out of 65), 66,6 (6 out of 9), 57,1 (8 out of 14) and 0 (0 out determined in mononuclear cells isolated from the peripheral blood of 29 of 2), respectively. The prenatal detection rate of LRDs varied in relation pregnant women in the 16th-19th week of pregnancy. The mean apoptosis with the fetal ultrasound screening policies (no routine scan, 1, 2 or 3 rou- rate using Annexin V was 6.80.5% (range; 4.2-8.1%) vs 6.140.5% tine scans) from 20,0% to 64,0%. (range; 3.7-6.9) obtained using the ethidium bromide staining. FISH using X and Ychromosome specific probes was applied in 17 cases known to P0598. Prenatal Diagnosis Of Dysmorphic Syndromes By carry male fetuses. The proportion of apoptotic cells showing X/Ysignals Routine Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination Across Europe. was 7.8% (range; 5-12%) while 75% of Annexin V + cells showed M. Hasanhodzic1, C. Stoll2 hybridization signals. In 12 samples from women with female fetuses no 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Hpital de Hautepierre; Stras- X/Ycells were recorded. Although our results are still preliminary, it seems bourg, France that use of Annexin V antibody to detect apoptotic cell population improves Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr FISH analysis and allows a more accurate determination of the proportion Ultrasound scan in the midtrimester of pregnancy is now a routine part of of fetal cells among the apptotic cell population. antenatal care in most European countries. The objectives of this study was to evaluate the prenatal diagnosis of dysmorphic syndromes by fetal P0596.Evaluation Of Prenatal Diagnosis Of Congenital Anom- ultrasonographic examination. Data from 20 registries of congenital mal- alies By Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination In Europe. formations in 12 European countries were included in the study. At least C. G. Stoll1, M. Clementi2 one routine anomalies scan was offered to the pregnant women participat- 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2The EUROSCAN Working Group; ing to this study. There were 8127 cases with congenital anomalies includ- Strasbourg, France ing 1866 cases with multiple malformations ; recognized syndromes, chro-216 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics mosomal or non chromosomal and multiple malformed, non syndromic. P0600.Evaluation Of The Prenatal Diagnosis Of Neural Tube Only recognized syndromes were included in this study. There were 2454 Defects By Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination In Different cases with congenital heart diseases, 479 out of them were recognized Centres Across Europe. syndromes including 375 chromosomal anomalies and 104 non chromo- T. Boyd1, D. Wellesley2, H. De Walle2, R. Tenconi2, S. Garcia Minaur2, G. somal syndromes including 28 deletions 22q11 (44,4% were prenatally Zandwijken2, C. Stoll2, M. Clementi2 detected), 17 heterotaxy sequences (64,7% were prenatally detected), 15 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Service de Gntique Mdicale, VATER association (46,6% were prenatally diagnosed) and 4 Noonan, 4 Hautepierre; Strasbourg, France fetal alcoholism, 3 CHARGE association and 33 others (47,7% of them Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr were detected prenatally). Hundred ninety two out of 1130 cases with renal Ultrasound scans in the midtrimester of pregnancy are now a routine part anomalies were recognized syndromes, 161 out of them (83,3%) were of antenatal care in most European countries. Using data from registries of diagnosed prenatally including 107 chromosomal aberrations and 54 non congenital anomalies a study was undertaken in Europe. The objective of chromosomal syndromes (15 VATER, 13 Meckel Gruber, 12 osteochon- the study was to evaluate prenatal detection of Neural Tube Defects (NTD) drodysplasias, 5 caudal regression, 3 megacystis-microcolon, 2 Di by routine ultrasonographic examination of the fetus. All NTDs suspected George, 2 fetal alcoholism and 12 others). Fifty four out of the 250 cases prenatally and all NTDs, including chromosomes anomalies, confirmed at with limb reduction deficiencies were recognized syndromes, including 16 birth were identified from 20 Registries of Congenital Malformation from 12 chromosomal syndromes and 38 non chromosomal syndromes (7 amniot- European countries; the registries are following the same methodology. ic bands, 6 VATER, 3 limb body wall complexe, 3 caudal regression, 2 During the study period (1996-98) there were 670.766 births. ANTD was each Poland, Hanhart, de Lange and TAR and 11 others);20 of them were diagnosed at delivery in 542 cases. In 453/542 (84%) the lesion was iso- diagnosed prenatally (37,0%) including 9 chromosomal syndromes. There lated (166 anencephaly;252 spina bifida;35 encephalocele). Of the 166 were 243 cases of abdominal wall defects including 57 recognizable syn- isolated cases with anencephaly, 159 (96%) were correctly identified pre- dromes, 48 with omphalocele (27 chromosomal, 5 OEIS, 2 caudal regres- natally;one was missed to scan, two were wrongly diagnosed, four were sion, 2 osteochondrodysplasia and 5 others) and 9 with gastroschisis (4 not scanned (sensitivity 98%). 87% of the prenatal diagnoses were made limb body wall complexe, 2 megacystis-microcolon, 2 chromosomal aber- before 24 weeks gestation;142 (86%) of isolated anencephalic pregnan- rations and 1 OEIS), 47 out of them were diagnosed prenatally (82,5%). cies were terminated, 11% of these after 24 weeks. Of the 252 cases of Hundred fifty 2 out of 809 cases with intestinal anomalies were recognized isolated spina bifida 171 (68%) were correctly identified prenatally, 112 syndromes, 46 were diagnosed prenatally (30.2%). There were 549 cleft (65%) before 24 weeks gestation. The diagnosis was missed on scan in 60 lip and palate (CL(P)) and 197 cleft palate (CP) including 74 chromosomal cases and 21 were not scanned (sensitivity 75%). The mean reduction in aberrations and 73 recognised syndromes (23 Pierre Robin, 11 holopros- birth prevalence because of termination of pregnancy for spina bifida was encephaly, 7 amniotic bands, 5 skeletal dysplasia, 4 Meckel Gruber, 2 49% (range 6-100%). There was a wide variation between centres in pre- OFD, 1 van der Woude and 20 others). Prenatal diagnosis was done in 51 natal detection rate (33-100%), termination of pregnancy of prenatally CL(P) (53.1%) and 7 CP (13.7%). Few anencephalic cases were syn- diagnosed cases (17-100%) and gestation both at diagnosis and termina- dromic. Out of 290 cases with spina bifida, 28 were recognized syndromes, tion of pregnancy. In conclusion a high prenatal detection rate for anen- 20 of them (71.5%) were diagnosed prenatally. Six out of the 9 syndromic cephaly was reported by all registers although some diagnoses were made encephaloceles were diagnosed prenatally. Prenatal detection rates of late in gestation. There is a large variation in prenatal detection and termi- syndromes varied significantly between European countries regarding to nation rates for spina-bifida between centres, reflecting differences both in the screening policy. In conclusion this study showed that around 50% of policy and culture. the recognized syndromes can be detected prenatally by the anomaly scans. However the detection rate varied with the type of syndromes and P0601. Familial Orofaciodigital syndrome type I revealed by with the policy of prenatal screening between countries. ultrasound diagnosis of porencephaly. C. Thauvin-Robinet1, L. Faivre1, T. Rousseau2, C. Durand2, N. Laurent2, P0599.Evaluation Of Prenatal Diagnosis Of Congenital Heart C. Maingueneau2, P. Sagot2, A. Nivelon-Chevallier1 Disease By Ultrasound ; Experience From 20 European Reg- 1Service de Gntique Mdicale; Dijon, France; 2Centre pluridisciplinaire istries Of Congenital Anomalies. de diagnostic prnatal, Maternit; Dijon, France E. Garne1, M. Clementi2, C. Stoll2 christelthauvin@hotmail.com 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Service de Gntique Mdicale, Porencephaly is a rare central nervous system abnormality and is rarely Hautepierre; Strasbourg, France associated with syndromes. Here, we report on a prenatal diagnosis of Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr complex central nervous system abnormalities including agenesis of the Ultrasound scans in the midtrimester of pregnancy are now a routine part corpus callosum, agenesis of the cerebellar vermis, bilateral hydrocephaly, of antenatal care in most European countries. Using data from registries of and multiple cystic porencephaly in a 33 WG foetus. Termination of preg- congenital anomalies a study was undertaken in Europe. The objective of nancy was proposed after genetic counselling. Autopsy showed a female the study was to evaluate prenatal detection of Congenital Heart Defect foetus with macrocephaly (W 1615g; L43cm and OFC 32cm), unilateral (CHD) by routine ultrasonographic examination of the fetus. There were postaxial polydactyly on the hand, and unilateral preaxial polydactyly on 2456 cases with CHD with an overall prenatal detection rate of 25%. Ter- feet. Facial dysmorphism included hypertelorism, epicanthus, hypoplastic mination of pregnancy was performed in 293 cases (12%). There was sig- nasal alae, left choanal atresia, midline pseudocleft of upper lip, multilobu- nificant variation in prenatal detection rate between regions with the lowest lated tongue with oral hamartoma and multiple gingival frenulae. Clinical detection rate in countries without ultrasound screening (11%) and the examination of the family revealed that the mother, sister and maternal highest detection rate in the countries with 3 fetal scans, 40 to 48% grandmother of the proband were affected, and family history argued in (p<0,01). There were 1696 cases with isolated CHD of which 16% were favor of an X linked dominant inheritance pattern. This is the fourth report diagnosed prenataly and 5% of the pregnancies were terminated (TOP); of porencephaly in association with orofaciodigital syndrome type I and is 45% of the 761 CHD with of least one other major extra cardiac malfor- another example of a large intrafamilial variability. This report raise two mation (associated cases) were detected prenataly and 21,5% were TOP issues; i) the difficulties in genetic counselling of orofaciodigital syndrome (p<0,01). Prenatal detection rate and TOPwere 40,3% and 22,9 for chro- type I families due to the great variability of the disease, and ii) the impor- mosomal anomalies, 51,9% and 30,8% for non chromosomal recognized tance of a detailed ultrasound examination after a prenatal diagnosis of syndromes and 48,6% and 16,3% for multiply malformed with non chro- porencephaly. mosomal and non other recognized syndromes, respectively. Only 69 cases (2,8% of the total) were fetal deaths. Prenatal detection rate of CHD P0602. Firsttrimester ultrasound screening; Ethical aspects varied significantly between countries in relation with fetal ultrasound of pregnancy terminations with life compatibility fetal pathol- screening policies and also between countries even with the same screen- ogy. ing recommendations. Risk of fetal death is low, which is important to know A. S. Latypov, L. E. Teregoulova when counselling parents after prenatal diagnosis of CHD in order to pro- Republican clinical hospital, Tatarstan; Kazan, Russian Federation vide ideal care for the patient. kazanMGC@mail.ru Carried out during 2000 ultrasonic screening for nuchal translucency in Kazan, Republic Tatarstan, Russia, has allowed to reveal significant amount cases of expressed fetal pathology, owing to what the women have selected interruption of pregnancy. 1680 pregnant women are inspected for the first half-year of 2000. 11 large defects are detected (0.65%);Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 217 Abnormality Cases er. Inter-observer repeatability was assessed in 54 fetuses in each of whom two observers performed two repeated measurements. The pul- Body stalk anomaly 1 satility index for veins (PIV), peak systolic velocity (S wave), peak velocity Holoprosencephaly 1 during atrial contraction (Awave) and time-averaged maximum velocity (TAMV) were recorded. The coefficient of variation (CV) and intraclass cor- Encephalocele 1 relation coefficient (ICC) were calculated. Cohens k-coefficient was used for categorical data. Both intra-observer and inter-observer variations were Acrania 3 low (intra-observer; CV of 10, 13, 22 and 13% and ICC of 0.85, 0.94, 0.94 Anencephaly 5 and 0.95; inter-observer; CV of 8.8, 14, 22 and 13% and an ICC of 0.86, 0.84, 0.87 and 0.84 respectively for PIV, S wave, A wave and TAMV). Introduction measurement nuchal translucency into the screening protocol There was 100% agreement for the detection of normal/abnormal blood has resulted the appearance the group of the pregnant women with a flow. In summary, intra- and inter-observer repeatability of all parameters fetuses without visible defects, but requiring invasive diagnostics proce- was acceptable, suggesting that the test could be reliably employed in clin- dures for exception chromosome pathology. ical practice after further validation in larger series. From 26 cases thickness nuchal translucency (1.55%) invasive procedure was carried out in 14 cases, the chromosome pathology was detected in 7 P0605. Chromosomal aberrations detected with amniocente- cases. sis in the fetuses with abnormal ultrasound Thus, in spite of the fact that the detected pathology in 4 cases was life K. Crkvenac, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic compatible (various variants of Turner syndrome) , the women have select- Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Dept. of Paediatrics, Uni- ed interruption of pregnancy. At the same time there was showed incorrect versity Hospital Center; Zagreb, Croatia tendency at the practical gynecologists to recommend interruption of preg- kriste2604@yahoo.com nancy at revealing markers without realization of confirming diagnostics. Most fetuses with cytogenetic abnormalities have structural anomalies, Conclusion: The introduction of the high resolution ultrasonic equipment which can be recognized by detailed ultrasound examination. Objective; allow to detect a significant amount of fetal anomalies. Obviously, the final During 1978-1999, amniocentesis was performed on 16 604 pregnant solution concerning of pregnancy determination remains for family. But it is women. Retrospective study of routine ultrasound was performed to estab- the physicians responsibility to give objective information to family about lish correlation between cytogenetic karyotyping and ultrasound in the all kinds of fetal abnormality and its developing. detection of chromosomal abnormalities.The main indications for kary- otyping are ultrasound suspection of fetal malformations, ultrasound sus- P0603. A case of ultrasound and molecular diagnosis of pection of growth retardation, hydramnios and olygohydramnios. Results; thanatophoric dysplasia type I 360 medical record charts of women with ultrasound as a major indication G. Ginocchio1, P. De Biasio2, F. Prefumo2, P. Marchini2, I. Bruzzone2, M. for prenatal diagnosis were reviewed. Karyotypes were available in all Baffico3, M. Lerone4, M. Vignolo5, P. L. Venturini1 cases. Of the 360 documented karyotypes, 27 chromosomal abnormalities 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute; Genova, Italy; were discovered (7.5%). Detected chromosomal abnormalities included 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute G. Gaslini, Univer- one triploidy 69,XXX, one triploidy 69,XXY, ten trisomy 18, seven trisomy sity of Genova; Genova, Italy; 3Laboratory of Human Genetics, Ospedale 21, one trisomy 9, six monosomy 45X and one balanced translocation Galliera; Genova, Italy; 4Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute G. 46,XX, t(10;11) (q24;q13). Conclusion; Aultrasound detectable fetal defect Gaslini; Genova, Italy; 5Department of Pediatrics, Institute G. Gaslini, is a useful marker for detection of chromosomal abnormality. University of Genova; Genova, Italy gmginocchio@yahoo.it P0606.Prenatal diagnosis of limb malformations;a retrospec- Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is the most common type of lethal skeletal tive study in 135 pregnancies dysplasia (LSD). Most of the prenatally diagnosed cases show abnormal S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, O. Boute-Benejean1, D. Thomas2, L. Devisme3, A. ultrasound findings in the second and third trimester of pregnancy. There Moerman1, A. Coeslier1, F. Puech4, M. Holder-Espinasse1 are reports of cases of TD diagnosed during the early second trimester, as 1Service de gntique Clinique; Lille, France; 2Pdiatrie en maternit; Lille, well as cases of normal sonograms at 12-13 weeks of fetuses subse- France; 3Laboratoire de Foetopathologie; Lille, France; 4Centre de diag- quently shown to be affected. Moreover, while a general diagnosis of LSD nostic prnatal; Lille, France can be reliably made by ultrasound, a specific disease diagnosis remains smanouvrier@chru-lille.fr often difficult. We observed a case of TD type I suspected at 18 weeks of Limb malformations (LM) have a prevalence of 1 in 1000. They can either gestation during a routine ultrasound scan. The main findings were abnor- be isolated or occur in association with other malformations as part of chro- mally short and bowed long bones, extremely small thoracic circumference mosomal abnormalities or multiple congenital anomalies syndromes and a typical telephone receiver appearance of the femurs. We were able (MCAS). The ultrasonographic prenatal detection of LM is difficult depend- to analyse genomic DNAobtained by chorionic villus sampling, identifying ing on the severity of the malformation and additional findings. We per- a C to G substitution at position 746 in the fibroblast growth factor recep- formed a retrospective study of 135 pregnancies with LM referred to the tor (FGFR) 3 gene, resulting in a Ser249Cys substitution already known to prenatal diagnostic centre of Lille (France) between January 1997 and be associated with TD type I disease. While ultrasound scans remain the December 1999. 22 cases were excluded because of incomplete data. The most important clue to suspect the disease, genetic molecular analysis of LM had been diagnosed thanks to the ultrasonographic survey in 74/107 TD-associated mutations on CVS samples can be of great help in early cases (69%). 49 were isolated (66%), 25 (34%) had an identified MCAS, 3 definition of the diagnosis and in genetic counselling. (4%) had isolated amelia. 54 (73%) gestations were terminated, 5(6%) pre- sented with spontaneous in utero death, 15 (20%) were continued. The LM P0604. Ductus venosus doppler flow in the first trimester of had not been prenatally diagnosed in 33 cases (31%). 25 (76%) were pregnancy; repeatability of an adjunctive marker for Downs alive, 4 were foetuses whose pregnancy had been terminated because of syndrome screening the diagnosis of another malformation (2 had abnormal chromosomes), 3 F. Prefumo1, P. De Biasio1, G. Ginocchio1, I. Bruzzone1, S. Ferrero1, P. were stillborn. Among the alive neonates (40 cases), 27 (67.5%) had iso- Marchini1, P. L. Venturini2 lated LM, 13 (32.5%) had a MCAS with a known diagnosis in 10 cases. 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute G. Gaslini, Univer- Genetic counseling was performed in 7 instances (17.5%). Among the sity of Genova; Genova, Italy; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecolo- dead cases (67), 3 (4.5%) had a severe isolated LM (amelia), 64 (95.5%) gy, Institute; Genova, Italy had associated findings (23% chromosomal abnormality, 77% MCAS with prefumo@ermes.cba.unige.it a known diagnosis in 2/3 cases). Genetic counseling was performed in 27 The analysis of Doppler waveforms of fetal ductus venosus flow has been instances (40%). proposed as a second level screening test for Downs syndrome in fetus- es with increased nuchal translucency thickness. Limiting invasive kary- P0607.Fusion 3 D Image as a tool for early diagnosis of con- otyping to fetuses with abnormal flow could dramatically reduce the num- genital defects in the I. and II. trimester of pregnancy. ber of procedures, minimally affecting the detection rate. However, since J. Santavy1, P. Polak2, A. Santava1, J. Hyjanek3, I. Dhaifalah4 no data are available on the reproducibility of this technique, we assessed 1Palacky University; Olomouc, Czech Republic; 2University Hospital Olo- the intra- and inter-observer repeatability of fetal ductus venosus Doppler mouc; Olomouc, Czech Republic; 3University Hospital; Olomouc, Czech measurements at 11-14 weeks of gestation. Waveforms were recorded Republic; 4Palacky University; Olomouc, Yemen transabdominally. Intra-observer repeatability was studied in 22 fetuses in santavy@aix.upol.cz whom four repeated measurements were performed by the same observ- Contemporary options of the foetal ultrasonographical diagnostics are per-218 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics manently broadening. In the case of congenital defects new methods P0610. A case report of Desbuquois Syndrome by prenatal enable their depiction in earlier stages of pregnancy.They are a base for diagnosis more detail differential diagnosis of found pathological features. At our S. Subha Reddy1, S. Srinivas Reddy2, S. Bali Reddy1 department we have received an opportunity to manage with quit new 1National Medical Diagnostic Lab; Southfield, MI United States; 2M.G.R. ultrasonographical method which facilitates a fusion of Color Angio Medical University and Research Institute; Chennai, India Doppler and Tissue Imaging pictures both in plane and space imagination. subhareddy@hotmail.com Method; Fusion 3 D ultrasonography Image in the pregnancy. Collection; Acase of Desbuquiois syndrome diagnosed prenatally is reported. A32- Pregnant women send to our Foetal Medicine Department with suspicion year-old Asian Indian, gravida 3 and para 2 was referred for evaluation for congenital defects of the foetus durin III. 2000  I. 2001. Results; Anew after a routine ultrasound examination at 22 weeks of gestation. The ultra- method iextends medical possibilities in the sphere of some types of con- sound revealed skeletal dysplasia with bilateral clubbed feet. The consan- genital defects, where a space display of vessels bed plays an important guinity was involved and the husband is patients first cousin. There was role in differential diagnosis (rens, hepar, lung, CNS etc.). It has a mean- no history of skeletal dysplasia or any other genetic disease in the family. ingful role at a consideration about foetal postnatal prognosis. The cytogenetic analysis was 46,XX karyotype. All long bones measure <10%ile. The ribs measure at the 45%ile for 22 weeks of gestation. The P0608. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome presenting as hydrops chest circumference was at 15th-30th%ile. Bilateral syndactyly of second, foetalis. third digits of right hand and third, fourth and fifth digits of left hand was A. T. J. M. Helderman-van den Enden1, S. G. Kant1, C. A. G. Holleboom2, noted. The toes of both feet seemed unusually long. After gentic counsel- C. J. Tinga3, H. H. H. Kanhai4, J. E. Groener1, J. A. Bakker5, H. R. Water- ing the couple chose for the termination of pregnancy. Autopsy findings ham6, M. H. Breuning1 showed the long bones of lower and upper extremities were short; narrow 1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical face with high forehead; arched confluent eyebrows; posteriorly rotated Center; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Department of Gynaecology, Dia- prominent and dysplastic ears; proximal syndactyly of toes 2 and 3; conessen Ziekenhuis Bronovo; The Hague, The Netherlands; 3Department micrognathia. X-ray examination revealed supernumerary ossification cen- of Pathology, Diaconessen Ziekenhuis Bronovo; The Hague, The Nether- ters between proximal phalanx and second metacarpal of the index and lands; 4Department of Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center; Lei- ring fingers. The diagnostic patterns based on the supernumerary ossifi- den, The Netherlands; 5Laboratory for Metabolic Diseases, University Hos- cation and extreme shortening of the long bones in this autosomal reces- pital Maastricht; Maastricht, The Netherlands; 6Laboratory of Genetic sive skeletal dysplasia are discussed. Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center; Amsterdam, The Nether- lands P0611.Prenatal diagnosis in Slovakia in 1991-1999. A.T.J.M.Helderman@KGC.AZL.NL F. Cisarik The Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLO) is an autosomal recessive multiple The Hospital of Zilina; Zilina, Slovakia congenital anomaly syndrome caused by a deficiency of the enzyme 7- foxi@mail.viapvt.sk dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC)reductase. The incidence is around 1 in Prenatal Genetic Diagnostics / PGD / was practised in seven Clinical 60,000-80,000 births. The presence of non-immune hydrops foetalis Genetic Departements of Slovakia in 1991. Nowadays, twelve Clinical (NIHF) has been described twice as an atypical finding in SLO (Angle et al Genetic Departments perform PGD in Slovakia, two of which provide DNA 1998, Maymon et al, 1999). We present in this abstract a third case of SLO analysis. Fetal sonographic examinations are routinely performed three with NIHF. The pregnancy was normal till 27 weeks, then IUGR was noted. times during gravidity of every mother, in 10th, 20th and 30th week of ges- At 29 weeks hydrops was present, karyotyping was normal 46,XY. At 30 tation. Sonographic identification of fetal aneuploidy markers is currently weeks intrauterine death had occurred. Post mortem examination showed not regularly used. Standard procedure of obstetric care provides screen- ambiguous external genitalia, postaxial polydactyly, syndactyly of the 2nd ing test of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein, which we offer to all pregnant and 3rd toes, abnormal lung segmentation and right renal agenesis, signs women between 15 and 20 weeks of gestation. We also offer the triple- suspect for SLO. Low cholesterol and a high 7- and 8-DHC concentrations marker screening for aneuploidy (including software analysis) only to part in prenatal collected blood from the umbilical cord were found. The parents of population of pregnant women. In Slovakia, 16,051 of prenatal genetic were both carrying a point mutation in the 7-DHC reductase gene. Chro- analyses were done between 1991-1999. There were following indications mosomal, metabolic, syndromic and infectious causes are found in NIHF. for PGD; 44.7% maternal age of 35 and higher, 29.8% positive maternal Metabolic diseases are found in 1-10%. It is to be expected that this per- serum screening, 11.2% high genetic risk, 2.5 % sonographic identification centage will increase because metabolic diseases like SLO can now be of fetal anomaly or positive sonographic markers for aneuploidy. There confirmed by laboratory testing. It is important to diagnose SLO because were found 319 /i.e. 2%/ of chromosomal anomalies. We determined of the possibility for early postnatal treatment. Furthermore it allows for pathological mutations in 27 fetuses from 116 prenatal DNAanalyses per- accurate genetic counseling and management of subsequent pregnancies. formed. Statistics of the birth defects in newborns did not reveal a References; Angle B et al. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Dec 4;80(4);322-6. May- decrease of birth defects frequency calculated per 10,000 newborns. This mon R et al. Prenat Diagn. 1999 Feb;19(2);105-7. frequency fluctuated around 230-240 per 10,000 newborns in period from 1991 to 1999. However, frequency of newborns with central nervous sys- P0609. Prenatal Diagnosis In A Fetus With Holoprosen- tem anomalies substantially decreased. Annual number of newborns with cephaly Down syndrome and other chromosomal anomalies did not decrease R. Pinto Leite1, A. Carvalho2, C. Candeias1, E. Ribeiro1 though. From sum of prenatal and postnatal cases of chromosomal anom- 1Servio de Gentica-Hospital Vila Real; Vila Real, Portugal; 2Servio de alies, we were able to find 44.9 % by prenatal chromosomal analysis. Obstetrcia- Hospital de Chaves; Chaves, Portugal genetica@hvreal.min-saude.pt P0612.Risk factors for birth defects in a developing country. Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental defect of M. Thong, C. Lim the forebrain and midface in humans, occurs with a frequency of about 1 University of Malaya; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in 16,000 live births and about 1 in 200 spontaneous abortion. Although the thongmk@medicine.med.um.edu.my majority cases of HPE exhibit normal karyotypes, chromosomal disorders Amajor birth defect is defined as an abnormality of prenatal origin that if are not uncommon. At least 12 different loci have been associated with uncorrected or uncorrectable, significantly impairs normal physical or HPE and now several distinct human genes for holoprosencephaly have social function or reduces normal life expectancy. Whilst the infant mortal- been localized (21q22.3, on 2p21, on 7q36, on 13q32 and on 18p). We ity rate in Malaysia has decreased the past 30 years as a result of better report a case of a 30-year-old pregnant woman with an abnormal scan at obstetric and neonatal services, the percentage of all medically certified 19 weeks of gestation. She had a normal obstetric history with a phe- infant deaths related to birth defects had risen steadily from 6.2% (1970) notipically normal son. In the present pregnancy the fetus presented holo- to 20.8% (1990). Information on risk factors associated with birth defects prosencephaly. Amniocentesis for cytogenetic evaluation was performed. are not well studied in developing countries. We postulated that a hospital- Chromosome analysis of cultured amniocytes with GTG banding showed based birth defect registry might be able to provide some information on a apparently balance reciprocal translocation 46,XX,t(1q15q)(q32q26.1). the magnitude of the problem and identify at-risk factors for birth defects in Karyotype of parents were referred and demonstrated to be normal. To our our population. We ascertained these risk factors associated with major knowledge this is the first case of holoprosencephaly and a chromosome birth defects in Malaysian births of 24 weeks gestation and above, using a anomaly involving these chromosomes. Abibliographic review is present- case-controlled study from a hospital-based birth defect registry over a 12- ed where association of holoprosencephaly and chromosome anomalies month period. The results showed the incidence of major birth defects to are discussed. be 1.8% amongst all births above 24 weeks of gestation and established the baseline incidence of major birth defects in the University of MalayaPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 219 Medical Centre in Kuala Lumpur. The majority of major birth defects in P0615.Evaluation of the hereditary components of intrahep- Malaysian newborns are potentially detectable antenatally by ultrasonog- atic choleostasis of pregnancy. raphy and karyotyping studies during the first and second trimesters. At- S. Turyk1, M. Salvo2, M. Palermo2 risk factors identified for major birth defects were family history of birth 1Hospital Britnico; Buenos Aires, Argentina; 2Hospital Nacional Prof. Dr. defects, adverse past obstetric events, low intake of folate / haematinics, A. Posadas; Buenos Aires, Argentina maternal diabetes, poly or oligohydramnios and late or unavailability of sagm@drwebsa.com.ar ultrasonography in pregnancy. We concluded that the application of appro- Choleostasis of pregnancy is a disease that occurs during the second half priate preconceptional care, genetic counselling and other preventive of pregnancy and regresses in puerperium, characterised by pruritus and strategies might reduce the incidence of major birth defects and infant mor- elevated serum bile acid levels. Its etiology remains unknown, but proba- tality in Malaysia. Larger population-based study for birth defects may be bly involves the interaction of abnormalities in the metabolism of estrogens able to confirm these observations. and progesterone.Its incidence varies according to geographical area. I.Ch.P. is associated with substantially increased mother morbidity and P0613. Chorion and decidual morphology in spontaneous fetal morbidity and mortality. We report here a detailed clinical history, pedi- abortuses with normal and pathologic karyotypes gree and examination, obtained from 22 pregnant woman with choleosta- J. Gorbatcheva, I. Voloschuk, N. Dyscheva, E. Sidneva sis. In all the cases maternal serum transaminase and bile acid levels were I.M.Sechenovs Moscow Medical Academy; Moscow, Russian Federation done and viral and drug induced hepatitis and gallbladder disease were nik.bochkov@mtu-net.ru ruled. Ten pedigrees contained two or more cases of I.Ch.P. and six sug- The morphological investigation of spontaneous abortuses (A) with normal gested autosomal recessive inheritance.The incidence of spontaneous and abnormal karyotype were (67 specimens of first trimester A) was car- abortion and fetal death in the 22 pedigrees was high. The mean maternal ried out. It included a histologic pattern and proliferative activity. The last age was 32,5 years and the mean gestacional age at the moment of the one was determinated as the rate of Ki-67-positive cytotrophoblast cells. diagnosis was 32,3 weeks. To reduce the risk of this pathological condition, The karyotyping was made on chromosome preparations of chorion villi it should be very important that patients have genetic counselling before prepared by direct method with routine and G-staining. Chromosomal conception, in order to plan the pregnancy. aberrations were estimated in 37,3%; 9 trisomies, 3 monosomies, 3 triploi- dies, 1 tetraploidy, 9 mosaics. The partial moles were diagnosed in P0616. Organisation and Practice of Prenatal Diagnostics in triploidy, as it was expected. Identical morphological signs of the develop- Estonia. Summary of ten years work. ment retardation of villi were diagnosed among abortuses with normal M. Sitska1, T. Ilus1, P. Ilisson1, K. Kuuse1, P. Tammur1, A. Ehrenberg2 karyotype and with aneuploidies. The diameter of villi was bigger in aneu- 1Medical Genetics Center of the Clinicum of the University of Tartu; Tartu, ploid Athan in Awith normal karyotype (p<0.05). Changes in the decidua, Estonia; 2Womens Clinic of the Clinicum of the University of Tartu; Tartu, which reflected mechanism of realisation of abortion (hemorrheologic dis- Estonia turbances, necrosis, etc.) were the same in Awith normal and abnormal Mari.Sitska@kliinikum.ee karyotype. The trophoblast proliferative activity was high in Awith abnor- In Estonia (pop. 1.46 million, birth rate 13185) prenatal diagnosis of genet- mal karyotype and low or completely absent in Awith normal karyotype. ic disorders was introduced into clinical practice in 1990 and is to a great The erythrocytes in the intervillous space were detected in all specimens extent (95%) performed in one center - Medical Genetics Center (MGC) of with chromosomal aberrations. Our results indicate that the blood flow in the Clinicum of Tartu University . The uptake of invasive prenatal studies is the intervillous space appears prematurely as a consequence of the pla- not high in Estonia. In 1999only 5.5% of pregnancies were monitored by centation defect in the aneuploid conceptuses. It leads to the abruptio of AC or CVS; The funding arrangement for PND is the national health insur- the ovum. ance system. Sources of information. Exact records about prenatal inva- sive testing in Estonia are kept at the MGC of the Clinicum of Tartu Uni- P0614.Amniocentesis for II and III trimester cytogenetic pre- versity . Invasive PND (amniocentesis, CVS, cordocentesis). Altogether natal diagnosis in Costa Rica 2767 procedures have been done. Abnormalities were detected in 87 (3.1 I. Castro Volio1, K. Sander Mangel2, M. Vargas Prado3, L. Snchez %) cases. For fetal chromosomal analyses we mostly use amniocentesis Chves2, G. Escalante Lpez2 (97 %). Alltogether 2700 amniocenteses have been done. The main indi- 1Instituto de Investigaciones en Salud (INISA), Universidad de Costa Rica; cation (69%) has been maternal age. Chromosomal disorder was diag- San Jos, Costa Rica; 2Unidad de Perinatologa, Servicio de Obstetricia, nosed in 71 (2.7%) cases. Chromosome anomalies have been screened Hospital R. A. Caldern Guardia, Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social for advanced maternal age since 1993. In 1999, 35 % of women >35 had (C.C.S.S.); San Jos, Costa Rica; 3Unidad de Perinatologa, Servicio de fetal karyotypes. Transabdominal CVS we have used only in highrisk preg- Obstetricia, Hospital Mxico, C.C.S.S.; San Jos, Costa Rica nancies in 44 cases. Abnormalities were detected in 13 cases (30%). Cor- icastro@cariari.ucr.ac.cr docentesis has been done in highrisk pregnancies in 23 cases. Chromo- The identification of fetal abnormal chromosomes in high risk pregnancies, somal abnormalties were detected in 3 cases (13%) . Maternal serum allows proper pediatric and obstetric management of the cases as well as screening has been routinely offered since 1998 only in Womens Clinic of genetic counseling. The results of 842 genetic amniocentesis from 1986 to Tartu and since 2000 in Southern Estonia. The impact of PND of chromo- 1999, are reported. All procedures were performed transabdominally and somal is increasing every year. During the 1999 year 50% of the trisomy under ultrasound guidance, in hospitals of the social security system and 21 cases were detected prenatally . in private facilities. There were two main reasons for referral; abnormal ultrasound assessment (48% of cases) and advanced maternal age (35%). P0617.Somatic microsatellite DNAmutations in spontaneous Most procedures (66%) were performed during the second trimester of abortions with normal karyotype pregnancy and 34% during the third trimester. Fetal cells were closed cul- T. V. Nikitina, S. A. Nazarenko, N. N. Sukhanova tured and suspension harvested. Turn around time was 14 days median. Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation In 217 amniotic fluid samples no diagnosis could be obtained, mainly due nikita@img.tsu.ru to absence of cell growth in late gestation samples and in blood contami- The causes of the loss of considerable proportion of human embryos with nated ones. In 625 fetal karyotypes obtained, 55 (9%) were abnormal, due normal karyotype remains obscure. Kiaris et al. (1996)reported high level to 33 trisomies (including a robertsonian translocation trisomy 13), eight of somatic microsatellite instability in spontaneous abortions; 40% cases of monosomy X, three mosaics (including a mosaic trisomy 22), bal- revealed discrepancy of PCR alleles between tissue sections from differ- anced and unbalanced translocations, extra structurally abnormal chromo- ent parts of embryos. To clarify the frequency of somatic microsatellite somes and other defects. Pseudomosaicism was detected in five cases. mutations in spontaneous abortions we have analyzed 55 missed abor- Taking into account the reason for referral, cases studied as a result of tions and anembryonic pregnancies with normal karyotype. DNA was abnormal ultrasound assessment exhibited 17% abnormal karyotypes, in extracted from fetal membranes or chorionic villi, which originated from two contrast to 2.5% cytogenetic defects in pregnancies of women 35 years or different embryo determinants; extra-embryonic mesoderm and cytotro- older. Prenatal cytogenetic and sonographic findings correlated with the phoblast. These tissues differentiates during the first several days of onto- phenotype of the newborn in 211 cases available for follow-up. Prenatal genesis and such approach allows to reveal mutations which took place at diagnosis of fetal defects allowed genetic counseling as well as better early stages of embryonic development. We used polyacrylamide gel elec- obstetric management and pediatric care. Normal results of both tests pro- trophoresis following PCR amplification for 21 tetranucleotide high-poly- vided reassurance to prospective parents. morphous loci located on seven autosomes. The isolated STR mismatch- es were evaluated in parent/abortus allelic transfers. An undetected twin demise (chimerizm) and non-paternity were excluded with high probability (more then 99.9%) by using of the other loci. We found four cases of third220 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics allele appearance. In two cases all three alleles were analogous with par- was born, whereas the 3 other couples decided to terminate the pregnan- ents ones, what is a result of cytogenetically unrecognized mosaic trisomy. cy. We expect that the availability of molecular tests will increase requests The presence of somatic mutation was detected by appearing in gel analy- for prenatal diagnosis. PGD represents an acceptable alternative in cou- sis a new (third) allele which can be distinguished from the parents ones. ples facing ethical reproductive dilemmas. We observed two (3.6%) unambiguous events of somatic microsatellite mutations only, that is by order of magnitude smaller than was found by P0621.Late gestation chorionic villus sampling; genetic and Kiaris et al. (1996). Acomprehensive analysis is in progress to confirm economic implications for rapid prenatal diagnosis of high- these results. risk pregnancies in the second and third trimesters. L. P. Shulman1, O. P. Phillips2, J. Matheson1, E. Powell1, S. Elias1 P0618.The Early Genetic Amniocentesis (ea) - Risks, Compli- 1University of Illinois at Chicago; Chicago, ILUnited States; 2University of cations And Use In Prenatal Diagnosis Tennessee, Memphis; Memphis, TN United States S. Brankovic-Niksic1, G. Radivojevic-Ilic1, S. Nikolic1, D. Plecas2 shulman@uic.edu 1Institute of Mental Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 2Institute of Obstetric Cytogenetic assessment of high-risk pregnancies during the second and and Gynecology; Belgrade, Yugoslavia third trimesters has primarily been achieved by amniocentesis, despite the nbrankov@eunet.yu reported efficacy and safety of chorionic villus sampling (CVS) for second Amniocentesis is the most commonly performed during the midsecond and third trimester cytogenetic analyses. Indeed, the concomitant use of trimester (16 - 18 week). We have reported the results of our groups of fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to obtain rapid cytogenetic informa- patients who had early amniocentesis (EA) before 16th week of gestation. tion from amniotic fluid samples is gaining popularity in the United States This paper presents the results of amniocentesis performed between 13 - and Europe. However, FISH analysis of amniotic fluid cells is frought with 15th week of gestation and its complications. We have also followed the diagnostic limitations and additional expense. We seek to compare the use offspring at birth and again by the first year of life. of five-color FISH analysis to CVS for the assessment of late-gestation (>14.0 weeks gestation) pregnancies at increased risk for fetal chromo- P0619. Minimal volume of amniotic fluid for reliabe prenatal some abnormalities. Materials/Methods; Late gestation CVS was per- cytogenetic diagnosis formed on 97 women at increased risk for fetal chromosome abnormalities B. Sikkema- Raddatz, J. van Echten, J. van der Vlag, C. H. C. Buys, G. from January 1995 through November 2000; seventy-nine women for pos- J. te Meerman itive maternal serum screen outcomes (and nonelevated AFP) and 18 for University of Groningen, Department of Medical Genetics; Groningen, The fetal structural abnormalities (without evidence of neural tube defects). Netherlands Results; Cytogenetic results were obtained from all samples. Five of the 79 B.Sikkema-Raddatz@medgen.azg.nl samples obtained from pregnancies identified by maternal serum screen- In current amniocentesis practice, 20 ml amniotic fluid (AF) is drawn for ing were characterized by chromosome abnormalities (3 cases of trisomy prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. When, as is often the case in a not negli- 21 and single cases of 45,X and trisomy 18). Nine of the 17 samples gible proportion of cases, only a smaller volume is obtained, repeated obtained from women carrying fetuses with structural defects were char- amniocentesis is recommended. This prompted us to investigate the mini- acterized by karyotypic abnormalities (3 cases of trisomy 18 and single mal volume of AF required for a reliable cytogenetic diagnosis (14 clones). cases of trisomy 21, trisomy 13, 45,X, 47,XX,+mar, partial trisomy 8 and Based upon the number of clones per 35 mm petri dish in which amnio- der17). Of the 14 cases of karyotypic abnormalities, 3 (21.4%) would not cytes were cultured, the first possible day for in situ cytogenetic analyses have been detected by FISH analyses for chromosomes X, Y, 13, 18 and was determined for 12 samples, taken at 14- 16 weeks of gestation. Cul- 21. In addition, FISH analyses added $75 to $240 to the cytogenetic cost tures were started from a range of small volumes of AF. It appeared that of each case. Conclusion; Late gestation CVS provides the opportunity to volumes smaller than 0.8ml yielded too few clones for a reliable diagnosis. obtain rapid and comprehensive cytogenetic information in a time frame The 12 cultures which started from 0.8 ml AF yielded 147 clones at day similar to that required for FISH analyses. FISH also adds additional cost 12. Controls, started with approximately 5 ml AF; 18  5 clones at day 9. A while providing less cytogenetic information than that obtainable by CVS. further series of 40 samples yielded 136 clones at day 11 for 0.8 ml AF CVS should thus be considered when a prengnacy at high risk for fetal and for controls 165 clones at day 9. Thus, by using 4 petridishes per chromosome abnormalities (without a concomitant increased risk for AFP- diagnosis repeated amniocentesis will not be necessary as long as more related abnormalities) is detected after 14 weeks gestation. than 3.2 ml of AF is available. Since the number of clones obtained from 0.8 ml AF is comparable to the number obtained in protocols for early P0622.Aretrospective cytognetics study about 185 cases of amniocentesis1, it might be worthwhile to investigate the feasibility to also twin-gestations. perform early diagnosis with smaller volumes of AF. 1Kennerknecht I, M. A. J. M. JAMAR1, C. Lemarchal2, V. Lemaire2, C. Herens2 Baur-Auberle S, Grab D and Terinde R (1992) First trimester amniocente- 1CHU Sart Tilman; LIEGE, Belgium; 2CHU Sart Tilman; LIEGE, Belgium sis between the seventh and 13th weeks; evaluation of the earliest possi- Mauricette.Jamar@chu;ulg.ac.be ble genetic diagnosis; Prenat Diagn12; 595- 601 From January 1st 1990 until December 31st 1998, we collected 13899 pre- natal diagnosis (on amniocentesis and chorius villus sampling). Three hun- P0620. The Belgian experience of prenatal diagnosis in Mar- dred thirty-nine samples concerned 185 cases of twin-gestations ; 154 fan syndrome (MFS). cases for which we received samples for both fetuses, 31 cases with only B. Loeys1, L. Nuytinck1, M. Bonduelle2, K. Sermon2, B. Hamel3, A. one sample. The indications were clearly given in 122 pregnancies Sanchez4, L. Messiaen1, A. De Paepe1 (65.9%); the most frequent were maternal age (49/185 =26.5%), positive 1University Hospital Ghent; Gent, Belgium; 2Free University of Brussels; ultrasound (21/185 =11.4%), medically assisted procreation (15/185 Brussels, Belgium; 3University Medical Center; Nijmegen, The Nether- =8.1%). Q-banding karyotyping was performed following classical treat- lands; 4Hospital Clinic; Barcelona, Spain ment. In 116 (62.7%) twin gestations, both fetuses were of the same sex bart.loeys@rug.ac.be (51 female; 65 male); 58 cases (31.4%) concerned twin couples; in 11 Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with an inci- cases (5.9%), sex could not be determined for both fetuses, because most dence of 1 in 5000 live births. Symptoms are variable from skeletal over- often of in vitro growth failure. Chromosome abnormalities were found in growth, cutaneous striae to ectopia lentis and aortic dilatation leading to seven twin-pregnancies (3.8%) ; four with only one fetus affected dissection. Since the disease causing mutations are dispersed throughout [47,XX,+18; 45,XX,t(13;14); 47,XYY; 47,XXX], two with both fetuses affect- the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1), prenatal diagnosis was until recently usually ed, showing the same chromosomal abnormality [inv(11)(q21q25); performed by linkage analysis in familial cases. However, mutation detec- 47,XX,+18] and one with only one fetus tested [47,XX, +18]. In total, we tion has become feasible with thorough screening methods. The pheno- found seven autosomal abnormalities, three balanced and four unbal- typic variability of the MFS makes reproductive options difficult, as molec- anced (all Trisomy 18), and two sex chromosome abnormalities, which ular diagnosis cannot predict clinical severity of the disease. We present were both observed in IVF pregnancies. One pregnancy exhibited a male data on 14 prenatal and/or pre-implantation diagnoses (PGD) in eight fam- fetus 47,XYYand a normal male fetus 46,XY. The other showed a female ilies, originating from Belgium, the Netherlands, Spain and France. In four fetus triplo-X and a normal 46,XYfetus. Results will be discussed in the families prenatal diagnosis was carried out using linkage analysis, where- poster. as in four other families the causative FBN1 mutation was characterised. Four PGD cycles in two couples lead to one ongoing pregnancy, and in addition two amniocenteses and eight chorion villus samplings were per- formed. In four pregnancies an affected foetus was diagnosed. In one of them, the couple chose to continue the pregnancy and an affected childPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 221 P0623. Facial photoanthropometric findings in a group of prior to a termination of pregnancy. However, only one author has been healthy newborns able to obtain a conventional karyotype in ECF ( Gruger 1996). Our objec- I. Chomczyk, E. Hubert, R. Posmyk, E. Burak, A. T. Midro tive was to gain further insight into the previously described technical vari- Department of Clinical Genetics and Clinic of Maxillofacial Surgery; Bia- ables that may determine a successful culture on a small ECF sample. We lystok, Poland performed 7 ultrasound guided coelocentesis (2-4 mL) in 7 time pregnant midro@amb.ac.bialystok.pl baboons at 36-40 days post-conception. The initial 0.5mLwas discarded. As the knowledge on dysmorphic traits distinctive for children with genetic ECF samples were ramdomly assigned to 2 groups in which the only dif- syndromes is essential in the diagnostic process, a support of appropriate ferences were the container and the type of medium. TABLE shows; Ani- photographic documentation is indispensable. Moreover, the clinical trait mal#; ECF mL; Type of Container; Type of Medium; Culture-Days; Kary- evaluation may be ensured by certain measurements made on those pho- otype results and Pregnancy outcome. Medium at equal volume to ECF; tographs. However, data elicited from a normal population are needed for (1)=Amniomax; (2)= 1+used Amniomax from fibroblast culture (1;1). Con- concluding on the findings of children being diagnosed. They are needed tainer (A) Small Petri dish keeping medium+ ECF on the small cover slip; in particular for newborns due to the principal concern of early diagnosing. (B) Plastic flaskettes which allows the medium+ECF to spread on the larg- The aim of our study was to determine the index values of selected anthro- er cover slip. CONCLUSIONS; We confirm that standard cytogenetic stud- pologically defined facial traits in a group of healthy newborns. 85 ran- ies can be done in very small samples of ECF. This preliminary data also domly selected healthy newborns (51 females and 34 males) aged from 1 suggests that it is keeping the cells together what may determine a suc- to 14 days, born at term spontaneously or by Caesarean section, were cesful ECF culture. studied. The photoanthropometric analysis was made according to Sten- Macri et alCurrent gel-Rutkowski. Arange between the 3rd and 97th percentiles was delin- 1996 Experience eated for discrimination of the values considered as dysmorphic. No sig- Total Screened 7,497 102,487 nificant differences related to age, sex, or delivery passage were found. Initial Positive Rate; We suggest that the obtained database may be useful as an approach of ONTD 4.4% 3.4% the normal population for comparing with the respective data elicited from Down syndrome 3.6% 3.4% newborns with genetic syndromes. Trisomy 18 NR 0.6% P0624.Prenatal ONTD and Down syndrome Screen Positives False Positive Rate after Rate Reduction Using Dried Blood Samples. revision; P. D. Buchanan1, D. A. Krantz2, T. W. Hallahan2, J. W. Larsen3, J. N. ONTD* 2.7% 2.0% Macri1 Down syndrome 2.8% 2.4% 1GeneCare Medical Genetics Center; Chapel Hill, NC United States; 2NTD Trisomy 18 NR 0.5% Laboratories; Huntington Station, NYUnited States; 3The George Wash- ington University Medical Center; Washington, DC United States genecare@earthlink.net P0626. Real-time PCR for foetal RhD status determination in In 1996, we reported the use of dried maternal blood samples for ONTD, maternal serum. Down syndrome, Trisomy-18 screening (Macri, et.al.) We present an E. Gautier, P. Ernault, L. Lohmann, J. Costa expanded comparison of our second trimester screen positive rates. Dried Hpital Amricain de Paris; Neuilly, France blood samples provide significant advantages over liquid samples by jean-marc.costa@ahp-paris.com reducing biohazard and eliminating broken tubes, centrifugation, and sam- Prenatal determination of foetal Rhesus D (RhD) status has great implica- ple degradation. The biggest advantage is the smaller standard deviations tions in RhD-negative woman at risk for foetal alloimmunization. No further of analyte levels observed with dried blood compared to liquid serum. In investigations are necessary if the fetus is RhD-negative, while anti-D pro- both second trimester and first trimester screening, we observed smaller phylaxis and clinical management of sensitized pregnant women are than previously reported SD. required. Foetal RhD status can actually be easily performed on amniotic fluid or chorionic villus sampling by detection of a specific sequence of the Macri et alCurrent RhD gene. However, these sampling procedures are invasive and at risk 1996 Experience for foetal loss. Amore advisable approach has been recently proposed to Total Screened 7,497 102,487 determine fetal RhD status by cell-free foetal DNAanalysis in maternal Initial Positive Rate; plasma (Lo et al, NEJM, 1998). Anew real-time PCR based on the Light- ONTD 4.4% 3.4% Cycler technology using hybridization probes was therefore developed to Down syndrome 3.6% 3.4% detect specific foetal RhD sequences in maternal serum. Ninety one sera Trisomy 18 NR 0.6% from pregnant women were analyzed using this new technique. Maternal blood was obtained during the first trimester [mean gestational age=13.2 False Positive Rate after weeks of gestation (8-14)] in 48 cases and during the second trimester revision; [mean gestational age=16.4 weeks of gestation (15-29)] in 43 cases. All ONTD* 2.7% 2.0% sera were blind tested and the results were compared with those obtained Down syndrome 2.8% 2.4% later in pregnancy on amniotic fluid cells. Trisomy 18 NR 0.5% NR = Not reported. *This number based on results after second specimen P0627. Epidemiological Study of Some Sentinel Anomalies collected. Cut-off Risks; ONTD1/400; Downs 1/380; t18 1/500. and Downs syndrome Recent studies indicate first trimester screening using nuchal translucency, O. Tymchenko, O. Nikula, O. Turos, T. Pokanevich, L. Piotrovich, O. free B-hCG and PAPP-A is effective. We have prospectively evaluated Makaruk over 25,000 first trimester patients exclusively with dried blood specimens. Laboratory of Genetic Monitoring, Institute of Hygiene and Medical Ecolo- In summary, the data indicate the screen positive rate in our expanded gy; Kiev, Ukraine dried blood screening is similar to the initial report showing significantly otimch@usch.kiev.ua decreased screen positive rates. It is known that the sentinel anomalies (SA) and Downs syndrome (DS) make a considerable contribution into infant morbidity and mortality. These P0625. Preliminary Report On Technical Issues Concerning defects are diagnosed well and can provide important clues in the detec- The In-vitro Growth Of Extracoelomic Cells For Chromosomal tion of teratogenic agents.An anencephalia, spina bifida, limb reduction, Studies Using the Pregnant Baboon Model. oesophageal atresia and traheo-oesophageal fistula, ano-rectal atresia, J. Santolaya-Forgas1, T. Hewitt2, Z. Shen3, M. McCorquodale3 cleft of a labium with / or without cleft of a palate, multiple congenitals 1Dept Ob/Gyn. Texas Tech Health Sciences Center at Amarillo; Amarillo, anomalies and Down syndrome were taken into account. TX United States; 2University of Illinois at Chicago; Chicago, IL United Objective. To estimate the relative risk (RR) of the live-borns with SAand States; 3Michael Reese Hospital; Chicago, ILUnited States DS in different Ukrainian regions. jsf@cortex.ama.ttuhsc.edu Methods. Data on live-borns only were received from the annual reports of In selected patients, prenatal diagnosis of genetic abnormalities could be seven medical genetic centres of Ukraine (Southern, Western, North, performed between 7 to 9 weeks of pregnancy via the coelocentesis pro- Northern-Eastern, Central, South-Eastern, South-Western). Period of the cedure (Jurkovic 1993, Pandya 1995). PCR and FISH based genetic stud- observation - from 1993 to 1999. The precise data about still-borns with ies have been performed in extra celomic fluid (ECF) obtained from women birth defects are unknown in Ukraine. RR was calculated according to Epi222 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics Info program for each selected defects. of the deletions were in exons 46(13.5%),47-50 (11.8% each) and the Results. It was established that RR evenly disseminated among the new- number of deleted exons varied from one to nine. So far 8 prenatal diag- borns of the country. RR for sentinel anomalies is demonstrated in the nosis have been performed. Table. RR was lower in the Northern and the South-Eastern regions (0,86 at the 0.81-0.90 confidence interval; 0.88; CI 0.84-0.93). RR was the high- P0630. No association between severe preeclampsia and a est in the Southern (1.10; CI 1.02-1.19) and the Northern-Eastern regions mutation in plasma platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (1.19; CI 1.14-1.25)(Table). (Val279Phe) in a Japanese population S. Sohda, N. Yamada, H. Watanabe, H. Hamada, K. Yamakawa- Region RR 95% CI Kobayashi, T. Arinami Northern 0.86 0.81-0.90 University of Tsukuba; Tsukuba, Japan Southern 1.10 1.02-1.19 sato@sohda.com Central 1.00 0.96-1.05 Platelet-activating factor (PAF), a phospholipid with a multiple actions that Western 1.00 0.97-1.04 include thrombosis and inflammation, is immediately inactivated by a plas- Northern-Eastern1.19 1.14-1.25 ma enzyme, PAF acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH). Deficiency of this enzyme in South-Eastern 0.88 0.84-0.93 plasma is caused by a missense mutation in the gene (Val279Phe). Sur- South-Western 1.03 0.98-1.08 prisingly, 4% of the Japanese population lacks the extra cellular isoform of Conclusion. The distinctions in the rates of observed defects can reflect not this enzyme, plasma PAF-AH, due to this mutation. However, the role of a only the difference of incidence in population, but mainly the difference in deficiency of this enzyme caused by this mutation in the etiology of sever the levels and the quality of medical care and other socio-economic fac- preeclampsia has not been determined. In this study, we investigated a tors. possible association of this mutation with the risk of sever preeclampsia in the Japanese population. The allele frequency of Val279Phe mutation was P0628.APilot Study On QF-PCR Analysis For Prenatal Diag- 18.9% in 111 patients with sever preeclampsia and 21.0% in 188 healthy nostics Of Down Syndrome In Bulgaria pregnant controls women (P= 0.60). The frequency of the homozygotes S. Andonova1, V. Vladimirova1, V. Dimitrova2, V. Mazneikova2, T. for the 279Phe allele was not significantly different between the patients Chernev2, E. Simeonov3, D. Toncheva4, I. Kremensky1 and the control pregnant women (P= 0.75). These findings indicate that 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Department of Fetal plasma PAF-AH deficiency due to Val279Phe mutation has no major effect Medicine; Sofia, Bulgaria; 3Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of on the etiology of sever preeclampsia in the Japanese population. Pediatrics; Sofia, Bulgaria; 4Department of Medical Genetics; Sofia, Bul- garia P0631.Molecular Basis of Cystic Fibrosis in Yugoslavia sandonova@netscape.net D. Radivojevic1, M. Guc-Scekic1, E. Kanavakis2, E. Kanavakis2, M. Down syndrome (trisomy 21) is the most frequent human chromosomal Tzetis2, M. Tzetis2, T. Antoniadi2, T. Antoniadi2, M. Djurisic1, T. Lalic1, J. disorder, occurring in approximately 1 in 700 newborns. Prenatal diagno- Savic1, P. Minic1 sis is offered because of advansed maternal age, abnormal maternal 1Institute of Mother and Child Health Care Dr Vukan Cupic; Belgrade, serum screening or ultrasound examination suggesting fetal abnormalities. Yugoslavia; 2University of Athens, 1st Department of Pediatric and It is usually performed by cytogenetic analysis of fetal cells, but this proce- Choremio Research Lab Unit of Molecular Medicine, St.Sophias Chil- dure is long lasting, expensive, requires high technical experience and drens Hospital; Athens, Greece exists some risk of culture or cytogenetic analysis failure. Here we report pdarko@beotel.yu the results from our initial experience of introducing a quantitative fluores- Since the cloning of the cystic fibrosis (CF) gene, a great deal of informa- cent PCR based analysis for rapid determination of trisomy 21 status. A tion has been contributed by various centres worldwide. More then 800 total of 38 fetus DNAsamples were extracted from amniotic cells, chorion- mutations, together with their distributions and frequencies, have been ic villi and cultivated fibroblasts; all samples were analysed in blind. Fluo- identified in various populations. In order to determine the heterogeneity of rescent labeled primers were used to amplify 2 STRs on chromosome 21 mutations in Yugoslavian (YU) CF patients, we analyzed 244 CF chromo- and PCR products were analyzed on an automatic DNAsequencer to iden- somes by PAGE, DGGE and direct sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic tify the presence of two or three copies of chromosome 21. In this study DNA. The major mutation deltaF508 accounts for 68,44% of CF chromo- D21S11 microsatellite gave an informative results by QF-PCR for a group somes (167 CF alleles), whereas another 18 mutations account for 13,12% of 32 samples, while marker D21S1270 - for another 32 samples. All sam- (32 CF alleles). Finally, 18,44% of YU CF chromosomes (45 CF alleles) ples were informative for at least one marker; 35 fetuses were identified as remain uncharacterized. At present, we have identified 15 mutations that having two copies of chromosome 21, and 3 fetuses - as having trisomy have frequency of less then 1%. That indicates the high degree of muta- 21. Our results indicate that QF-PCR could be used as an alternative rapid tional heterogeneity in Yugoslavia. In this work, authors will discuss their and accurate method for prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome, espes- results, comparing them with datas from other European populations. sially when ultrasound or biochemical analyses already suggest fetal chro- mosome disorders. Rapid results will allow a termination of pregnancy at P0632. Molecular analysis of 88 Iranian patients with an early stage of gestation. Duchnne/Becker Muscular Dystrophies by Multiplex - PCR And RFLPs P0629.Deletion Screening , RFLPs and CARepeats Analysis S. Keradmand-Kia1, S. Zeinaly1, H. Najmabadi2,3, F. Pourfarzad2, A. of Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy for Prenatal Mowjodi1, D. Farhud4 Diagnosis and Carrier Detection in Iranian Population 1Biotech. Dept. Pasture Institute; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Uni- F. Pourfarzad1,2, A. R. Nadji1, R. Karimi-Nejad1, M. Azad1, S. Jalil-Nejad1, versity of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; S. Kheradmand Kia2, M. Karimi-Nejad1, Y. Shafeghati2, H. Najmabadi2,1 3Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 4School Of Public Healt, Tehran Medical University; Tehran, Islamic Iran; 2University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Republic of Iran Iran maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and the milder allelic Becker Mus- Duchenne and Becker Muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are X-linked dis- cular Dystrophy (BMD) are X-linked disorders affecting 1 out of 3500 & 1 orders affecting 1;3500 and 1 in 18000 live male birth, respectively. Both out of 18000 live male birth, respectively. Both DMD & BMD result from DMD and BMD result from heterogeneous mutations in the dystrophin heterogeneous mutation in the dystrophin gene and in about 65% of the gene and in about 65% of the cases the gene has one or more deleted cases one or more exons of the gene are deleted or duplicated. One third exons and the remaining cases are revealed as point mutation. One third of cases arise from new mutations & two third are familial. To analyze the of cases arise from new mutation and two thirds are familial. In order to prevalence of deletion in Iranian patients, a deletion screening was per- determine the range of the deletion in Iranian patients and prenatal diag- formed on a group of 88 unrelated DMD/BMD patients. Three set of multi- nosis, a deletion screening and linkage analysis were preformed in a group plex PCRs were used to screen 18 exons of dystrophin gene. Deletions of 30 unrelated DMD/BMD patients. Three sets of multiplex PCR were were detected in 56.8% of patients. Seventy four percent of deleted exons used to screen for twenty of the most frequent deletions of dystrophin were located in the major hot spot region, whereas 26% were in the minor gene. Three intragenic RFLPs (pERT87-15/Bam HI, pERT 87-8/Taq I, hot spot region. The most frequently deleted exons were exons 50, 48 & pERT87-15/XmnI) and Two CArepeats (3-Dys and 5-Dys MSA), which 47 (16.2%, 16.2% & 12% respectively). No deletion was detected in exon have the most hetrozygostiy frequency were used to carrier detection and 43). The intragenic RFLPs analysis (pERT87.15/ BamHI & pERT87.8/ linkage analysis. Deletions were detected in 53% of the patients and most TaqI) were carried out on DNAsamples obtained from 22 Iranian unrelat-Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 223 ed families (196 males & females) showing DMD & BMD clinical symp- in prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection for b-thalassemia in order to toms, that 45% of them had informative patterns. The percentage of het- prevent this prevalent disease in this country. erozygosity was 22.75% for BamHI intragenic RFLP, and 22.75% for TaqI intragenic RFLPs. P0636. A Clinical Experience On Prenatal Diagnosis Of Downs Syndrome by FISH Using Alu-PCR Amplified YAC P0633. Molecular Diangosis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy in Clones In Uncultured Amniocytes Iran S. Mohaddes Ardebili S. Teimourian1,2, Y. Shafeghaty2, G. H. Baba Mohammady3, N. Tabriz University of Medical Sciences; Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran Almadany3, M. Azad3, S. Jalilnejad3, R. Karimi-Nejad3, H. Najmabadi2,3 Mohaddes@tbzmed.ac.ir 1Institute of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Tehran University; Tehran, In Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) experiments, the hybridisation Islamic Republic of Iran; 2University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, efficiency is generally less than satisfactory when total yeast genomic DNA Islamic Republic of Iran; 3Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; isolated from pulsed-field gels is used as probes. to overcome these prob- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran lems Alu-PCR products of a chromosome 21-specific YAC, 831B9 was maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk used to detectd the number of chromosome 21 copies on uncultured lym- All three types of autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy map to phocytes and amniocytes by FISH. In all of the experiments carried out chromosome 5q12 and are associated with deletions or mutations of the using the 831B9 YAC clone, strong signals were produced. signal intensi- SMNt gene. The availability of a test to distinguish between the SMNt gene ties were comparable to those observed using chromosome-specific and its nearly identical centromeric copy SMNc allows molecular diagno- alphoid DNA probes. Ninety percent or more of the randomly elevated sis. We have analysed patients from 25 Iranian families for the presence nuclei from uncultured blood cells and 86% or more of the uncultured or absence of a deletion in the SMNt gene. To compare the telomeric with amniocytes showed two distinct signals, levels which compare favourably centromeric portion, we have enployed method by ( Chang et al ). Our with similar studies in this field. Our results obtained from application of the results show that in 23 family, (92%)of SMApatients exon 7 of SMNt has technique on 1000 peipheral blood samples and more than 550 amniotic been deleted and in about 1 family (4%) of SMApatients exon 8 of SMNt fluid samples suggests that this approach can be reliably used for prena- has been deleted. For the remained patients the probability of mutations in tal and postnatal detection of chromosome 21 aneuploidy. SMNt gene exists. Prenatal diagnosis for 6 family was done and 2 affect- ed 4 carrier 4 carrier and 2 normal were identified. P0637. CGG Repeats Analysis of the FMR1 Gene in Mental Retarded Individuals with Clinical Symptoms of the FragileX P0634. Deletion screening of dystrophin gene in Yugoslav syndrome in Iranian Population DMD/BMD patients F. Taghizadeh1, S. S. Hosseini Amini1, S. Teimourian1, R. Karimi-Nejad1, T. N. Lalic1, M. Guc Scekic1, M. Djurisic1, D. Radivojevic1, D. Zamurovic1, Y. Shafeghati2, M. H. Karimi-Nejad1, H. Najmabadi2,1 S. Todorovic2 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1Mother and child health institute dr Vukan Cupic; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; Iran; 2University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of 2Institute for neurology and psychiatry for children and youth; Belgrade, Iran Yugoslavia maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk majkaidete@ptt.yu FragileX syndrome is considered as the most common form of inherited To initiate the complete charcterization of mutations in the dystrophin gene mental retardation, that is dominantly inherited in males as an x-linked in Yugoslav Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy patients, we screened dominant trait. This syndrome is known to be the result of a dynamic muta- 140 patients for the presence of deletions in the dystrophin gene, using tion at the 5UTR (Untranslated Region) of the FMR1(FragileX Mental multiplex PCR reaction for the simultaneous amplification of 17 deletion- Retardation 1) gene. The number of CGG repeats in this area is amplified prone exons and muscular promoter. Intragenic deletions were found in 75 to more than 200 repeats resulting methylation of CpG islands and of 121 patient with DMD (62%) and in 7 of 19 patients with BMD (36,8%). decrease or absent of FMR1 expression in affected individuals. The result The majority of deletions were clustered in the 3 region of the gene of this methylation is the absense of FMRP(FragileX Mental Retardation (76,8%) while deletions in the 5 region were less abundant (18,3%). Loss Protein) that plays an important role in development of brain neurons. The of muscular promoter region was found in one patient and large dele- clinical phenotypes in males consist of mental retardation, special somatic tions(more than 25 exons) were detected in 3 probands. This results will features and macroorchidism. For the first time in Iran we used PCR (Poly- be further discussed and compared with the results from other populations. merase Chain Reaction) and southern blot analysis for detection of the fragileX mutation. DIG-labeled probes were used for the detection of bands P0635.Rare and New Beta thalassemia mutations in Iran in the southern blot analysis(No radioactive materials were used in this H. Najmabadi1,2, A. A. Poorfathollah3, N. Amirizadeh1, M. Neishabury1, A. study). 180 individuals from 127 families with at least one mentally retard- Hatamy1, K. Javan1, N. Amirizadeh1, C. Oberkanins4, W. Krugluger5 ed child were examined, 79 cases had a full mutation(FM), 10 with a pre- 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; mutation(PM) and 91 were normal(N). In prenetal diagnosis that was per- 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of formed for 8 fetuses from these families 2 normal males, 1 normal females, Iran; 3Iran Blood Transfusion Services; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 3 fullmutation males and 2 fullmutation females were detected 4Vienna Lab, Labrodiagnostika GmbH, A-1110; Vienna, Austria; 5Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital; Vienna, Austria P0638. Mutation Detection and Prenatal Diagnosis in Iranian maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk -Thalassemia Traits Ten years of widespread testing for beta-thalassemia mutations in Iran D. D. Farhud1,2, P. Derakhshandeh1,2, H. Najmabadi3, M. Zakernia4, M. using amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) and Reverse Haghshenas5, S. Kheradmand2, A. Attariani2 Hybridization, focused on 25 beta-thalassemia mutations, which have 1Human Genetics, School of Public Health, Tehran Univ. of Medical Sci- been assigned to cover the majority of mutations in the Iranian population. ences; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Genetic Clinic, Valie-Assr Sq. 16; However, depending on the geographical location, beta-thalassemia muta- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 3Genetic Research Center, Welfare and tions of 15% to 30% of the patients remained unidentified, indicating the Rehabilation University Tehran; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 4MRI presence of additional beta globin mutations in Iran. The aim of this study Center; Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran; 5Dept. of Hematology, Shiraz Univ. was the characterization of the molecular defect in a group of patients with of Medical Sciences; Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran unknown mutations. Over a 3 years period, a total of 70 DNAsamples from pupak-peykar@yahoo.com unidentified beta-thalassemia cases, representing different geographical -Thalassemia is the most frequent single gene defect in the world (1). areas and ethnical groups, were collected from various prenatal diagnosis Nearly 25000 indivdual with b-Thalassemia major living in Iran. Over 150 laboratories in Iran. DNAwas subjected to sequence analysis and so far mutations have been reported sofar. sequencing of 30 of these samples has been performed. Sequence analy- Mutation detection in b-globin gene: The mutation spectrum of -Tha- sis has reveald 2 new mutations not previously reported. These include a lassemia in Iran is very heterogenously, because of different ecological, mutation in cd 67 T-G leading to a hemoglobin variant with a Val-Gly sub- ethnical and geographical feature of the population, therfore the mutation stitution and a possible beta-thalassemia mutation (T-C substitution at analysis was carried out in five main provinces, north, south, west, east IVS2.840). Furthermore, 8 known mutations (cd 42/43 +T, cd 24/25 -GGT and central. del, cd 82/83 -G del, -88 C-A, -87 C-G, cd 15-T, cd 39 +G and IVS-1/130 During the last nine years, 720 individuals with b-Thalassemia have been G-C) were identified, which can be added to the list of rare b-thalassemia diagnosed in the Genetic Clinic in Tehran. mutations in Iran. These results further characterize the heterogenous 85 % of the patients have been screened for 21 common -globin gene spectrum of b-thalassemia mutations in Iran and will improve the abilities mutations in Iran, by directed PCR-ARMS methods (2, 3) and 12 % of224 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics other patients by nine RFLPsystems (4). For 3 % of the patients , it was mother/child pairs, 4 child only and one mother only. Overall, 17/32 (53%) not possible to determine the mutations of both alleles. of NS were found to have one or more abnormalities in mother, child or 43.3 % of the total marriages have been first or second cousin , out of both, with a total of 25 abnormalities detected. In 6/31 children (19%) we these consanguineous marriages, 74.35% had the same mutations. found 2 with FVLheterozygosity(H), 2 with MTHFR homozygosity(HZ), 3 Prenatal diagnosis: Out of 305 CVS and amniotic fluid from 610 patients with PRO(H) and one with ACA. In 13/28 mothers (46%) we found 3 with (84.7%) used for prenatal diagnosis (5), 26.1 % were normal for -globin FVL(H), 4 with MTHFR(HZ), one with PRO(H), 6 with ACL, one with LAC gene , 48,9 % trait (Heterozygote) and 25 % major -Thalassemia. and 2 with confirmed type III Protein S deficiency. Four mothers and one A comparision between frequency of  globin gene mutations: Results child had combination defects. Only one mother/child pair were concordant have shown, that IVSII-1 mutation is the most frequent type in Iran (49%), for the same defect. Our data suggest that maternal thrombophilia may be 52.6 % of which is distributed in northern provinces, specially on the Caspi- at least as important as these defects in the fetus. Mechanisms to explain an Sea (4), as the first most frequent mutation in -globin gene. The low- the apparent role of maternal thrombophilia may include chronic fetal est in centeral provinces (14.0 %) and again higher in the southern hypoxemia from placental dysfunction, for which we have some anecdotal provinces (28 %). evidence, functional breakdown of the placental barrier via thrombosis and IVSI-1 and C39 are most frequent mutations in southern provinces spe- infarction and other undoubtably complex maternal-fetal interactions. A cially on the persian golf region. complete evaluation for thrombophilia in both child and mother is indicated Other frequent mutation in Iran are as follows ; in NS. Identification of maternal factors is critically important for implemen- IVSI-5 (9 %), Fr 8-9 (6 %), C30 (5 %), IVSI-25 (5 %), IVSI-110 (5 %)., tation of prevention strategies. Additional studies, including the availability C44(4 %),IVSI-1(4 %),C39 (4 %),IVSI-745 (3%), FR 36-37 (3 %),C8 (2 of population-based controls and placental evaluations are needed to con- %),IVSI-6 (1 %),Fr41-42, Fr16, -88, C15, IVSI-130 (1 %). firm and better understand our observations. b-Thalassemia gene flow: The mutation spectrum of the b-Thalassemia in Iran should be compared with the mutations of the neighbouring countries. P0641. Beckwith Wiedemann; Further Prenatal Characteriza- Therefore it was necessary to study in a north-south,- west-east- -globin tion of the Syndrome gene flow in Iran. It shows the following results; O. Reish1, I. Lerer2, A. Amiel3, D. Abeliovich2 The frequencis of IVSII-1 is decreased from north to south ,while the fre- 1Genetic Institute, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center; Zerifin, Israel; 2Genetic quencies of Fr 36-37, C39 and IVSI-1 Show an opposite direction. Institute, Hadassah Medical Center; Jerusalem, Israel; 3Genetic Institute, The frequency of C44 and C30 decreased from west to east and the fre- Meir Medical Center; Kefar Saba, Israel quency of the IVSI-1 increase from west to east. oreish@post.tau.ac.il IVSI-1 as a splice junction mutation (C>T) is a prevalent mutation of Purpose; To further characterize the prenatal findings in Beckwith Wiede- Asian,Indian and Chinese (South -east countries) (7). mann Syndrome (BWS). Methods; Two patients had prenatal ultrasonic The frequency of the Fr 36-37 from the west to east of Iran is the same. anomalies suggestive for BWS. Cytogenetic analysis and PCR amplifica- tion of polymorphic loci mapping to 11p15.5 region were used. Results; Ini- P0639.Carrier Analysis and prenatal diagnosis in haemophil- tial amniotic karyotype was normal in both. Postnatal evaluation revealed ia Afamilies of north India by RFLPand STR markers. partial trisomy of 11p15.5 due to paternal translocation in one and paternal G. S. Pandey1, S. R. Phadke2, B. Mittal2 uniparental disomy (UPD) in the second patient. Conclusions; The 1Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Meducal Sciences; Lucknow, described ultrasonic findings should suggest the syndrome. Prenatal PCR India; 2Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences; Luc- analysis for 11p15.5 region in addition to conventional cytogenetic analy- know, India sis is suggested to detect potential paternal UPD or allelic duplication. gspandey@sgpgi.ac.in Haemophilia Ais an X-linked recessive genetic disorder affecting 1/5,000- P0642.Study of p53 tumor suppressor gene in spontaneous 10,000 males, resulting from mutations in factor VIII gene. Mutational het- abortions erogeneity causes difficulties in identification of mutations. Carrier analysis D. Toncheva1, B. Zaharieva1, L. Georgieva1, A. Savov1, S. Atanassova1, and prenatal diagnosis is possible by DNAlinkage analysis using intra- A. Markoff2, I. Kremenski3 genic factor VIII gene linked DNAmarkers. In order to find out informative- 1Medical University Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Institute fur Medizinishche Bio- ness of STR markers (intron 13 and 22) in Indian population, DNAsamples chemie, ZMBE, Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat; Munster, Germany; from 50 normal females were amplified by PCR followed by separation in 3Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Maichin dom; denaturing sequencing gel. Allele sizing was carried out by comparing the Sofia, Bulgaria bands with pUC sequencing ladder in the same gel. Heterozygosity of draga@sofiaonline.com RFLPmarker was studied in 60 normal females each for Hind III and Bcl I We suggested that p53 is a good candidate gene to be associated with by PCR followed by restrction digestion analysis. Observed heterozygosi- spontaneous abortions due to the fact that p53 inactivation could lead to ty for intron 13 STR was 60% (29/50) and for intron 22 STR was 40% accumulation of genome imbalances and miscarriages. For the first time (21/50) respectively. Number of alleles seen for intron 13 and 22 were 5 mutation screening of exons 4 to 9 of p53 gene was carried out in 31 spon- and 4 respectively. Observed heterozygosity for RFLPmarkers for Hind III taneous and 30 voluntary abortions. SSCPshift was detected in exons 6 and Bcl I were 63% (38/60) and 60% (36/60) respectively. Both STR and and 9 only in the spontaneous abortions analyzed (23.3%). The DNA RFLPmarkers were used in carrier analysis for 35 haemophilia Afamilies sequencing in 1 out of the 7 samples with changed SSCPmobility revealed and 3 prenatal diagnosis were performed. In order to cover 100 percent misscence mutation GAC to GGC in codon 260 leading to Asp->Gln sub- families, direct detection of intron 22 inversion mutation is under progress. stitution near to the so could hot-spot region (third domain), caracterized by high mutability rate. In two patients the sequencing of exon 6 revealed P0640.Thrombophilia in Neonatal Stroke neutral polymorphism g13399 A>G, in two - polymorphism in intron 9 C. J. Curry1, J. W. Holmes1, E. R. Roeder1, A. L. Storm1, J. Wall2 IVS9nt+12T>C, and in two - normal sequence. Our results of the p53 1Genetic Medicine,Valley Childrens Hospital/UCSF; Madera, CA United mutation screening are the first data supporting the hypothesis of possible States; 2Molecular Diagnostics,University of California; San Francisco, CA role of p53 mutation in spontaneous abortions in human. United States ccurry@valleychildrens.org P0643. Maternal UPD 20 in an Infant from a Pregnancy with Neonatal stroke (NS) accounts for about 25% of all childhood stroke and Mosaic Trisomy 20 is an incompletely ascertained cause of childhood death, mental retarda- C. Hoppe1, F. von Eggeling1, U. Claussen1, S. N. MacGregor2, I. S. Salaf- tion, seizures and cerebral palsy. Factor V Leiden (FVL) and other throm- sky3 bophilic factors in the child have been implicated in causation but maternal 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Division factors have not been systematically evaluated. Between 1998-2000 we of Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Evanston Hospital, Northwestern Univer- evaluated 32 patients with NS looking at thrombophilic factors in the moth- sity Medical School; Evanston, IL United States; 3Division of Genetics, er and child as well as multiple clinical characteristics.Patients were ascer- Evanston Hospital, Northwestern University Medical School; Evanston, IL tained in clinical settings and ranged in age from newborns to 10 years. NS United States was defined on the basis of history and cranial imaging;CT(20), MRI(3), fegg@mti-n.uni-jena.de both(8), and autopsy(1). Global ischemic injury and watershed infarcts Uniparental disomy (UPD) has been reported for the majority of human were excluded. Mutations studied included FVL, Prothrombin 20210 chromosomes. In most cases this is thought to arise from trisomic or mono- (PRO), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677 (MTHFR) and, in most somic rescue of an aneuplodic cell line. Adverse phenotypic effects have cases, Protein C, S, and Antithrombin III activities, anticardiolipin antibod- been documented for chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16. But there ies (ACA) and lupus anticoagulant(LAC). Testing was performed on 27 are only two reports in the literature of UPD 20 with abnormal phenotypicPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 225 effects. Here we present the first case of a maternal uniparental disomy with full mutations and 16 with premutations. Follow up information on all (UPD) 20 with normal karyotype. It was found in a 35-month old girl, the samples obtained so far, including approximately 30% of the terminated product of a pregnancy complicated by a prenatal diagnosis of mosaic tri- products of conception, indicates no false positive or negative results. somy 20. Phenotypic abnormalities included pre- and postnatal growth fail- Maternal cell contamination has presented problems in 3 cases. Thus, ure, microcephaly, minor dysmorphic features and psychomotoric devel- highly reliable screening of at-risk pregnant women for fragile X status and opmental delay. Chromosomal analysis on cord blood revealed only an subsequent prenatal diagnosis is now possible. apparently normal 46, XX karyotype. Maternal UPD was confirmed by microsatellite analysis of 27 chromosome 20 loci, whereas 11 markers P0646. Measure of X-inactivation using a Methyl-PCR were found to be informative. Maternal heterodisomy was detected in two method; Prenatal study in a case with Xq terminal deletion and maternal isodisomy in three loci. In the remaining six loci a noninfor- and diaphragmatic hernia mative maternal UPD was displayed. The change from iso- to hetero- to R. L. Touraine, F. Prieur, V. Adouard, B. de Frminville, B. Lauras iso- to heterodisomy in four segments can best be explained by two CHU de Saint Etienne; Saint Etienne, France recombination events. Whether this UPD is due to a meiosis I or meiosis II renaud.touraine@univ-st-etienne.fr error cannot be decided, because the recombination creates two partial Classical methods to measure X-inactivation require the use of methyla- isodisomies. Ameiosis I error seems to be more likely as the microsatel- tion-sensitive restriction enzymes and either Southern blot or PCR analy- lites located at the centromere display a heterodisomy. This case suggests sis. Numerous technical drawbacks can limit the utilization of these meth- that a search for UPD in pregnancies complicated by a prenatal diagnosis ods. We developed an original method using methyl-PCR. We illustrate the of mosaic trisomy 20 would be desirable. use of this method with the case of a malformed female fetus diagnosed prenatally with a deletion of one chromosome X. A young woman was P0644. Allele Frequency of the Uncoupling Protein-1 Bcl I referred to us because of diaphragmatic hernia diagnosed in her fetus at Polymorphism and the TRP64ARG Variant of the 3-Adrener- 22 weeks of amenorrhea. This was the first child of unrelated parents orig- gic Receptor in SIDS Victims inating from Algeria. Familial medical history was unremarkable. No abnor- A. Fatemi1,2, C. Item2, S. Stckler-Ipsiroglu2, O. Ipsiroglu2, W. Patsch3, W. malities were diagnosed at the previous ultra sound examination done at Sperl4, W. Strobl1 12 weeks. Fetal karyotype analysis done on amniotic cells showed a ter- 1Dept. of Medical Chemistry; Vienna, Austria; 2Dept. of Pediatrics; Vienna, minal deletion of the long arm of one chromosome X in a girl; Austria; 3Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, LKA; Salzburg, Austria; 4Dept. of 46,X,del(X)(q27). Karyotype analysis was normal for both parents. Con- Pediatrics, LKA; Salzburg, Austria sidering the de novo nature of this chromosomal abnormality, we worried ali.fatemi@akh-wien.ac.at about its role in the malformation observed. We therefore studied the fetus Disturbances of thermoregulation in brown adipose tissue (BAT) have X-inactivation status. X-inactivation was measured with our methyl-PCR been postulated as a cause of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). The method at 3 loci, namely, FMR1, FMR2 and the Androgen Receptor (AR) human uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1), expressed in BAT, dissipates the genes, corresponding respectively to Xq27.3, Xq28 and Xq11.2. First, we trans-mitochondrial proton gradient as heat and plays a central role in confirmed the fetus hemizygoty at the FMR1 and FMR2 genes loci, the energy homeostasis and thermogenesis. The UCP-1 activity is regulated fetus having 2 alleles at the AR gene locus. Second, we established that by the 3-adrenergic receptor. ABcl I polymorphism at -3826 relative to the X-inactivation was almost completely skewed with the normal chromosome transcription start site of the UCP-1 gene and a variant of the 3-adrener- X always active. This was further supported by a normal Iduronate Sulfa- gic receptor (Trp64Arg) are associated with alterations of energy home- tase activity in cultured amniotic cells. We concluded rather unlikely any ostasis and with reduced UCP-1 mRNA. To determine, whether the UCP- causative link between the chromosomal abnormality and the diaphrag- 1 Bcl I polymorphism is associated with the occurrence of SIDS, we matic hernia in that fetus. Ultra sound examination follow-up was favorable extracted DNAfrom Guthrie cards of 53 Austrian SIDS victims and 54 con- and pregnancy was continued. Soon after delivery, at 32 weeks, diaphrag- trols. The clinical characteristic of the majority of the SIDS patients have matic hernia was surgically cured. No other malformation was observed in been reported previously. A350 bp fragment of the UCP-1 promoter was this baby weighting 1920g. Preferential inactivation of the deleted chromo- amplified by nested PCR and digested with Bcl I. We found that the allelic some X was confirmed postnatally in different tissues. Methyl-PCR repre- frequencies for the UCP-1 Bcl I polymorphism did not differ between the sents an easy and rapid method to measure X inactivation, requiring a lim- SIDS group (0.65/035) and the control group (0.72/0.28, chi 2; 1.26, p; ited amount of DNAand without the inconvenient use of methylation-sen- 0.26). Our data do not support an association of the UCP-1 Bcl I polymor- sitive restriction enzymes. phism with SIDS. Considering the limited number of subjects studied and the heterogeneity of SIDS, however, a role of UCP-1 in the pathogenesis P0647.Rapid Detection Of Common Aneuploidies And Zygos- SIDS can not be ruled out. The role of the of the 3-adrenergic receptor, ity Determination By Fluorescent Multiplex Polymerase Chain which is involved in UCPgene regulation, is under investigation. Reaction C. F. Rodrigues, P. M. Jorge, M. R. Santos P0645. The Fragile X Syndrome; Screening And Prenatal Instituto de Gentica Mdica Jacinto Magalhes; Porto, Portugal Diagnosis carina.rodrigues@ijm.min-saude.pt W. T. Brown, S. Nolin, C. Dobkin, E. Jenkins We report the results of a study using fluorescent polymerase chain reac- New York State Institute for Basic Research; Staten Island, NY United tion (F-PCR) of polymorphic tandem repeat markers, for rapid foetal sex- States ing, detection of common aneuploidies and determination of zygosity, in a WTBIBR@AOL.COM total of 203 pregnancies. Indications included X-linked disorders, anom- Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited form of mental retarda- alies detected by ultrasound scanning, advanced maternal age combined tion. Its molecular basis is usually an expansion of a repetitive CGG triplet with other risk factors and twinning. Testing was carried out directly on 1.5 sequence located in the 5 untranslated region of the fragile X gene, FMR1. ml amniotic fluid (n=199). Three analyses were done on chorionic villi, and Because of its prevalence and medical importance, efficient means for one on a failed amniocyte culture. Whenever possible samples from both accurate diagnostic screening and prenatal testing are needed. Poly- parents were collected on filter paper. Apreviously described combination merase chain reaction (PCR) is rapid and requires little DNA. We have car- of markers for chromosomes 21, 13, 18 and X was used, in addition to oth- ried out screening and prenatal diagnosis for the fragile X syndrome using ers for chromosomes 18, 21, Yand the X-linked dystrophin gene.During a PCR protocol we have developed that accurately resolves normal alleles the initial pilot study, cultured amniocytes from 10 Down syndrome cases as well as detects premutations and most full mutations (>90%). Follow-up were used as controls. Nineteen foetuses were correctly diagnosed with Southern blotting is carried out on prenatal samples and other selected aneuploidies involving chromosomes 21 (n=12), 13 (n=2), 18 (n=2) and X samples. Testing of 2095 males with developmental delay of unknown eti- (n=3). Markers were uninformative in 4 positive cases (as confirmed by ology revealed 61 (3%) were positive for fragile X. Our prenatal experience cytogenetic analysis). Five, in a total of 16 sets of twins, were monozygot- now includes screening of 624 pregnant women, who had a family history ic. Acase of Down syndrome was detected in one twin of a dizygotic preg- of mental retardation of undetermined etiology. We have found 12 of the nancy. In the total of samples studied, 98% were informative, thus allowing women to be carriers; 3 full mutations, 3 premutations and 6 with unstable the exclusion of common aneuploidies in 175 foetuses within 24-48 hours. borderline alleles. Two additional fragile X families were identified although This test also allowed rapid foetal sexing whenever necessary and rapid the women were not carriers. Thus, 2.7% (14/624) of women were carriers determination of zygosity which is advantageous essentially in like-sex or came from fragile X families or had unstable alleles. Additionally, 25 car- twins with uncertain chorionicity. riers (40%) with prior unknown carrier status were identified among 62 pregnant members of previously identified fragile X families. Prospective prenatal testing of 230 carrier women correctly detected 98 fetal samples226 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics P0648.Prenatal Diagnosis of Beta-thalassemia in Iranian Pop- more detail 202 of the 305 tests. These data also describe 114 pregnan- ulation, Results of Ten Years Study cies in 41 couples who had 2 or more prenatal tests (range 2 - 5 tests). F. Sahebjam1, R. Karimi-Nejad1, S. Teimourian1, M. Karimi-Nejad1, H. Although prenatal testing is used by the minority of those at risk of HD, it Najmabadi2 is clear from this study that both direct testing for the HD mutation and 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetic center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of exclusion testing are valuable tools in preventing transmission of HD for Iran; 2GeneticsResearch Center, Welfare Sciences and Rehabilitation Uni- individuals who belong to an HD family. versity; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran sahebjam@MAILANDNEWS.COM P0651. Bayesian risk of cystic fibrosis in fetuses with Beta-thalassemia is the most common genetic disorder in Iran. It is esti- echogenic bowel reported from a eight-year experience of mated that at least 25,000 affected patients and 2 million carriers live in prenatal screening performed in Brittany (France), where the Iran. Therefore prenatal diagnosis is at present a primary goal for preven- disease is frequent tion. As a first center, 10 years ago we started mutation screening and pre- V. Scotet1, M. De Braekeleer1, M. P. Audrzet1, I. Qu r1, B. Mercier1, I. natal diagnosis of -thalassemia in Iranian families. During 10-year period Duguproux1, J. Andrieux1, M. Blayau2, C. Frec1 we have made prenatal diagnosis for 314 cases (178 amnion samples and 1CHU, UBO; Brest, France; 2CHU; Rennes, France 136 CVS samples). We used a 23 primers-based panel for diagnosing the virginie.scotet@univ-brest.fr mutations of the parents and samples. Using this panel along with RFLF Echogenic bowel has been associated with an increased risk of cystic we were able to provide a reliable prenatal diagnosis for over 95% of preg- fibrosis (CF). The situation is particularly difficult when one CF mutation is nancies. Out of these 314 cases, 81 (26%) cases were normal, 147 (47%) detected in an echogenic bowel fetus. We determined the residual risk of cases were heterozygotes for a single Beta-thalassemia mutation, and 72 CF in such fetuses, from the experience performed in Brittany, a region (24%) cases were either homozygotes or compound heterozygotes. In 9 where the disease is frequent. Atotal of 113 pregnant women were referred samples we could not detect the mutations. Our data showed a very close for a prenatal diagnosis of CF based on an initial analysis of three exons Mendelian distribution as expected for a Mendelian type mode of inheri- of the gene (87% mutation detection rate) followed by an extended analy- tance. The frequency of detected mutations also will be discussed. sis when only one mutation was detected (98.5% detection rate). Among those 113 fetuses, 11 were CF and 10 heterozygous. The incidence of CF P0649. Molecular Analysis of Neurofibromatosis Type 1 in (9.7%) and of heterozygosity (8.8%) were significantly higher than expect- Turkish Families Using Polymorphic Markers ed (p<0.001). We used Bayesian calculations to estimate the residual risk S. Oguzkan, M. Cinbis, S. Ayter, B. Anlar, S. Aysun of CF, which depends on CF incidence, on carrier rate and on mutation Hacettepe University, School of Medicine; Ankara, Turkey detection rate. Assuming a carrier rate of 8.8% (1/11), the residual risk was soguzkan@yahoo.com 1/501 when no mutation was detected by our protocol and 1/4.6 when one Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF 1) is a common autosomal dominant disor- mutation was identified. The complementary analysis performed in this last der characterized by multiple neurofibromas, caf-au-lait spots, and Lisch case, which leads to a mutation detection rate of 98.5%, enables to reduce nodules of iris. NF1 gene is located at chromosome 17q11.2 and encodes this risk to 1/32. Our results are of first importance for clinicians who order an mRNAcontaining 60 exons.The NF1 gene product neurofibromin is a testing for CF following the ultrasound diagnosis of echogenic bowel. They large protein of 2818 amino acids. The protein acts as a negative regula- also highlight the importance of efforts made to identify a second mutation tor in the ras signal transduction pathway. Diagnosis of NF1 is based on in heterozygous fetuses, what enables to reduce the residual risk of CF. established clinical criteria. The disease has a high mutation rate and wide range of expression most patients are expected to have different muta- P0652.Quantitation of fetal DNAin maternal serum in normal tions, so molecular analysis and genetic counselling is limited to the iden- and aneuploid pregnancies tification of the specific mutation in each patient or family. This situtation N. Miharu, Y. Ohashi, O. Samura, H. Honda, K. Ohama means that genetic counselling has to rely mainly on indirect diagnosis Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hiroshima University School of using linked markers. We have analysed 10 Turkish families for a total of Medicine; HIroshima, Japan 27 affected individuals and 34 non-affected relatives with the use of poly- miharu@mcai.med.hiroshima-u.ac.jp morphic sequences, 4 intragenic and 5 flanking markers. We have started We investigated whether the amount of circulating cell-free fetal DNAin diagnosis by using extragenic RFLPs ( pHHH 202, p11.3C4.2, pEW206, maternal serum is influenced by fetal karyotype, using real-time quantita- pEW207, p2F9.8 ). Then the use of intragenic microsatellit markers ( tive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Serum samples were EVI20-CA repeat, Alu-AAAT repeat, IVS38GT53.0-CA/GT repeat, obtained from pregnant women at week 15 to 17 of gestation, prior to IVS27AC28.4-AC/TG repeat ) has increased the informativity in our series undergoing amniocentesis. We examined 70 samples in total, consisting of of NF1 families. As a result, we can provide the prenatal and the presym- 55 pregnant women with 46,XY, 5 cases with 47,XY,+21, 3 cases with tomatic diagnosis to these families. 47,XY,+18, a single case with 46,XY,dup(1) and 2 cases with twins of 46,XY, and 4 cases with 46,XX which were used as negative controls. We P0650. Prenatal testing for Huntingtons disease - a descrip- measured the concentration of the SRYsequence as a molecular marker tion of tests accomplished from 1993 - 1998; a European col- for fetal DNA. The SRYsequence was detectable and measurable when laborative study the fetuses were male except for one case with 47,XY,+18. This case S. A. Simpson1, M. Zoeteweij2, G. Evers-Kiebooms3, K. Nys3, P. S. Harp- showed fetal growth retardation and bradycardia. No amplification signals er4, A. Durr5, G. Jacopini6, C. Yapijakis7 of the SRYsequence were detected when the fetuses were female. The 1Grampian University Hospitals Trust; Aberdeen, United Kingdom; 2Clinical mean concentration of fetal DNAin maternal serum was 31.5 copies/ml in Genetics Centre; Leiden, The Netherlands; 3Centre for Human Genetics; the pregnancies with 46,XY, 23.5 copies/ml in the pregnancies with Leuven, Belgium; 4Institute of Medical Genetics; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 47,XY,+21 and 21.5 copies/ml in the pregnancies with 46,XY,+18. No sig- 5INSERM-Unite 298; Paris, France; 6Istituto di Psicologia; Rome, Italy; nificant difference in the concentration of fetal DNA was observed 7Department of Neurology; Athens, Greece +between pregnancies with fetuses of normal karyotype and those with s.a.simpson@abdn.ac.uk fetuses of abnormal karyotype. This poster will describe the experience of 6 countries participating in a multidisciplinary study of prenatal tests in pregnancies at risk of Hunting- P0653.Prenatal diagnosis using fetal cells and free fetal DNA tons disease. Additional data will also be presented from 7 centres within in maternal blood the 6 countries. Atotal of 305 tests were performed. The average age of S. Hahn, X. Zhong, L. Dudarewicz, C. Carrillo, W. Holzgreve the prospective parent at risk of Huntingtons disease (HD) was 30.8 years, University of Basel; Basel, Switzerland and 53.9% of this group were female. 57.4% of the prospective parents shahn@uhbs.ch were known to have the gene for HD, whereas the others had not under- Our group has previously shown that fetal erythroblasts can be enriched gone predictive or diagnostic testing. 65.2% of the pregnancies were for from maternal blood using magnetic cell separation (MACS), by which investigated using mutation analysis, the remainder by exclusion testing. means we were able to identify fetal aneuploidies before an invasive pro- Exclusion testing allows the at risk prospective parent to have children at cedure. This aspect is currently being investigated in the large scale NIH negligible risk of HD, without defining accurately their own risk, as it shows funded NIFTYstudy, in which our group is participating. We have recently whether the fetus has inherited the at risk chromosome 4 from the affect- extended upon these early observations by examining the possibility of ed grandparent. If so, then the fetus shares the 50% risk of the prospec- determining fetal genetic loci by single cell PCR in individual erythroblasts tive parent, if not, then the fetus is at negligible risk. 43% of the total tests isolated by micromanipulation. This study, which for convenience, focused gave an unfavourable result. 8 of these high risk pregnancies were contin- on the fetal rhesus D and SRYloci, indicated that it is possible to determine ued. Data from the 7 participating centres will be given which describe in multiple fetal loci with a high degree of accuracy by these means. ThisPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 227 aspect has been confimred in a further collaborative study, in which we twins concordant for gender in comparison to female. No such difference examined for fetal hemoglobinopathies. We have also intensely pursued was found between female versus male fetuses of disconcordant twins for the recent finding of free fetal DNAin maternal plasma. By using the same gender. sensitive PCR assay that we have established for the analysis of single fetal cells, we have shown that multiple fetal loci can be reliably determined P0656. The correlation between first and second trimester using free fetal DNA. In order to optimise this assay for a possible clinical markers for Downs syndrome screening setting, we have recently developed a multiplex realtime PCR assay, as P. De Biasio1, F. Prefumo1, P. Marchini1, I. Bruzzone1, G. Ginocchio1, S. this methodology is more amenable to automation. By the use of such real- Ferrero1, S. Canini2, P. L. Venturini1 time quantitative PCR assays, we have also made the interesting finding 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Institute; Genova, Italy; 2Clin- that free fetal DNA levels are elevated in pregnancies with trisomy 21 ical Laboratory, Institute G. Gaslini; Genova, Italy fetuses, but not in those with trisomy 18 fetuses. This result, which con- bnhdeb@tin.it firms and extends upon a report made by Lo and Bianchi, could form the Recently, a new screening method for Downs syndrome based on the inte- basis of a new additional screening assay for the detection of fetal aneu- gration of sequential measurements of first and second-trimester markers ploidies. into a single test was described. This integrated test is supposed to detect more cases of trisomy 21 with a lower false positive rate than currently P0654.5 Cases of low hCG in 2 nd Trimester Screening, which available first trimester combined test (nuchal translucency, free beta-hCG, resulted in Chromosomal Abnormalities. PAPP-A) and (hCG, unconjugated estriol, alpha-fetoprotein). The esti- M. Simandlova1, M. Havlovicov1, M. Malkov1, V. Krutlkov1, S. Vej- mates of its performance are based on there being little or no correlation valkov1, A. Puchmajerov1, M. Macek1, E. Kocrek1, D. Novotn1, E. between the first and second trimester markers used. We verified this Seemanova1, P. Goetz1, E. Kulovan?2, J. Marek3, R. Kodet4, V. Dudkov5 assumption in an unselected pregnant population. We studied 927 con- 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles secutive singleton. All the women had both first trimester combined test University Hospital; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Dpt. of Obstetrics and and second trimester triple test. All the maternal serum marker levels were Gynaecology, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles university; Prague, Czech assayed by immunoradiometric measurements. Nuchal translucency (NT) Republic; 3Centre of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, 2nd Med- and biochemical marker measurements were transformed as gestation- ical faculty, Charles university; Prague, Czech Republic; 4Dpt. of Patholo- specific multiples of the median (MoM). The correlation between each pair gy of 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; of markers was analysed by Pearsons r regression coefficient. No marker 5Dpt. of Radioisotopy, Homolka Hospital; Prague, Czech Republic showed a significant correlation with any other one with the exception of martina.simandlova@lfmotol.cuni.cz free beta-hCG subunit versus total hCG (* p<0.001). Thus, the informa- Low HCG in the triple test is ussually associated with low uE3 and togeth- tions supplied by first and second trimester screening markers are differ- er indicate higher risk for Edwards or Patau syndrome, triploidy or preg- ent, with the obvious exception of free beta-hCG and total hCG. Then it is nancy with Turner syndrome without hydrops. hCG can be also lowered in correct to integrate first and second trimester markers levels. some cases of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome ( estriol is low more often) and Second trimesterFirst trimester in pregnancy with bad course (i.e. missed abortion). We present five cases markers markers of low hCG associated with chromosomal abnormalities. In the fist there Free was low hCG (0,35 MoM) and high AFP(2,41 MoM), in the karyotype was hCG uE3 AFP beta- PAPP-A 5,45 %mosaicism for trisomy 8. In the second case hCG was 0,31 MoM, hCG uE3 0,42 MoM, risk for M. Edwards 1;19, karyotype 46,XY. Immediately NT 0.015 -0.05 0.003 -0.13 0.08 after birth critical defect led to the defect of this newborn baby, FISH analy- First trimesterPAPP-A 0.08 0.12 0.04 0.16 sis confirmed 22 q 11.2 microdeletion. In the third case hCG was 0,35 markers Free beta- MoM, there was evaluated duodenal obstruction by US investigation in the hCG 0.48* 0.06 0.003 32nd week of pregnancy, karyotype was 47,XXY. In the forth case hCG Second AFP 0.24 0.22 was 0,23 MoM, karyotype was 47, XYY. In the last case hCG was 0,23 trimester uE3 -0.04 MoM, echokardiogram showed cardiac failure, fetal ultrasound investiga- markers tion described ren arcuatum, karyotype was 46,XX. By the method QFPCR we proved partial trisomy of the 18 th chromosome, TOPwas provided. P0657.Elevated alphafetoprotein levels in a rare case of apla- Conclusions; We recommend better control of pregnancies with low hCG, sia cutis congenita. detailed ultrasound and echocardiography investigation of the fetus, kary- B. S. Reddy, S. S. Reddy otyping of amniocentesis eventually. There is about 8% pregnant woman National Medical Diagnostic Laboratory; Southfield, MI United States with hCG bellow 0,5 MoM, therefore we stress the necessity of each eval- balireddy@hotmail.com uation individiually. Acase of aplasia cutis congenita with elevated maternal serum and amni- otic fluid alphafetoprotein and a positive acetylcholinesterase is described. P0655. Amniotic fluid alpha fetoprotein difference between The patient was 29-year-old Asian woman, gravida 3, para 2. The mater- twin pairs; does zygosity or gender have an impact? nal serum drawn at 18 weeks revealed a high level of alphafetopro- R. Sharony, A. Amiel, Y. Grinshpun-Cohen, S. Markov, M. D. Fejgin tein,392ng/ml(8.4 multiples of the median). Amniotic fluid alphafetoprotein Sapir Med Ctr, The Genetic Inst; Kfar Saba, Israel was also elevated,at 49.6ug/ml(8.2 multiples of the median). Acetyl- sharonyr@netvision.net.il cholinesterase was positive and amniotic fluid culture revealed a normal Objectives;To examine the assumption that AFAFPlevels are different in 46,XX karyotype. At 28 weeks, the patient presented with ruptured mem- female and male fetuses. To look for a possible difference in the levels of branes, chorioamnionitis. Following cesarean delivery the neonate was AFAFPbetween monozygous and heterozygous twins. Since the produc- found to have lacked >85% of its skin and died. Autopsy revealed aplasia tion of AFAFPis similar in monozygous twins the levels of AFAFPshould cutis congenita involving >85% of the body with absent scalp hair and eye- reflect these changes as well. Design;Comparison of the levels of AFAFP lashes. The other noted dysmorphic features were a flat facial profile, a between pregnancies with female and male fetuses in gender-concordant down-turned mouth, an abnormally curled right ear and the left ear fused and gender-disconcordant twin. In addition, AF levels of AFPin monozy- to the scalp. The plausible theories for the pathogenesis were discussed. gotic and heterozygotic twins were compared. At-test of P< 0.05 was con- Furthermore, it was discussed whether the acetylcholinesterase-to- sidered significant. Material and Methods;Between 1995-1999 we per- pseudocholinesterase ratio is diagnostic tool in differentiating neural tube formed 201 amniocenteses on twin pregnancies at Meir Hospital, Kfar defects from other anomalies. It was advocated that aplasia cutis congeni- Saba, Israel. One hundred and nine of them were concordant for gender ta must be considered in the differential diagnosis in a pregnancy evi- (62 females and 47 males) while 92 had a different sex. Amniotic fluid AFP denced with elevated levels of serum and amniotic fluid alphafetoprotein, levels of each sac were measured using fluorescent immunoassay meth- positive acetylcholinesterase and normal ultrasonography outcome. ods. Results;There was no significant difference in the levels of AFAFPin female compared to male twins. Average AFAFPwas lower in female twins P0658.The First Trimester Screening is the best approach to compared to their male counterpart (p=0.07). Nevertheless, there was no prenatal diagnosis difference between AFAFPof male versus female fetuses in gender-dis- G. Tsukerman1,2, N. Gusina2, H. Zinkevich2, I. Kirillova2 cordant fetuses. AFAFPdid not differ significantly in cases of identical twin 1Reproductive Genetics Institute; CHICAGO, ILUnited States; 2Institute for from non-identical or unknown zygosity twins Conclusions;We could not Hereditary Diseases; Minsk, Belarus detect a significant difference between AFAFPlevels in monozygous ver- genescreen@flashcom.net sus heterozygous twin. However, the levels of AFAFPwere higher in male By the beginning of the first trimester screening (FTS), we have already228 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics had experience in the screening of almost 100,000-second trimester preg- P0660.Serum markers in pregnancy after in vitro fertilisation nancies, including 6.7% of women of 35 and older. The detection rate of T. Kascheeva, V. Vakharlovskiy, Y. Paikacheva, O. Arzhanova Downs syndrome was 66%, which is probably the highest possible result Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation for double-markers screening. This figure could be a good background for TIV@ti2629.spb.edu future comparison with results of any new type of prenatal screening. The Anew group of high risk pregnancy in the Down screening program has pilot study of the FTS started in 1996, and, by 1999, 35,942 pregnancies been identified in our lab since 1994. Serum markers for Downs syndrome were screened by ultrasound. The age distribution in this group is similar in women subjected to in vitro fertilisation were quite differed from these to the one in the second trimester. The vast majority of pregnancies were ones in common pregnancies. To examine the Downs syndrome (DS) screened between 10th and 13th weeks of gestation. During the pilot screening positive rate among in vitro fertilisation (IVF) pregnancies, we study, 8 types of ultrasound scanners were used, and only two of them measured second trimester serum markers in 60 singleton and in 32 twin proved to be suitable for the FTS. Besides that, 16,000 serum samples IVF pregnancies. Total beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and from unaffected pregnancies and 42 Downs syndrome cases were tested alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were measured. Median AFPlevels were of the for AFP, Free b-hCG and partly for PAPP-A. The median level of AFP, Free same order and median hCG was 40% lower in IVF singleton pregnancies b-hCG and PAPP-Ain single unaffected pregnancies for each CRLwas with threatened abortion compared to control values, meanwhile median derived. Several versions of PAPP-Akits were tested and 30% difference AFP was 50 % higher (P=0,05) and median hCG was 55% higher (P= in concentration between kits was discovered. The expected detection rate 0,001 ) in IVF pregnancies without threatened abortion. Women after IVF for different marker combinations was determined. Amodeling exercise for in the screening program could be attributed to high DS risk group because screened population with maternal age, NT, AFP, PAPP-Aand Free b-hCG of their age (mean age was 32 (P=0.001)) and usually high hCG. Thus AFP predicts a 92% detection rate for Downs syndrome in FTS at 5% FPR. and hCG values should be adjusted to avoid the high screen positive rate Based on the predictions collected from the pilot program, we started a in programs for IVF pregnancies. Th first DS fetus was recovered after IVF prospective population FTS. The risk of 1;360 at the expected date of deliv- in St.Petersburg. Its karyotyping on the 19 w.p. was provoked by previous ery was chosen as the cut-off for an invasive procedure. 4, 384 of unse- biochemical (16 weeks) and US markers (18 weeks). lected pregnant women were tested according to the protocol. 93% of pregnant women were screened at CRLof the fetus between 38 and 70 P0661.Evaluation of pregnancy-associated plasma protein A mm. 6 cases of trisomy 21 were detected with the expected number 5.03. (PAPP-A) as an additional serum marker in risk assessment Since the acceptance of invasive procedures was only 75%, we could not for fetal chromosomal disorders. estimate a real detection rate for aneuploidies until all pregnancy outcomes U. Sancken were known. Currently we know all pregnancy outcomes for screened University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Germany pregnancies; 1 case of trisomy 21 was registered because a woman with usancke@gwdg.de the risk of 1;32 refused to have an invasive procedure, and 1 case of tri- In order to evaluate serum-PAPP-A as a risk marker for fetal trisomies somy 13 was also registered since the risk calculation for trisomy 13 had PAPP-Aconcentrations were assayed in 33 serum samples of pregnancies not been applied yet. Practically, no cases of trisomy 21 were missed. affected by fetal trisomy 18 (13 cases) and trisomy 21 (20 cases) and in 593 controls between 9th and 13th week of gestation. The median PAPP- P0659. Elevated first trimester free beta-human chorionic AMoM values were 0.22 MoM for trisomy 18 and 0.38 MoM for trisomy 21, gonadotropin (hCG) is not associated with adverse pregnan- thus significantly lower than the median of the controls (1 MoM). Arisk cy outcome algorithm was modelled on the basis of the found PAPP-Adistributions and Y. Yaron, Y. Sapir, Y. Ochshorn, A. Orr-Urtreger additionally on hCG and AFPdistributions of 98 pregnancies affected by Prenatal Diagnosis Unit & Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical fetal trisomy 21 and those of 588 matched controls of the second trimester. Center; Tel Aviv, Israel Compared with the Triple-test the new algorithm results both in a higher yyaron@post.tau.ac.il sensitivity and in a higher specificity as to risk assessment for trisomy 21. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is associated with Down syndrome Subsequently 644 prospective examinations were carried out by combin- (DS) and is therefore used in most second trimester maternal serum DS ing the serum-markers PAPP-A (first trimester) and hCG/AFP (second screening programs. Elevated hCG is also known to be associated with trimester) and by applying the new risk algorithm. In this cohort two cases adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preeclampsia, miscarriage and fetal with fetal trisomy 21 were detected because of high risk (>1;380) and one growth restriction (FGR). This has been attributed to placental abnormali- case with fetal trisomy 18 was found solely by an extremely low PAPP-A ties. Recently, first trimester DS screening has been introduced, using concentration (0,2 MoM). The false-positive rate was 5,5% and there were nuchal translucency (NT) and maternal serum biochemical markers (free no false-negative results. beta-hCG and PAPP-A). The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether first trimester maternal serum free beta-hCG is also associated P0662. Placental Growth Hormone in prenatal screening of with adverse outcomes. The study included 1269 patients with singleton fetal chromosomal abnormalities and congenital malforma- pregnancies who underwent first trimester DS screening. The rates of var- tions ious pregnancy outcomes were evaluated according maternal serum free E. Papadopoulou1, S. Sifakis2, Y. Koumantaki3, E. Angelakis2, S. Smbi- beta-hCG levels. Acut-off value of 3.0 multiples of the median (MoM) was rakis1, N. Karkavitsas4, E. Koumantakis2 employed. 92 patients (7%) had elevated free beta-hCG, however no sig- 1Dept of Pediatrics, University of Crete; Heraklion, Greece; 2Dept of nificant increase was found in these patients for any of the outcomes eval- Obstetrics-Gynecology, University of Crete; Heraklion, Greece; 3Dept uated; Hygiene-Epidemiology, University of Athens; Athens, Greece; 4Dept of Nuclear Medicine, University of Crete; Heraklion, Greece Adverse PregnancyFree beta hCG >=Free beta hCG < 3.0 sifakis@excite.com Outcome 3.0 MOM (n=92) MOM (n=1177) Aim; to examine the predictive value of maternal serum Placental Growth FGR 2.2 % 2.3 % Hormone (hPGH) in prenatal diagnosis of fetuses affected by congenital Oligohydramnios 1.1 % 0.2 % anomalies. Material-Methods; Serum samples were obtained at 16th-17th Preeclampsia 2.2 % 2.8 % week from 122 high-risk pregnancies of an abnormal fetus. The increased Preterm delivery 3.3 % 3.3 % risk was identified by advanced maternal age (#48), pathological biochem- Miscarriage 0 % 0.8 % ical markers (#31), ultrasound scanning (USS) (#19), positive family histo- Chromosome 1.1 % 1.5 % ry (#10), increased nuchal translucency (#9) and diabetes mellitus (#5). aberration Amniocentesis was performed in 76 pregnancies, and high-quality USS at Fetal anomaly 1.1 % 1.3 % 20th-22nd week in the remaining 46 cases. Maternal serum hPGH was Abruptio placentae 0 % 0.1 % measured by a solid phase immunoradiometric assay, using specific mon- No other statistically significant cut-off values for free beta-hCG were oclonal antibodies for two different epitopes of hPGH. T-test and Post Hoc- detected. We conclude that unlike second trimester beta-hCG, first test were used for statistical analysis. Results; Karyotype analysis trimester free beta-hCG is not a predictor of adverse pregnancy outcomes. revealed 7 fetuses with chromosomal aberration, and USS detected 19 fetuses with minor or major malformation. The mean value of hPGH serum concentration of the 26 pathological fetuses was 6.28 ng/ml (SD 4.32) that was significantly higher than the mean value (2.79 ng/ml 1.68 SD) in normal fetuses (p<0,05). The hPGH determination in the detection of abnormal fetuses had 42% sensitivity, 75% specificity, 41% positive and 80% negative predictive value. Conclusion; our results show that hPGH isPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 229 a specific marker for prenatal detection of fetuses with chromosomal total of 38 unbalanced chromosomal anomalies (including 13 trisomies 21, abnormalities and congenital malformations. However, its moderate sensi- 11 trisomies 18, 7 Turner syndromes) were diagnosed mainly by CVS or tivity and positive predictive value do not allow at present, to be used as an amniocentesis. Apreliminary analysis based on NTmeasurements alone additional marker in prenatal screening tests. Further investigations, in and a risk cut off of 1;400 revealed a detection rate of 36 out of 38 unbal- larger obstetrical populations are needed to establish hPGH in prenatal anced chromosome anomalies (95 %) with a false-positive rate of 10 %. diagnosis. Risk screening in the first trimester appears to have clear advantages as compared to second trimester screening using maternal serum markers. P0663. Choroid Plexus Cysts in the Mid-Trimester Fetus; Modification of risk including triple marker screening results P0665. Prenatal diagnosis of 2q37 deletions resulting from L. M. Bird1,2,3, B. Dixson3, D. Masser-Frye3, L. Mestre3, L. Ribas3, L. three different mechanisms of chromosomal rearrangements. Mullen2, K. Kalla4, K. Carder3, V. Catanzarite3, M. Jones1,2,3 S. W. Cheung, A. A. Ybarra, L. Cooper 1Childrens Hospital; San Diego, CAUnited States; 2University of Califor- DYNAgene; Houston, TX United States nia; San Diego, CAUnited States; 3Sharp & Childrens Prenatal Diagnos- swcheung@dynagene tic Center; San Diego, CAUnited States; 4Kaiser Permanente; San Diego, Terminal 2q37 deletion is a recognizable syndrome with growth retarda- CAUnited States tion, developmental delay, microcephaly, dysmorphic features, cardiac Lbird@chsd.org defects, genital anomalies, and syndactyly/clinodactyly. We report three Most studies regarding the risk for Trisomy 18 when a choroid plexus cyst prenatal cases with normal ultrasound findings and subtle terminal dele- (CPC) is found on prenatal ultrasound employ an average risk of approxi- tions of 2q37, each of which was derived from different mechanisms of mately 1/150. The major difficulty in interpreting most of the previous stud- chromosome rearrangements. Case 1, a paternal pericentric inversion of ies has been the failure to consider other variables that impact the risk of chromosome 2 [inv(2)(p25.2q37.2)] lead to an imbalance in the fetus. The aneuploidy, such as maternal age or serum screening results. Gupta et al. result showed that the fetus carried a rec(2) with a partial duplication of 2p (1997) analyzed prospective studies of unselected populations and sug- at band p25.1 and a monosomy for 2q at band q37. Case 2, a paternal gested a relative risk of 9 when the CPC is isolated and a relative risk of translocation involving 2q37 and 11p13.3 was only detectable by cytoge- 1800 when the CPC is associated with other ultrasound abnormalities. We netics after the FISH result was available. Initial results were present a study of more than 300 CPCs detected in the 2nd trimester after 46,XY,add(2)(q27), which was subsequently found in the father. FISH the advent of triple marker screening. The results are presented using both analysis carried out with a probe specific for the 2q telomere (BAC 172113) the average-risk method most commonly employed in the clinical literature, revealed monosomy 2q in the amniotic fluid sample. FISH analysis using as well as using the likelihood ratios suggested by Gupta et al. to modify the same probe on the father identified a balanced translocation between individual risk assessment. Two hundred eighty patients had isolated 2q and 11p. These results verify paternal transmission of the unbalanced CPCs, and 43 patients had complicated CPCs. Of the 43 complicated translocation resulting in a fetus with a partial duplication of 11p13.3 and CPCs, there were 9 karyotypic abnormalities (8 trisomy 18 and one inher- monosomy for 2q at band q37. Case 3, a de novo deletion was detected ited chromosome 9 inversion). Of the 280 isolated CPCs, there were 3 by standard cytogenetics and verified by FISH using telomeric probes indi- karyotypic abnormalities (one trisomy 18, one 45,X/46,X,iso(Xq), and one cating a fetus affected with monosomy 2q at band q37. Detailed cytoge- de novo chromosome 16 inversion). The incidence of finding a significant netic studies for chromosome rearrangements, FISH analysis and follow chromosomal anomaly in fetuses with isolated CPCs is thus 1/93 in our up studies will be presented. referral population if an average risk method is employed. If trisomy 18 risk had been modified according to the likelihood ratios established by Gupta P0666.Prenatal diagnosis of mosaic tetrasomy 8p. et al., 97 women would have had a midtrimester risk greater than or equal M. J. Le Bris1, M. P. Audrezet1, P. Marcorelles1, P. Parent1, H. Le Guern1, to 1/100 and would have been offered amniocentesis. This level of risk M. Collet1, P. Heren2, C. Frec3, M. De Braekeleer3 (1/100) was chosen because it is at this risk for trisomy 18 that amniocen- 1CHU Morvan; Brest, France; 2CH; Lannion, France; 3CHU Morvan & Uni- tesis is funded by the state prenatal diagnosis program. All 9 cases of tri- versit de Bretagne Occidentale; Brest, France somy 18 would have been ascertained using this method, as well as the marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr de novo chromosome 16 inversion and the familial chromosome 9 inver- Tetrasomy 8p is a rare chromosomal disorder that has only been detected sion. The only chromosomal abnormality that would not have been ascer- in a mosaic form. At the present time, 11 cases have been reported; their tained is the case with 45,X/46,X,iso(Xq). However, because of her age, phenotype included agenesis of the corpus callosum, enlarged ventricles, this patient was eligible for amniocentesis irrespective of the trisomy 18 minor facial dysmorphism, rib and vertebral anomalies, and mild to moder- risk. With individualized risk assessment that included triple marker ate developmental delay. To the best of our knowledge, tetrasomy 8p has screening results, 65 amniocenteses would have been performed, instead never been prenatally diagnosed. This 43 years old woman was referred of 218 that were performed using the average risk method of counseling. for amniocentesis at 20 weeks gestation because of advanced maternal There would have been no reduction in sensitivity for trisomy 18, and age. Amniotic fluid cells were cultured according to standard techniques by specificity would have increased greatly. In addition to fiscal savings, the the in situ method. Asupernumerary chromosomal marker was detected in theoretical loss of one fetus due to a procedure-related loss would have a single clone of amniotic cell cultures and interpreted by RHG banding as been avoided. We conclude that the individualized risk assessment using an isochromosome of the short arm of chromosome 8 (i(8p)). The ultra- the method advocating by Gupta et al. is preferable to an average risk in sound investigation at 27 weeksgestation revealed enlarged ventricles counseling patients with CPC about the risk for Trisomy 18. and agenesis of the corpus callosum which were confirmed at fetal autop- sy after medical termination of the pregnancy. Chromosomal analyses, P0664.First trimester risk screening for aneuploidy; Results including RHG banding and FISH, of several tissues showed different lev- from a prospective trial in a single center els of i(8p) mosaicism. Whereas no i(8p) was detected on cytotrophobast P. Miny1,2, W. Holzgreve3, C. Batukan3, A. Gerber4, C. Szente5, F. Wen- nor additional amniotic fluid cells, 97% and 30% of cells from long term cul- zel6, S. Tercanli3 tures of placenta and lymphocytes respectively had the i(8p). Using DNA 1Division of Medical Genetics, University Childrens Hospital; Basel, markers, the isochromosome 8p was interpreted as the result of a prezy- Switzerland; 2Aristogen GmbH; Ingelheim, Germany; 3University Womens gotic event during maternal meiosis. Our findings suggest that the i(8p) is Hospital; Basel, Switzerland; 4Institute Dr. Viollier; Basel, Switzerland; 5Div. the subject of tissue selection. Tetrasomy 8p might be underdiagnosed Medical Genetics, University Childrens Hospital Basel; Aristogen GmbH, during pregnancy; therefore, we recommend karyotyping on a fetal blood Ingelheim; Basel; Ingelheim, Switzerland; 6Div. Medical Genetics, Univer- sample following detection of agenesis of the corpus callosum when no sity Childrens Hospital; Basel, Switzerland chromosomal abnormality has been found on the amniotic fluid cell cul- peter.miny@unibas.ch tures. First trimester risk screening was introduced in late 1997 using the sono- graphic measurement of the fetal nuchal translucency (NT) and participat- P0667.Application of Inter-Fluorecence in situ hybridization ing in the quality control scheme of the Fetal Medicine Foundation, Lon- (FISH) of Chromosome 13/21 Satellite Probe in Amniotic cells don. Later maternal serum markers (free  hCG, PAPPA) were included. for Prenatal Diagnosis Trisomy 21 Syndrome Patients were ascertained at the University Womens Hospital, Basel, from W. Li1, Y. Wu2, Z. Ye2 the outpatient clinic and those refered for specialized ultrasound services. 1Institute of Medical Genetics of Zhuhai; Zhuhai, China; 2Institute of Med- Risk screening was offered to all patients with a fetal crown rump length ical Genetics of Zhuhai; Zuhai, China between 38 and 84 mm (i.e. gestational age 10+3 to 13+6 weeks) after liwendian@21cn.com extensive counseling. Atotal of 2339 consecutive pregnancies will have Objective To investigate the prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 syndrome reached term by the end of April 2001 following risk screening. So far, a using chromosome 13/21?satellite probe Fluorecence in situ hybridization230 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics (FISH) on uncultured interphase cells from amnic fluid. a more significant factor than del22q11 in this population, even when Methods The interphase amniocytes of 10 fetus who were detected normal excluding cases ascertained through abnormal chromosomes. and 3 fetus who were detected trisomy by prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis were selected. We did FISH which used chromosome 13/21 ? satellite P0670. Immunological abnormality at partial trisomy 3p syn- probe directly on the uncultured amniocytes of these 13 samples. drome Results The total rate of the hybridization were 36.7% and 38.6% in con- N. Nikitina1, V. Sorokina1, E. Nikolaeva1, G. Pavlov2, M. Devaikina1 trols group and observation group respectively, which showed no signifi- 1Medico-Genetic Centre; Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation; 2Ural Medical cantly difference. In controls group, there are 36.5% of the cells which have Academy; Ekaterinburg, United States four signals in the nucleus and 4.0% of the cells which have five signals in gvp@online.ural.ru the nucleus. In observation group, there are 3.9% of the cells which have The proband is a 1 y. o. female infant, the first child of an unrelated 31-y. four signals in the nucleus and 36.1% of the cells which have five signals o. mother and 33 y. o. father. Two previous pregnancies ended in regress. in the nucleus. The controls group and observation group showed signifi- Chromosome studies showed that the father had a balanced reciprocal cant difference by the statistical X2values (P<0.01). Trisomy 21 syndrome translocation t(3;14) (p24;q23). The family refused from the prenatal exam- was diagnosed when cells which have five signals in nucleus were more ination for this pregnancy. The proband was delivered by C-section. The than 36.1%. babys weight was 2700 g. and his length was 46 cm. On the 4th day after ConclusionChromosome 13/21? satellite probe is a very reliable and valu- the birth the babys status got poorer. The proband was transferred to the able method for the prenatal diagnosis on trisomy 21 syndrome. intensive care with encephalitis and ulceronecrosic gastritis diagnosis. The stomachs perforation was operated successfully. At 2 months the baby P0668. Prenatal Characterisation of 27 Autosomal Marker suffered from sepsis of mixed etiology (Klebsiella and Proteus), at 8 Chromosomes and Outcomes of Pregnancies months -from broncopneumonia. And whats more - upper respiratory tract G. Hickmann1, M. Mazauric1, S. Weik1, O. Bartsch2, P. Kozlowski1 infection. At 2 and 9 months the proband was tested immunologically; 1Center for Prenatal Diagnosis and Genetics; Duesseldorf, Germany; decreased serum IgA, IgG, decreased E-rosette formation, decreased 2Institut for Clinical Genetics; Medical Faculty, Technical University; Dres- activity of phagocytes were revealed. At the age of 1 the childs height was den, Germany 71,5 cm and weight - 9000 g. Dysmorphic features of the face were obvi- institut@praenatal.de uos; a broad and flat nasal bridge, full cheeks, a short nose. Chromosome We present 27 cases of prenatal marker chromosomes (mar) identified studies confirmed partial trisomy 3p paternal. In 6 cases previously pub- after amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling or cordocentesis. Investiga- lished, children were diagnosed with frequent infections and in 3 cases the tions included conventional cytogenetics (GTG-, CBG-, NOR-banding) and decrease of immunological indexes was established. So we can speak FISH using locus- and centromere-specific probes and whole chromosome about immunological disfunction as one of the clinico-laboratory charac- paints. Eleven mar were present in mosaic status with normal cells and 16 teristics of the syndrome. were present in all cells. Twenty mar were found to have arisen de novo and 7 were found to be familial (3 mat, 4 pat). Markers originated from P0671. Prenatal Diagnosis of a de novo unbalanced chromosomes 1, 8, 11;22, 12, 13 or 21 (4x), 15 (5x), 15;21 or 13;15, 16, rearrangement by CGH and FISH 18 (2x), 19, 21, and 22 (8x). Outcomes; One woman had an abortion. S. Park1, Y. Kim1, M. Kim2, S. Hong3, H. Ryu2 Seven pregnancies were terminated, 6 of them after abnormal ultrasound 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Repub- findings indicated a high risk for a handicapped child. One woman with a lic of Korea; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Cheil moderately increased risk for a handicapped child chose to terminate the Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Pathology, Samsung pregnancy without ultrasonografic abnormalities after being counselled . A Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea total of 19 children were born of which seventeen are healthy (range 0-5 genelab@samsung.co.kr years, 6 females and 11 males) One male twin, karyotype Unbalanced translocation was identified in a fetus with cardiac anomaly at 47,XY,+mar(11;22), with severe malformations (enterothorax, diaphrag- 21 weeks of gestation; 46,XX,der(9)t(7;9)(p21;p23). Parental karyotypes matic hernia, hydrocephalus, atrioventricular septal defect, renal malfor- were normal, indicating a de novo origin of the unbalanced translocation in mations) died one hour after birth; the other twin is healthy (balanced the fetus. By comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and fluorescence 11;22-translocation). One other male child demonstrates congenital abnor- in situ hybridization (FISH), we defined the composition of an unbalanced malities (cat-eye syndrome; preauricular pit, renal dysfunction and moder- de novo translocation. CGH revealed the DNAamplification at distal 7p ate growth and motor retardation). Asubset of the healthy children had (7p21`pter) and the deletion at 9p (9p23`pter). FISH with chromosome high-risk marker chromosomes. Aspects of genetic counselling will be dis- 7 and 9 painting probes confirmed the partial trisomic status of the short cussed. arm in chromosome 7 and the partial monosomy of the short arm in chro- mosome 9. Resampling for special banding to confirm the precise break- P0669.Deletion 22q11 and fetal cardiac pathology point was declined and the parents opted for termination at 23 weeks of D. E. McFadden1, W. P. Robinson2 gestation. Therapeutic termination of the pregnancy was done. Autopsy 1C&W Hospital and University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Cana- showed cardiac anomalies of right ventricle hypoplasia, pulmonary atresia da; 2University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada and left heart enlargement with prominent aorta, and urogenital anomalies dmcfadden@cw.bc.ca of hypoplasia of internal genital organs with cystocele. This case demon- The incidence of microdeletion 22q11 in fetal populations is not known but strates that FISH and CGH are useful for the identification of chromosomal is probably lower than in liveborns given the greater role that aneuploidy material of unknown origin. plays in fetuses. All cardiac anomalies diagnosed in the Fetal Pathology Laboratory at C&W Hospital in a 2 year period were collected. Method of P0672. Prediction of prognosis in apparently balanced de ascertainment, presence of other anomalies, cytogenetic results, and novo rearrangements at prenatal diagnosis; Role of molecu- results of del22q11 FISH testing were noted. Chromosomally normal cases lar cytogenetic study and fetal ultrasound in which del22q11FISH testing had not been performed were tested mole- H. Ryu1, S. Park2, Y. Kim2, M. Kim1, Y. Lee3 cularly. Cardiac anomalies were present in 102 of 484 fetal autopsies. 32 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Cheil Hospital; cases were terminated after prenatal diagnosis of chromosome abnormal- Seoul, Republic of Korea; 2Laboratory of Medical genetics, Samsung Cheil ity, 17 were spontaneously aborted, and the rest were terminated after pre- Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Radiology, Samsung natal diagnosis of fetal anomalies, including 14 cases diagnosed with car- Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea diac anomaly. Most (90/102) cases had other anomalies (complex); only genelab@samsung.co.kr 12 had isolated cardiac lesions. 5 of the isolated cases and 64 of the com- De novo balanced reciprocal translocations incidentally found at prenatal plex group were chromosomally abnormal. Excluding those 32 cases ter- diagnosis raises serious prognostic dilemmas. In our series of 5,541 pre- minated on the basis of chromosome abnormality (4 isolated, 28 complex), natal diagnoses during the past 5 years, there were 5 cases of de novo bal- 1/8 (12.5%) isolated cardiac lesions and 37/62 (59.7%)complex cases anced reciprocal translocations. High resolution banding and molecular were abnormal. The most common abnormality was VSD. Tetralogy of Fal- cytogenetic study (FISH and CGH) were performed as an adjunct to G- lot was present in 7 cases and there were 2 cases of truncus arteriosus banding for characterization of the abnormal chromosomes. In two cases, and 3 of pulmonary atresia. Eight chromosomally normal cases tested by there were fetal anomalies found using ultrasound; one had thickened fetal FISH showed no del22q11, including TOF (2) and PA(2). The remaining myocardium, another had a markedly enlarged right atrium and ventricle. cytogenetically normal cases were tested by molecular markers and The parents decided to terminate the pregnancy and the autopsy showed showed no evidence of deletions. These results suggest that del22q11 consistent results with the prenatal ultrasound. In the third case, a prena- does not play a major role in fetal cardiac pathology and that aneuploidy is tal diagnosis indicated due to thickened nuchal folds at second trimester ofPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 231 pregnancy. Pregnancy was continued and a 3500gm healthy baby was the fetus for detecting major abnormalities was offered as an alternative delivered with no anomalies except simian creases on both hands and option to the couple during genetic counseling. They decided termination cryptochidism. At present, he is a healthy at the age of 6. In the last two of pregnancy. Fetal autopsy did not reveal malformations. There was no cases, there were no fetal anomalies found on the ultrasound. The couples cytogenetic examination for confirmation of the trisomy neither in fetal nor were counseled that the risk of phenotypic abnormality from a de novo in placental tissues. Trisomy 2 mosaicism is related with no specific type of reciprocal translocation has been estimated at approximately 6.1% [War- abnormalities, IUGR, and fetal demise or stillbirth. The only reported case burton, 1991]. Both couples decided to continue pregnancy and delivered with normal outcome had only 4% trisomy 2 cells in amniocytes. Cytoge- healthy babies. The children showed normal development during follow up netic studies have shown confirmation rates about 81-88% in cases with examinations up to the age of 5 and 2 years, respectively. In our series, abnormal outcome. Confined placental mosaicism may also be considered detailed fetal ultrasound including fetal echocardiogram played an impor- in differential diagnosis, while some of the fetuses with trisomy 2 placental tant role for predictions of fetal prognosis. mosaicism may have uniparental disomy. In conclusion, the rarity of tri- somy 2 mosaicism in prenatal diagnosis makes the diagnostic approach, P0673. Diagnostic Of Mosaic Karyotype 46, Xx / 46, Xy In the management and the genetic counseling difficult. Amniotic Fluid G. Radivojevic-Pilic1, S. Nikolic1, S. Brankovic-Niksic1, M. Stevanovic2 P0676. Features of Cornelia de Lange and Cri-du-Chat Syn- 1Institute of Mental Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 2Institute of Genetic dromes in a Foetus with a Derivative Chromosome from a Engineering; Belgrade, Yugoslavia Maternal 3;5 Translocation nbrankov@eunet.yu N. O. Teles1, M. Pinto1, O. Pinho2, R. Nogueira2 The paper discusses the case of a patient who, after the ultrasound find- 1Instituto de Gentica Mdica J.M.; Porto, Portugal; 2Centro Hospitalar V. ing, was referred to prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. The analysis of amni- N. Gaia; Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal otic fluid cells indicated the presence of the following karyotype in the natalia@igm.min-saude.pt fetus; 46, xx / 46, xy. The conformation of this mosaic karyotype was made Cornelia de Lange and Cri-du-Chat syndromes are well known entities by classic cytogenetic analysis and FISH of the cells of peripheral blood described for the first time in 1933 and 1963, respectively. The main fea- and fibroblast of fetuss skin. Once again, this case has indicated that the tures of Cornelia de Lange are; bushy eyebrows, hirsutism, synophrys, thin problem of mosaic is one of the most difficult problems in prenatal diagno- downturning upper lip, micromelia and mental retardation; in some cases sis. it is associated with 3q26.1 duplication. On the other hand, Cri-du-Chat features are much less obvious and include microcephaly, downward slant P0674.Rapid prenatal screening for chromosome X, Y, 21, 13 of the palpebral fissures and mental retardation, and it is caused by a dele- and 18 aneuploidies by quantitative fluorescent polymerase tion of 5p15. Chromosome studies were performed on amniotic fluid cells chain reaction (QF-PCR) on 551 uncultured amniotic fluids. of a 21 years old woman referred for ultrasound abnormalities and V. Cirigliano1,2, M. Caadas1, M. Ejarque1, E. Lloveras3, A. Plaja3, C. revealed an abnormal karyotype with a derivative of a 3;5 translocation Fuster2, J. Egozcue2 inherited from the mother.The authors describe the ultrasound, cytogenet- 1Dept. of Molecular Biology, General Lab; Barcelona, Spain; 2Dept. Biolo- ic and post-mortem findings in the foetus terminated at 20 weeks with char- gia Celular i Fisiologia, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona; Barcelona, acteristics suggesting both Cornelia de Lange and Cri-du-Chat syndromes. Spain; 3Dept. of Cytogenetics, General Lab; Barcelona, Spain As far as we know this is the first case where both syndromes have been v_cirigliano@hotmail.com found in the same foetus. Since 1993 it has repeatedly been shown that rapid and accurate diagno- sis of selected chromosome aneuploidies can be achieved by Quantitative P0677. Prenatal Diagnosis of the Fetus with Mosaic Fluorescent Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) amplification of del(12)(q21.32q22); First Prenatal Case genomic repeated sequences known as Small Tandem Repeats (STR). In N. Basaran1, T. Sener2, B. Durak1, H. Berkil1, Y. H. Ozon1 the last few years, this approach has been successfully used in large 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; experimental and clinical trials on hundreds of amniotic fluids and CVS Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of samples. Due to the early shortage of highly polymorphic STR markers on Obstetrics and Gynecology; Eskisehir, Turkey the X and Ychromosomes, the great majority of studies focused on the nbasaran@ogu.edu.tr detection of aneuploidies involving chromosomes 21, 13, 18 and the fetal Proximal or interstitial 12q deletions are very rare, and only six patients sex. Recently it has been shown that the newly identified pentanucleotide were described previously (Funderbunk et al., 1984; Meinecke and Mei- repeat X22, which maps in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR 2) of the X necke, 1987; Watson et al., 1989; Tonoki et al., 1998; Rauen et al., 2000; and Ychromosomes, together with a modified sequence of the amelogenin Zollino et al., 2000). All of the reported cases were diagnosed postnataly. region, allows accurate detection of sex chromosome copy number. We The couple were referred to our department because of the advanced developed a multiplex QF-PCR assay including these sequences together maternal age and the amniocentesis was applied in 18th weeks of gesta- with highly informative autosomal STRs for the rapid prenatal detection of tion. The fetal karyotype was revealed as 46,XY/46,XY,del(12)(21.32q22) aneuploidies involving chromosomes X, Y, 13, 18 and 21. The test was (87/13). This mosaic karyotype was also confirmed by the cordocentesis used in clinical trial on 551 uncultured amniotic fluids allowing the assess- (86/14) and the pregnancy was terminated at 24th weeks of gestation. The ment of sex chromosome copy number in 100% of samples, including one postmortem physical examination of the fetus showed minor facial dys- case of Klinefelter and two of Turner syndrome. In the course of this trial morphism. This case is especially important because of the chromosomal 17 autosomal trisomies were also correctly diagnosed. The assay proved abnormality (interstitial 12q deletion) is the first prenataly diagnosed. to be efficient and reliable allowing the detection of all numerical variations of the examined chromosomes within 24 hours from collection of the sam- P0678. The Usage Of Comparative Genomic Hybridization ple. Technique In Prenatal Diagnosis Y. H. Ozon1, T. Sener2, S. Artan1, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, N. Basaran1 P0675.Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 2 mosaicism 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; S. Sifakis1, V. Velissariou2, E. Papadopoulou1, E. Angelakis1, S. Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Christopoulou2, M. B. Petersen2, E. Koumantakis1 Obstetrics and Gynecology; Eskisehir, Turkey 1Department of Obstetrics Gynecology, University of Crete; Heraklion, hozon@ogu.edu.tr Greece; 2Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, MITERAMater- As it is known, the majority of chromosome abnormalities in newborn relat- nity and Surgical Center; Athens, Greece ed aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y, are nearly 95 per- sifakis@excite.com cent of all the chromosome abnormalities diagnosed prenatally. Full kary- Trisomy 2 mosaicism is very rare in prenatal diagnosis. Published data otype analysis from amniocentesis and/or CVS have been performed to from eleven cases showed a risk >60% for an abnormal outcome. We the pregnancies at risk for chromosomal syndromes. However it is time present a case of mosaic trisomy 2 detected at amniocentesis in a 35 year- consuming and labour-instensive. Comparative Genomic Hybridization old G3P2 woman. Amniocentesis was performed at the 16th gestational (CGH) employed to uncultured cells has a new to investigate chromosome week because of advanced maternal age. There was no family history of aneuploidies. In this study, we report the results of the first study evaluat- congenital abnormalities or genetic diseases. The culture of amniocytes ed the DNA of these samples for CGH analysis of uncultured amnio- and the use of GTG banding revealed a 47,XY,+2(4)/46,XY(21) karyotype cytes/CVS. The results of 40 amniotic fluid samples/CVS were analysed by in two different cultures. At the time of amniocentesis there were no patho- CGH and the results were compared with the ones from standart cytoge- logical ultrasonographic findings and the fetus weight was normal for ges- netics. CGH allowed accurate sex and chromosome enumeration in 38 tational age. The use of serial high-resolution ultrasound examination of uncultured amniocytes/ trophoblasts (95%), consistent with the result232 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics obtained by traditional cytogenetic analysis. Neither false positive nor false reported for chromosome 18 (cytogenetic analysis showed a trisomy 18). negative results were obtained. Morever, the signals/nucleus for each We detected 21 abnormal cases (trisomy 21, 18, 13, 69XXX and a mosa- probe was also evaluated. This experience demonstrates that CGH can ic (46,XX(15)/45,X(15)). Additionally, more then 30 blood stained amniotic provide a rapid and accurate clinical method for prenatal idendification of fluids were studied. Only 4 gave ambiguous results (triallelic pattern for chromosome aneuploidies and sexes. most markers or abnormal ratios). The results of this study clearly support that quantitative fluorescence PCR for common aneuploidies is an accu- P0679.The high recurrence probability of early died child with rate and rapid adjunct to conventional cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis and unbalanced partial monosomy 7q with trisomy 13q in large can be used as part of the diagnostic routine in a prenatal unit. pedigree of t(7;13)(q34;q13) carriers. A. T. Midro, B. Panasiuk, A. Sawicka, B. Stasiewicz-Jarocka P0682.Rapid aneuploidy screening using QF-PCR; data from Department of Clinical Genetics; Bialystok, Poland a UK diagnostic laboratory midro@amb.ac.bialystok.pl K. L. Mann, S. Fox, Z. Docherty, C. Mackie Ogilvie Holoprosencephaly and cyclopia is very often result of unbalanced kary- Guys Hospital; London, United Kingdom otype and influences at early death. We observed partial monosomy 7q kmann@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk with trisomy 13q as result of familial translocation t(7;13)(q34;q13). From Prenatal diagnosis of chromosome aneuploidies currently involves the cul- literature data we know that both involved chromosome 7 and 13 are ture and karyotype analysis of chorionic villus or amniotic fluid samples. responsible for holoprosencephaly. Pedigree analysis show sixty members The average UK reporting time using this approach is 13.8 days, and there with 5 carriers and ten early died children with similar malformations. It was is increasing pressure to develop techniques that provide a more rapid enough to estimate probability of recurence of unbalanced progeny. result. Quantitative-fluorescence PCR uses dosage analysis at polymor- Genetic risk was estimated according to the method of Stene and Stengel- phic loci and is suited to high throughput. We have set-up and assessed Rutkowski. Figure 8/29 i.e. 27.6% +/- 8.3% was obtained after ascertain- QF-PCR as a diagnostic test for trisomy 13, 18 and 21. Trisomic samples ment corretion. It could be useful for genetic counselling. were characterised by 3 allele peaks or 1;2 or 2;1 dosage differences between 2 allele peaks. One multiplex PCR was designed to include 10 P0680.Trisomy 18 and 21 Associated with a Partial Hydatidi- tetranucleotide repeat markers (3, 4 and 3 for chromosomes 13, 18 and 21 form Mole respectively). The use of three fluorescent labels enabled all chromosomes U. Tantravahi1,2, H. Pinar3, M. Steinhoff3, D. Singer3 to be analysed in a single injection on a capillary-based fluorescence 1Brown University; Providence, RI United States; 2Women and Infants analyser. DNAwas prepared from uncultured amniotic fluid or chorionic villi Hospital; Providence, RI United States; 3Women and Infants Hospital, using a rapid, resin-based approach. The strategy was evaluated with blind Brown University; Providence, RI United States and pilot studies and QF-PCR has now been successfully integrated into utantrav@wihri.org our cytogenetic service. All amniotic fluid and chorionic villus samples are Partial hydatidiform moles have triploid chromosome constitution except tested and results issued within 3 working days (mean reporting time 1.58 for few cases where they are diploid. We describe a case of partial hyda- working days, median reporting time 1 working day). Abnormal results are tidiform mole with unusual chromosomal findings. A32-year-old woman confirmed by rapid-FISH and all samples have follow-up karyotype analy- whose pregnancy history was remarkable for two previous early fetal loss- sis. To date 631 diagnoses have been made with no false positive or neg- es, presented at 14 weeks gestational age with intrauterine fetal demise. ative results. Our experience of QF-PCR as a clinical service over a 12 Products of conception after a dilatation and curettage procedure consist- month period (estimated to include 1,200 samples) will be presented. ed of two populations of villi; one was small and sclerotic and the other large hydropic with trophoblastic proliferation. Some of these hydropic villi P0683. Preimplantation Diagnosis For Beta-globin Gene had scalloping borders and trophoblastic inclusions. Occasional villi had Mutations blood vessels with nucleated red blood cells. Some sections revealed A. Kuliev1, S. Rechitsky1, O. Verlinsky1, G. Kalakoutis2, M. Angastiniotis2, severely macerated embryonic fragments. These findings were consistent Y. Verlinsky1 with a partial hydatidiform mole. Although almost all partial hydatidiform 1Reproductive Genetics Institute; Chicago, IL United States; 2Makarios moles are triploid, a DNAflow cytometric analysis revealed a diploid peak. Hospital; Nicosia, Cyprus Chromosomal analysis of the villi as well as the fetal tissue using Fluores- Anver_Kuliev@immc.org cent Suppression In situ Hybridization (FISH) studies using chromosome Prevention of beta-globin gene mutations is presently based on prospec- enumeration DNAprobes revealed trisomy for chromosomes 18 and 21. tive carrier screening, prenatal diagnosis and termination of affected preg- Products of conception with morphological changes consistent with partial nancies. We introduced preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to pre- hydatidiform mole but diploid DNAflow analysis, should probably be eval- select unaffected embryo and establish healthy pregnancies avoiding uated with FISH to rule out unexpected chromosomal abnormalities. pregnancy termination. Using a standard IVF setup, the oocytes or Although hydropic villi have been associated with aneuploid pregnancies, embryos were biopsied and tested for the presence of beta-globin gene chromosomal abnormalities as identified in this case showing typical par- mutations by multiplex nested PCR, involving simultaneous mutation and tial hydatidiform mole morphology have not been previously described. linked marker analysis in single blasromeres for paternal, or first and sec- ond polar bodies for maternal mutations. Overall, 40 PGD cycles were per- P0681. Routine use of QF-PCR for prenatal diagnosis of the formed from 26 couples at risk for having children with sickle cell disease most common aneuploidies (7 cycles) or different thalassemia mutations, including IVS1-110, IVSII - C. Bili1, A. Divane2, A. Apessos3, A. Maravelaki4, L. Florentin1 745, IVSI-1, IVSI-6, codon 39, 619 bp deletion and IVSI-5 (33 cycles). Of 1Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, Alfalab Medical Institute of the 265 resulting embryos with DNAresults, 101 unaffected embryos were Research and Diagnosis; Athens, Greece; 2Molecular Biology and Cyto- pre-selected for transfer back to patients in 40 clinical cycles, resulting in genetics Center,Alfalab Medical Institute of Research and Diagnosis; 14 clinical pregnancies and 7 healthy children born by the present time. Athens, Greece; 3Molecular Biology and Cytogentics Center,Alfalab, Med- The remaining embryos were avoided from transfer either because they ical Institute of Resesarch and Diagnosis; Athens, Greece; 4Molecular Biol- were predicted to contain an abnormal gene, or had not available confir- ogy and Cytogenetics Center, Alfalab Medical Institute of Resesarch and matory marker analysis. Of 116 embryos from this group available for fol- Diagnosis; Athens, Greece low up confirmation analysis the genotype was correctly predicted in 114 lfloren@hellasnet.gr (98.2%), demonstrating a high accuracy of PGD for beta-globin gene We have routinely performed prenatal diagnosis of the most common ane- mutations using multiplex nested PCR analysis in single blastomeres or uploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Yusing multiplex quantitative polar bodies. fluorescence PCR on more than 700 amniotic fluid samples. Our results were all confirmed by cytogenetics analysis. In most cases results were P0684.Clinical Outcome Of Preimplantation Aneuploidy Test- based in two informative markers for each chromosome, in some cases we ing In Ivf Patients Of Advanced Maternal Age had to use at least three or four markers to obtain a result and occasion- Y. Verlinsky, J. Cieslak, S. Evsikov, A. Kuliev ally due to lack of heterozygosity results were based on a single marker for Reproductive Genetics Institute; Chicago, ILUnited States a specific chromosome. We have found that the markers we have used Anver_Kuliev@immc.org were informative in the Greek population also with a heterozygosity fre- Selection of embryos for transfer in IVF is currently based on morphologi- quency ranging within 0.75-0.90, similar to the frequencies reported in the cal parameters, which do not correlate with chromosomal make up, lead- literature. There was accordance between the quantitative fluorescence ing to incidental transfer of aneuploid embryos. We introduced preimplan- PCR and cytogenetic results in all but 2 cases. We had one false negative tation aneuploidy testing of oocytes to improve the clinical outcome in the result of a trisomy 18 and an ambiguous result for which no result was IVF patients of advanced maternal age. Using standard IVF procedure, thePosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 233 first and second polar bodies were removed following maturation and fer- P0687. Meiotic outcomes in female translocation carriers tilization of oocytes in 87 clinical cycles from patients of 39 years and older. ascertained in three-day human embryos. Polar bodies were tested for aneuploidies by five-color FISH probes spe- C. Mackie Ogilvie, T. L. Kirby, P. R. Braude, P. N. Scriven cific for chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21 & 22 (Vysis). Overall, 56% of oocytes Guys & St. Thomas Centre for PGD; London, United Kingdom were aneuploid, resulting from errors in the first (40.8%) and second caroline.ogilvie@kcl.ac.uk (42.1%) meiotic divisions, and were not transferred. The embryos resulting Chromosomes involved in reciprocal translocations form quadrivalents at from aneuploidy free oocytes were transferred back to uterus and the meiosis. These complexes segregate by alternate, adjacent-1, adjacent-2, pregnancy and implantation rates yielded in this group were compared to 3;1 or 4;0 modes, to give gametes with different balanced or unbalanced that in the control group, involving 77 clinical cycles from routine IVF chromosome complements. The lack of direct access to female gametes patients of the same age. On the average, 1.8 aneuploidy-free embryos has meant that until recently data concerning frequency of segregation per cycle were pre-selected and transferred in the test group, compared to mode in female carriers has not been easily available. With the develop- 2.8 in the control. Despite this difference, 8% implantation and 14.5% preg- ment of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for chromosome nancy rates were observed in the test group, compared to 3.4 and 7.9%, rearrangements, these data are now emerging. We have carried out PGD respectively, in the control, demonstrating a two-fold improvement of the cycles for 15 couples with translocations; of these, data were obtained for clinical outcome of IVF following pre-selection of aneuploidy-free embryos. six female carriers of reciprocal translocations and three female carriers of Robertsonian translocations. Following PGD and transfer of embryos with P0685. Preimplantation Diagnosis for Single Gene Disorders a normal/balanced PGD result, the remaining embryos from each cycle Combined with HLATesting were spread and tested for confirmation of diagnosis and segregation S. Rechitsky1, O. Verlinsky1, W. Schoolcraft2, C. Strom1, A. Kuliev1, Y. mode. Not all embryos gave informative results, as arrested embryos gave Verlinsky1 nuclear fragments and multinucleated cells made interpretation difficult. Of 1Reproductive Genetics Institute; Chicago, IL United States; 2Colorado those which gave an informative result, 66% (range 60% to 75%) of Center for Reproductive Medicine; Denver, CO United States embryos (n=48) from female reciprocal translocation carriers were consis- Anver_Kuliev@immc.org tent with alternate segregation, compared with 77% (range 60% to 100%) Preimplantation diagnosis provides an option for avoiding an affected (n=27) for Robertsonian translocations. Interestingly, in the reciprocal pregnancy together with pre-selection of an HLAcompatible donor for an translocation cycles, only 16% of embryos were consistent with adjacent- affected sibling. We performed preimplantation HLAtesting for leukemia, 1 segregation, the mode that gives rise to the most common unbalanced Fanconi anemia (IVS 4+4 A-Tmutation) and thalassemia (619bp deletion), products seen at prenatal diagnosis. Six of the couples established a suc- the latter two combined with mutation analysis. Haplotype analysis for fam- cessful pregnancy following PGD. These results, together with further data ily members (including father, mother and affected child) was performed to currently being collected, will be presented and discussed. identify different polymorphic STR alleles corresponding to specific mark- ers in HLAgenes. Linked STRs scattered through HLAgenes were applied P0688.Establishing a one-step multiplex fluorescent PCR for to increase accuracy of analysis and detect potential crossover between the diagnosis of Huntingtons disease on single cells HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-E and HLA-DQB genes. Single blastomeres C. Gro1, L. A. Kunz-Schughart2, U. Hehr1, D. Seifert1, F. Hofstaedter2, B. were biopsied in a standard IVF setting and tested by multiplex nested Seifert1, A. Hehr1 PCR analysis to analyze simultaneously for mutations, linked markers, and 1Center for Gynecological Endocrinology, Reproductive Medicine and HLAgenes. Genotyping for Fanconi anemia (four cycles) and thalassemia Human Genetics; Regensburg, Germany; 2Institute of Pathology, Universi- (one cycle) mutations was possible in 33 and 8 embryos, respectively, 6 ty of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany and 3 of which were affected, and 24 and 5 unaffected. HLAtesting of claudia.gross@humangenetik-regensburg.de these unaffected embryos, and 28 embryos obtained in clinical cycles for Huntingtons disease is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disor- leukemia, revealed 13 HLAmatched embryos overall, including 5 for Fan- der caused by a CAG-trinucleotide repeat expansion in the 5 coding coni anemia, 3 for thalassemia and 5 for leukemia. These embryos were region of the HD gene. Here we report a one-step multiplex fluorescent transferred back to patients, resulting in a clinical pregnancy and birth of PCR protocol to detect simultaneously the disease causing mutation as an unaffected child in case of Fanconi anemia, whose cord blood stem well as the fragment sizes of closely linked highly polymorphic markers at cells have been transplanted to the affected sibling. the single cell level. The repeat expansion itself and five neighbouring microsatellite markers were amplified using fluorescently labelled primers P0686.Testing Times; Creating a protocol for Preimplantation and analysed with the Genescan software on an ABI 310 genetic analyser. Genetic Diagnosis for Huntingtons Disease The multiplex PCR was optimised with human genomic DNAof normal A. Lashwood1, F. A. -. Flinter2, P. R. -. Braude3 controls and subsequently on nucleated single cells, separated from whole 1Centre For Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis; London, United Kingdom; blood after enrichment with Histopaque (Sigma) by fluorescence-activated 2Centre for Preimplantation Diagnosis, Guys & St. Thomas Hospital; Lon- cell sorting. In the next step, this protocol was applied for the analysis of don, United Kingdom; 3Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, single cells from a known Huntingtons disease carrier with 19 and 44 Guys & St. Thomas Hospital; London, United Kingdom repeats, respectively. Although the normal Huntington allele was preferen- alison.lashwood@gstt.sthames.nhs.uk tially amplified, a reproducible amplification of both repeat alleles could be Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) combines in vitro fertilisation demonstrated. In order to reduce the risk of misdiagnosis due to allelic technology with molecular and cytogenetic analysis. PGD is an alternative drop out or contamination and to increase the reliability of the test, the reproductive option for couples at risk of having a child with a genetic dis- repeat was coamplified with 2 additional closely linked informative mark- order. Huntingtons disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegen- ers. The here presented PCR protocol on single cells without preamplifi- erative adult onset disorder. Individuals at risk can have a gene test prior cation and the simultaneous detection of the coamplified fragments can be to the onset of symptoms. Prenatal diagnosis is available, but the uptake completed in less than 6 hours. Potential applications of this protocol is low. PGD for Huntingtons disease (HD) has been considered by The include the analysis of polar bodies obtained during assisted reproduction Guys & St. Thomas Centre For Preimplantation Diagnosis. Couples of female Huntingtons disease carriers in order to transfer fertilized where one partner has received an HD gene positive test result will be con- oocytes with the normal allele. sidered for PGD treatment. In accordance with the 1990 Human Fertilisa- tion & Embryology Act, a licence to practise PGD is required from the P0689. Successful IVF treatment of couples with chromoso- Human Fertilisation & Embryology Authority. Unlike other single gene dis- mal aberrations orders for which we offer PGD treatment, there are several issues relating Y. Wettergren1, L. Nilsson2, L. Hamberger2, J. Wahlstrm3, C. Hanson2 to PGD for HD which require special attention.  To ensure accuracy in a 1Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/stra; Gteborg, PGD cycle, HD allele sizes are needed from the non gene carrying partner. Sweden; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska Univer-  If confirmatory prenatal testing is not undertaken following a successful sity Hospital; Gteborg, Sweden; 3Department of Clinical Genetics, PGD cycle, no confirmation of diagnosis can be obtained at birth.  The Sahlgrenska University Hospital; Gteborg, Sweden welfare of children born into a family where one parent will become symp- yvonne.wettergren@dep-surg.gu.se tomatic of HD. In order to address these issues it has been necessary to Carriers of translocated or inverted chromosomes usually have reduced create a detailed working protocol for the management of PGD for HD. We fertility caused by chromosome imbalances formed during gametogenesis. believe that this is the first such document and the details will be discussed Generally, these carriers are subjected to a higher frequency of miscar- in this paper. riage as well as an increased risk of having children affected by chromo- some imbalances. The actual risk depends on the chromosomes involved in the aberration and the position of the breakpoints. Couples affected by234 Posters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics reduced fertility caused by translocations or inversions often turn to the IVF more chromosomes in sequential hybridizations by populating the screen clinic for treatment. After thorough penetration of the possible genetic risks with more probes per hybridization. reddyk@questdiagnostics.com we decided to make a pilot study comparing 10 subfertile couples with chromosomal aberrations. These couples did undergo up to three stimu- P0692. The Ethical and Psychological Aspects of Prenatal lated IVF cycles using intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) when indi- Diagnostics (PD)in Tbilisi cated. All couples were strongly recommended to have a prenatal genetic M. Chipashvili1, J. Kristesashvili2 diagnosis in case of pregnancy. Here, we present the outcome of the IVF 1E.Pipia Tbilisi Medical Institute; Georgia, Georgia; 2Zhordania Institute of treatment of the 10 subfertile couples (9 translocation carriers and one Human Reproduction; Tbilisi, Georgia inversion carrier). Thirty-two treatment cycles resulted in 8 pregnancies; maka@kheta.ge 2 spontaneous abortions The aim of this research was to study womens attitude towards PD, the possibilities of abortion due to medico-genetic reasons, the birth of defec- 5 deliveries tive child. Investigation carried out by annonymous questionnaire in 4 1 ongoing pregnancy Maternal Houses of Tbilisi among 922 women with different age and edu- In total, 7 healthy children were born. Although preimplantation genetic cational level. 102 Women refuse to complete a questionnaire. The most diagnosis (PGD) may be an attractive alternative for couples with chromo- of interviewed women ( 90,2%)prefer the early methods of PD in first somal aberrations, traditional IVF treatment in combination with prenatal trimester of pregnancy and in the case of defective fetus they checked an diagnosis seems to be an option in cases where PGD is not acceptable or abortion as a right conclusion. Approximately the half of inquired possible. women(48%)considered an abortion as non-ethical in the late stages of pregnancy even of abnormal fetus. There is a relatively large number of P0690. Sex determination and detection of delta F508 muta- women (37%) who suppose doctors preferance toward their defective tion in human blastomeres by F-PCR childs future(Childrens home, Family). A great majority of all inquired Z. Ban, B. Nagy, P. Fancsovits, J. Urbancsek, Z. Papp women would like to avoid the problems concerning to defective childs Semmelweis University; Budapest, Hungary future, they prefer stillborn defective child rather then living one(40%). Cor- banz@noi1.sote.hu relation between age, educational level, pregnancies and ethical and psy- OBJECTIVE; Preimplantation genetic diagnosis requests highly sensitive chological attitudes were find out. Conclusion; 1. 90,2% of all women pre- methods, that are very sensitive for contamination to detect genetic alter- fer the early methods of Pd; 2.Women before the age 25 suppose to care ations in single blastomeres. Fluorescence polymerase reaction (F-PCR) for defective child in Childrens Home, the most women aged 25-35 would- is a reliable method for single cell PCR. This study summarizes our expe- nt wish to look at their children in Childrens Home; 3. 47,5% women with rience in the detection X and Ychromosomes for sex determination and in high education and 10% with secondary education considered that defec- the detection of delta F508 mutation in single blastomeres. METHODS; tive child must grow up in the family; 4. In all groups; as early appears We analysed 108 blastomeres. 46 blastomeres (23 preembryos) for F508 Maternal feeling in women, they prefer to care for defective child in the mutation and 62 blastomeres (31 preembryios) for X and Ychromosomes. family. The amplification of the delta F508 region was performed with CF1a and CF2 primers, for the identification of X and Ychromosomes we used the P0693.Diagnostic dilemma in prenatal diagnosis of sex chro- AmelAand AmelB primers. RESULTS; 54 preebryos were biopsied suc- mosomal anomalies cessfully (2 intact blastomeres). Amplification of the delta F508 region was A. Tth1, E. P.Tardy1, K. Hajdu1, J. Btorfi1, S. Gombos2 successful in 42 blastomeres, we accepted results only in cases, when the 1Semmelweis University; Budapest, Hungary; 2Rkus County Hospital; two blastomeres from the same preembryo showed the same results. This Budapest, Hungary was the case in 40 preembryos (87%). Detection of X/Ychromosomes was dr.atoth@netposta.net successful in 58 blastomeres (29 preembryos) We could accept the results Couples are facing with a very difficult decision when a fetal sex chrom- in 28 preembryos (90%). CONCLUSION; In our study F-PCR appears to some abnormality is identified. The decision is more complicated when the be a reliable method for the preimplantation genetic diagnosis of the delta result of prenatal investigation presents mosaic karyotypes. Postnatal F508 mutation and gender determination in X-linked recessive disorders. studies show that even in cases of apparently pure 45,X result there is a high possibility of tissue specific discrepancies. Since Turner syndrome is P0691. Aneuploidy screen of blastomeres in at least 2 and basically a lethal abnormality, it has been proposed that liveborn patients occasionally 3 sequential fluorescence in situ hybridizations should have a mosaic chromosome complement. However, it is extremely using probes from 7 chromosomes(13,16,18,21,22,X and Y). problematic to predict by prenatal investigations that the foetus will have K. S. Reddy1, V. Sulcova1, K. Lundin2, U. Selleskog3, S. Ziebe4, L. Helm- gonadal dysgenesis, mixed gonadal dysgenesis with ambiguous genitalia gaard5, J. C. Arce5 or normal male with or without infertility. We report eight cases with prena- 1Quest Diagnostics Inc.; San Juan Capistrano, CAUnited States; 2Enheten tally diagnosed sex chromosomal anomalies. Studies were carried out for Reproduktionsmedicin, Su/Sahlgrenska; Gothenburg, Sweden; 3Fertili- both by conventional cytogenetic methods and FISH from chorionic villi ty Center, Carlanderska; Gothenburg, Sweden; 4Fertilitetsklinikken, and amniotic fluid. Based on the literature and our results we aim to pres- Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark; 5Novo Nordisk A/S; Bagsvaerd, ent a strategy to establish correct diagnosis counselling and management. Denmark reddyk@questdiagnostics.com P0694.Technical and ethical considerations raised by prena- To assess the chromosome status of individual blastomeres from human tal diagnosis in non lethal and clinically heterogeneous dis- embryos sequential FISH screen was performed using PB probe (Vysis orders evidence the necessity of a multidisciplinary approach MultiVysion PB 5-color mix of DNAprobes for chromosomes 13,16,18,21 ; experience based on Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease and 22), followed by X/Yprobe (CEPX /CEPY(alpha satellite) (Vysis Inc.). R. Bernard1, P. Negre1, A. Vandenberghe2, J. Pouget3, N. Philip1,4, N. For both hybridization, results were obtained on 100% of the nuclei [42/42] L vy1,4 tested. Six nuclei were subject to a third hybridization. In 3 cases, the third 1Departement de Genetique Medicale; Marseille, France; 2Unite de Gene- hybridization was to backtrack and complete the screen using PB probe tique Moleculaire; Lyon, France; 3Service de neurologie et des maladies when a nuclei was detected only on the second sequential X/Yhybridiza- neuromusculaires; Marseille, France; 4Inserm U491 Medical Genetics and tion. In 3 cases, a third hybridization confirmed one large signal consisted Development; Marseille, France of two overlapping signals by using single copy probes DGS for 22, CBFB rafaelleb@free.fr for 16 and KALfor X chromosome. The technical aspects of this study that CMTdisease is a typical example of a dominant non-lethal disease with a require caution in interpretation are; in the PB hybridization the aqua and wide spectrum of severity ranging from asymptomatism to severe motor blue fluorescence signals bleed through and hence interpreting the probes and sensory disability. Since molecular diagnosis is available, prenatal labeled with these fluorophores requires cross checking to see if they are diagnosis is required by many at risk families. Our laboratory has to face overlapped or are in different location. Secondly, short (4-hour) sequential frequent requests for CMTprenatal diagnosis. Here, we present our expe- hybridization also resulted in the bleed through of the PB green and red rience in developping molecular procedures as well as genetic counselling signals from the first hybridization, but the carry over of the signals were and psychological issues for at risk parents. Oppositely from adult testing, eliminated in a longer sequential hybridization (overnight). Conclusion; results delay, severitys prediction, and the elements of the final decision Two sequential hybridizations worked on a consistent basis. In those nuclei regarding a possible pregnancy termination are crucial. We thus devel- that were subject to the third hybridization, 100% gave results. This study opped a multidisciplinary approach including clinical and molecular geneti- shows that our FISH protocol to screen blastomeres is robust and that cists, obstetricians, psychiatrists, neurologists and patients associations. In there is a potential for expanding this FISH test to screen ploidy status of order to optimize the safety as well as the delay of the results, we designedPosters: Prenatal and Perinatal Genetics 235 technical molecular procedures potentially allowing a very short results Xq22. The genomic organization of the NXF gene cluster is Xcen-GLA- delay. The ability to use these approaches will be compared to classical NXF5-NXF2-NXF4-NXF3-PLP-Xqter. We identified five different isoforms methods. We insist on the heavyness of the process engaged for the par- of NXF5 and the one that produces the longest ORF (NXF5a) was shown ents when considering the very high risk pregnancy, compared to the ques- to bind to RNAas well as to p15, which points to a role in mRNAnuclear tions and doubts regarding the phenotypes severity in case of positive export. NXF5 is expressed at very low levels and expression profiling of the diagnosis. Paradoxically, the unpredictable degree of severity is also the two mouse nxf-homologs (nxf-a and nxf-b) which also map on X, demon- reason why prenatal diagnosis is required and must be ethically adressed. strated the highest mRNAlevels of both genes in the brain. The expression Ethical questions raised by prenatal diagnosis in CMT evidence that of nxf-a is predominantly detected in the cerebrum while for nxf-b, the molecular diagnosis in non-lethal genetic diseases can not be standard- expression in the cerebellum was more pronounced. Amutation detection ized, and should be actively and multidisciplinary considered. Eventually, analysis of NXF5 in 117 mentally retarded patients revealed single-base the accessibility of preimplantation embryo diagnosis that our approach pair polymorphisms but no disease-associated changes were identified in should make feasible will also be discussed. this population of patients. Our results point to an important role of the potential nuclear RNAexport factor NXF5 in the development of cognitive P0695.Prenatal diagnosis - do males have a clue? functions. U. Dresler, J. Kunze, J. Pelz Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany P0698. RhD/d status determination by gene dosage using a science2000uk@yahoo.co.uk quantitative real-time duplex PCR. About 65% of women with an age of 35+ years decide to make use of inva- P. Ernault, E. Gautier, L. Lohmann, M. Girard, J. Costa sive prenatal diagnosis during pregnancy in Berlin (Germany). Several fac- Hpital Amricain de Paris; Neuilly, France tors have an influence on this decision. Subject of this study was the jean-marc.costa@ahp-paris.com impact of their partners and an evaluation of their knowledge about the Rhesus D (RhD) antigen is encoded by an autosomal gene (1p34.3). It has diagnostic procedure. Personal interviews with 200 women (35+ years old) been demonstrated that the RhD-negative phenotype is mainly caused in who just gave birth to a healthy child and with 117 of their partners are Caucasian population by a complete deletion of this gene. Amethod for reported. Interviews were conducted on maternity wards of 11 hospitals in RhD/d status determination could have application in couples where there Berlin. Males were less well informed about prenatal diagnosis (PD) than is an RhD-negative woman at risk for fetal allo-immunization. If the father their female counterparts. The males level of knowledge depends on that is homozygous (D/D), all his children will be RhD-positive;invasive proce- of their partners. It differs significantly regarding the mens intention to dure to determine fetal RhD genotype becomes unnecessary. Serological have a child, the size of the family, whether or not the woman took advan- methods do not indicate easily wether one or two copies of the RhD gene tage of the invasive PD and which diagnostic procedure she chose (amnio- are present in RhD-positive individuals. Therefore, a quantitative duplex centesis or chorion villi sampling). Males knowledge about PD is depend- PCR using real-time technology was developed to determine the number ing neither on their religion nor on their age. The males influence on the of RhD gene copies. Both the RhD gene and a second autosomal refer- female decision whether or not to undergo invasive PD is small. It does not ence gene were co-amplified by PCR. Each of the PCR products were depend on the males knowledge and the magnitude of its impact is esti- simultaneously and specifically detected using hybridization probes, mated differently by both partners in 25% respectively labelled either with LCRed640 (for the RhD gene) or LCRed705 (for the reference gene). Serial dilutions of a control DNAwas P0696. PCR-bassed Analysis of Infectious Teratogen in used to establish a standard curve for both the two genes. Arelative quan- Amnion Fluid titation expressed as a RhD gene/reference gene ratio was calculated for A. R. Nadji1, S. Kashani1, S. Jalil-Nejad1, A. Karimi-Nejad1, H. Najmaba- each sample. One hundred and one blood samples were tested using this di2,1 assay. Results showed that two clear non overlapping populations are 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of identified (ratio ;1.30 +/-0.09 vs ratio ; 0.65+/-0.04) suggesting that dis- Iran; 2University Of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of crimination of RhD homozygotes from RhD heterozygotes can be easily Iran achieved by gene dosage. Results were compared to those obtained from maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk phenotypic studies. Molecular biology approaches has led to new orientation in the fields of Pathobiology Sciences.The consequences of this changes are getting the P0699.Nuchal Translucency amd Chromosome Anomalies result sooner, increasing the specifity and sensitivity of the assay and more S. V. Boulytcheva, O. K. Rusanova, I. V. Popova, O. V. Buntova reliability on the test result. Generally, maternal teratogenic infections are Laboratory of Prenatal Diagnostics, Astrakhan Medico-Genetic Consulting detected by the seroconversion of mother and fetus against the microor- Centre; Astrakhan, Russian Federation ganism, Invivo and Invitro culture of microbe from body secretions of fetus, coolworld@astranet.ru amnion fluid and autopsy samples. For this purpose, the sensitivity of sero- A three- level ultrasonic screening of pregnant women is held in the logical assays, isolation and culture of pathogen may be insufficient and Medico- Genetic Consulting Centre in Astrakhan. Analysing results of are time consuming. PCR, a very sensitive specific and rapid assay, helps screening of 10 - 14 week pregnancy discovered that > 3 mm nuchal us to detect the teratogen genome in the amnion fluid and plays an impor- translucency of a fetus makes it possible to find out 9% of its chromosome tant role in prenatal diagnosis of teratogenic infections. In order to extend anomalies. The growing level of the nuchal translucency increases the fre- our Amnion synthesis pannel in this center, we have decided to include quency of chromosome anomalies in the following proportion; when the the infectious teratogen detection ( CMV, HSV) by PCR method.So far, we nuchal translucency is >3mm, chromosome anomalies make 9,4 %, when have analysed 40 samples. From these , eight HSV positive and two CMV the nuchal translucency is >4mm, chromosome anomalies make 27 %, the positve cases were detected. This study is now in progress on more num- nuchal translucency >4 mm corresponds to 100 % chromosome anom- ber of samples. alies, as well as the nuchal translucency of 10 mm. Apregnant woman of 29, somatically was observed in our centre. It was her first pregnancy. Her P0697.NXF5, a novel member of the nuclear RNAexport fac- genetic background has no aggravations. The spouses karyotype has no tor family, involved in a syndromic form of mental retardation peculiarities. The ultrasonic examination at 11 - 12 week pregnancy dis- G. F. V. Froyen, J. Lin, P. Marynen covered monochorial twins, the nuchal translucency being found 6 mm in VIB; Leuven, Belgium both fetuses. The prenatal karyotyping by the method of transabdominal guy.froyen@med.kuleuven.ac.be chorioincentesis was held at 11 -12 week pregnancy. The samples were Mental retardation provides a basis for the identification of genes involved prepared by the direct method, the common colouring of the sample was in the development of cognitive functions. Here, we report on the identifi- used. Both fetuses karyotype is 92, xxxx ( tetraploid ). The pregnancy was cation of a gene that is interrupted by an inv(X)(p21.1;q22) in a male not interrupted, as the woman desired to keep it. At the term of 20 - 21 patient with a syndromic form of MR. The Xp-breakpoint is positioned in the week the ultrasonic examination showed numerous congenital defects in gene contig Xpter-CYBB-TCTE1L-breakpoint-SRPX-RPGR-OTC-Xcen. both fetuses. The pregnancy was interrupted on the 21-st week. Results of However, a male with normal mental development, with a microdeletion on the pathoanatomical examination are as follows; The first fetus Weight is Xp21 extending from CYBB to RPGR was reported. Molecular analysis of 400 gr., height is 26 cm. Peculiarities of the phenotype are; docicho- the Xq-breakpoint region identified a novel gene called Nuclear eXport cephalia, skewed forehead and occiput, hypertelorism, wide sunken nose Factor 5 (NXF5) that is split by the breakpoint leading to its functional nulli- bridge, the nose being short and snubbed, the filter is long and well somy. The predicted protein likely is a novel member of the nuclear RNA formed, the lips are narrow with their rim inside, hypoplasia of the lower eXport Factor family since it shows 78% similarity with TAP/NXF1. Three jaw. The auricles are low placed, ear lobes are attached, the neck is short. other genes highly similar to NXF5 were found within a region of 1 Mb on The cross palm wrinkles are seen on both sides of the hand, klinodactylia236 Posters: Gene Structure and Function of the second to fifth fingers. All the toes are of the same length, ectonia of mosomal analysis of the aborted conceptus provides valuable information the first toes is observed. There is obvious edema of the necks back sur- regarding recurrence risk and possible therapies for the couple. Conven- face going down to the body and the neck hygroma. The chest is cylindri- tional karyotyping depends on tissue culture and analysis of metaphase cal. The division of lungs into lobes is correct. The hearts size is normal, preparations which is time consuming with high rate of culture failure and there is one common ventricle, the ventricular septum is absent. The artery false results due to maternal cell contamination. Interphase FISH is a pow- trunk goes out of the common ventricle, then two pulmonary arteries are erful molecular cytogenetic technique which has been used for several ramified from it, the diameter is 1 - 2 mm. The oval window is open. The applications in cytogenetic diagnosis. The objective of our study was to kidney is normally structured and placed, the ureters are a bit widened, compare the results of multicolor interphase FISH with conventional chro- wound. The adrenals are of normal size and position. The uterus and mosomal analysis for he detection of the most common aneuploidies in adnexa are normally sized and placed. There is observed hypoplasia of spontaneous abortions and to test whether interphase FISH can eliminate thick intestine. The turn of the intestine is incomplete. The outside repro- the need for culture in these samples. For this we have used the chromo- ductive organs are developed according to the female type. There is some specific probes for 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Yfor interphase hypoplasia of labia majora, the clitoris is enlarged. Proximal sections of the FISH analysis on the products of conception from 52 women with recurrent limbs are shortened. The second fetus; The weight is 400 gr., the height is spontaneous abortions. Aneuploidies were detected in 26 samples using 26 cm. Peculiarities of the phenotype are as follows ; dolihocephalia, auri- these probes. Conventional karyotyping in all these samples confirmed the cles are low placed, hypertelorism, short snub nose, long filter, thin lips, results of FISH analysis except in 2 cases where the probe for 15 was short neck, there are wing-like skin folds on the neck, the lower jaw is cohybridizing with polymorphic region on chromosome 14 (thereby show- hypoplastic. There is arachnodactylia, klinodactylia of the second, third, ing false trisomy 15 on the interphase cells) and 2 cases where aneuploidy fourth finger, cross palm wrinkles on both hands. All the toes have the of chromosome 7 and 17 (for which the probes were not used) were same length. Shortness of proximal limb sections is observed. The chest detected. The results suggest that multicolor interphase FISH overcomes has a wide aperture. Lungs division into lobes is correct. In the membra- the limitations of conventional karyotyping and readily identify common nous part of the ventricular septum there is a defect, its diameter is 0,2 cm. aneuploidies associated with spontaneous abortions eliminating the need The length of the plumonary artery curcumference is 1 cm, of the aortha is for tissue culture in a substantial number of samples. 0,9 cm. The pulmonar artery goes out of the right ventricle, the aortha goes out of the left one. The size of kidney is 2,2x1x1 for the right one and 2x1x1 P0703.49,XXXXY; Case Report in Prenatal Diagnosis for the left. There is distension of renal pelvis and calyces. The ureters are G. Di Cola1, C. Perfumo1, C. Caporale1, P. Caggiati1, S. Rossi1, M. Savi2 widened, wound, their diameter is 0,2 cm. There is stenosis in the vesicu- 1Bio-Tech Laboratories; Parma, Italy; 2Istituto Genetica Medica, Universit lar-urethral segments. The turn of the intestine is incomplete. The uterus di Parma; Parma, Italy and adnexa are normally structured and placed. Outside genitals are bbiotech@tin.it developed according to the female type, there is hypoplasia of labia majo- The pentasomy 49,XXXXYis one of the rarest sex chromosome defects, ra, the cliterus is enlarged. The cerebrum is obviously edemic, division into occurring with an estimated incidence of 1 in 85 000 male births. This con- hemispheres is shown, side ventricles are widened. dition is associated with pre- and postnatal growth deficiency, severe men- tal retardation, hypogenitalism, and other skeletal, facial and cardio-vas- P0700. Nuchal Translucency as a Marker of Hereditary and cular anomalies. We report on the prenatal diagnosis, genetic analysis of Congenital Pathology a 49,XXXXYfetus. S. V. Boulytcheva, O. K. Rusanova A33-year-old, primigravida woman was referred for amniocenthesis and Laboratory of Prenatal Diagnostics, Astrakhan Medico-Genetic Consulting quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) with small Centre; Astrakhan, Russian Federation tandem repeat (STR) markers specific for chromosome 13, 18, 21, X and coolworld@astranet.ru Yat 16 weeks gestation for positive second trimester triple test (1;16) and The laboratory of the prenatal diagnostics of the Astrakhan Medico-Genet- increased nuchal translucency. ic Consulting Centre holds prenatal karyotyping of pregnant women of the Quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) with small risk group. The groups are formed when the women turn to the Centre to tandem repeat (STR) markers specific for chromosome X and a pentanu- be genetically examined. Ultrasonic screening is held at the term of 10-14 cleotide marker X22 for the Xq/Yq pseudoautosomal region PAR2 rapidly and 20-24 week pregnancy. Special attention is paid to early diagnosing of detected the X-chromosome polysomy from amniotic fluid cells. Cytoge- chromosome anomalies at the term of 10-14 weeks. The principal ultra- netic analysis revealed a karyotype of 49,XXXXY. sonic marker of chromosome anomalies is found to be nuchal translucen- Our case also shows that QF-PCR assays with sex chromosome specific cy of the fetus > 3 mm. STR markers provide rapid prenatal diagnosis of numerical sex chromo- The prenatal karyotyping is held at the term of 10-14 week pregnancy by some aneuploidies. the method of transabdominal biopsy of the koryon in the following risk groups; the presence of nuchal translucency- 22 cases ( 24,7 % ), the age P0704.Identification Of Fetal Dna In Systemic Lupus Erythe- of the pregnant woman above 36 years- 3 cases ( 3,4 % ), nuchal translu- matosus cency in combination with the mentioned age -5 cases ( 5,6 % ), one of the M. P. S. Alvarenga1, E. C. Pavarino Bertelli2, M. Abbud F2, R. A. Toledo2, spouses having chromosome reconstruction - 6 cases ( 6,7 % ), birth of a I. M. M. Fernandes2, F. A. Malara2, E. H. Tajara3, E. M. Goloni Bertollo2 child with congenital or hereditary diseases - 2 cases ( 2,3 % ), other 1Famerp - Faculdade de Medicina de So Jos do Rio Preto; So Jos do cases- 51 ( 57,3 % ). The total of 89 pregnant women have been exam- Rio Preto - SP, Brazil; 2Faculdade de Medicina de So Jos do Rio Preto; ined. There were found 8 cases ( 9 % ) of digital chromosome anomalies; So Jos do Rio Preto -SP, Brazil; 3Instituto de Biocincias, Letras e Cin- trisomy 18 - 2 cases, trisomy 21 - 2 cases, monosomy according to sexu- cias Exatas de So Jos do Rio Preto - UNESP; So Jos do Rio Preto - al chromosomes- 2 cases, monosomy according to autosomes- 1 case, SP, Brazil tetraploidia - 1 case. The majority of chromosome anomalies was found to eny.goloni@famerp.br belong to the first risk group. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease charac- The results of the investigation held made it possible to come to the fol- terized by diverse clinical manifestations and the presence of multiple lowing conclusions; it is reasonable to hold the first ultrasonic prenatal autoantibodies. SLE affects approximately 1 in 2000 individuals and is screening of pregnant women at the term of 10 - 14 week pregnancy; form- more prevalent in women, particularly their reproductive years.There are ing groups of women with a high degree of the risk of giving birth to chil- multiple etiological factors involved in this pathogenesis. Recent studies dren with congenital and hereditary pathology it is necessary to consider indicate that fetal cells can survive in the maternal circulation for many not only conventional medico- genetic recommendations but the discovery years post partum. This finding suggests that fetal microchimerism could in the fetus of ultrasonic markers of hereditary and congenital diseases, be involved in the autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, such as nuchal translucency. Sjgrens syndrome and scleroderma. We used the polymerase chain reac- tion (PCR) to identify Y-chromosome sequences in DNAextracted from P0701. Multicolor FISH for Detection of Common Aneuploi- peripheral-blood cells and renal biopsy from women with SLE and health dies in Fetuses from Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion women both had had male children. We describe the presence, of the y- V. Jobanputra, K. Kucheria chromosome-specific sequence in DNA extracted from the peripheral- Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences; New Delhi, blood and biopsy of women with SLE. These observations provide support India for the hypothesis that a fetal antimaternal graft-versus-host reaction may vjobanputra@hotmail.com be an immunopathogenic mechanism in the development of SLE in some Aneuploidy is a leading cause of reproductive wastage. About 50% of women. spontaneous abortions have abnormal chromosomal complement. Chro- Financial support; FAPESP- Funda o de Amparo Pesquisa do EstadoPosters: Gene Structure and Function 237 de So Paulo, Here we report the identification of one complex I gene; NDUFA5. The FAMERP- Faculdade de Medicina de So Jos do Rio Preto NDUFA5 spans approximately 14 Kb of genomic DNAand is composed of five exons (Gene Bank ac. No. AF044415-AF044418). The promoter P0705.Microsatellite instability in the FRAXA-FRAXF region; region was studied for putative transcription factor binding sites and it implications for the mechanisms of trinucleotide repeat reveals that the gene is controlled by housekeeping transcriptional machin- expansion. ery. As usual for housekeeping genes, the 5 end of NDUFA5 is embedded V. V. Strelnikov, O. Drozd, M. Nemtsova, D. Zaletayev in a CpG-island. In the human genome there are several processed Research Centre for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation pseudogenes of NDUFA5. The transcriptional start site of human NDUFA5 vstrel@iname.com was mapped by primer extension on a single Tresidue 109 bp upstream Reported associations between fragile X (FX) mutations and adjacent the translation start codon. The functional gene was localized by FISH to polymorphic markers may reflect founder effects as well as microsatellite 7q31. The position was future refined using two NDUFA5 specific STSs on instability (MI). To better understand the bases of mutational processes in radiation hybrid panel. NDUFA5 maps 3 cR distal to the genetic marker the FX populations, we analyzed allele frequencies and mode of inheri- D7S648 that is positioned within YAC883_a_2. By heteroduplex analysis tance of DXS584, FRAXAC1, FRAXAC2, DXS1691, DXS1123 and there was found one variable nucleotide at the position 318 (T/C). The fre- DXS1113 microsatellites in normal and FX individuals in Russia. The study quencies of this variation were analyzed in Complex I deficiency patients of inheritance mode for DXS584, FRAXAC1, FRAXAC2, DXS1691, and age matched control group, no significant difference was found. The DXS1123 and DXS1113 revealed 3 DXS548, 4 FRAXAC1 and 2 DXS1123 variant seems not to be related to any disease phenotype. unstable FX maternally derived meioses among 54 tested, thus showing that not only an FMR1 (CGG)n repeat is unstable on FX chromosomes, but P0708.Sequencing of the LDLR gene and of the coding exons other microsatellites as well. The proximal bounder of the region of FX- of LRP1 on individual DNAsamples reveals novel mutations associated microsatellite instability is no closer than 150 kb to FRAXA in both genes. (DXS548 being unstable) and the distal bounder is no farther than 1.8 Mb F. Van Leuven (DXS1123 being unstable and DXS1113 being stable). The boundaries of Experimental Genetics Group; Leuven, Belgium this region coincide with the boundaries of delayed replication zone fredvl@med.kuleuven.ac.be detected on X(q27.3-q28) in the cell lines from the FX patients. Spreading Methods were developed using long-range amplification to sequence all of late replication zone changes the replication timing leading to the inabil- the 89 exons of the LRP1 gene and the entire LDLR gene (exons 2-18 and ity of mismatch repare system to correct the replication mistakes naturally introns) on individual DNAsamples. Analysis of 3 test-groups of 22 healthy occurring in repetitive sequences and in trinucleotide repeats particularly. individuals, 29 Alzheimer patients and 18 individuals with different clinical It means that FX mutations arise not on a specific haplotype background, and molecularly uncharacterized lipid metabolism problems, revealed 5 but are themselves results of specific occurrences of MI, thus depending coding polymorphisms in de LRP1 gene, i.e. A217V, A775P, D2080N, not solely on the internal properties of FMR1 (CGG)n repeat, but on the D2632E and G4379S. No genetic defect was evident in the LRP1 gene of chromosomal background as well, representing an example of position any of the AD patients, further excluding LRP1 as a major genetic problem effect on human X-chromosomes. in AD. LRPA217V (exon 6) was present in the 3 groups as a normal poly- morphism, while D2632E was observed only once, in a healthy volunteer. P0706.AGlu to Ala Polymorphism Leads to Loss of Function On the other hand, LRP1 alleles A775P, D2080N, and G4379 were of the Human P2X7 Receptor encountered only in patients with FH or with undefined problems of lipid W. Zhang, B. Gu, R. Worthington, R. Sluyter, P. Dao-Ung, J. Barden, J. metabolism. This finding forced us to analyze their LDLR gene entirely Wiley from exons 2 to 18. This yielded a sequence contig of 33,567 nucleotides, University of Sydney; Sydney, Australia and thereby - finally - an exact physical map of the LDLR gene. This cor- Weiyi.Zhang@swsahs.nsw.gov.au rects the published and web-posted maps in many positions, and include The P2X7 receptor is a ligand-gated cation selective channel which medi- not only the exact size but also their content of about 250 Alu-related ates ATP-induced apoptosis of cells of the immune system. We and others repeat sequences distributed all over the gene. In addition, 4 novel LDLR have shown that P2X7 is non-functional both in lymphocytes and mono- mutations that cause FH were defined, i.e. del e7-10, exon 9 mutation cytes from some subjects. To study a possible genetic basis, we N407T, a 20 bp insertion in exon 4, and a double mutation C292W/K290R sequenced genomic DNAcoding for the carboxy terminal tail of P2X7. In 9 in exon 6. No evidence for pathology connected to the LRP1 mutations of 45 normal subjects, a heterozygous nucleotide substitution (A1513C) was obtained by subsequent screening for the 5 LRP1 variants in larger was found while 1 subject carried the homozygous substitution which groups of 110 FH patients and 118 patients with molecularly undefined, codes for glutamic acid to alanine at amino acid position 496. Surface clinical problems of cholesterol and/or lipid metabolism. In three individu- expression of P2X7 on lymphocytes was not affected by this A1513C poly- als with a mutant LDLR gene also a variant LRP1 allele was present, but morphism demonstrated both by confocal microscopy and immunofluores- without direct, obvious clinical compound effects, indicating that the variant cent staining. Monocytes and lymphocytes from the A1513C homozygous LRP1 alleles must, at this moment, be considered polymorphisms. subject expressed non-functional receptor while heterozygotes showed P2X7 function which was half that of germline P2X7. Results of transfec- P0709.Abnormal mRNAsplicing resulting from four different tion experiments showed the mutant P2X7 receptor was non-functional mutations in the CFTR gene when expressed at low receptor density but regained function at a high M. Tzetis1, A. Efthymiadou2, S. Doudounakis3, E. Kanavakis2 receptor density. This density-dependence mutant P2X7 function was also 1Athens University; Athens, Greece; 2Athens University, Medical Genetics; seen on differentiation of fresh monocytes to macrophages with interferon- Athens, Greece; 3St Sophias Childrens Hospital; Athens, Greece gamma which upregulated mutant P2X7 and partially restored its function. mtzeti@cc.uoa.gr P2X7-mediated apoptosis of lymphocytes was impaired in homozygous Four different putative splicing mutations in the CFTR gene have been mutant P2X7 compared with germline (8.6% versus 35.2%). The data sug- studied by analysing mRNAextracted from nasal epithelial cells harvested gest that the glutamic acid at position 496 is required for optimal assembly from patients with cystic fibrosis and one heterozygote with reccurent of the P2X7 receptor. episodes of pneumonia. Four patients carried the 621+3A>G mutation (2 with F508del, 1 with 1898+1G>T and 1 with W1282X), 1 carried the P0707.Genomic organization of the human respiratory chain 2751+2T>A( with F508del), another the 296+1G>C ( with 3130+1G>A) complex I 13-kDa subunit gene NDUFA5. and 1 heterozygote 1717-9T>C (with D565G and R668C in cis). For each K. Tamboom1, I. Pata2, I. Wittig3, M. Wehnert3, A. Metspalu2 case two non-CF control subjects were also studied for the appropriate 1Institute of Experimental and Clinical Medicine; Tallinn, Estonia; 2Institute cDNAfragment. The 621+3A>G mutation resulted in activation of an alter- of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Estonian Biocentre; Tartu, native splice site within exon 4 (28.35.9% of total cDNA) and skipping of Estonia; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greif- exon 4 (6.751.35% of total cDNA). The 2751+2T>Amutation resulted in swald; Greifswald, Germany skipping of exon 14a (52.6% of total cDNA), the 296+1G>C mutation kristiin@ekmi.ee resulted in skipping of exon 2 (56% of total cDNA). The patients carrying NADH; ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first multisubunit the above mutations presented with PI and all except the patient carrying enzyme complex in the respiratory electron transport chain of mitochon- the 296+1G>C mutation were diagnosed between birth and 8mos. Muta- dria. It catalyzes the transfer of electrons from NADH to ubiquinone cou- tion 1717-9T>C resulted in skipping of exon 11 as a minor product and pled to proton translocation across the membrane. Complex I contain at skipping of exons 9 and 11 as a major product. The patient was diagnosed least 42 subunits, seven of them are encoded by mitochondria and remain- with reccurent episodes of pneumonia and has normal sweat test. Open ders are the products of nuclear genes and are imported into the organelle. reading frame is maintained in transcpirts produced by mutations238 Posters: Gene Structure and Function 621+3A>G, 2751+2T>A, and 296+1G>C (except for the change in the last Homozygous male and female mice also exhibits normal phenotype, how- aa of exon 1 from Ser to Arg), but deletion of exon 11 as a consequence ever THEG -/- male mice are infertile. Further molecular, histological and of mutation 1719-9T>C results in a stop codon within exon 12. physiological analyses are in progress, which will give us insights into the critical role of THEG protein in male germ cell development. The cellular P0710. Genomic Structure And Functional Analysis Of The type and subcellular localization of the THEG protein in the testicular sec- Human Ssadh Gene tions of adult mice were determined by immunostaining with a polyclonal P. Malaspina1, P. Blasi1, M. Corvaro1, F. Amaldi1, A. Novelletto2, F. Loreni1 antibody against THEG protein. Apredominant signal was detected in the 1University Tor Vergata; Rome, Italy; 2University of Calabria; Rende, Italy nucleus of round spermatids, whereas no specific staining was observed patrizia.malaspina@uniroma2.it in other germ cell stages and in somatic cells. Ahuman homologue of Mitochondrial NAD+ dependent succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase THEG (hTHEG) was cloned. The complete genomic structure was charac- (SSADH, OMIM 271980) deficiency is a defect in the GABAdegradative terised from sequence analysis of a genomic hTHEG PAC clone and from pathway that results in 4-hydroxybutyric aciduria, a rare inborn error of the release of the working draft sequence of the human genome in the metabolism inherited in an autosomal recessive manner [1]. We had GenBank. already identified and physically mapped the SSADH gene in 6p22 [2]. Analysis of cDNA clones encompassing the entire coding sequence P0713.Relationship between transcription of carnitine palmi- allowed to predict a 535 residues amino acid sequence (accession n. toyltransferase (CPT) in rat liver and in human peripheral Y11192). We used this information to detect the first two mutations that blood mononuclear cells and carnitine levels affect SSADH expression by causing exon skipping during mRNAmatura- H. Karlic1, S. Lohninger2, C. Laschan3, A. Lohninger2 tion [3]. Northern blot analysis revealed the presence of two SSADH 1Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Leukemia Research and Hematology; mRNAs (about 4 and 2 Kb), whose relative abundance seems to vary in Vienna, Austria; 2Institute of Medical Chemistry, University of Vienna; Vien- different tissues. These data suggest that, although having a central role in na, Austria; 33rd Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital; Vienna, Austria the cellular metabolism, a tissue-specific expression of the SSADH gene molzell@adis.at could exist. The different length of the two trascripts could be partially due This study focused on the influence of dietary L-carnitine supplementation to the alternative usage of two polyadenilation signals that we identified on the transcription rate of carnitine palmitoyltransferases (CPT-1Aand and localized 78 bp and 2 Kb downstream the ORF. In order to investigate CPT-1B) which are key enzymes of fatty acid metabolism. The expression the qualitative and quantitative difference between the two mRNAs we first of these enzymes is related to the metabolic availability of L-carnitine decided to identify putative promoter region(s) through transfection of which is decreased in aging subjects and in metabolic disorders such as reporter gene constructs cloning different portions of 5 Kb region upstream hyperlipidemia. mRNAof all samples was determined by the LightCycler the ATG start codon. The results show that a 180 bp region immediately SYBR green technique (RT-LC-PCR). In animal experiments 100 upstream the ATG is able to drive considerable activity of the luciferase mg/kg/bw/d L-carnitine was administered orally to old (21months) male reporter gene as contrasted with more distal DNAportions. Acknowledg- Spraque Dawley rats for a period of 3 months. Old (21 months) and adult ment; This work was supported by Telethon Onlus Italia grant. E.818 (P.M.) (7 months) control animals received tap water exclusively. Livers from car- References [1] Chambliss K.L., et al. J. Biol. Chem. 270;461-467, 1995. [2] nitine treated old rats showed an 8-12 fold higher transcription rate regard- Malaspina P., et al. Genomics 36;399-407, 1996. [3] Chambliss K.L., et al. ing ratios both of CPT/-actin and CPT/G6PDH. Further, PBMC (peripher- Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63;399-408, 1998. al blood mononuclear cells) from 10 healthy humans and 5 patients with hyperlipidaemia type IV were analyzed. In cases with hyperlipidaemia type P0711.Alternative first exons of PTCH1 are differentially reg- IV we observed an up to 100-fold increase in CPTtranscripts relative to - ulated in vivo and may confer different functions to the actin or G6PDH (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase) after at least 4 PTCH1 protein weeks of L-carnitine supplementation (1g/d), but no further rise when in a P. Kogerman1, D. Krause2, F. Rahnama2, L. Kogerman1, A. Undn2, P. comparable range to controls. To our knowledge this is the first report to Zaphiropoulos2, R. Toftgrd2 date providing direct evidence for a stimulatory effect of dietary L-carnitine 1National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics; Tallinn, Estonia; on the transcription rate of CPTin PBMC. This appears to reflect a meta- 2Karolinska Institutet; Huddinge, Sweden bolic situation comparable to that in liver. Thus, this study provides a non- priitk@kbfi.ee invasive approach for monitoring the effect of L-carnitine deficiency and L- PTCH1 gene is a human tumor suppressor frequently gene mutated in carnitine supplementation on oxidative metabolism. basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and several other tumor types. It encodes a receptor for soluble factors of the hedgehog family. Binding of hedgehog to P0714.Quantitative Analysis of Immune-Mediated Stimulation the receptor relieves its inhibitory action on the transmembrane co-recep- of Tumor Necrosis Factor in Macrophages at the mRNA-level tor SMOH. In this study we described alternative first exons of the PTCH1 using RT-PCR and LightCycler SYBR Green Technology and tumor suppressor gene and shown that they are differentially regulated in at the Protein Level using ELISA normal tissues, exon 1B being expressed at very low levels and the major M. Weghofer1, H. Karlic1, A. Haslberger2 mRNAspecies containing exon 1 or 1A. Exon 1B transcripts were found to 1Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Leukemia Research and Hematology; be specifically upregulated in nodular BCCs. All PTCH1 alternatively Vienna, Austria; 2Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Vien- spliced isoforms encode proteins that colocalize and interact with SMOH in na; Vienna, Austria doubly transfected cells. Furthermore, functional assays demonstrated that molzell@adis.at whereas all PTCH1 isoforms can inhibit the activity of SHH, only the Expression of cytokines such as TNF (Tumor Necrosis Factor) as induced PTCH1B isoform is capable of fully inhibiting SMOH activity. These results by lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from the outer membrane of gram negative indicate that in tumor cells the PTCH1B promoter is specifically activated bacteria has been associated with septic shock. As macrophages and den- and importantly, that the N-terminal part of PTCH1 including exon 1B is dritic cells have been considered as the most important target cells, the required for full inhibition of SMOH signaling but not for physical interaction focus of this study was to investigate quantitative changes in mRNAsyn- with SMOH. thesis rates of TNF. The stress-sensitve murine macrophage cell line RAW 264.7 was chosen an an in vitro model. RAW 264.7 cells were stimulated P0712. Germ cell-Sertoli cell interaction; Functional analysis for 2, 4, 6 and 18 hours with 100 ng/ml LPS. Using RT-PCR and LightCy- of THEG gene cler SYBR Green Technology we could show a 3-10 fold increase in the A. U. Mannan, G. Nica, P. Burfeind, W. Engel LPS-induced transcription rate of TNF which decreased after 18 hours Institute of Human Genetics; Gttingen, Germany down to the 2-fold rate of untreated controls. Analysis of TNF-synthesis at amannan@gwdg.de the protein level using ELISAindicated a 40-70 fold rise in the TNF syn- Stage-specific interactions between Sertoli cells and germ cells are central thesis rate after 2 hours which was still elevated 10 - 30 fold after 18 hours in the regulation of spermatogenesis, but their molecular mechanisms are compared to untreated controls. These data indicate that expression of still poorly understood. In the present study, a differentially expressed TNF is regulated at the posttranscriptional level. gene, named THEG, which is specifically expressed in spermatids, is char- acterised. Its expression is up regulated by some unknown factor/s from P0715.The isolation of new of human minisatellite UPS29 and Sertoli cells. The gene is approximately 10 kb pairs in size and contains 8 search for its homologs in animals. exons. The ORF of 376 amino acids encodes for a 42.7 kDa putative I. Ogneva, I. Suchkova nuclear protein. To elucidate the potential role of the THEG, we deleted the Institute for Experimental Medicine; Saint-Petersberg, Russian Federation gene in mice through homologous recombination. Both male and female molgen@molgen.iem.ras.spb.ru mice heterozygous for THEG mutation appeared normal and fertile. The molecular mechanism of the micro- and minisatellite DNAinstabilityPosters: Gene Structure and Function 239 remains mainly unclear, though the role of GC-content is known. The main P0718. Expression and alternative splicing of the candidate aims of this work were an isolation of new GC-rich human minisatellite and tumor suppressor gene DICE1 the search for its homologs in animals. The computer analysis of the cos- I. Wieland, A. Rpke, P. F. Wieacker mid with a 34175 bp clone of human DNA, performed by Dr G. Vergnaud, Institute for Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke-University; Magdeburg, revealed the presence of gene containing a minisatellite sequence in one Germany of its intrones and named UPS29. We determined the repeated element of ilse.wieland@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de this sequence to be 46 bp long with the total length of 745 bp. Our com- The candidate tumor suppressor gene DICE1 is located within a previous- puter analysis showed that the remarkable feature of repeat is the pres- ly reported LOH critical region telomeric to the RB1 gene in chromosomal ence of one direct and two inverted short repeats (5 bp long) in the middle region 13q14.3. Intron/exon mapping of the DICE1 gene revealed 18 of repeat. These short repeats are analogous to the elements, found in exons that are preceded by a GC-rich promoter. The DICE1 mRNA is sopC-locus of F-plasmid in E. coli. UPS29 contains a large number of sites, expressed in a variety of normal tissues and it is downregulated in tumor that are homologous to hot spots of recombination of various organisms cells suggesting tumor-specific inactivation of DICE1 by gene silencing. In and it also contains four sites for topoisomerase I. Further analysis adult brain an alternatively spliced DICE1 transcript (ASP1) has been iden- revealed a sequence in Mus musculus, that is expressed in hypothalamus tified that appears to be differentially expressed. In the variant DICE1 tran- and codes a 322 bp mRNA. Some exons of this sequence, including the script ASP1 exon 3 is spliced out which results in a DICE1 protein lacking once flanking UPS29 element, are highly homologuos (86%) to human a potential protein kinase C phosphorylation site. In order to determine one. Described computer analysis gave us an opportunity to isolate human expression of the DICE1 mRNAs in different brain regions RT-PCR based UPS29 with the help of our modification of Southern analysis and its expression profiling of a regional brain panel was performed. Expression mouse homolog using PCR. of DICE1 was observed in frontal and temporal lobe, cerebellum, substan- tia nigra, caudate nucleus, thalamus, hypothalamus, pons, medulla and P0716.The structure, expression, and evolution of the human spinal cord but not in hippocampus and amygdala. The ASP1 transcript nucleoporin 155 (NUP155) gene appears to be expressed predominantly in substantia nigra. From these X. Zhang1, H. Yang2, J. Yu3, N. Gregersen4, E. Niebuhr5, L. Bolund1 results we conclude that in the brain alternative splicing and expression of 1Aarhus University; Aarhus, Denmark; 2Chinese Academy of Sciences; the DICE1 mRNAis regulated in a region-specific manner. Beijing, China; 3University of Washington; Seattle, WA United States; 4Aarhus University Hospital; Aarhus, Denmark; 5Copenhagen University; P0719.Analysis of expression and function of the mammalian Copenhagen, Denmark pelota gene xqzhang@humgen.au.dk M. Sallam, H. Lee, R. Shamsadin, W. Engel, I. Adham Nucleoporins (NUPs) are the main components of nuclear pore complex Institut fr Humangenetik; Gttingen, Germany (NPC) which are involved in the regulation of bi-directional trafficking of mahmoud2001@yahoo.com molecules, especially mRNAs and proteins, through the nucleopores During spermatogenesis, spermatogonia undergo extensive mitotic divi- between nucleus and cytoplasm. We have obtained the complete sions forming primary spermatocytes, which then remain in an extended sequence and genomic organization of the gene for human NUP155, one premeiotic G2 phase bevor entry into two meiotic divisions and produce of the most abundant nucleoporins in the NPC, by sequencing and anno- haploid spermatids. Several genes that regulate the meiotic division in tating a 165.6 kb human BAC clone. The human NUP155 gene is estimat- Drosophila have recently been identified. In the male homozygous for a ed to be 90 kb in length and contains 36 exons. It is expressed in all the mutation in pelota gene, the germline mitotic divisions are normal but the tissues tested with two major alternatively-spliced transcripts resulted from cell cycle arrests prior to the first meiotic division. The resulting 4N germ the alternative usage of a 5 cryptic splice donor in Intron 1 and two cells in testis of pelota mutants develop to spermatids with head and tail. polyadenylation signals. We have also cloned a full-length cDNAof the The continued differentiation of 4N spermatids after meiotic failure sug- mouse Nup155 gene, as well as the Nup153, a Nup155 orthologue, from gested that the pelota gene is required only for transition of the germ cells the pufferfish (Fugu) genome, which is only 9 kb in length with similar from premeiotic G2 phase to the meiotic phase. To understand the function genomic organization but much smaller introns. Comparative analyses of of pelota gene in mammals, we have isolated the murine and human gene the NUP155 orthologues in human, mouse, rat, Fugu, Arabidopsis, and determined its chromosomal localization. The predicted murine and Drosophila, and yeast, reveal a loss of one of the two paralogues, human proteins share a 65 % sequence identity with the Drosophila pelota increased numbers of introns in higher organisms and highly conserved protein. Southern blot and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analy- amino acid sequences in eukaryote evolution. The regions harboring the sis reveal that the pelota gene is present as a single copy gene in murine NUP155 orthologues in the human and Fugu genomes have different gene and human genome and is localized on murine chromosome 13 and on orders, advocating cautious interpretation of synteny in comparative human chromosome 5q11.2. Northern blot analysis indicates that the genomics analysis even in the vertebrate lineage. human gene is expressed in two alternative spliced mRNAs ( 1.6 and 2.1 kb ). The 1.6 kb mRNAis found in all tissuse studied, while the 2.1 kb tran- P0717. Exclusion of Gemin3 and Profilin II as modifying script is detected predominantly in testis. To determine the function of the genes for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) using denaturing pelota gene in mammalian spermatogenesis, we have generated the high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) Pelota mutant mice and analysed the phenotype of homozygous mutant. C. Helmken, B. Wirth In contrast to normal development of the Drosophila pelota mutant, the Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany pelota deficient mice die in theearly embryonic development. C.Helmken@gmx.de Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by homozygous mutations of the P0720. Functional characterisation of an atypical LINE1 ele- survival motor neuron gene 1 (SMN1). SMN, located on chromosome ment (LIPMA2) contained in intron 11 of the human dys- 5q13, is part of an 800 kDa protein complex with a crucial role in snRNP trophin gene. biogenesis, pre-mRNAsplicing and a presumable function in neural trans- A. Ferlini1, F. Gualandi1, P. Rimessi1, E. Calzolari1, B. Cardazzo2, T. Patar- port. In rare cases sibs with identical 5q13-homologs and identical SMN1 nello2, M. Dunckley3, F. Muntoni3 mutations can show variable phenotypes, suggesting that SMAis modified 1Sezione di Genetica Medica, University of Ferrara; Ferrara, Italy; 2Dipar- by other, yet unknown factors. Recently, we excluded SIP1 and Htra2- timento di Biologia, University of Padova; Padova, Italy; 3Department of beta1, two SMN-interacting proteins, as putative SMAmodifying genes. Paediatrics, HH, Imperial College School of Medicine; London, United Here we report the analysis of Gemin3 and Profilin II, two further SMN- Kingdom interacting proteins, as putative SMN modifiers and searched for muta- fla@dns.unife.it tions/polymorphisms using DHPLC. We studied the complete coding Several recent observations suggest that LINE1 mobile elements may not region in 36 sibs belonging to 15 SMAfamilies displaying identical 5q13 only represent junk DNA. The finding that they can co-mobilise 3 tails, haplotypes and SMN1 mutations but variable phenotypes. Two different which may be relevant both for exon shuffling and other regulatory func- polymorphisms were detected in Gemin3 exon 11 but with no significant tions raises the question of whether and how these elements may function association to the phenotype. To look for quantitative differences between in the genome. We carried on functional as well as phylogenetic studies on transcription isoforms and the total amount of RNA, we performed quanti- an atypical LINE1 element, LIPMA2, which contains an unusual 3720 bp tative analysis of RT-PCR products from 26 sibs of 11 families with identi- tail at its 5 end. Atruncated (but preserving the 3 end 800 bp of the tail) cal genotypes without identifying any significant difference between phe- LIPMA2 element is normally present in the dystrophin gene intron 11 and notypically discordant sibs. Based on these data, we suggest that the is involved in a deletion causing a dystrophinopathy. We have defined this intrafamilial phenotypic variability in SMAfamilies is not caused by poly- rearrangement finding out that it brought the LIPMA2 tail close to a cryptic morphic variants or transcription differences within Gemin3 or Profilin II. splice site and caused a splicing pathology. This observation suggests that240 Posters: Gene Structure and Function the LIPMA2 5 tail might play a role in the splicing process. In order to func- sists of signal peptide, LAPand mature TGF-beta1. LAPassociates with tionally and phylogenetically investigate this novel element of L1 class, we mature TGF-beta1 by noncovalent binding and represses the activation as firstly tested by Zoo-blot and PCR/sequencing the presence of the 3 end latent form. To know how these mutations cause CED, we performed func- 800 bp of the LIPMA2 5 tail in genomic DNAof several species. Results tional analysis of mutated TGF-beta1. Pulse-chase analysis and ELISA showed that this sequence is a primate specific repeat element that revealed that all mutations cause instability of the TGF-beta1 and LAP appeared firstly in lemur, at least 25-45 million years ago, when the line- complex and the increase of free TGF-beta1. This instability is inhibited by age of the common ancestor of old world monkeys and hominoids in vitro administration of dexamethasone. The results gave an insight into emerged. Comparative analysis also showed that The LIPMA2 5 tail con- not only the pathogenesis of CED but also the function of TGF-beta1 in tains several regulatory motifs, particularly in its 3 end (last 800 bp), that bone remodeling. are adjacent to the LINE1 consensus, and at least 7 tail regions are well conserved among primates as well as human chromosomes. In order to P0723. Intracellular localization of the y+LAT-1 amino acid functionally test this tail, we used a reporter construct containing the beta- transporter; green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion studies globin exon 2 , intron 2 splicing borders, and beta-globin exon 3, under the M. Heinonen T7 promoter control for in vitro transcription. We inserted in this construct University of Turku; Turku, Finland the entire 3 end 800 bp of the tail. We also made a control construct sim- minna.heinonen@utu.fi ilar in length and containing the full beta-globin intron 2. From these two Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal recessive disease in constructs, together the control-construct, DNA templates have been which the absorption of cationic amino acids is defective in small intestine obtained by PCR and have been in vitro transcribed. Asplicing assay was and renal tubules. This leads to excretion of cationic amino acids in urine. than carried out using HeLa cell extracts as splicing substrate. The exper- The symptoms associated with LPI are caused by defective amino acid iments showed that the construct containing the LIPAM2 tail is affecting the uptake leading to protein malnutrition, which causes growth failure and beta-globin splicing. The presence of several regulatory motifs, including at osteoporosis. The absorption defect also causes vomiting and sometimes least one purine-rich SR binding site and other transcription controllers in hyperammonemia after protein feeding, and children with LPI often devel- the conserved regions, together with the splicing capacity of this tail, sug- op protein aversion. LPI belongs to the Finnish disease heritage, but gests that it may represent a conserved non-coding sequence (CNS). This appears globally. All together, there are more than 100 LPI cases world- observation might have several implications in the general role(s) retropo- wide of which half of the cases are reported in Finland. LPI is caused by son-related sequences may have in genome plasticity. Acknowledgement mutations in SLC7A7 (solute carrier family 7 member 7) gene encoding This work has been supported by the EU grant FINGER, number QLG2- y+LAT-1 amino acid transporter polypeptide. The SLC7A7 gene comprises CT-1999-00920 (to AF) of 11 exons and 10 introns spanning about 48 kb of genomic DNA. All Finnish patients have the same founder mutation 1181-2 A Tor LPIFin, a P0721. Ceruloplasmin Receptor Involved In Copper Metabo- splice site mutation leading to a 10 base-pair deletion in the cDNAlevel, lism Is a Member Of Transmembrane Ceruloplasmin-like Mul- which is absent elsewhere. The patients outside Finland have a variety of ticopper Oxidase Family. different mutations. y+LAT-1 (y+L amino acid transporter-1) has 12 N. Platonova1, A. Vasin2, B. Mitshenko2, N. Tsymbalenko1, L. Puchkova1 hydrophobic transmembrane domains, 6 extracellular and 5 intracellular 1Institute for Experimental Medicine; St. Petersburg, Russian Federation; loops. Both the carboxy and amino termini are cytoplasmic. The y+LAT-1 2State Technical University; St. Petersburg, Russian Federation protein forms a heterodimeric structure with the 4F2 cell surface antigen chemist@ctinet.ru receptor heavy chain (4F2hc). The heterodimer is responsible of the Electrophoretically pure ceruloplasmin receptor (CpR), which is the protein cationic amino acid transport activity on the basolateral membrane of the of metabolic copper system (MCS) in mammalian, was isolated from polar epithelium cells in the small intestine and renal tubules. In this study, human erythrocyte membranes using the affinity chromatography. The the cellular localization of the wild type and mutant y+LAT-1 is studied by clone containing the insert of CpR cDNAwas isolated from the expression using GFP-reporter protein fusions in different cultured cells. Also, the het- cDNAlibrary from human placenta. The comparative BLASTanalysis of erodimeric interactions of y+LAT-1 with the 4F2 heavy chain are studied by the two sequencing clone fragments in the GenBank database shows using fluorescent microscopy and fluorescent fusion proteins of both of the these sequences are homologous to human Cp cDNA. The 638 b.p. subunits of the active transport system. sequence (NAF211154) contains fragments that are homologous to Cp exons 4-7 (81% identity). The deduced amino acid sequence has 83% of P0724. Cloning of the human DDAH1 gene; a new player in identity to E216  E427 segment of Cp. One of the two glycosylated sites the pathogenesis of renal cell carcinoma? of the compared Cp region remains unchanged in CpR. All ligands for D. Steinemann1, B. Hinzmann2, S. Gesk1, H. J. Heidebrecht3, G. Beck- mononuclear copper type 1 site of Cp are conservative in CpR. The 257 mann2, L. Harder1, W. Grote1, A. Rosenthal2, B. Schlegelberger1, R. b.p. sequence (NAF211153) has 76% sequence identity with Cp cDNA Siebert1 exon 16. This deduced amino acid has no homologies to any a.a. 1Institute of Human Genetics; Kiel, Germany; 2metaGen Gesellschaft fr sequences in the Genbank database. According to the analysis with the Genomforschung; Berlin, Germany; 3Institute of Hematopathology; Kiel, PC/GENE system it contains a putative transmembrane domain. Thus we Germany can relate CpR to the family of transmembrane CP-like proteins. The com- steinemann@medgen.uni-kiel.de puter analysis of 20 proteins participating in MCS of various organisms Nitric oxide (NO) is an important regulator of many cellular processes, using CLUSTAL W and PHYLIP programmes found out CpR sequence including inflammation, necrotic and apoptotic cell death. NO is produced NAF211154 is the most similar to Cp, Heph and Fet3. CpR sequence by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase, which is competitively inhibited by NAF211153 is the most similar to Aso and Ccc2. This data make us think endogenously produced asymmetrically methylated arginine residues. The that Cp, CpR and Heph have a common ancestral gene with Fet3 from S. enzyme dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH) specifically cerevisiae. hydrolyzes these methylated arginines to citrulline and methylamines and thereby regulates NOS activity and thus the NO level in vivo. During the P0722.Mutations in Latency Associated Protein (LAP) Cause identification and characterization of a new apoptosis inducing gene, Instability of the TGF-beta1 Complex and Camurati-Engel- BCL10, mapping to the human chromosomal region 1p22, we identified the mann Disease (CED) human DDAH1 gene. This gene is highly conserved during evolution. It is A. Kinoshita1, T. Saito2, H. Sugawara1, K. Yamasaki1, Y. Makita3, K. almost identical to the rat DDAH gene and shows considerable homology Yoshiura1, N. Taniguchi2, N. Niikawa1 to genes encoding arginine deiminases from B. burgdorferi, P. aeruginosa, 1Dept. Human Genet., Nagasaki Univ. Sch. Med.; Nagasaki, Japan; 2Dept. S. pyogenes and C. elegans. The gene structure of the human DDAH1 Biochemistry, Osaka Univ.; Osaka, Japan; 3Dept. Public Health, implies 6 exons of 627bp, 102bp, 73bp, 119bp, 143bp and 572bp (includ- Asahikawa Med. Coll.; Asahikawa, Japan ing 5 and 3 UTR) interspaced by five introns of 31kb, 7169bp, 971bp, d399006a@stcc.nagasaki-u.ac.jp 8491bp 25.5kb und 3171bp. Electronic expression analysis of DDAH1 CED (MIM *131300) or progressive diaphyseal dysplasia (DPD1) is an revealed wide expression of the DDAH1 gene. Remarkably in renal tumor autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyperosteosis and sclero- tissue DDAH1 was significantly downregulated as compared to normal sis of the diaphyses of the long bones. We identified, in 10 CED families (8 renal tissue implying a role of DDAH1 in the pathogenesis of renal cell car- Japanese and 2 Caucasians), four different missense mutations (R218H, cinomas. To identify mechanisms leading to downregulation of the R218C, C223R and C225R) in the TGFB1 gene at a domain correspon- DDAH1gene in renal tumors we screened the six exons of DDAH1 for ding to the C-terminus of LAPof latent TGF-beta1. TGF-beta1 is translat- mutations of the coding region by PCR-SSCPand partial sequencing. In ed as a precursor protein with 390 amino acids, and dimerized by a disul- 20 renal cell carcinomas analysed no inactivating mutations were fide bond at the cysteine residues. The TGF-beta1 precursor protein con- observed. Subsequently, monoclonal antibodies were raised against thePosters: Gene Structure and Function 241 recombinant DDAH1 protein. Current immunhistochemical experiments The expression of 24-H, the enzyme that degrades vitamin D3, is tightly with these antibodies address for other mechanisms like mutations in reg- regulated by this vitamin. 24-H was expressed in proximal and distal ulatory elements which could result in decreased expression or mRNA tubules in wild-type mice, but expression was not detected in APRT-defi- instability. This study was supported by the Hensel-Stiftung (Kiel, Ger- cient mice, suggesting diminished circulating levels of vitamin D3 in these many) mice. MGPis an inhibitor of soft tissue calcification and its expression in glomeruli, cortex, and medulla was up-regulated in APRTdeficiency, pos- P0725.Identification of Eight Novel 5-Exons in Cerebral Cap- sibly to limit further harmful calcification. KAPis the most abundant mRNA illary Malformation Gene-1 (CCM1) Encoding KRIT1 in the mouse kidney and its expression is under sex-hormone control. KAP I. Eerola, B. A. S. McIntyre, M. Vikkula expression in S3 proximal tubules was decreased in one-month-old APRT- Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology; Brussels, Belgium deficient mice, and expression was not detected in wild-type or mutant iiro.eerola@bchm.ucl.ac.be mice at three or six months. This decrease was not related to renal tubu- Cerebral capillary malformations (CCM), also known as cerebral caver- lar loss in diseased animals, but probably reflects the effects of age-relat- nomas, are vascular malformations of the brain. These malformations are ed hormonal changes. IMPT-1, which is expressed preferentially from the usually multiple and consist of dilated capillary-venous channels, which maternal allele, is involved in ion transport, and its expression in proximal tend to grow in size. The average age of clinical presentation is 33 years tubules was decreased in APRT-deficiency, possibly due to loss of cells and the most common symptoms include headache, seizures and cerebral expressing this gene, or to epigenetic inactivation. These observations haemorrhage. CCMs often show familial aggregation and genetic linkage suggest that hormonal imbalances, tissue calcification, and impaired ion has been established to three chromosomal loci, 7q21-22 (CCM1), 7p13- transport adversely affect renal function in APRT-deficient mice. The iden- 15 (CCM2) and 3q25.2-27 (CCM3). Identification of mutations in the CCM1 tification of genes expressed at different stages of disease progression, gene encoding KRIT1 (Krev-1 Interaction Trapped 1) has provided the first and the cell types expressing these genes, may lead to a better under- clue to the molecular mechanisms causing CCM. In addition, we showed standing of the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of nephrolithiasis. that vascular defects caused by CCM1 mutations are not restricted to cere- Supported by NIH grant DK38185. bral vasculature, but can also cause cutaneous lesions defined as hyperk- eratotic capillary-venous malformations. However, CCM1 mutations have P0728.Conditions for DNAphase transition induced by ligand not been identified in all the families linked to CCM1. Here we demonstrate binding. that the CCM1 gene contains eight additional 5-exons which may thus V. B. Teif1, D. Y. Lando2 encompass the missing mutations. 1Institute of Atomic and Molecular Physics; Minsk, Belarus; 2Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry; Minsk, Belarus P0726.Four novel testis specific ADAM family genes- studies vlad_teif@yahoo.com on their expression and function. Cooperative binding of ligands to DNAlattice may arise in result of two T. Rzymski, E. Bolcun, P. Grzmil, W. Engel types of interaction between ligands bound to DNA. Firstly, there are direct Institut fr Humangenetik; Gttingen, Germany contact interactions or any other kind of short-range interactions between trzymski@yahoo.com ligands that occupy adjacent base pairs. An example of contact interac- The ADAM (a disintegrin and a metalloprotease)protein family consists of tions is glue ends of subunits of lac-repressor that govern their assem- at least 31 members, wich are all characterized by the presence of metal- bling on DNA. Secondly, there are long-range interactions that are loprotease- and disintegrin- like domains. The latter has been suggested to occurred due to alteration of DNAstructure or/and DNAcharge density mediate cell- cell and cell- matrix interactions by binding to appropriate around bound ligands or of the whole DNAmolecule. Various antibiotics receptors of the integrin type. In this poster we present data concerning and drugs, metal ions and many other compounds give rise to such inter- four ADAMs genes that are only expressed in testis; testase 1, testase2, actions. In our recent work (1) we showed that some types of long-range testase 3 and ADAM 27. Testase 1, 2 and 3 show high homology to each (but not short-range) interactions may give rise to ligand binding to DNA other and to ADAM 20- human orthologous gene to the mouse fertilin a, with the character of phase transition. Such sharp transition may be The three testases probably function as active metalloproteases. ADAM 27 caused by changes in DNAtopology or by DNAcondensation. Here we is more related to cyritestine, a putative adhesion protein, which was found study influence of energetics and stoicheometry of binding on the charac- to be necessery for mouse fertility. All of these proteins are precisely regu- ter of phase transition. Physical meaning of these transitions is discussed. lated during postnatal testis development. Testase 1 expression was found 1. Lando D. Y., Teif V. B. Long-range interactions between ligands bound to start at day 5, testase 2 at day 20, testase 3 at day 5, ADAM 27 at day to a DNAmolecule give rise to adsorption with the character of phase tran- day 15 of the postnatal testis development. Two of these genes, testase2 sition of the first kind. // J. Biomol. Struct. & Dynam., V. 18, N 5., P. 903- and ADAM 27 are expressed exclusively in male germ cells. RT-PCR 911 (2000). analyse revealed that testase 2 was haploid and the other three ADAMs were diploid expressed. In order to investigate the function of these genes, P0729. Role of mutated BIGH3 in corneal dystrophies with knock- out mice are generated. The results of these functional analyses amyloid and non-amyloid deposits are reported. S. Morand1, C. Bonny1, F. L. Munier2, D. F. Schorderet1 1Division of Medical Genetics; Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Jules Gonin Eye P0727. Cell-specific expression of genes associated with Hospital; Lausanne, Switzerland renal injury in a knockout mouse model for kidney stone dis- Sabine.Morand@chuv.hospvd.ch ease Mutations in the BIGH3 gene are responsible for autosomal dominant A. Sahota, E. Tzortzaki, D. Glass, M. Yang, L. Deng, J. Tischfield corneal dystrophies (CD) linked to 5q. CD lattice type I is associated with Rutgers University; Piscataway, United States amyloid deposits and an R124C mutation while the Groenouw type I pro- sahota@nel-exchange.rutgers.edu duces non-amyloid deposits and is due to an R555W sequence variation. A prominent feature of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) defi- We investigated the mechanisms leading to deposits in 5q31-linked ciency is 2,8-dihydroxyadenine (DHA) nephrolithiasis. In a knockout corneal dystrophies. Although these 2 mutations represent hot spots, other mouse model for DHAlithiasis, we recently demonstrated changes in renal sequence variations have been reported in lattice type I-like phenotypes. mRNA expression for a subset of genes associated with inflammation, Methods ; The full length BIGH3 sequence without stop codon was ampli- chemotaxis, fibrosis, and calcification. As a first step in understanding the fied from plasmids pGEM-BigWT, pGEM-BigR124C and pGEM-R555W role of these genes in DHA-induced renal injury, we have used in situ and subcloned in pEGFP-N2 to give pEGFP-BigWT, pEGFP-BigR124C hybridization (ISH) or RT-PCR ISH to identify the cell types expressing and pEGFP-BigR555W. The non classical mutations N622K, G623D, these genes at different stages of disease progression. Digoxigenin- H626R and V631D were introduced using oligonucleotides directed muta- labeled oligonucleotide probes were hybridized to paraffin-embedded kid- genesis to give pEGFP-BigN622K, pEGFP-BigG623D, pEGFP-BigH626R ney sections, and adjacent sections were stained with hematoxylin and and pEGFP-BigV631D. Apoptosis was measured in transiently transfected eosin for histological evaluation. Messages of low (APRT), medium (1,25- HeLa and HCE, a human corneal epithelial cell line, by Hoechst /PI nuclear dihydroxyvitamin D3-24 hydroxylase, 24-H; and matrix gla protein, MGP), staining after 24 or 48 hrs of culture. Results ; The following rates of apop- or high (kidney androgen-regulated protein, KAP) abundance could be tosis were observed in HeLa (and in HCE) ; pEGFP; 3% (4.1%);pEGFP- readily detected by ISH, but RT-PCR ISH was required for the detection of BigWT; 2.5% (2.8%); pEGFP-BigR124C ; 12% (16%); pEGFP-BigR555W; messages of extremely low abundance (imprinted multi-membrane span- 14.7% (9%); pEGFP-BigG623D ; 8% (8%); pEGFP-BigH626R ; 6% ning polyspecific transporter-like gene 1, IMPT-1). APRTwas expressed in (7.6%); pEGFP-BigV631D ; 13.5% (8.7%). Measurement of LDH activity all cell types in wild-type mice, but no expression was observed in the showed similar differences between the constructs. Conclusion ; Transient knockout mice, demonstrating the specificity of the hybridization reaction. overexpression of mutated BIGH3 in HeLa and HCE cells induces apopto-242 Posters: Gene Structure and Function sis. These results indicate that apoptosis plays an essential role in cornea hearing loss linked to the chromosomal region 2p23 (DFNB9). By SSCP dystrophies and amyloid formation. Thus, because of the accessibility of analysis as well as by sequencing of the recently identified DFNB9-gene, corneas, CD represent good models in which the formation and solubiliza- OTOFERLIN, we excluded the nonsense mutation in exon 18 of OTOF- tion of amyloid can be investigated. short splice-form as reported for four Lebanese families. Also no further DFNB9-relevant mutations in the additional 29 exons of this transcript were P0730. The importance of regulation ceruloplasmin gene found. Moreover, we detected a 92 bp-intervening sequence in the 5-UTR, expression in mammary grand cells for copper homeostasis at the position -121 to -29 of the OTOF-short splice form in all analyzed in newborns individuals (controls and members of this family) that was absent in the N. Gyulikhandanova1, R. Povalihin2 published 5-UTR sequence of this cDNA. This could be indicative for an 1St. Peterburg State Technical University; St. Petersburg, Russian Feder- additional OTOF-splice form. In fact, we detected two missense mutations ation; 2Institute for Experimental Medicine; St. Petersburg, Russian Feder- in exon 15 of OTOF-long splice form. Interestingly, exon 15 encodes the ation first of the four Ca2+ binding C2C-domains of this gene. Based on com- marsa@newmail.ru puter simulations our first mutation effects the secondary structure of C2C- Ceruloplasmin (Cp) is soluble copper contained glycoprotein which func- domain through creation of a new alpha-helix structure. The second muta- tions as an universal transporter of the copper (Cu) ions. We were shown tion results in substitution of the predicted C2C-domain specific -sheet that specific molecular form Cp is synthesised by mammary gland cells no. 7 through an alpha-helix structure and diminishes the likelihood of and its is secreted to milk. 7-fold decrease of Cp concentration in samples forming of -sheet no. 1 under the significant limit of 0.7. These predicted of breast milk during 20 days of lactation period was demonstrated, and Cp changes in secondary structure of the C2-domain may cause an alteration molecule contains 5-7 Cu atoms. So, the level of Cu (10 (g/kg body weight) the conformation of -sheet dependent-Ca2+ binding loops in this protein. is constant at the breastfeeding. Therefore, in the newborns Cu balance is This would in turn result in altering Ca2+ binding capacity of OTOF, which controlled at the transcriptional level in mammary grand cells. By comput- is essential in signal transduction pathways or in Ca2+ triggered vesicle er analysis of the 5-flanking region of rat CPgene we found a potential membrane fusion by changing the electrostatic potential of membrane in sites for nuclear hormone receptor RORalpha1, for estrogen and proges- exocytosis processes. teron; and specific cis-elements liver expression genes (HNF-1) and genes expressed in mammary grand (WAP). This region of CP gene (1700 P0733.Localisation and organisation of the gamma-glutamyl nucleotides) was amplificated. Gel-shift analysis shown that PCR-product transferase (GGT) genes on human chromosome 22q contain the specific sites for 9-cis-retinoic acids and thyroid hormone D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1, E. Burgert1, G. Uyanik1, A. Jauch2, K. Do3, M. receptors. Also, PCR-product bound TF from liver and mammary gland Cunod3, A. Mainberger1 were different. Afragment (2.3 kb) chromosome Cp gene was cloned in 1Institute for Human Genetics, University of Freiburg; Freiburg, Germany; pTZ19. The fragment hybridized with Cp-cDNA containing from 520 to 2Institute for Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg; Heidelberg, Ger- 2620 nucleotides of the Cp-mRNA. Antibodies to TF YY1 are detected YY1 many; 3Centre for Research in Psychiatric Neuroscience, University of protein in the 2,3 kb DNA\TF complex. The data were approved by gel-shift Lausanne; Lausanne, Switzerland analysis. The YY1 protein was identified by western-blot hybridization morrisro@humangenetik.ukl.uni-freiburg.de manly in TF fraction from liver of adult rats. It is possible this data indicate Members of the gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) gene family are on existence of the tissue-specific regulation of CPgene expression on the chromosome 22q11, a region prone to rearrangements and deletions that transcriptional level. cause human congenital anomaly disorders including Cat Eye (CES), Velo-Cardio-Facial/Di-George (VCFS/DGS), and derivative 22 (der(22)) P0731.Chromosomal mapping of the human Protein Kinase C syndromes. Low-copy repeats (LCR) in 22q11, containing sets of repeated Gene Module genes, of which GGTis one, seem to mediate deletions or duplications. K. Kofler, M. Erdel, G. Utermann, G. Baier GGTis a major enzyme of glutathione (GSH) homeostasis, and the induc- University of Innsbruck; Innsbruck, Austria tion of GGTin response to oxidative stress is an essential element of the kurt.kofler@uibk.ac.at cellular response to oxidative injury. In order to determine whether any of Members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases the GGTgenes may be involved in disorders assigned to 22q11, it was play critical roles in the regulation of cellular differentiation and proliferation essential to clarify their exact chromosomal localisation and organisation. of diverse cell types (1). Molecular cloning and biochemical studies identi- We have identified GGT gene-specific DNA sequences by sequencing fied PKC enzymes as members of a distinct family that constitutes, at the YACs and PACs containing different GGTgenes. Using these sequences, gene level, nine mammalian members, i.e. alpha, beta, gamma, delta, we have localised six GGT genes to a 6 Mb region of 22q11 via Blast epsilon, zeta, eta, theta & iota. In this study we have performed fine chro- searches in human chromosome 22 DNAsequence. We have named the mosomal mapping by fluorescence in situ hybridization, employing cosmid, most proximal gene GGT13a, to distinguish it from a nearly identical gene BAC & PAC probes of all 9 PKC isoforms. As result the human PKC genes which lies more distal, GGT13b. Previously named GGTgenes 3 and are not clustered and found at single loci. Additionally, employing HUGO 11 occur on different YACs which map to the identical chromosome 22q and bioinformatic tools, genomic organization analysis of the PKC genes, sequence location, so are most likely allelic. Genes 1 and 2 consist only of as well as the search of neighboring polymorphic markers (useful for exons 8 to 12, which represent the functional domain of the protein. Gene genetic linkage analysis) has been initiated. Comparison of chromosomal 6 is the most distal gene and is adjacent to gene 2. Sequence comparisons location of these fine-mapped PKC gene loci with human disease gene loci of the different genes indicate two groups of nearly identical genes within (and known orthologous regions within the mouse map) is currently per- each group; GGT13-like, comprising genes 3/11, 13a and 13b; and GGT formed. Along with tissue-specific and restricted spatial pattern PKC 6-like, comprising genes 1, 2 and 6. The exact localisation of these genes isoenzyme expression, information from biochemical signal transduction on chromosome 22q has allowed us to highlight polymorphic markers work and the phenotype of the established mouse PKC KO-lines (loss-of- which can be used in genetic studies to test the possible involvement of function) will permit genetic studies in defined groups of patients in search these genes in the above-mentioned disorders. for PKC associated genetic defects/abnormalities. (1.) Altman A, Isakov N and Baier G, Protein kinase C theta; a new essen- P0734.Structure and regulation of the murine homologue of tial superstar on the Tcell stage Immunology Today, Nov 1;21(11);567- the gene for human arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1, an 573. enzyme involved in folate metabolism S. Boukouvala1, N. Price1, K. Plant2, E. Sim1 P0732. Two missense-mutations in C2C-domain of OTOF- 1Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford; Oxford OX1 3QT, long-splice-form cause non-syndromic autosomal recessive United Kingdom; 2Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of inherited hearing loss (DFNB9) Oxford; Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom N. Blin1, H. Esmer2, M. Pfister3, H. Zenner3, F. Mirghomizadeh2 sotiria.boukouvala@pharm.ox.ac.uk 1Molecular Genetics, Uni Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany; 2IZKF, Univ. Arylamine N-acetyltransferases (NATs) acetylate arylamine and hydrazine Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany; 3HNO, Univ.-Klinikum; Tbingen, Germany drugs and carcinogens. In humans, there are two isoenzymes encoded by blin@uni-tuebingen.de genes located on chromosomal region 8p22. The NAT1 isoenzyme can DFNB, the non-syndromic hearing loss with autosomal recessive mode of also N-acetylate p-aminobenzoylglutamate. The product of this reaction is inheritance, constitutes the vast majority of genetically based severe to a major folate catabolite in vivo, which suggests that NAT1 could be profound childhood forms of deafness, which normally lead to inability of involved in the metabolism of folate, a compound of key importance during speech acquisition. We analyzed a consanguineous family originating from early embryogenesis. In mice, the genes encoding for three NATisoen- eastern Turkey in which four siblings suffered from severe to profound zymes have been localised on chromosome 8, in a region syntenic withPosters: Gene Structure and Function 243 human 8p22. We describe the structure and expression of the gene for Alternative splicing provides for maximal variability of coding products and murine NAT2, the functional equivalent of human NAT1. Murine Nat2 is the regulation patterns from limited numbers of genes. In the K+ channel only Nat gene expressed at the blastocyst stage, as demonstrated by RT- superfamily the 5-alternative splicing affecting the first exons is quite com- PCR. We show that the Nat2 gene has an unusual structure, with an intron- mon. The alternative usage of the first exons does not always change the less coding region separated from a short non-coding exon by a 6kb intron. N-terminal sequence at the amino acid level. The functional significance of The transcription initiation site was accurately mapped by RNase protec- the 5-splicing of various K+ channel subunits is not yet known. We have tion assay and a promoter was identified upstream of the non-coding exon cloned a novel human potassium channel subunit KCNK10 which belongs by reporter gene assay. The promoter has the typical GC-rich sequence of to the tandem pore domain K+ channel gene family and has 85 % amino housekeeping genes lacking a TATA-box. The intron is unlikely to contain acid sequence identity to KCNK2. So far, we have identified three different an alternative promoter, but may contain other regulatory elements, as 5-splice variants of KCNK10. These variants provide an opportunity for indicated by reporter gene assays. The unusual splicing pattern of the Nat2 studying the functional implications of N-terminal alternative splicing of transcript was detected in embryonic stem cells, embryonic liver cells and potassium channels. Two of the three different KCNK10 splice forms are several adult tissues of the mouse. Investigation of the factors regulating already expressed in HEK293 cells. Both showed outward rectification expression of murine Nat2 will aid in understanding its possible role in using 5 mM K+ bath solution. The channels have mean open times in the development. [Supported by the Wellcome Trust and Action Research order of 100 s and measured single channel conductances were between (SPARKS)]. 119 and 187 pS. With symmetrical K+ in the pipette solution, the single channel current voltage relation was linear. RT-PCR experiments demon- P0735. Genomic structure of GJB6 encoding Cx30 in a con- strated a tissue-specific expression pattern of the KCNK10 splice variants. nexin cluster on chromosome 13q11 Further studies will show if their variable N-terminals are associated with J. Lamartine1, E. Callouet2, G. Waksman1 different biophysical and pharmacological properties. 1Universit dEvry/CEA; Evry, France; 2Genethon; EVRY, France lamartin@dsvidf.cea.fr P0738.Proliferative effects of TSC1 are independent of TSC2; The connexin (Cx) gene family codes for protein subunits of gap junction first evidence for separable functions of tuberous sclerosis channels, which permit the rapid exchange of ions and metabolites genes between neighbouring cells. Mutations in genes encoding connexins have M. Hengstschlger, A. Miloloza, M. Kubista, M. Rosner been identified in various human inherited diseases, especially skin dis- Prenatal Diagnosis and Therapy; Vienna, Austria eases and hearing loss. We have recently shown that mutations in the Markus.Hengstschlaeger@akh-wien.ac.at GJB6 gene encoding Cx30 are responsible for Hidrotic Ectoderma Dys- The autosomal dominant disease tuberous sclerosis is caused by muta- plasia (Clouston syndrome), a rare genodermatosis. Another mutation of tions in either TSC1 on chromosome 9q34, encoding hamartin, or TSC2 on GJB6 was also identified in non syndromic autosomal dominant deafness. chromosome 16p13.3, encoding tuberin. The biochemical functions of The control of GJB6 expression in various human tissues appears as a key these two proteins have not been clarified so far. The observations that the point to understand the molecular basis of these two diseases. In order to phenotypes associated with mutations in these genes are similar (although localise the promoter region of GJB6, we reconstructed the genomic struc- not identical) and that these two proteins can interact in vivo suggested ture of the gene. Acomplete GJB6 cDNAwas cloned by 5 RACE from a that hamartin and tuberin function in the same complex. Earlier, we have human brain cDNAlibrary. The sequence of this full length cDNAwas com- shown that these two molecules affect the control of mammalian cell pro- pared with genomic sequences obtained from BAC clones previously liferation (J Biol Chem 272; 29031; Oncogene 16;2197; PNAS 95; 15653; mapped in this region. We found that GJB6 is composed of 4 exons span- Hum Mol Genet 9;1721).We now found that hamartin can affect prolifera- ning more than 10 kb of genomic sequence. The coding sequence is tion independently of the presence of functional tuberin. Different molecu- entirely contained in exon 4. The identification of the transcription initiation lar approaches demonstrated that the two TSC proteins can affect cellular site allowed us to localise the promoter and start to study it. By analysing proliferation by independent mechanisms. This is the first evidence that the genomic sequence around GJB6, we were able to position two other these two genes can have separable functions and can, beside creating a genes encoding connexins ; GJB2 encoding Cx26 and GJA3 encoding complex, also act independently. These data have clear impact for under- Cx46. These 3 connexin genes are clustered in a region of 60 kb. This con- standing the phenotypical differences of the TSC1- and the TSC2-associ- nexin region on chromosome 13q11 could be the result of duplication ated disease and for understanding of the functions of hamartin and events of an ancestral common gene. tuberin. P0736.Hfb1 brainspecific sequence as a part of the extended P0739.Isolation and characterisation of a novel human chro- 3-untranslated region of the human complexin 2 gene mosome 21q22.1 gene encoding an RNAassociated protein I. Vladychenskaya1, N. Raevskaya1, L. Dergunova1, G. Sulimova2, E. F. Chapot-Skovsgaard Klimov2, S. Limborska1 Faculty of Medecine, Geneva; 1211 Geneve 4, Switzerland 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Insti- chapot6@etu.unige.ch tute of General Genetics RAS; Moscow, Russian Federation To contribute to the development of the transcript map of human chromo- irinavl@img.ras.ru some 21 (HC21) and thus identify candidate genes for Down syndrome Hfb1 brain-specific sequence (Acc. No. Y15167) was obtained from the and phenotypes that map to HC21, we have used RTPCR, RACE and human cDNAforebrain cortex library.The genomic clone from the human cDNAlibrary screening to isolate a novel cDNA, named C21orf66. This chromosome 5 cosmid library hybridizing with Hfb1 was investigated. The new gene spans more than 40kb of genomic sequence on 21q22.1 nucleotide sequence more than 4 kb in length (Ghfb, Acc. No. AF318943) (between SYNJ1 and C21ORF49 genes) and is split in 20 exons. C21orf66 was determined for the part of this genomic clone.100% identity between is expressed in all 20 adult and foetal tissues tested, except colon and the 5-end of Ghfb sequence and 3-untranslated region of the human com- stomach. Alternative splicing permits the synthesis of 4 mRNAs encoding plexin 2 mRNA was revealed by the comparison of Ghfb with the proteins of 469, 511, 835 and 917 amino acids that contain several Nuclear sequences from the GenBank database.Long transcripts with their 5-ends Localisation Sequences, an S1 RNAbinding domain, and a PfamB 3456 coinciding with the human complexin 2 sequence and 3-ends coinciding domain of unknown function. The occurrence of these domains suggests with Ghfb sequence were revealed by RT-PCR. These data make us pos- that this protein is localised in the nucleus and binds RNA. C21orf66 pro- sible to suppose that Hfb1sequence is the part of yet not-described human tein is strongly homologous to a putative C.elegans peptide (F43G9.12, complexin 2 gene exon which is coding for one of the possible ends of the 27% identity over 758 residues). Double stranded RNA interference of corresponding mRNA. PCR screening of the GeneBridge 4 RH-panel F43G9.12 leads to 90% or more embryonic lethality as well as low post- using Ghfb-specific primers allowed to map Ghfb sequence within the 5q35 embryonic growth (Nature, vol 408, 2000). Almost the full length mouse chromosomal region. The localization site for Ghfb appeared to be near the homologue cDNAhas been cloned and showed 90 % amino acid identity same with that determined for human complexin 2 gene thus confirming with the human protein. C21orf66 overexpression might consequently dis- the close vicinity of these two sequences. turb pre-mRNAsplicing, general cellular translation, and lead to some phe- notype, causing C21orf66 to emerge as a good candidate for some of the P0737. KCNK10; a new model for 5-alternative splicing in Down syndrome phenotypes. potassium channels W. Gu1, G. Schlichthrl2, C. Derst2, J. Daut2, O. Steinlein1 1Inst. fr Humangenetik; Bonn, Germany; 2Inst. fr Normale und Patholo- gische Physiologie; Marburg, Germany eeg@mailer.meb.uni-bonn.de244 Posters: Gene Structure and Function P0740.Molecular basis of CFTR exon 9 alternative splicing interaction was confirmed in vitro by a GSTpulldown experiment. We could F. E. Baralle1, E. Buratti1, T. Doerk2, E. Zuccato1, C. Stuani1, F. Pagani1 also demonstrate interaction between SALL1 and SUMO-1 in the yeast 1International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology; Trieste, system indicating that SALL1 is modified by sumoylation. Sumoylation is Italy; 2Medizinische Hochschul; Hannover, Germany known to target proteins to certain subnuclear compartments. Expression pagani@icgeb.trieste.it of a GFP-SALL1 fusion protein in NIH3T3 cells showed indeed localization We have analyzed the cis- and trans-acting factors involved in the regula- of GFP-SALL1 in distinct nuclear speckles. tion of CFTR exon 9 alternative splicing, which have been associated to monosymptomatic forms of Cystic Fibrosis. We have identified in intron 8, P0743.Acombined analysis of the cystic fibrosis transmem- in the exon itself and in the intron 9 5 proximal region critical cis-acting ele- brane conductance regulator; implications for structure and ments regulating exon 9 splicing. At the 3 splice site of intron 8,there are disease models two elements composed by polymorphic (TG)m(T)n repeats. We report the J. Chen1, C. Cutler2, C. Jacques3, G. Boeuf4, E. Denamur5, G. Lecointre6, identification of TDP-43, a nuclear protein not previously described to bind B. Mercier3, G. Cramb2, C. Ferec3 RNA, as the factor binding specifically to the (TG)m repeats. Antisense 1Etablissement Franais du Sang-Bretagne; Brest, France; 2University of inhibition of endogenous TDP43 expression increased inclusion of exon 9. Saint Andrews; Fife, United Kingdom; 3Universite de Bretagne Occidentale Paradoxically, SR proteins inhibit exon 9 splicing, through the interaction and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire; Brest, France; 4Laboratoire ARAGO; with sequences located both in the coding region and in intron 9 where we Banyuls-sur-Mer, France; 5INSERM U458; Paris, France; 6Museum have mapped an Intronic Splicing Silencer. Interestingly, some missense National dHistoire Naturelle; Paris, France mutations, such as G424S, I444S and A455E, previously considered to Jian-Min.Chen@univ-brest.fr cause CF only by altering protein function, showed an aberrant splicing Over the past decade, more than 900 mutations have been identified in the pattern in transient transfection assay, indicating that the nucleotide cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene; and an changes affect exonic splicing enhancers. Therefore, mutations in the enormous wealth of information concerning the structure and function of exons and the composition of the (TG)m(T)n polymorphic repeats affect the protein has also been accumulated. This data, evaluated together in a alternative splicing and can lead to phenotypes of variable severity accord- sequence comparison of all currently available CFTR homologues, has ing to the individual concentration of splicing factors. In addition antisense recently enabled us to define a functional R domain of the CFTR. Here, inhibition of TDP43 may provide a new therapeutic target to correct exon 9 such a combined analysis has been augmented by the determination of skipping. two full-length cDNAsequences (sCFTR-I and sCFTR-II) from the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), an alternatively spliced exon 12- transcript of the P0741. Three new exons of the ATM gene activated by aber- sCFTR-I, and an additional partial coding sequence from the kangaroo rant splicing due to intronic mutations (Macropus giganteus ) and has been extended to refine the boundaries of A. Sobeck1, D. Schindler1, R. Bendix2, T. Drk2 the two nucleotide binding domains and the COOH-terminal tail. This 1Biozentrum, University; Wrzburg, Germany; 2Medical School; Hannover, approach also provides further insights into the differential roles of the two Germany halves of CFTR, and highlights several well conserved motifs that may be doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de involved in inter- or intra-molecular interactions. Moreover, the serious pos- The ATM gene that is mutated in ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) encodes a 350 sibility that a certain fraction of missense mutations identified in the CFTR kDa protein kinase which orchestrates the radiation-induced DNAdamage gene may not have functional consequences, is discussed. Finally, phylo- response and cell cycle regulation. The mutational spectrum of the ATM genetic analysis of all the full-length CFTR amino acid sequences, and an gene is still undergoing further expansion although several extensive stud- extended set of exon 13 coding nucleotide sequences, reinforces the idea ies have investigated the molecular basis of A-T in large numbers of that the rabbit rather than the mouse may represent the optimal CF model patients (e.g., Sandoval et al. 1999). We have explored the presence of and strengthens the assertion that a long branch attraction artifact sepa- aberrantly spliced ATM mRNAisoforms in lymphoblastoid cell lines from a rates the murine rodents from the rabbit and guinea pig, the other Glires. subset of A-Tpatients. Three new exons of 166, 58 and 65 bp in size were identified by detection of their sequence being inserted into the reading P0744.Towards a complete transcription map of the Williams- frame of the ATM transcript. The underlying molecular events appear to be Beuren syndrome deletion region the consequence of two point mutations and one four-bp-deletion, respec- L. F. Magano, M. Bays, R. Flores, L. A. Prez Jurado tively, that were decovered deep in the introns 15, 19 and 20 of the ATM Genetics Unit, Dept. of Experimental Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra; gene in a total of four A-Tpatients. One of these mutations generates a Barcelona, Spain canonical splice donor signal. The second mutation produced only a sub- luis.magano@cexs.upf.es tle change of the consensus splice donor site score but nevertheless Acommon 7q11.23 heterozygous deletion of ~1.6 Mb that arises as a con- proved functional as a new splice site. Finally, the third mutation disrupted sequence of unequal crossing over between highly homologous repeat a sequence that appears to act as a splicing silencer element in its normal blocks has been defined in the great majority of Williams-Beuren syndrome context. We conclude that even subtle changes in introns can activate (WBS) patients. Up to 17-18 genes located in the deleted interval have cryptic exons and are sufficient to cause the classical course of A-T. Muta- been reported to date. Amap of the ortologous region showed that the tions deep in the introns may account for a number of failures to detect order of the intradeletion genes is fully conserved in mouse. Based on the ATM mutations by genomic mutation scanning. physical maps and high-throughput genome sequences from both species released by the Genome Projects, we have identified seven novel genes P0742. SALL1, which is mutated in the Townes-Brocks syn- located between WBSCR14 and ELN, by comparative analysis using the drome, is a transcriptional repressor and interacts with UBC9 integrated NIX service (http;//www.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk). On Northern blots, and the small ubiquitin like modifier 1 (SUMO-1). the novel genes (provisionally named WBSCR16-22) are expressed as C. Netzer, L. Rieger, J. Kohlhase, S. K. Bohlander single transcripts with sizes ranging from 1.2 to 4.5 kb, and with variable Institute of Human Genetics, University of Gttingen; Gttingen, Germany intensities in the different tissues. We have characterised the complete cnetzer@web.de cDNAand genomic structure of 5/7 genes, while two genes are still incom- The SALL1 gene encodes a putative zinc finger transcription factor (1324 plete at the 5 end. Homology searches and prediction of putative protein aa) which is mutated in Townes Brocks syndrome. This syndrome is inher- domains suggest these new genes code for; 1- a DNAJ family member, 2- ited in an autosomal dominant fashion and is characterized by imperforate an alpha/beta hydrolase, 3- a new claudin family member, 4- two different anus, preaxial polydactyly, and dysplastic ears. Little is known about the methyltransferases, and 5- two novel proteins with no predicted domains. cellular function of SALL1. To investigate its possible role as a transcription Idenfication of all genes in the WBS critical region is required to define factor we performed reporter gene assays expressing portions of SALL1 those whose haploinsufficiency may contribute to the clinical phenotype fused to the GAL4 DNAbinding domain transiently in mammalian cells. and to establish precise clinical-molecular correlations in patients with par- These experiments revealed that the central 1000 aa of SALL1 strongly tial deletions. repress the expression of a luciferase reporter gene controlled by the thymidine kinase promoter and GAL4 DNAbinding sites. Trichostatin A, an P0745.Physiological role of the ClC-2 chloride channel inhibitor of histone deacetylases, was not able to relieve this repression C. A. Huebner, V. Stein, M. R. Boesl, A. A. Zdebik, T. J. Jentsch suggesting that SALL1-mediated repression does not lead to the recruit- Zentrum fr Molekulare Neurobiologie Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany ment of mSin3A, N-CoR or histone deacetylases. We also employed the chuebner@zmnh.uni-hamburg.de yeast two-hybrid system to identify protein interaction partners of SALL1. ClC-2 is a member of the large family of voltage-gated chloride channels One of these interacting proteins is UBC9 which is known to mediate the which includes at least nine different members in mammals. Expression of covalent modification of other proteins by SUMO-1. The SALL1/UBC9 ClC-2 mRNAcorrelates with the presence of a hyperpolarization-activatedPosters: Gene Structure and Function 245 chloride current with similar voltage dependence and kinetics as ClC-2. potential and dysfunction of this current may lead to an abnormal action ClC-2 is almost ubiquitously expressed. Though ClC-2 is largely closed potential duration and thereby may cause cardiac arrhythmias. Therefore, under resting conditions, it can be slowly activated by strong hyperpolar- we further analyzed the genomic organization of the KChIP2 gene, which ization. In the Xenopus oocyte expression system ClC-2 can be activated consists of 9 exons, and determined its chromosomal localization using by osmotic cell swelling, suggesting a role in the regulation of cell volume, FISH analysis. Subsequently, a mutation-screening test was established and by acidic extracellular pH, which was postulated to be important for for both, the KCND3 and the KChIP2 gene, which will allow targeted gastric acid secretion. It has been proposed that expression of ClC-2 in screening for mutations in patients with various forms of arrhythmias. certain neurons ensures an inhibitory response to GABA by preventing intracellular chloride from rising above its electrochemical equilibrium. P0748. Characterization, tissue expression, and chromoso- Immunocytochemistry has revealed that ClC-2 is expressed in apical mal assignment of the human RAB22Agene belonging to Rab membranes of respiratory epithelial cells, the same site where CFTR is small GTPases normally expressed. To investigate the physiological role of ClC-2 we gen- S. Kumann, S. Worch, A. Hehr, I. Hansmann, D. Schlote erated ClC-2 null (ClC-2-/-) mice. ClC-2-/- mice developed at the expected Institut fr Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie; Halle, Germany Mendelian ratio and appeared normal at gross morphological evaluation. dietmar.schlote@medizin.uni-halle.de Life expectancy was not altered. Lung development was normal and res- The mouse chromosome 2 segment (MMU2) corresponding to human piratory related symptoms were absent. We did not observe spontaneous chromosome 20 (HSA20) is known to be involved in both, maternal as well epileptic seizures nor did we find an altered response to the seizure induc- as paternal noncomplementation (genomic imprinting). Uniparental dis- ing agent flurothyl. Secretion of gastric acid was not reduced in Clc-2-/- omies for distinct regions of MMU2 result in different neonatal lethalities mice. Though female Clc-2-/- mice were fertile, we observed a progressive with opposite anomalous phenotypes, strongly suggesting the presence of degeneration of the testes in Clc-2-/- mice, leading to male infertility. imprinted genes in this region. These chromosomal regions show a con- served synteny of gene loci to human 20q13 segment, predicting the pres- P0746. E2Tag Epitope Tagging System for Monitoring and ence of imprinted genes in this syntenic human chromosomal region. Two Purification of Proteins mouse models have been generated carrying reciprocal translocations R. Kurg, A. Ilves, N. Kaldalu, M. Ustav which served to define chromosomal segments of the parental source Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University and Estonian Bio- effect. We have identified a new gene in this region of interest which is centre; Tartu, Estonia located on a BAC RPCIB753L051096 proximal to GNAS1 on HSA20q13. rkurg@ebc.ee Cloning and sequencing the full-length cDNArevealed a novel isoform of As functional genomics becomes proteomics, researches will look for eas- the human RAB22 subfamily of small GTP-binding proteins playing an ier, less time intensive ways in which to express, isolate, and detect pro- important role in the regulation of vesicular trafficking. Based on the EST teins. Epitope tagging is a recombinant DNAtechnique by which a protein WI-12997 this new isoform was isolated containing 2242 nucleotides and is made immunoreactive to a pre-existing antibody. A short amino acid is designated RAB22A. Structurally, the RAB22Aencodes a polypeptide of sequence (epitope tag) is incorporated into the primary sequence of a 194 amino acids which has 97% identity to the canine rab22a. Northern recombinantly expressed protein, the tagged protein is expressed and can blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression slightly increased in heart. be detected and purified with antibodies directed against the epitope tag. The genomic structure was solved by database analysis and sequencing Epitope tags are small and they have minimal, if any effects on the biolog- of the isolated BAC clone. The gene consists of 7 exons spanning about ical function of the tagged protein. Epitope tagging eliminates the time con- 50 kb of genomic sequence. Supported by a grant of the DHGP. suming work of producing a new antibody every time a different protein is studied. So, epitope tagging is a technology, which simplifies the detection, characterization and purification of proteins. Here we describe the use of P0749.Regulation Of The Human Hfe Gene Expression ; Cis- the bovine papillomavirus type 1 E2 protein sequence, SSTSSDFRDR as elements Of The Promoter And Trans-acting Factors an epitope tag. The new tag, E2Tag, can be fused to the N- or C-terminus C. Mura, G. Le Gac, C. Ferec or in the middle of the protein and the activities of the tagged proteins have INSERM, CHU, UBO; Brest, France been tested in different assays, including Western blot assay, immunofluo- Catherine.Mura@univ-brest.fr recsence staining of cells, immunoprecipitation as well as the DNAbinding Hereditary hemochromatosis (HC) is a common autosomal recessive and DNaseI footprinting assays. The anti-E2Tag antibody interaction with genetic disorder of iron homeostasis. The human HFE gene is clearly its respective epitope tolerates high salt concentrations up to 2 M NaCl, involved in HC. Two missense mutations (C282Yand H63D) account for this permits immunoprecipitation and immunopurification of the tagged approximately 90% of HC chromosomes and other rare or private muta- proteins in high-salt buffers and reduction of the nonspecific binding of the tions have been described. However, the role of HFE remains unclear and contaminating proteins. We suggest that the E2Tag is a useful tool for the mechanism of the regulation of HFE expression is unknown. Here, we detection and purification of proteins. examined the functional organization of the HFE gene promoter and defined the cis-elements and trans-acting factors. The analysis of HFE- P0747.Functional and molecular characterization of the car- driven luciferase reporter gene activity performed by transient transfection diac transient outward current Ito and its putative implication into human cells indicated that the -1485 to -8 sequence of the 5-flanking in cardiac arrhythmias region relative to the first coding nucleotide contains several elements that B. Wollnik1, N. Decher2, O. Uyguner1, B. Karaman1, C. R. Scherer2, A. regulate the transcriptional activity of the HFE gene. We determined that Ghanbari1, M. Yuksel-Apak1, K. Steinmeyer2 the level of HFE expression was cell-line dependent, the promoter activity 1Center of Molecular Cardiac Arrhythmia, Division of Medical Genetics, was 2.8-fold higher in HepG2 cells and 1.7-fold higher in HT29-19Acells Child Health Institute; Istanbul, Turkey; 2Aventis Pharma Deutschland compared with HeLa cells. We identified a promoter region where activity GmbH, DG Cardiovascular Diseases; Frankfurt, Germany was maximal, which extended from the part of the untranslated first exon wollnik@superonline.com to position -558, and additional positive and negative elements extending Alterations of the cardiac action potential due to dysfunction of heart spe- to -1057 and -1485, respectively. Cotransfection with vectors expressing cific ion channels are known to cause cardiac arrhythmias. Recently, muta- the ubiquitous Sp1 and the tissue-specific GATA-1 transcription factors tions in different ion channel genes have been identified in families with showed a trans-activation with a maximum increase in HFE-directed tran- long QTsyndrome, a cardiac repolarization abnormality leading to ventric- scription of 7.1-fold and 8.7-fold, respectively. The data revealed that ular tachycardias and sudden cardiac death. However, nothing is known GATA-1 transcription factor, implicated in the up-regulation of a number of yet about the molecular basis of various other common rhythm abnormali- genes involved in iron homeostasis, allowed a coordinated expression of ties of the heart. The KCND3 gene encodes the Kv4.3 A-type potassium HFE with this group of genes. channel, a molecular correlate of the cardiac transient outward current Ito. In the present study, we cloned the Kv channel-interacting protein 2 P0750.Functional characterization of a new human gene fam- (KChIP2) cDNAfrom human heart and identified two functional splice vari- ily ants of the gene. The human KChIP2 cDNAencodes a 252 amino acid pro- M. Tuson1, L. Hjelmqvist1, E. Herrero2, G. Marfany1, S. Balcells1, R. tein and is expressed in heart and brain. Using functional expression of the Gonzlez-Duarte1 Kv4.3 and KChIP2 proteins in Xenopus oocytes, we show that KChIP2 1Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; interacts with Kv4.3 and modifies its biophysical properties. The resulting 2Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Lleida; Lleida, Spain current resembles the native cardiac transient outward current, suggesting mtuson@bio.ub.es that KChIP2 contributes to the heterogeneity of Ito in human heart. The Ito With the completion of the human genome project, a huge amount of current is important for the initial fast repolarisation of the cardiac action sequence data is available for genomic analysis and the challenge is to246 Posters: Gene Structure and Function understand the roles of gene products. Although functional clues are containing a unique helix-loop-helix domain (HLH). These genes are clus- obtained by database comparisons, a significant number of predicted tered together in a region of conserved mouse-human synteny on chro- genes remains unclassified. We here describe one such a case, a new mosome 5G. The two members of this family, TFII-I (Gtf2i) and BEN gene family with at least three members in human and orthologous genes (Gtf2ird1), contain large multiple HLH domains unlike other basic HLH pro- in mouse, yeast, Arabidopsis and Drosophila. The first human member teins, suggesting more complex multiple roles. In fact TFII-I has been was found while searching candidate genes for Retinitis Pigmentosa, and shown to be a multifunctional phosphoprotein with roles in transcription additional members were identified on the basis of sequence homology. To and signal transduction and BEN is thought to be involved in transcription- approach function, Northern analysis and GFP-fusion proteins are being al regulation. The primary sequence of Gtf2ird2 contains two HLH domains performed for the human members. Additionally, yeast knockouts have with homology to the HLH domains present in six copies in both TFII-I and been constructed and their phenotypes are being characterised. BEN. Although the role of Gtf2ird2 is unknown this motif homology sug- gests that it belongs to this unique family of HLH transcription factors. P0751.Genetic analysis of a 22 bp deletion of the Hfe gene. Gtf2ird2 is expressed as a 3.5kb transcript in most adult tissues tested but S. A. M. Taylor1,2, S. M. Kinkley3, B. Brown4, A. T. Lyng5, G. N. Schep6, D. a smaller transcript (~3kb) is found in testis. The ORF encodes a protein of P. Lillicrap3 936 amino acids with a molecular weight of 104578Da that is predicted to 1Pathology, Queens University; Kingston, ON Canada; 2Pathology, be slightly acidic. Structurally Gtf2ird2 comprises 16 exons and spans a Kingston General Hospital; Kingston, Ontario, Canada; 3Queens Universi- genomic region of 33.940kb. We have also isolated the human orthologue ty; Kingston, ON Canada; 4Queens Unversity; Kingston, ON Canada; (GTF2IRD2) located on 7q11.23 within the duplicated region flanking the 5Pathology, KIngston General Hospital; Kingston, ON Canada; 6South Williams syndrome (WS) critical region. WS is a developmental disorder Lake Regional Health Centre; Newmarket, ON Canada with characteristic physical, cognitive, and behavioural traits caused by a taylor@cliff.path.queensu.ca microdeletion of ~1.5Mb. Of all the deleted genes, only haploinsufficiency The mutations of the Hfe gene which are most commonly associated with for elastin has been associated with a WS phenotype (the heart abnor- hemochromatosis are H63D and C282Y. They are easily tested for by PCR mality, SVAS). Functional and mouse studies will be required to determine amplification of exons 2 and 4 of the Hfe gene followed by diagnostic if hemizygosity for GTF2IRD2 contributes to the aetiology of the syndrome. restriction enzyme digestion. To date our laboratory has performed testing on more than 3500 individuals. In one individual we observed altered PCR P0754.Analysis of transcriptional startpoints and methylation fragments which suggested the presence of a deletion of exon 2 of the Hfe patterns of the PMP22 promotors B and C in tumor cell lines gene. The affected individual is a 32 year old female of Celtic descent. The containing a PMP22 amplification. patient, who is described as being very thin, presented with malabsorption, K. Huehne, B. Rautenstrauss nonspecific abdominal pain, and swollen arthritic fingers. Increased ferritin Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany levels were present while a liver biopsy did not reveal evidence of abnor- khuehne@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de mal iron stores. She has had one normal pregnancy. Treatment by phle- Recent data prove that the peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) is alter- botomy resulted in reduction of ferritin levels to below normal after the natively transcribed from promotors A, B and C. Promotor Ais active in removal of six units of blood. Further investigation of this individual myelinating Schwann cells and contains elements important for peripher- revealed that she is a compound heterozygote for the C282Ymutation as al-nerve specific expression. Promoter B is predominantly activated in non- well as a deletion of exon 2. A22bp deletion of the Hfe gene beginning at neuronal tissues and transcript C appears in relatively high amounts in residue 369 (Accession # NM_00410) was confirmed by sequence analy- tumor cell lines carrying a 7 to 11 fold PMP22 amplification. The tumor cell sis. The deletion results in the addition of 30 nonspecific amino acids lines used were SF763 (glioblastoma) and RH30 (osteosarcoma).Tran- beyond the alanine residue at codon 48. This to our knowledge is the first script C has also been identified in human fetal lung and, albeit at lower report of a truncating mutation in the coding region of the Hfe gene that is levels, in sciatic nerve tissue.With the gene racer method gaining full- associated in humans with iron overload. length cDNAclones we discovered that transcript Aalways starts from a distinct nucleotide. However, transcript B and C revealed multiple starting P0752. TFNR - a subunit of TFIIIB - is a candidate gene for points in several distinct regions and furthermore from neighbouring atypical forms of SMAwith cerebral atrophy nucleotides. Additionally, we studied the effect of CpG island methylation A. Kelter, J. Herchenbach, B. Wirth in the PMP22 promotors B and C by methylation specific PCR performed Institute of human genetics; Bonn, Germany with DNAfrom sciatic nerve, leucocytes and tumor cell lines. In leucocytes akelter@gmx.de and sciatic nerve the two promotors did not contain methylated CpGs. The transcription factor-like nuclear regulator (TFNR) is a novel human However, hypermethylation of promotor B was discovered in SF763, which gene that maps on 5q13, distally to the duplicated region which includes indicates a silencing effect. In RH30 most copies of promotors B and C SMN1, the spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) determining gene and allowed were methylated but the few remaining hypomethylated copies were obvi- us to design an evolutionary model of the SMA region. TFNR shows ously sufficient for strong expression of PMP22. The biological sense of homology to yeast B protein which is required for transcription of both the transcript C in tumor cell lines remains to be determined. TATA-less and snRNA-type RNApolymerase III promotors and thus is an essential factor of the basal RNApolymerase III transcription machinery. P0755.Identification and characterization of the novel human Northern blot and transcription start point analysis allowed us to determine metalloproteinase genes; MMP-21, MMP-26 and MMP-28. a transcript length of ~ 10 kb. The TFNR transcript is highly expressed in G. Marchenko cerebellum and weakly in all tissues tested. TFNR encodes a 2254 amino The Burnham Institute; La Jolla, CAUnited States acids (aa) protein. The protein contains a SANTdomain, and ssDNA- and marchenko@burnham.org dsDNA-protein interactions were shown. Immunocytological studies Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are strongly associated with cancer cell showed that the TFNR protein is highly expressed in the granule cell layer invasion and metastasis, tumor neovascularization and other pathologies of the cerebellar cortex. Based on its proximity to SMN1 and its expression such as inflammation, arthritis, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative dis- in the cerebellum, we investigated several SMApatients with large dele- eases. Increasing understanding of the role for MMPs in complex regula- tions in the SMAregion. Quantitativ analysis of an SMApatient with cere- tory and extracellular matrix remodeling processes has stimulated the bral atrophy, showed a heterozygous deletion of TFNR and no mutation in search for novel genes encoding proteinases with unique functions, regu- the remaining copy. Therefore, we speculate that the cerebral atrophy is lation and expression patterns. To date about 20 human MMPgenes have due to a hemizygous effect of TFNR. Human and mouse antibodies from been cloned and partially characterized. In our strategy for identification of the N- and C- terminus were established and will allow ontogenetic and novel genes, we combined subtraction of the known MMP genes from functional analysis of TFNR. The construction of a TFNR knock-out mouse gene libraries and enrichment of the pool of unknown MMPgenes using is in progress. the magnetic bead technology followed by PCR with degenerate primers and RACE. This facilitated identification and cloning of three novel genes P0753.Murine Gtf2ird2- another member of the TFII-I family of MMP-21, MMP-26 and MMP-28 with relatively low representation in transcription factors with unique HLH domains. human cDNAlibraries. Here we report the molecular cloning, nucleotide M. Tassabehji1, C. Wilmot2, A. Read1 sequences, the chromosomal localization (11p15.3, 17q21.2, and 10q21 1University of Manchester; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2University of for MMP26, MMP28 and MMP21 respectively) and genomic organization Leeds; Leeds, United Kingdom with a unique intron/exon distribution, as well as expression of novel genes m.tassabehji@man.ac.uk in human normal and tumor tissues. Catalytic domains of the novel pro- We have isolated and characterised a novel murine gene, Gtf2ird2, which teins were expressed in E. coli and partially characterized in terms of sub- appears to be a member of the TFII-I transcription factor family of genes strate specificity and inhibition by natural and synthetic inhibitors of MMPs.Posters: Gene Structure and Function 247 The unique amino acid sequence and transcription regulation of these all cases are caused by a homozygous (GAA)n expansion in intron 1 genes by transcription factors such as AP1, AP2, AP4, Sp1, RORAsuggest resulting in decreased levels of frataxin, a highly conserved mitochondrial a critical function of these enzymes in malignancy. protein that is thought to prevent toxic iron accumulation in mitochondria. With the aim to better understand the function of frataxin we have gener- P0756. Human genes for K+-dependent Na/Ca-exchangers, ated transgenic mice expressing different levels of human frataxin. The full NCKX1, NCKX2 and NCKX3; genomic structure, comparative length human frataxin cDNAwas inserted into a pCI-neo vector, under the analysis of promoter regions and expression patterns. control of the CMV promoter. Three independent lines were established, A. Reigo1,2, A. Metspalu1,2 with copy number ranging from 1 to 6. Overexpression was confirmed at 1Tartu University Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology; Tartu, Estonia; RNAand protein levels, and high levels were found in several tissues, but 2Estonian Biocentre; Tartu, Estonia particularly in heart and pancreas. However, because of the inactivation of 3pusa2susa@hot.ee the CMV promoter during early embryonic development, these transgenics Cytoplasmic Ca2+ level is an evolutionarily old signal used throughout the could not rescue the early embryonic lethality of the homozygous frda life cycle of an organism in an universal, yet versatile manner, providing a knock-out. Transgenic mice, up to one year of age, did not show any obvi- regulatory crosstalk between different signaling pathways. Restoring the ous abnormality. Detailed studies of iron metabolism, mitochondrial func- resting state and avoiding lethally high Ca2+ concentrations, expelling tion and resistance to oxidative stress are in progress. Preleminary results Ca2+ through ATP-driven pumps and Na/Ca-exchangers is essential for show that plasma iron and total serum iron binding capacity are in the nor- cell survival and function. The exchangers, characterized as having low mal range and resistance to the cardiotoxicity of adriamicin, which is affinity, yet high capacity for intracellular calcium, fall into two classes (NCX thought to be mediated by an oxidative stress mechanism, is not and NCKX) according to their K+-dependence and stoichiometry of action. increased. All the NCKX genes analyzed here perform 4Na+ exchange for 1Ca2+ plus 1K+. We have determined full genomic structures for three distinct human P0759.Molecular analysis of the complexity of the DAZ gene genes encoding K+-dependent Na/Ca-exchangers, NCKX1 (stretches family in AZFc reveals partial DAZ deletions in men with >40kb in 15q22, has 4 alternative transcripts of 10, 9, 8 and 6 exons), severe oligozoospermia as novel mutation event NCKX2 (encompasses 272kb in 9p22, has 2 alternative transcripts of 10 S. Fernandes1, J. Goncalves2, H. Ditton1, K. Huellen1, M. Sousa3, A. Bar- and 9 exons) and NCKX3 (covers 150kb in 20p12, encodes 2 alternative ros4, P. H. Vogt1 transcripts of 17 and 16 exons). Analysis of their promoter regions and cis- 1Institute of Human Genetics; Heidelberg, Germany; 2INS Dr. Ricardo regulatory elements, as well as functional domains, reveals highly con- Jorge; Lisboa, Portugal; 3Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas de Abel served motifs important for transcriptional regulation and function. Com- Salazar; Porto, Portugal; 4Centro de Genetica da Reproducao; Porto, Por- plete mRNAsequences have been refined, based on 5- and 3-RT-PCR tugal and underlying genomic clone sequencing results (additional sequence susana_fernandes@med.uni-heidelberg.de tracks are added to those available in public databases). We also present One of the strongest candidates for the azoospermia factor (AZF) is the comparative expression patterns of the alternative transcripts of the three DAZ (Deleted in Azoospermia) gene family, exclusively expressed in male genes. Additional data from this study, specific expression of NCKX1 and germ cells and mapped to the AZFc male fertility locus located in distal NCKX2 in retinal photoreceptors and their involvement in light adaptation Yq11 (Vogt et al., 1996). AZFc deletions are a major cause for the occur- brings all the three genes forth as good candidate disease genes for inher- rence of male infertility as they were found in men with idiopathic ited retinopathias. azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia with a frequency between 4-20 % (Vogt, 1998). Recent analysis of the DAZ gene cluster by restriction map- P0757. A member of the MAGE-family cloned from the peri- ping, Fiber-FISH and sequence analysis in different men identified a vari- centromeric region of chromosome X able number of DAZ gene copies in AZFc (3 DAZ genes; Yen, 1997; 4 DAZ P. Wieacker1, K. Langnse2, B. Seidel2, M. Wehnert3 genes; Saxena et al. 2000; 7 DAZ genes, Glser et al., 1998) suggesting 1Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke-University; 39120 the presence of DAZ pseudogenes. We, therefore set out to identify those Magdeburg, Germany; 2Institute of Medical Neurobiology, Otto-von-Guer- DAZ gene copies which are essential for human male fertility by DAZ copy icke-University; Magdeburg, Germany; 3Institute of Human Genetics, specific transcription and translation analyses and by a molecular screen Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University; Greifswald, Germany for partial DAZ deletions in men with severe oligozoospermia. For the iden- peter.wieacker@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de tification of partial DAZ deletions the structure of each DAZ gene copy was In a search for candidate genes for X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) we marked by a set of single nucleotide variants (DAZ-SNVs) and DAZ copy have cloned from Xp11 the human gene 11B6 (meanwhile known as specific restriction maps. In this way a series of copy specific DAZ haplo- MAGE-D) containing 13 exons and covering 8.3 kb of genomic DNA. The types were established and screened for their presence in the AZFc locus open reading frame for 606 amino acids contains several nuclear localiza- of patients with severe oligozoospermia. Up to now 3 individuals with par- tion signals. The deduced protein sequence shows about 30% similarity to tial DAZ deletions were identified and confirmed by Southern blotting the MAGE proteins and necdin with highest similarity in the central part experiments (Fernandes S. et al. in prep). Our results identify DAZ1 as the (aa286-480) of the protein. The 2.2kb mRNAis expressed in brain, skele- first DAZ gene copy essential for human male fertility. References; Glser tal muscle, heart, placenta and pancreas and in lower amounts in kidney B, Yen PH, Schempp W (1998) Fibre-fluorescence in situ hybridisation and lung. Northern analysis in various rat tissues revealed highest expres- unravels apparently seven DAZ genes or pseudogenes clustered within a sion in a brain subfraction (brain stem, striatum, thalamus and hypothala- Y-chromosome region frequently deleted in azoospermic males. Chromo- mus) and in skeletal muscle. In situ hybridization studies in rat brain some Res. 6; 481-486. Saxena R, de Vries, JWA, Repping S, et al. (2000) revealed prominent labelling in the hippocampal formation, nucleus Four DAZ genes in two clusters found in the AZFc region of the human Y supraopticus, cerebellar purkinje cells and plexus choroideus. In situ chromosome. Genomics 67; 256-267. Vogt PH, Edelmann A, Kirsch S, et hybridization in rat testis revealed high expression in Leydig cells, in con- al. (1996) Human Ychromosome azoospermia factors (AZF) mapped to trast to the expression data of other MAGE genes mainly expressed in different subregions in Yq11. Hum. Mol. Genet. 5; 933-943. Vogt PH (1998) spermatogenic (mouse Mage-a, Mage-b) or Sertoli cells (rat MAGE- Human Ychromosome deletions in Yq11, AZF candidate genes and male D1/SNERG-1). By sequencing the exons as well as the exon/intron bound- infertility; history and update. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 4; 739-744. Yen PH, Chai, aries in 6 independent XLMR patients with linkage in this critical region no NN, Salido EC. (1998) The human DAZ genes, a putative male infertility causative mutation could be detected. Five single nucleotide polymor- factor on the Y chromosome, are highly polymorphic in the DAZ repeat phisms (SNPs) encoding synonymous amino acids have been identified in regions. Mam. Genome 8; 756-759. the protein coding sequence. The allele frequencies of these SNPs have been determined in different ethnic populations. P0760. Cloning And Characterisation Of The Gene Encoding The Human Npl4, AComponent Of The Nuclear Pore Complex P0758. Characterization of transgenic mice overexpressing Which Interacts With The Ubiqutin Fusion Degradation Pro- human frataxin tein- 1(ufd1l) C. Miranda1,2, K. Ohshima1, M. Santos1,2, M. Pandolfo3, M. Pandolfo3, M. A. Botta1, C.Tandoi2, G.Fini3, G.Calabrese4, B. Dallapiccola2, G. Novelli1 Pandolfo1 1Tor Vergata University of Rome; Rome, Italy; 2Chair of Medical Genetics, 1Hpital Notre-Dame, CHUM; Montral, PQ Canada; 2UnIGENe, IBMC, La Sapienza University of Rome and CSS-Mendel Institute; Rome, Italy; Univ. Porto; Porto, Portugal; 3Hpital Notre-Dame, CHUM; Montral, Por- 3Tor Vergata University of Rome and CSS-Mendel Institute; Rome, Italy; tugal 4Institute of Biology and Genetics, University of Chieti; Chieti, Italy cjtmiranda@hotmail.com botta@genetica.med.uniroma2.it Friedreich ataxia is the most common autosomal recessive ataxia. Almost UFD1L gene encodes for the human homologue of the yeast ubiquitin248 Posters: Gene Structure and Function fusion-degradation 1 protein, an essential component of the ubiquitin- ings suggest that 1) histone acetylation may not strictly correlate with the dependent proteolytic turnover and mRNAprocessing. Although UFD1L DNAmethylation status at each imprinted locus, and 2) chromatin structure gene has been mapped in the region commonly deleted in patients with of the imprinted domain may vary between mouse fibroblasts and human DiGeorge syndrome (DGS), it is not clear the link between its haploinsuffi- lymphoblasts. ciency and some specific features of the DGS phenotype. Since a Ufd1l/Npl4 protein complex has been recently described in rat, we have P0763. Analysis of Microdeletions in the Y Chromosome of cloned and characterised the human counterpart of the Npl4 gene. Human Idiopatic Azoospermia and Severe Oligospermia with Infertil Npl4 gene encodes for a protein showing 96%, 44%, 34% homology with Men by using Multiplex PCR Npl4 from rat, C. elegans, S. cerevisiae respectively and, similarly to the C. M. Muslumanoglu1, M. Turgut2, O. Cilingir1, C. Can2, Y. Ozyurek2, N. elegans and rat orthologs, contains a single C-terminal RanBP2 zinc finger Basaran1 motif. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) experiments on human 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics; metaphases localised the Npl4 gene on the most telomeric region of chro- Eskisehir, Turkey; 2Osmangazi Univ, Medical Faculty, Department of Urol- mosome 17q. Northern blots analysis on fetal and adult human tissues ogy; Eskisehir, Turkey revealed a ~ 4.5 Kb transcript most abundant in heart, brain, skeletal mus- mhamza@ogu.edu.tr cle and kidney. Given the involvement of the yeast Npl4p in the nuclear tar- It has been known that some infertile men with azoospermia and geted protein transport, the identification of the Ufd1l/Npl4 complex in oligospermia have microdeletions in the Ychromosome. However, the fre- mammals reveals a potential relationship between nuclear transport quency of such microdeletions among the infertile men is unknown. We defects and the DGS phenotype. Npl4 gene could therefore be considered have studied 14 men with azoospermia and oligospermia. Our study con- a good candidate to perform mutations screening in patients with DGS and sist of 18 primer pairs that are homologous to previously identified and no detectable 22q11 deletion. Work supported by Telethon grant 364/bi mapped sequence tagged sites. These primers amplify nonpolymorphic and E723. short DNAsegments from Sthe Ychromosome when used in polymerase chain reactions. Primers have been combined into four sets for using in P0761.Mutational analysis of the SH2D1Agene in two Danish multiplex PCR. Molecular deletion analyses of azoospermic and oligosper- families mic males have suggested existence of Azoospermia Factor(AZF) residing K. Grnskov, S. Timshel, A. Sand, K. Brndum-Nielsen in deletion intervals 5 and 6 of the human Ychromosome and coinciding John F. Kennedy Institute; Glostrup, Denmark with three functional regions associated with spermatogenic failure. Addi- kag@kennedy.dk tionaly, it was investigated fourth, AZF region called AZFd which is located X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLPor Duncan disease), is char- between AZFb and AZFc. Of 14 patients, we found microdeletions lying in acterized by an extreme sensitivity to Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), leading to different regions of in three (21.4%) cases. severe and often fatal infectious mononucleosis. The disease is caused by mutations in the SH2D1Agene (Xq25), containing four exons. The mRNA P0764.An additional alternative exon of the Neurofibromato- of 2.5 kb encodes a protein of 128 amino acids, consisting of a 5 aa N ter- sis Type 1 (NF1) gene called 10a-2 codes for a possible trans- minal sequence, a Src homology 2 (SH2) domain and 25 aa C-terminal tail. membrane segment SH2D1Ahave been found to bind a phosphotyrosine of the signalling lym- B. Bartelt, P. Kruse, W. Vogel, O. Kenner, R. Mller, D. Kaufmann phocyte activating molecule (SLAM) protein thereby inhibiting recruitment University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany of a tyrosine phosphatase, SHP2. SLAM is a transmembrane receptor with britta.bartelt@medizin.uni-ulm.de two immunoglobulin-like domains expressed in Tand B cells. We have per- An additional splice product of the Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) gene formed mutational analysis of the SH2D1Agene in two Danish families. In was found. It contains an insert of 45 bp of intron 10a. This insert, termed a boy with symptoms of XLPwe found a R55X mutation. This mutation has exon 10a-2, qualifies as an exon as it is surrounded by splice sites with suf- been found in several XLPpatients and are known to be disease causing. ficiently high splice site scores, contains no in-frame stop codon and does In another family, a 16 year old boy died from mononucleosis. Mutational not alter the reading frame of the following in-frame exon 10b. This addi- analysis was performed on DNAextracted from tissue embedded in paraf- tional splice product was expressed in HeLa cells at a level of 10% of the fin. Exon 2 was not amplified and we did not find any mutations in the wildtype allele. It was found to be expressed at comparable levels in all remaining exons, however, in DNAfrom the mother and sister we found a human primary and tumor cell cultures examined. Of human tissues, a missense mutation in exon 3 in the C-terminal tail, Q112H. The interpreta- higher expression was seen in parts of the brain. Exon 10a-2 was also tions of our findings are; a) Q112H is a rare polymorphism unrelated to dis- found to be expressed in cells derived from primates and cat, but not in ease, b) Q112H is disease causing and the results in the boy was due to cells from cow, rat or mouse. Sequence comparison between exon 10a-2 artifact and poor quality of DNA and the NF1 sequences of fugu rubripes and drosophila melanogaster showed no high homology. Investigation of the putative 10a-2 protein P0762. Role of histone acetylation in genomic imprinting of sequence suggests that its predisposes to transmembrane helices. To test human 15q11-q13 and mouse 7C. this, fusion proteins of EGFPand NF1 exon 9 to 10b were expressed in M. Takahashi1, K. Takano1, T. Wada1, T. Ohta2, R. D. Nicholls2, S. Saitoh1 HeLa and brown melanoma cells. Fusion protein without exon 10a-2 1Hokkaido University; Sapporo, Japan; 2Center for Neurobiology and showed only a cytoplasmic localization. In contrast, fusion protein contain- Behavior, Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania; Philadel- ing exon 10a-2 exhibited predominantly perinuclear granular signals. phia, PAUnited States makmak@med.hokudai.ac.jp P0765.XOS9, a non-coding transcript antisense to SOX9 To understand the role of histone acetylation in genomic imprinting, we U. Dohrmann1, D. Pfeifer1, F. Poulat2, G. Scherer1 have investigated the status of histone acetylation of imprinted loci in 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Freiburg, Germany; 2Insti- human 15q11-q13, which is associated with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) tut de Gntique Humaine; Montpellier, France and Angelman syndrome (AS), and the syntenic region in mouse 7C. We udohrmann@mm31.ukl.uni-freiburg.de performed Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays using anti-acety- SOX9, the gene mutated in the human skeletal malformation syndrome lated histone H3 and H4 antibodies to assess histone acetylation. Lym- campomelic dysplasia with XY sex reversal, is an essential regulator of phoblastoid cells from PWS and AS patients, and controls, as well as chondrocyte and testis differentiation and is expressed in a variety of fibroblasts from PWS and AS model mice carrying a 4 Mb deletion, and embryonic and adult tissues. Genomic sequence analyses showed that control mice were used. We have previously identified parent-of-origin spe- SOX9 is the only protein-coding gene within a region of 2.5 Mb on distal cific histone acetylation confined to the CpG island of SNURF-SNRPN. In 17q. Database searches for ESTs revealed the presence of a non-coding, this study, we extended the study to 6 human loci including 5 paternally- polyadenylated RNA transcribed from the SOX9 antisense strand. We expressed loci (MKRN3, MAGEL2, NDN, SNURF-SNRPN, and IPW), and named the corresponding gene XOS9. It extends over 67.5 kb and con- 1 maternally-expressed (UBE3A), as well as 4 mouse paternally- sists of 14 exons with a total length of at least 1250 bp, with each exon expressed loci (Mkrn3, Magel2, Ndn, and Snurf-Snrpn). Although the CpG flanked by canonical splice donor and acceptor sites. The 5.4 kb SOX9 island of SNURF-SNRPN demonstrated a clear difference of histone gene is embedded within the 17 kb first intron of XOS9, and XOS9 exon 2 acetylation, other human loci did not demonstrate such parent-of-origin overlaps with part of the SOX9 promoter. The processing of the XOS9 tran- specific differences even in the CpG island of those genes where parent- scripts appears to be complex, as at least 8 different alternatively spliced of-origin specific DNAmethylation has been demonstrated. In contrast, in XOS9 variants are found in various tissues of different developmental mouse fibroblasts, the maternally derived inactive allele is less acetylated stages and in cell lines. Reporter gene constructs containing the XOS9 than the paternally derived active allele at all tested loci, with the most promoter showed enhanced reporter gene activity in some eukaryotic cell striking difference detected at the CpG island of Snurf-Snrpn. These find- lines but not in others, revealing specific regulation of the XOS9 promoter.Posters: Gene Structure and Function 249 Interestingly, cells that activate the XOS9 promoter are derived from tis- all human tumor tissues tested (NF1 neurofibroma, sporadic intramedullar sues known to express SOX9. Work is in progress to establish a role for neurinoma, sporadic meningiomas, NF2 schwannoma, NF2 meningioma, XOS9 in the complex regulation of the SOX9 gene. basalioma and naevus) as well as in cultured tumor cell lines and cultured primary cells. Hence our data show that aberrant splicing is a very com- P0766. Suppression analysis of the human beta-globin non- mon process. According to simulations of the secondary structures of the sense mutation CD15 (TGG->TGA) pre-mRNAwe suggest that it is due to the rare occurrence of alternative F. Almeida, A. Miranda, J. Lavinha, L. Romao structures at the splice donor site not recognised by the splice machinery. Instituto Nacional de Saude Dr. Ricardo Jorge; Lisbon, Portugal In HeLa cells aberrant splicing is increased at elevated temperature and fatima.almeida@insa.min-saude.pt low pH in vitro, conditions often found in tumor tissues. We suggest that Nonsense mutations may cause the synthesis of truncated proteins from a increased aberrant splicing due to environmental factors represents an mutant gene. Because the protein is incomplete and deleterious, its mRNA additional mechanism for reduction of the amount of tumor suppressor is often rapidly degraded by a mechanism termed nonsense-mediated mRNAin the absence of relevant mutations in the tumor. decay (NMD).ACD15 nonsense mutation was found in portuguese beta- thalassemia carriers (Ribeiro et al., Brit. J. Hematol. 1992) and cloned. P0769. Towards understanding the molecular pathology of Surprisingly, the corresponding mRNAwas expressed at levels similar to vitelliform macular dystrophy (Best disease) wild-type in vivo as well as in vitro (Romao et al., Blood 2000). Since the F. Krmer1, V. Milenkovic1, H. Sthr1, R. S. Molday2, B. H. F. Weber1 CD15 mRNAis not subject of NMD, there is a therapeutic interest in study- 1Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Department of Biochemistry; ing if this mutation may be suppressed. It is known that some aminoglyco- Vancouver, BC Canada side antibiotics may suppress nonsense mutations during translation by fkraemer@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de competing with protein factors that promote the release of the polypeptide The autosomal dominant vitelliform macular dystrophy (Best disease, from the ribosome.In order to test this hypothesis, murine erythroleukemic VMD2) is characterized by a typical bilateral accumulation of lipofuscin-like (MEL) cells were cotransfected with the CD15 nonsense mutated gene or, material within and beneath the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The egg as a positive control, with the wild-type gene, and the puromycin-resist- yolk-like macular lesion and the absence of the light-rise in the electro-ocu- ance gene (selection marker). The pools of transfected cells were induced logram (EOG) are key features associated with this disease. Recently, the to erythroid differentiation, i.e. to transgene expression, and the aminogly- gene underlying Best disease has been identified and more than 75 dis- coside G418 was added in varying concentrations. Cytoplasmic extracts of tinct mutations have been reported. Of these, almost all are found to be MELcell pools expressing either transgene in the presence or absence of clustered in four regions of the N-terminus implying functional significance G418 were prepared and protein expression analysis was performed by for these regions. To gain insight into the pathogenic mechanisms of immunoblotting.Preliminary results indicate that the amount of beta-globin mutant VMD2 protein, we developed a heterologous cell expression sys- resulting from suppression of CD15 is low. For a quantification, transfect- tem. Monoclonal (mAb_H6) and polyclonal (pAb_333/334) antibodies were ed MELcell lines are currently being subcloned from the pool. generated against different epitopes of the VMD2 protein and their speci- ficity was verified by Western blotting. Both antibodies label a specific band P0767.Use of the GFPas reporter in an adhesion test system in the detergent phase of human RPE extractions but not other tissues to determine in vivo effects of Myelin Protein Zero (P0) muta- tested. COS-7 and ARPE-19 were chosen as suitable cell lines for the tions transfection experiments, as no endogenous VMD2 expression is A. Ekici1, E. Nelis2, C. Van Broeckhoven2, B. W. Rautenstrauss1 detectable in these cell systems. Anumber of different mutations found 1Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany; 2Laboratory of Neuro- nearby and within the predicted transmembrane domains of VMD2 were genetics, Born Bunge Foundation, University of Antwerp; Antwerp, Bel- selected for this study. Using site-directed mutagenesis, A10T, R92S, gium Y227N, A243V and DI295 were introduced into the full length cDNAof aekici@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de VMD2. The mutant constructs and the intact VMD2 were transiently trans- P0 is a well characterized cell adhesion molecule playing a crucial role dur- fected into COS-7 and ARPE-19 cell lines. The current study will present ing myelination in peripheral nervous system. GFP is a helpful tool to the subcellular localisation of mutant and intact VMD2 protein as a first observe cellular events in vivo and is multiple used for this purpose in var- step in the functional characterization of its biological role in the RPE. ious cells or even organisms. P0 mutations cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B (CMT1B), Dejerine-Sottas-Syndrome (DSS) and congen- P0770.Is the IVS2 Region of the Human Agamma Globin Gene ital hypomyelination (CH), diseases of different severity, even if the same an Important Regulatory Region? position is substituted by different amino acids. We used two insect cell L. Osorio-Almeida, I. Gonalves, A. Raimundo, P. Baptista lines, S2 and HighFive, in order to develop an adhesion test system to FCT/UNL; Caparica, Portugal determine effects of P0 mutations. We analyzed 3 pathogenic mutations mlo@mail.fct.unl.pt for their effect on adhesion capability in a S2 cell system and found a direct Our work performed in beta thalassemia and HbLepore heterozygotes with correlation of adhesion capability and severity of the disease phenotype. variable levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) has shown that one important We constructed fusion proteins with GFP for P0wt and one mutation to contribution to the observed HbF elevation comes from cis acting visualize the effect in vivo both on the intracellular localization and on the sequences located in the betaglobin gene cluster. The genetic markers changes in the adhesion capability. The GFP-P0wt fusion revealed the consist of two polymorphic microsatelites lying in the Agamma globin IVS2 expected adhesion capability and moreover the membrane insertion of the gene [(TG)n] and 5to beta globin gene [(AT)xTy]. We observed a statisti- fusion protein was clearly visible in a fluorescent microscope. The GFP-P0 cally significant correlation between the presence of allele (TG)13 in Agam- mutation showed expression, but no membrane insertion and may ma; IVS2, in linkage disequilibrium with the C to T transition at -158 of explaine the lack of its adhesion capability. Hence, this system is suitable Ggamma gene, and HbF elevation. The AgammaIVS2 has been previous- to predict the severity of the phenotype based on expression of in vitro ly identified as a region required for the inducible expression of gamma mutated P0 and visualize the effect of mutations in vivo. globin gene by hemin. To further characterize this region, we have foot- printed two introns with different (TG)n alleles and have analysed regions P0768. Aberrant Splicing in Several Human Tumors in the of interest by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Through these studies we Tumor Suppressor Genes NF1, NF2 and TSC2 identified two binding sites for the erythroid regulatory factor GATA-1 and O. Kenner1, D. Kaufmann1, W. Leistner2, P. Kruse1, S. Hoffmeyer3, C. five sites bound by general transcription factors (Sp1, NF1, YY1, BP1 and Hein4, W. Vogel1, L. Messiaen5, B. Bartelt1 Oct 1). Additionally, we have found in the two alleles studied [(TG)13 and 1Department of Human Genetics; Ulm - Donau, Germany; 2Max-Delbrck- (TG)9(CG)5(TG)8] that the microsatelite region interacts with different pro- Center for Molecular Medicine; Berlin, Germany; 3Epidauros; Bernried, teins. These proteins, not yet identified, are present in adult erythroid Germany; 4Department of Neurosurgery; Ulm - Donau, Germany; 5Depart- nuclear extracts. All these data suggests that AgammaIVS2 contains DNA ment of Medical Genetics; Ghent, Belgium elements functionally relevant for gamma to beta globin gene regulation. oliver.kenner@medizin.uni-ulm.de We started to test the functional importance of the Oct 1 binding site by a Mutations at splice sites or surrounding sequences have been reported to PCR-based method of site directed mutagenesis in the (TG)13 allele. The cause aberrant splicing. Splicing errors, however, can also occur without normal and mutated introns were inserted into a plasmid p2g301 (a gift sequence alterations. We investigated three tumor suppressor genes for from Dr. Swee Lay Thein), able to express the gamma and the beta genes aberrant splicing in tumors. At a low frequency per exon it was found for 5 under the control of HS2 site. We are currently performing stable transfec- of 7 investigated in-frame exons of the neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) tion assays with the normal and the mutated constructs into MELcells to gene, for 2 of 3 exons of the neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene and for investigate if the Oct 1 site is functionally relevant for the gamma globin 1 of 3 exons of the tuberous sclerosis 2 (TSC2) gene. It was detectable in gene expression. 250 Posters: Gene Structure and Function P0771. Aggregation and toxicity in mammalian cells of pro- coma and between 1 and 2 % of the population over age 40 is affected by teins containing homopolymeric (Gln)- or (Leu)- repeats. this disease. Recently, mutations in the trabecular meshwork-inducible glu- J. C. Dorsman, B. Pepers, D. Langenberg, J. T. Den Dunnen, G. B. Van cocorticoid response (TIGR) gene, also known as myocilin (MYOC), were Ommen identified for juvenile open angle glaucoma (JOAG). TIGR/MYOC is locat- LUMC; Leiden, The Netherlands ed on human chromosome 1q23-24 and his function remains unknown. As J.C.Dorsman@LUMC.NL prerequisite for TIGR expression analysis three different green fluorescent Several neurological disorders are caused by the expansion of a trinu- proteins have been transfected into S2-insect cells. First the GFP-coding cleotide repeat. The largest group of these diseases, including Hunting- region was cleaved from pQBI25 and subcloned into the expression/selec- tons disease (HD) and several spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), are asso- tion plasmid. The assay uses the expression/selection vector pIB/V5-His. ciated with an expansion of a (CAG)n repeat in the coding region of the The highest concentrations of blasticidin (10g/ml) resulted in good and gene. Since the instability of the (CAG)n repeat lies at the DNAlevel there contamination free growth of the cell culture. In this analysis the GFP is no a priory reason why the sequence (CAG)n or its complement (CTG)n derived from the pQBI25 vector revealed the highest transfection efficien- would not occasionally be translated as (Gln)n, (Leu)n, (Ser)n, (Ala)n or cy accompanied by bright fluorescence. Analysis of BFPproteins, howev- (Cys)n, depending on reading frame and translated strand. Yet, in the neu- er, was hampered by the blue fluorescence of S2 cells themselves. In anal- rodegenerative disorders only Gln-repeat expansions are found, while the ogy to experiments performed with Myelin Protein Zero-GFP Fusions in occurrence of repeats encoding (very) long stretches of other amino acids this system we perform currently expression analysis of TIGR-GFPfusion has not been documented. To understand this observation and to deter- proteins. This will allow to determine the correct ATG codon as well as mine the potential effect of other repeats we transformed mammalian cells intracellular localization and a postulated secretion of the protein. with constructs expressing different single amino acid stretches. To over- come the inherent instability of long homogeneous trinucleotide repeats we P0774.Interspecies comparison of SMN genes and screen for employed the redundancy of the genetic code to express homogeneous cis-elements regulating transcription. single amino acid stretches from mixed sequence DNAoligomers. These L. R. SIMARD, A. Semionov, C. Rochette sequences replicate stably in pro- and eukaryotes and facilitated the Centre de Recherche Hpital Sainte-Justine; Montral, PQ Canada expression of proteins containing up to 300 glutamines or leucines. Trans- simardlo@medclin.umontreal.ca fections of cultured mammalian cells show that proteins containing The spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) region on chromosome 5q13 contains (Gln)300- and (Leu)300-repeats are toxic and display a high propensity for an inverted 500-kb duplication and deleterious mutations in one of the sur- aggregation with Leu-repeats producing a significantly increased toxicity vival motor neuron (SMN) genes, namely SMN1, cause this common lethal compared to Gln-repeats. In addition, various cellular transcription factors childhood neuropathy. The major difference between SMN1 and SMN2 is co-aggregate in these aggregates, including the transcriptional co-activa- a single nucleotide that, in SMN2, favors the exclusion of exon 7. SMA tors CBPand p300. We are currently studying the effects of the expression severity parallels the amount of available full-length SMN. We have of proteins containing single amino acid repeats in mammalian cells using demonstrated that SMN gene duplication occurred >5 Mya in a common DNA chip and micro-array technology. These studies should provide ancestor of humans and chimpanzees; however, SMN2 first appeared in insight in the cellular changes and the toxic effects of these aggregation- Homo sapiens indicating that SMN1 is the ancestral gene. RNAand pro- prone proteins. tein data suggest both temporal and spatial regulation of SMN production. We have used two approaches to identify potential cis-elements involved P0772. The autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets in SMN gene regulation. First, we performed an interspecies sequence (ADHR) gene is a secreted fibroblast growth factor (FGF23) comparison to generate a percent identity plot. PipMaker detected 3 major B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, A. Benet-Pages1, K. E. White2, S. Hauck1, M. clusters of highly conserved (60-70%) DNAstretches between the mouse Grabowski1, G. Carn2, M. Ueffing1, M. J. Econs2, T. Meitinger1, T. M. and human SMN genes. These segments also harbored a number of puta- Strom1 tive binding sites for known transcription factors. In addition, the region sur- 1Technische Universitt Mnchen und GSF Forschungszentrum fr rounding exon 7 shared 77% identity. Second, functional assays of Umwelt und Gesundheit; Mnchen, Germany; 2Indiana University School enhancer/silencer activity of the entire 14-kb mouse Smn gene revealed of Medicine; Indianapolis, IN United States two DNAsegments that affected the promoter activity of a CATreporter bettina@pedgen.med.uni-muenchen.de gene. One of these mapped to a region of 70% interspecies sequence Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR) is a phosphate identity. This high degree of sequence conservation was lacking in the sec- wasting disorder, characterised by low serum phosphorus concentrations, ond element. In conclusion, we have identified two elements potentially rickets, osteomalacia, lower extremities deformities, short stature, bone involved in transcriptional regulation of SMN gene expression. This work pain, and dental abscesses. Recently, we identified missense mutations in could provide some clues towards manipulating SMN2 gene expression to a novel fibroblast growth factor (FGF23) as the cause for ADHR. Patients potentially treat SMA. Funded by HSCF and MRC. with ADHR display many clinical and laboratory characteristics that are observed in patients with oncogenic hypophosphatemic osteomalacia P0775. Subcellular localization of the polycystic kidney dis- (OHO). OHO is thought to arise by the secretion of a phosphate wasting ease-1 and -2 gene products. factor. We therefore investigated whether FGF23 is a secreted factor. An D. J. M. Peters, M. H. Scheffers, H. Le, P. van der Bent, E. de Heer, M. H. affinity purified polyclonal antibody was produced against a peptide corre- Breuning sponding to residues 229-243 of human FGF23. After stable transfection Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands of HEK293 cells with a plasmid (pcDNA3.1) encoding full-length human d.j.m.peters@lumc.nl FGF23 with an C-terminal 6xHis tag, two protein species of approximately Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common 35 and 15 kDa were detected in the conditioned medium but not in the cell hereditary disease characterized by the progressive development of fluid- lysate by Western blot analysis. Detection by an anti-His antibody gave the filled cysts in renal tubuli, leading to chronic renal failure. To date two pro- same results, indicating that the affinity-purified anti-FGF23 antibody teins have been identified to be involved in ADPKD, polycystin-1 and poly- recognised recombinant human FGF23 protein. FGF23 without the signal cystin-2. These proteins are thought to function in signal transduction, peptide of 24 amino acids is predicted to have a molecular mass of 25.3 cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell adhesion and probably act in a com- kDa. If the molecular mass is correctly estimated by SDS-PAGE, our find- mon cellular pathway as well as independently of eachother. Antibodies ings thus imply that FGF23 undergoes post-translational modifications. To generated against both proteins have been used to study expression in tis- investigate whether FGF23 is a substrate of the putative endopeptidase sues and in cultured epithelial cells. We also analyzed MDCK-cells, a renal PHEX, we prepared constructs for the coexpression of wildtype FGF23 epithelial cell line, transfected with a full-length Polycystin-2-enhanced and mutant FGF23 with PHEX. In summary, the FGF23 protein is a secret- green fluorescent protein (Pol2-EGFP) fusion protein construct. Pol2- ed factor and may have an important role in human phosphate homeosta- EGFPoverexpressing cells showed mainly diffuse cytoplasmic expression, sis. consistent with endoplasmic reticulum/pre-middle Golgi localization report- ed by Cai et al. (JBC Oct 1999). Expression of Pol2-EGFPin the plasma P0773. Development of an insect cell expression system for membrane was detected only in a small subset of cells. Staining with poly- in vivo analysis of TIGR-GFPfusion proteins clonal antibodies raised against polycystin-2 overlapped with Pol2-EGFP S. Oezbey, A. B. Ekici, E. Kierysch, K. Michels-Rautenstrauss, B. Rauten- expression, which indicates that these antibodies recognize polycystin-2. strauss Staining with antibodies raised against polycystin-1, partially overlapped in Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany the cytoplasm which generally paralleled intensity of Pol2-EGFPexpres- soezbey@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de sion. In the plasma membrane polycystin-1 co-localizes with desmosomes Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common form of glau- and possible colocalization with polycystin-2 was observed in the subset ofPosters: Gene Structure and Function 251 cells in which Pol2-EGFPwas expressed at the plasma membrane. These human. 3UTRs are known to influence the fate of mRNAs in several ways, results suggest cotransport of these proteins from the cytoplasm to the including intracellular localisation, control of its stability and regulation of plasma membrane and that Polycystin-1 and -2 may interact and stabilize translation efficiency. These functions are often mediated by proteins, bind- eachother in a cell cycle or transcription/translation dependent manner. ing to regulatory sequences within the 3UTRs. Our group searched for protein binding sites within the NF1 3UTR and defines the interacting pro- P0776. Human TSPY can be transcribed and processed in teins. Up to now we were able to identify five protein binding regions Mouse GC-1 cells termed PBR1-5 in the NF1 3UTR. Two of them were studied in more B. Skawran, F. Dechend, S. Schubert, J. Schmidtke detail. PBR1 binds three different proteins with estimated molecular Institut fr Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany weights of 40 kDa, 68 kDa and 96 kDa. Cross-link reactions demonstrated bskawran@yahoo.de that the protein interacting with NF1-PBR5 has an approximate molecular The human TSPY (testis specific protein, Y-encoded) is organized as a weight of 48 kDa. In order to identify the respective proteins we established repetitive gene family of 30 to 60 copies with ist bulk mapping to yp.TSPY a new screening method using high density protein expression filters from codes for a testis specific expressed m-RNAtranskripts and could also be the RZPD (Resource Center German Human Genome Project). The filters detected on Western blots as a 33/38kD protein, depending on its degree contain 37200 clones expressing high levels of the protein-repertoire of of phosphorylation. By immunohistostaining TSPYwas detected in sper- human fetal brain. After incubation of the filters with radiolabelled PBR1 or matogonia and to a lesser extent in primary spermatocytes, suggesting a 5 RNAwe obtained 8 positive clones interacting specifically with one of the role in spermatogenesis. Nevertheless the precise function of TSPY two PBRs. The identification and verification of the putative RNAbinding remains unknown. In contrast to human TSPY, mouse tspy appears to be proteins are on the way. a single copy pseudogene. To better understanding of TSPYregulation, we determined whether human TSPYcan be correctly transcribed and spliced P0779.TSPYvariants in six loci on the human Y-chromosome in a mouse spermatogonia cell line (GC-1).After transfection of these cells S. Schubert1, F. Dechend1, G. Williams2, B. Skawran1, M. Krawczak3, C. with a construct including the entire gene and the putative promoter of Tyler-Smith2, J. Schmidtke4 human TSPY, we could show that the hTSPYcDNAis spliced according to 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Ger- the major pattern known from in-vivo studies. This cellular model enabled many; 2CRC, University of Oxford; Oxford, United Kingdom; 3Institute of us to investigate the human TSPY promoter region more precisely. We Medical Genetics, University of Wales; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 4Institut have cloned different reduced promoter fragments into a luciferase-vector fr Humangenetik, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, United Kingdom (pGL3) (Promega) and tested their transcriptional activities in the GC-1 schubert.stephanie@mh-hannover.de spermatogonia cell line. The distinct promoter regions showed different TSPY (testis-specific protein, Y-encoded) is a Y-specific, heterogeneous transcriptional activities, enabling us to determine length and functional gene family. It was first discovered in humans but has subsequently been domains of the TSPY-promoter. detected in many other mammalian species. The majority of human TSPY copies map to interval 3C on Yp11.2 (TSPYA) where each copy is embed- P0777.Homologues To The First Gene For Autosomal Domi- ded in a single unit of the DYZ5 tandem repeat array. TSPYthus forms the nant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) Are Pseudogenes only known regular tandemly-repeated protein-coding gene family in the N. Bogdanova1, A. Markoff2, M. McCluskey3, J. Horst1, B. Dworniczak1 human genome. Aminor locus (TSPYB) exists in an interval proximal to 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Univ. Mnster; Mnster, Germany; 2Institut fr 3D, close to the centomere. FISH analysis revealed an additional minor Medizinische Biochemie, Univ. Mnster; Mnster, Germany; 3Centre for locus on Yq11.23. Recently, a new member of the TSPY gene family Human Genetics, Edith Cowan University; Jundaloop, Australia (TSPYq1) was isolated from subinterval 6E, part of the AZFc region. Thus bogdano@uni-muenster.de in humans, as in many other species, TSPYis organized as a repetitive Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the most gene family, with inter-individual variation in copy number ranging from common monogenic inherited disorders with an incidence of approximate- about 30 to 60. The present study was performed in order to obtain more ly 1 in 1000. The disease is characterized by development of fluid-filled detailed insight into the structure, organization and genomic evolution of cysts in both kidneys which, in most affected individuals, results in kidney the human TSPYgene family by mapping three sequence variants identi- failure. In affected individuals of European descent, mutations in the PKD1 fied through RT-PCR analysis onto genomic clones derived from two dif- gene, located on 16p13.3 are the most common cause for the disease and ferent YAC-contigs. TSPYgene family members occur in at least six loca- account for up to 85% of the cases. The PKD1 gene extends over ~52 kb tions on the human Ychromosome, and each cluster comprises a unique of genomic DNAand contains 46 exons encoded by a 14 kb transcript. A combination of variants. Our data further suggest that an 18 bp tandem large part of the gene, extending from exon 1 to the first 87 bp of exon 33, duplication found in TSPYexon 1 originated from an unequal sister chro- is duplicated in at least three homologous genes (HG), which are located matid exchange between two tandemly arranged on chromosome 16p13.1 and share approximately 95-97% homology with TSPYclusters. the PKD1 gene, thus heavily obstructing the mutation analysis of PKD1. Two of these genes have been recently covered in a large sequencing P0780.Cloning and characterization of hOAT1, a novel organ- work on chromosome 16. It has been however not known for years if ic anion transporter in kidney homologous to PKD1 genes code for functional polypeptides. We have D. Prawitt1, A. Bahn2, T. Enklaar1, H. Hauser1, F. Quondamatteo2, A. Hille- identified four more homologues to PKD1 which are different from the pre- mann2, R. Herken2, G. Burckhardt2, B. U. Zabel1 viously published sequence by employing PCR screening of a bacterial 1Universitaetskinderklinik; Mainz, Germany; 2Zentrum fuer Physiologie und artificial chromosome (BAC) DNAlibrary and BLASThomology searches Pathophysiologie; Gttingen, Germany in publically available data bases. Deciphering the structural differences prawitt@wserv.kinder.klinik.uni-mainz.de between HG and PKD1 allows for differential analysis of those genes. The human organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1) plays a key role in the Assaying their transcripts in the model cell line T98G shows that HG are secretion of many clinically important drugs (e.g.antiviral drugs) in the not translated. Taken together with the sequence information about the proximal tubule cells of the kidney. In a PCR based approach we isolated genes, these data show that homologues to PKD1 are pseudogenes. This a genomic hOAT1 PAC clone and determined the exon-intron structure of is the first work on PKD1 homologous genes to demonstrate that HG the gene. hOAT1 consists of 10 exons ranging from 104 to 369 bp. RT- belong to a PKD1 pseudogene family, the members of which emerged at PCR analysis on human kidney samples led to the detection of two new about the same time in the course of molecular evolution. The precise splice variants (hOAT1-3 and hOAT1-4), showing a 132 bp inframe dele- structural characterization of HG allows in addition to create better tion of the ORF as part of exon 9. Using Fluorescence in-situ-hybridization reagents for conventional mutation analysis of the duplicated part of the and radiation hybrid panels we mapped the hOAT1 gene to chromosome PKD1 gene. 11q13.1-q13.2. In order to further elucidate its function and involvement in regulatory processes expression experiments were performed with the P0778.Anew screening method applied to the identification human and the rabbit orthologue (rbOAT1). Transcription of the gene was of proteins interacting with the neurofibromin mRNA not only observed in kidney and liver, but also in non secreting tissues like A. Striebel, J. Haeussler, W. Vogel, G. Assum muscle and eye. In situ hybridization of the rabbit retina with the renal Department of Human Genetics University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany rbOAT1 as a probe revealed positive signals in the endothelium of inner andrea.striebel@medizin.uni-ulm.de blood vessels, the ganglion cells and several neurons in the bipolar cell Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common genetic disor- layer. Since this is the first description of an organic anion transporter in ders in human with a prevalence of about 1 in 3500 individuals. The 8.5 kb neuron cells, it is tempting to speculate about hOAT1 playing a role in coding sequence of the NF1 gene is followed by an unusually long 3- transport processes of neurotransmitter metabolites in the visual system. untranslated region (3.5 kb) which is highly conserved between mouse and252 Posters: Gene Structure and Function P0781.Not like the others; Prm3 with unexpected properties. somal region 8p22-p23 is of special interest since it is associated with fre- D. Boinska, G. Schlter, W. Engel quent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and probably involved in different types Institut fr Humangenetik; Gttingen, Germany of human cancer. Moreover, the gene causing keratolytic winter erythema dagusia_b@yahoo.com (KWE), a skin disease characterized by hyperkeratosis and peeling of the The protamine 3 gene (Prm3) is a member of the protamine gene cluster palmar and plantar skin, has been localized to this chromosomal region. on a mouse chromoseme16. The transcriptional and translational pattern of Prm3 seems to be similar to these of the other genes from this locus P0784.Analysis of brain specific expressed genes frequently (protamine 1, 2 and transition protein 2). Expression starts from the day 20 deleted in Neurofibromatosis type 1 patients (postnatal) of mouse development. Prm3 protein can be found after a delay E. Moschgath, W. Vogel, G. Assum of 7 days. To our surprise, immunohistochemical studies show that unlike Department of Human Genetics University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany other protamines or transition proteins, Prm3 protein is not present in the elke.moschgath@medizin.uni-ulm.de nucleus, but in the cytoplasma of elongating spermatids and residual bod- The Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) gene is located on chromosome ies of mature sperms. Also, unlike the other basic protamines and transi- 17q11.2, in a 1.5 Mb region which is flanked by two copies of a long range tion proteins, the Prm3 cDNAsequence seems to code for an acidic pro- repeated sequences. Approximately 10% of NF1 patients carry a deletion tein of 104 amino acids with a central domain of 24 consecutive acidic of the entire region between the repeats. Most of these patients are more aminoacids (glutamic/aspartic). Correspondingly, on IEF westernblots we severely affected and suffer from learning disabilities as well as mental can detect a band at an IEPof about 4,5 pH. In contrast to many other tes- retardation besides other symptoms, the hallmarks of the NF1 phenotype. ticular mRNAs, Prm3 mRNAseems to be translated relatively efficiently; In order to identify the genes responsible for this specific phenotype we about 60% of mRNAassociated to polysomes, polysome spacing about started a search for genes located in the deleted region which are 100nt. To determine the function of the Prm3 gene, knock-out and trans- expressed in brain. RT-PCR experiments showed that nine of twelve ESTs gene studies with inducible aberrant Prm3 expression are underway. located in the critical region are expressed in human brain. We character- ized the gene flanking the NF1 gene in 3 direction in more detail, termed P0782.Interaction Of Polycystin 1, The Major Protein Affected FHN3 (flanking the human NF1 gene in 3direction). The FHN3 gene spans In Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease, With 105 kb and comprises 18 exons. Alternative splicing and usage of multiple Annexin V polyAsites were found by analysing a panel of fetal tissue specific cDNAs A. Markoff1, N. Bogdanova2, U. Rescher1, F. Qian3, G. Germino3, J. by RT-PCR. Northern Blot hybridisation experiments with different human Horst2, B. Dworniczak2, V. Gerke1 adult tissues revealed the occurrence of a brain specific 9.5 kb mRNAin 1Institut fr Medizinische Biochemie, ZMBE, Univ. Mnster; Mnster, Ger- addition to the 3.5 kb transcript, which was also found in other tissues. The many; 2Institut fr Humangenetik, Univ. Mnster; Mnster, Germany; deduced amino acid sequence of the FHN3 gene shows no homology to 3Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Johns Hopkins Universi- other known proteins or functional domains. The brain specific isoform ty School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD United States results from the usage of a downstream alternative polyAsite while the markoff@uni-muenster.de protein coding part of the transcript is not altered. Polycystin 1 is the gene product of PKD1, the first gene identified to be causative for the condition of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney dis- P0785. Molecular identification of genes and pathways ease (ADPKD). Mutations in PKD1 are thought to be responsible for 85% involved in skeletogenesis - potential candidates for human of the ADPKD Europeans and 14% are attributed to the second gene, disorders PKD2 . Polycystin 1 is proposed to be a transmembrane protein with mul- A. Winterpacht1, G. Mohrmann1, S. Schlaubitz2, C. Stelzer2, P. Her- tiple ligand binding domains. Modeling data indicate two complete leucine- manns2, C. Mhlbauer3, B. Lee4, T. Hankeln3, B. Zabel2, E. R. Schmidt3 rich repeats at the very N-terminus which could provide a site for protein- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; protein interaction. In order to characterise potential members of the 2Childrens Hospital, University of Mainz; Mainz, Germany; 3GENterprise PKD1-PKD2 pathway, we sought to identify the binding partner(s) of poly- GmbH, Mainz; Mainz, Germany; 4Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX cystin. We demonstrate that annexin V, a calcium and phospholipid bind- United States ing protein, specifically interacts with the polycystin 1 LRR in vitro and in winterpacht@uke.uni-hamburg.de vivo. Our results from in vitro binding experiments show complex formation We initiated a project which is aimed at the systematic identification and with the LRR of polycystin 1, specific for annexin V and its N-terminal por- characterization of novel genes and regulatory pathways involved in the tion. Display of LRR on the extracellular side allows for binding of annexin complex processes of cartilage/bone formation, growth, differentiation and V to the cell surface in a model system. Binding of annexin V to polycystin homeostasis. The goal is to generate a number of positional and function- 1 could possibly sequester annexin V molecules and prevent their cluster- al candidate genes for inherited monogenic (skeletal dysplasias) as well as ing on endothelial cell membranes thereby not alowing for anticoagulatory multigenic disorders (osteoarthritis/osteoarthrosis and osteoporosis). activity. Starting point of the project is a unique human fetal cartilage cDNAlibrary. Sequencing of 400 randomly selected clones revealed that 62% of the P0783. Identification and localization of a novel human clones showed sequence similarity to known genes (including collagen myotubularin related protein gene, MTMR8, on chromosome type II and osteonectin), 13% matched to known genomic sequences and 8p22-p23 15% to other ESTs in the databases. The remaining 4,5% of clones S. Appel1, K. Reichwald2, A. Reis3, A. Rosenthal2, H. C. Hennies1 showed no match to known sequences and were considered as putative 1Max-Delbrck-Centrum; Berlin, Germany; 2Institute of Molecular Biotech- novel cDNAs, most likely representing cartilage-specific transcripts. The nology; Jena, Germany; 3Friedrich-Alexander-Universitt; Erlangen, Ger- generation of 10.000 human ESTs is now in progress. So far, 2000 ESTs many have been generated and fifteen cDNAs that do not show any significant siappel@mdc-berlin.de similarities to known genes are currently analysed in more detail. These Myotubularin and myotubularin related proteins belong to the dual speci- cDNAs represent genes encoding transcription factors (one with a KRAB ficity phosphatases that are able to dephosphorylate protein phosphotyro- domain), putative transmembrane proteins as well as a protein with PHD sine as well as phosphothreonine or phosphoserine. Several myotubularin domains. For novel or very rare transcripts the chromosomal localisation related proteins have been identified so far. Mutations in the human as well as the expression pattern will be determined and full length cDNA myotubularin gene (MTM1), which is located on the X chromosome, lead will be sequenced for a subset of transcripts (80-100). All sequences will to X-linked myotubular myopathy. We have isolated and localized a novel be subject to comprehensive bioinformatic analysis, stored in a special putative myotubularin related protein gene, MTMR8, on chromosome database and will be used to generate DNA-microarrays for expression 8p22-p23 between the markers at D8S550 and D8S1759 by exon trapping profiling with a focus on human disorders. experiments and RT-PCR. The gene consists of ten exons and spans about 43 kb genomic sequence. The corresponding cDNAis 7036 bp in P0786.Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) - molecular dissec- length. The open reading frame, which starts in exon 2, predicts a protein tion of a complex phenotype by comparative sequencing and of 464 amino acids and a calculated molecular mass of 54 kD. The functional studies myotubularin protein family is highly conserved from humans down to S. Endele1, N. Pfarr1,2, S. Schlickum1, C. Steglich1, M. Oswald2, R. Heller1, yeast. Like myotubularin related protein 5 (MTMR5 or Sbf1), MTMR8 B. Zabel2, A. Winterpacht1 shows significant similarities to other myotubularin related proteins but has 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; no dual specificity phosphatase domain. It contains a double helical motif 2Childrens Hospital, University of Mainz; Mainz, Germany similar to the SETinteraction domain, the function of which is still unknown endele@uke.uni-hamburg.de but is thought to play a role in the control of cell proliferation. The chromo- Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a complex and variable malformationPosters: Gene Structure and Function 253 syndrome resulting from the absence of the distal segment of one chro- of hybridization reactions because the same cell line can be used under mosome 4 short arm (4p16.3). Clinical and cytogenetic data indicate that identical experimental conditions as positive and negative control, depend- WHS is a contiguous gene syndrome with an undefined number of genes ing upon the presence or absence of p53 induction. Northern blot analysis contributing to the phenotype. The WHS critical region (WHSCR) has been was used to confirm the presence of the target RNAin nuclear samples confined to a 165 kb gene rich region on chromosomal subband 4p16.3. derived from induced cells. For mRNAfluorescence in situ hybridization Our studies aim at the identification of all genes and regulatory regions in (RNA-FISH), PCR generated digoxigenin labeled probes were used. This the WHSCR (including flanking regions) as well as the functional charac- method permitted detection of the expected RNAtranscripts in the nucle- terization of the gene products in order to identify those genes that are us, as distinct spots and track-like structures depending on the time of involved in the phenotype. induction, which were absent in the negative controls. Accumulation of the We and others have previously identified novel genes in the WHSCR and transcripts at site of transcription was visualized by combined DNAand flanking region using exon trapping and computer based analysis of this RNAFISH. Specific detection of RNAtranscripts in the nucleus may there- region. Here we report the reinvestigation of the WHSCR using compara- fore provide a possible alternative to cytoplasmic hybridization in some tive sequencing of the corresponding chromosomal region in the mouse instances. We are currently testing the possibility of the detection of other genome (chromosome 5) and interspecies sequence comparison to iden- expressed genes. tify evolutionary conserved and therefore functionally important sequences. Besides the known genes LETM1, WHSC1, WHSC2, POL4P P0789. Genetic Characteristics of the Homopolymeric Tract we identified additional putative transcribed sequences which may repre- Length Heteroplasmy in the Control (D-loop) Region of the sent alternatively spliced exons or additional genes. One of these tran- Mitochondrial DNA scripts shows specific expression in several adult and fetal organs affect- H. Sudoyo1,2, S. Malik1, P. Pramoonjago1, H. Suryadi1, E. Sahiratmadja1, ed in WHS patients. Further activities will concentrate on the functional D. Safari1, S. Marzuki1 analysis of the transcribed sequences and on conserved non-coding 1Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology; Jakarta, Indonesia; 2Departement regions. On the basis of these data we present a novel, complete transcript of Medical Biology, University of Indonesia; Jakarta, Indonesia map of these region which is complemented by functional studies on some herawati@eijkman.go.id of the putative gene products. Mutation in the mitochondrial DNAoccurs at a high rate, and mtDNAmuta- tions underlie a wide range of human diseases. Sequence polymorphisms P0787. Molecular characterization of human plexin B3 and in the mtDNAhave been also suggested to be associated with either the demonstration of expression of its gene (PLXNB3) in brain generation or the expression of other mtDNAor nDNAmutations. Notable S. Krejcova1, A. Veske2, P. Michelson2, M. Schachner3, U. Finckh2 in this context are those in the D-loop control region, in particular the Tto 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hamburg and Institute of Biology C sequence variant (T16189C) between nt16184 and 16193, which have and Medical Genetics, Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Insti- been implicated as a predisposing factor for several diseases including tute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Eppendorf, University Ham- diabetes mellitus. Elucidation of factors responsible for errors in mtDNA burg; Hamburg, Germany; 3Center for Molecular Neurobiology, University replication is important in our understanding of the generation of mtDNA Hospital Eppendorf, University Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany mutations (pathological and normal variants). The mtDNAgenome con- finckh@uke.uni-hamburg.de tains several homopolymeric tracts, ranging from five to twelve cytosines. Neurodevelopmental studies on semaphorin-mediated axon guidance Above the length of six the tracts started to show unstability as reflected by showed that plexins are semaphorin receptors mediating cell repulsion and the presence of length heteroplasmy, indicating slip replication. The attraction in the developing nervous system. PLXNB3, the gene encoding mtDNAT16189C variant is associated with the formation of poly-C of var- plexin B3 maps to Xq28 and may be considered as candidate gene for X- ious lengths, ranging from five to 12, and thus providing an excellent sys- linked neurological disorders including mental retardation. We isolated and tem to study the generation of the length heteroplasmy and its determining characterized full-length (6142 bp ) PLXNB3cDNAby screening fetal brain factor(s). We have thus studied the genetic characteristics of this mtDNA cDNAlibrary and performing 5RACE-PCR. Computer analysis predicted region, taking advantage of our extensive collection of cell lines and vari- an ORF for a 1910 amino acid transmembrane protein containing all ous tissue samples obtained at autopsies. In this communication we pres- domains characteristic for plexins, with closest homology to plexin B1/SEP. ent evidence to show that; 1. The pattern of length heteroplasmy is gener- The transcribed region spans more then 15 kb and contains a 5-noncod- ated de novo during mitochondrial biogenesis, as shown (a) after severe ing and 35 coding exons. Multiple tissue northern blot analysis revealed mtDNA copy number reduction by exposing cultured fibroblast cells to 6.7 and 8.6 kb transcripts and suggested a predominant expression in ethidium bromide, and repopulation of the cells following its removal; (b) in human brain. In situhybridization showed complex and changing expres- single cell pick-up experiment regardless of random segregation of other sion patterns during mouse embryonic development. In adult human CNS mtDNAmutation marker; and (c) by the fact that the pattern is maintained neuronal expression was observed in cortex, mesencephalon, pons, in different tissues of an individual obtained at autopsy. 2. The pattern of medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. Plexin B3 was also highly expressed length heteroplasmy is determined by both mitochondrial and nuclear in adult mouse ovary and testis. Two different specific rabbit-anti human genetic factors, in that (a) for homopolymeric tracts of more than nine plexin B3 antisera were obtained by immunization of animals with cytosines the pattern is maternally inherited; and (b) for homopolymeric oligopeptides derived from extracellular plexin B3 domains. By using these tract of eight cytosines or less nuclear influence is dominant as demon- antisera and a phosphotyrosine specific antibody, western blot analysis of strated in experiments involving the generation of cybrids. various protein fractions of COS7 cells transfected with human cDNAcon- taining the complete ORF showed that plexin B3 is a tyrosine phosphory- P0790. The Molecular Basis of Intron 2 Mutation at Splicing lated transmembrane monomeric ~230 kDa glycoprotein. Western blotting Donor Site from GT to AT on the CYP21 Gene Occurred in also revealed a plexin B3 immunoreactive aberrant band in human glioma, Patient with CYP21-Deficiency suggesting tumor associated expression of PLXNB3with reduced glyco- H. Lee1, S. Chang2 sylation of its protein. Supported by DFG; SFB444, C3. Correspondence; 1Kingcar Food Industrial Co., Ltd. Yuan-Shan Research Institute, No. 86, veske@uke.uni-hamburg.de Chen-Hsiang Rd. Yuan San; I-Lan, Taiwan Republic of China; 2Graduate Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, Taipei Medical University, No. 250, P0788. Detection of messenger RNA in situ; P53 inducible Wu-Hsing Street,; Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China transcripts accumulate at the site of transcription in a time hhlee@kingcar.com.tw dependent manner Maturation at the primary RNAtranscript of eukaryotic gene often involves H. Weninger, S. Bartl, F. Watzinger, H. Kovar, T. Lion the removal of unwanted internal segments and rejoining the remaining CCRI; Vienna, Austria segments. The fidelity of RNAsplicing is dependent on the identity of the weninger@ccri.univie.ac.at nucleotide sequences at exon/intron boundaries. It has been known that Detection of cytoplasmic mRNAs by in situ hybridization has been difficult dinucleotides of GTstarted and AG ended in an intron have a considerable in a number of instances on single cell level, particularly because of the dif- degree of conservation and to be functionally important in the splicing fuse distribution of transcripts, and thus, the low density of signals. We event. Substitution of GTto any other nucleotide eventually leads to a mal- have therefore examined the possibility of detecting RNAtranscripts in the function in RNAsplicing processing. In this report, we used transient trans- nucleus where a higher concentration of target molecules, and thus, high- fection of cloned CYP21 genome which contained the intron 2 mutation at er signal intensity might be expected. In search of a model system provid- the splicing site from GTto ATinto COS-1 cells and analyzed the RNAtran- ing optimum controls, we have selected the Ewing tumor cell line SK-N-MC script by RT-PCR. The results showed that skip at exon 3 occurred during in which transcription of a p53 inducible gene is controlled by a recombi- RNAprocessing when the splicing donor site changed from GTto AT. The nant p53 protein. This system offers a very good control for the specificity prominent splicing product was the transcript with whole exon 3 region254 Posters: Gene Structure and Function skipped. Other minor RNAprocessing products appeared to contain some target of rapamycin (mTOR), a downstream target of Akt, which immuno- additional intron 2 sequences. Similar results were obtained when the precipitated with, and phosphorylated, IRS-1. TNF also inhibited insulin- splicing donor site sequences were changed from GTto ATin human beta- induced glucose transport in myotubes and rapamycin reversed this effect. globin gene, further emphasizing general consequence of the splicing Treatment of embryonic kidney 293 cells with TNF also impaired insulin- donor site mutation for RNAprocessing. promoted tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and this was blocked by tran- sitent expression of kinase that Akt. Transient expression of PTEN, a P0791. Mapping and expression analysis of the human tumour suppressor which can dephosphorylated phosphatidylinositol UBE4Agene (3,4,5)-triphosphate, and activator of PI-3-kinase, also blocked the ability E. Pontieri1,2, A. Novelli1, F. Amati1, A. Botta1, G. Carruba2, G. Novelli1 of TNF to inhibit insulin-induced phosphation of IRS-1 in 293 cells. Thus 1Universit Tor Vergata;Roma, Italy; 2Universit degli Studi; LAquila, Italy TNF can promote insulin resistance by activation of a PI 3- eugenio.pontieri@dnaserver.med.uniroma2.it kinase/Akt/mTOR pathway and this capacity isantagonized byPTEN. UBE4Ais a novel ubiquitination factor actively involved in the multiubiqui- tination chain assembly of target proteins in the proteasomal degradation P0794.Functional analysis of UFD1L(Ubiquitin Fusion Degra- process. E4 binds to the ubiquitin moieties of these conjugates and, dation 1 Like) gene product in eukaryotic cells together with E1, E2 and E3 enzymes drives the multiubiquitin chain F. Amati1,2, E. Conti1,2, I. Cond3, F. Sangiuolo1, B. Dallapiccola2,4, R. assembly, yielding long chains. E4Ais the human homologue of the yeast Testi3, G. Novelli1 UFD2, also involved in the stress tolerance. Recently a chimeric protein 1Dept. of Biopathology and Diagnostics Imaging, Tor Vergata University; Ufd2/D4Cole1e was identified in mouse and found associated to slow Wal- Roma, Italy; 2CSS-Mendel Institute; Roma, Italy; 3Dept. of Experimental lerian degeneration (Wlds), a disease characterised by axon death at Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, Tor Vergata University; Roma, Italy; peripheral and central level. We characterised a full-length cDNAof 6060 4Dept. of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, La Sapienza University; bps of the human UFD2/UBE4A corresponding to the KIAA0126 cDNA Roma, Italy deposited in GenBank. UFD2/UBE4Awas mapped by FISH experiments amati@med.uniroma2.it on the human chromosome region 11q23.3. Northern blots analysis using Ubiquitin-specific processes are essential in regulation of some apoptotic adult tissues showed that this gene is expressed at high levels as a single pathways. Spontaneous apoptosis, observed in T cells from DiGeorge band of 7.5 Kb in the heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and to discrete levels patients, may be, at least in part, responsible for Tcell deficiency in DiGe- in the brain, liver, and placenta. Afaint band was evident in colon, thymus, orge syndrome. UFD1L, a gene mapping in the typically deleted region for spleen, small intestine, lung and peripheral blood leukocytes. ANorthern DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndromes, encodes for the human homo- blot containing fetal tissues confirmed the adult results. Because of the logue of yeast Ufd1 protein, an ubiquitin-dependent enzyme that takes part importance in ubiquitin pathway and its involvement in neuronal degener- in a degradation pathway of ubiquitin fused substrates. Although the bio- ation of this protein, we suggest that UBE4Acan be considered a candi- chemical role of UFD1Lin mammals is still unknown, it is presumable an date for neurodegenerative diseases mapping on chromosome 11q. active role in degradation processes mediated by ubiquitin also in human cells. We have analysed the in vivo cellular localization of UFD1L by P0792.Nucleotide Change At Hypersensitive Site-3 Of Lcr In means its cloning in an eukaryotic GFP-expression vector and then we Beta Thalassemia Major And Intermedia Patients used this chimaeric vector to analize the possible role of UFD1Lprotein in O. Guzeloglu Kayisli, G. Bagci, G. Luleci the regulation of programmed cell death triggered from Fas receptor Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology (CD95/APO-1). NIH3T3 and Cos-1 cell lines were transfected with the and Genetics; Antalya, Turkey UFD1L-GFPfusion construct and with the GFP-vector alone as a control. ozlem@hipokrat.med.akdeniz.edu.tr Both cell lines expressed UFD1Lin the cytoplasm with a particular con- Beta globin locus control region (LCR) is the first identified examples of a centration around the nuclear envelope. UFD1Loverexpression was per- dominant control region located at a distance of many kilobases from the formed in human Tlymphoma HuT78 cells. In this condition, no anti-apop- structural genes. It has very strong enhancer activity extending over the totic effect was observed upon Fas and ceramide stimulation, thus exclud- entire locus. b-LCR consists of four strong erythroid-specific DNase hyper- ing a role in the specific pathway of this death receptor. Our results indi- sensitive sites (5 HS-1, 2, 3, and 4). Most of the LCR activity is associat- cate that UFD1Lis a cytoplasmatic protein, particularly abundant around ed with 5 HS-2, 3 and 4. Hypersensitive site-3 (HS-3) of the b-LCR has the nucleus, and that it is not involved in the Fas and ceramide specific been implicated as an important regulator of the b-like globin genes. To apoptosis pathways. Nevertheless, further overexpression analysis involv- investigate the polymorphisms at HS-3 of the human b-LCR, both b-tha- ing other apoptotic stimuli and accumulation/degradation of key signaling lassemia patients and control group were initially amplified by PCR and proteins may provide elucidation of the possible pathways regulated by then amplified products were screened for changes at HS-3 using direct UFD1L. Work supported by Italian Ministry of Health and Telethon grants DNAsequencing technique. According to our results, guanine deletion of (N. E.723) 7415 position at the HS-3 was observed in a b thalassemia major patient. This segment including deletion of 7415 position is the core region of HS- P0795.Visible transient expression of green fluorescent pro- 3 which consists of binding sites for ubiquitous and erythroid specific reg- tein requires intranuclear microinjection of large copy num- ulatory factors such as GATA-1, YY1, and CSBP-2 transcription factors. bers of pEGFPplasmid. These transcription factors play an important role in b-globin gene switch- A. Laner, D. Schindelhauer ing. To investigate whether there is any transcription factors bound this Ludwig Maximilians University; Munich, Germany region we will aim to determine the interaction between these trans-acting a.laner@gmx.de factors and DNAusing bandshift assay in the future studies. In order to assess the copy number of a simple viral promoter/GFP-cDNA expression cassette required for visible transient expression, we microin- P0793.API-3 kinase/Akt/mTOR pathway Mediates and PTEN jected pEGFPplasmid into the nucleus of the human immortalized epithe- Antogonizes TNF-induced Insulin Resistance lial cell line 16HBE, the tumor cell line HT1080, and primary human fibrob- O. N. Ozes1, H. Akca1, T. Maehama2, J. E. Dixon2, D. B. Donner1 lasts. pEGFP plasmid was diluted down from approximately 100 000 1Department of Microbiology&Immunology, Indiana University School of copies to 1 copy per injection volume (1 pl) in a DNAsolution containing Medicine and Walther Oncology Center; Indianapolis, IN United States; constant amounts of non expressing plasmid DNA. Independently of the 2Department of Medical Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center cell line used, at least 100-1000 copies were required to detect green cells and Walther Oncology Center; Ann Arbor, MI United States under the microscope. Between 100 and 10 000 copies the intensity was ozes@hipokrat.med.akdeniz.edu.tr substantially increased. Above 10 000 copies no additional increase was TNF produced by fat cells in obese animals induces resistance to insulin detected. With higher copy numbers only the intensity was increased and through mechanisms that have not been completely identified. In NIH 3T3 not the number of expressing cells, since all dilutions from 100 to 100 000 cells, TNF inhibits insulin-promoted phosphorylation of IRS-1, an adaptor copies led to approximately 60-80% surviving and expressing cells. Within protein that links the insulin receptor to signaling pathways that promote a copy number group, most cells were found to show relatively equal inten- insulin action, and activates the Akt serine-threonine kinase through the sity, however a 5-10 % fraction of cells showed extremely high intensity intermediacy of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase). Exposure to independent of the injected copy number, indicating the existence of occa- TNF was not required to induce insulin resitance in NIH 3T3 cells stably sional circumstances activating expression in the order of 1000-fold in expressing constitutively-active Akt. In insulin-sensitive myotubes, TNF those cells. We conclude that single copies of simple gene markers might activated Akt and inhibited insulin-promoted phosphorylation of IRS-1. This not be suitable to readily detect the presence of transfected DNA. Data will effect, and the capacity of TNF to impair insulin induced glucose uptake be presented narrowing down the circumstances leading to the dramatic into myotubes, was reversed by rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mammalian expression increase. Posters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education 255 P0796. Measurement of cellular fluorescence parameters were then compared with each patients hospital records. Twenty-two fam- using a microfluidic, chip-based system ilies (59%) perceived their offsprings malady as an accident, with little risk E. Broomfield1, A. Brecht2, K. Hahnenberger3, T. Preckel4 of reoccurrence. Only two (5.4%) admitted a family history of DMD, sug- 1Agilent Technologies; Bracknell, United Kingdom; 2Agilent Technologies; gesting either an unusually high frequency of de novo mutations, or, more Waldbronn, Germany; 3Agilent Technologies; Palo Alto, CAUnited States; likely, a poor knowlege of the disease. After the diagnosis was settled, 16 4Caliper Technologies; Palo Alto, CAUnited States families (43%) planned to (and nine did) conceive another baby. Although elaine_broomfield@agilent.com some acknowledged it, the risk was seriously underestimated, and gener- In 1999 Agilent introduced the 2100 Bioanalyzer as a first broadly available ally not linked to the mothers serum creatine kinase levels. Our data sug- product for the life science laboratory using Caliper LabChip technology. gests that the beliefs, projects and decisions of the families affected by So far separation based applications have been introduced, addressing DMD suffered little scientifically-based influence. We consider the low level DNA, RNA, and proteins. The compact, benchtop system is capable of of medical education in the general population, together with the lack of a two-color fluorescence detection and runs disposable microfluidic glass specific genetic counseling program, as being the leading causes for this chips. The novel applications presented here are based on the controlled situation, as well as the main issues that have to be corrected. movement of cells by pressure-driven flow inside networks of microchan- nels. Cells are hydrodynamically focussed before passing the fluorescence P0799.Attitudes towards prenatal diagnosis and termination detector in single file. Each chip accommodates several samples. Data of pregnancy among health professionals in Lebanon acquisition is automated while analysis allows for user-specific settings. L. F. Zahed1, M. Nabulsi2 Specific advantages of the instrument are the low number of cells required 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, American University for analysis and the ease-of-use. So far the technology has been used in of Beirut Medical Center; Beirut, Lebanon; 2Department of Pediatrics, cell transfection, and apoptosis detection. Transfection data were obtained American University of Beirut; Beirut, Lebanon from cells expressing green fluorescent protein and from antibody-stained lailaz@aub.edu.lb cells. Counterstaining cells by a DNA-specific dye facilitated the accurate Despite advances in the field of genetics, avoidance of many conditions determination of transfection efficiency. For an apoptosis related parame- still relies on screening, prenatal diagnosis and termination of pregnancy in ter exposition of phosphatidylserine (PS) to the outer cell membrane leaflet case of an affected fetus. Attitudes towards such prevention techniques was studied. Biotinylated AnnexinV was bound to externalized PS in camp- are influenced by many variables, including, at least to a certain extent, the tothecin treated cells and labeled by Cy5-avidin. Calcein-staining was used attitudes of health professionals. Most of the studies have been conducted to differentiate live and apoptotic cells from dead cells. Results obtained in the Western world. Therefore, to assess attitudes in a Middle-Eastern with the microfluidic chips showed good correlation with data obtained society, we have sent questionnaires concerning different genetic condi- using a standard flow cytometer. The simple use and the low cell con- tions, to geneticists, family doctors, pediatricians and obstetricians affiliat- sumption of the microfluidic approach make the technique an ideal add-on ed to one of the major medical centers in Lebanon. The questionnaires for all cell based procedures. Further applications of this simple cell-analy- were based on similar published questionnaires and responses measured sis approach are under development. according to a similar scoring system. Atotal of 43 questionnaires were sent so far and responses received from 31 (72%). Generally-speaking, P0797. Genetic counseling in Leber Hereditary Optic Neu- obstetricians seemed to be most favorable towards prenatal diagnosis and ropathy (LHON) termination of pregnancy, both for medical and social conditions. They K. Huoponen, A. Puomila, V. Juvonen, E. Nikoskelainen, M. Savontaus were followed by geneticists then family physicians, while the least favor- University of Turku; Turku, Finland able were pediatricians. Awide range of responses were noticed within kirsi.huoponen@utu.fi each group and there was noted variability for particular questions. There LHON is a maternally inherited disorder resulting in subacute visual loss. was no clear correlation between response and sex, age or religious affili- It is associated with mutations in mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA). About 15% ation. of the families are heteroplasmic. Molecular diagnosis of LHON is usually made by means of mtDNAanalysis in blood DNA, since the actual target P0800. Suspicion on triple - X - syndrome in rapid prenatal tissues (optic nerve, retina) are not available for examination. According to FISH diagnosis on uncultivated amniotic fluid cells; Problems genealogical data the general risk for optic atrophy in homoplasmic indi- and pitfalls for genetic counselling viduals is about 30-50% in males and 5-15% in females. However, genet- R. Hauschild, V. Beensen, A. Heller, H. Starke, T. Liehr ic counseling in LHON is extremely difficult. We cannot detect the persons Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany at risk for optic atrophy even in homoplasmic families, since all individuals rhau@mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de with homoplasmic mutations do not express the disease. In heteroplasmic A27 year old pregnant woman with suspicion on triple - X - syndrome after families the situation is even more complex. The offspring of a heteroplas- prenatal rapid (FISH-) diagnosis (using a centromere -X- specific probe) mic mother can have dramatically different levels of heteroplasmy. Fur- was referred to genetic counselling. Prenatal diagnosis has been per- thermore, the amount of mutant mtDNAmay considerably vary between formed because of foetal nuchal translucency detected by ultrasound. The the tissues of the same individual, and therefore blood is not necessarily pregnant woman has been informed in detail about the result of the rapid indicative of the mutation load in other tissues. We describe a family where test, the preliminary (!) nature of the finding, the possible existence of triple the mother has less than 1% of mutant mtDNA, and yet she has transmit- - X - syndrome, and the probable rare occurrence of important clinical find- ted a considerable amount of mutant mtDNAto her son. In his tissues, the ings. Additionally, we stressed the necessity of further cytogenetic investi- proportion of mutant mtDNAvaries from 50% in blood up to 86% in other gations. However, the given information contributed to a considerable con- tissues. Affected heteroplasmic individuals usually have more than 70% of fusion of the pregnant woman. She presumed a very problematic disease mutant mtDNAin blood. However, the son with only 50% of mutant mtDNA of the expected child. The confusion was based mainly on discrepancies in blood is severely affected. His sister has 0% of mutant mtDNAin her between the rapid prenatal FISH results and the cytogenetic investigations blood and no risk for optic atrophy. However, we cannot exclude a theo- on cultured amniotic fluid cells. The latter revealed a strong evidence for a retical risk that she may transmit the disease to her offspring. normal female karyotype of 46,XX, resulting of 3 metaphases analysed at first. Numerous additional conversations were needed to explain the P0798.Genetic counseling in Romania - an acute issue details and the cytogenetic findings completed thereafter before the given O. Gore1, A. Bobulescu2, C. Gore3, M. Isvoranu1 situation has been understood and accepted. The further cytogenetic 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of investigations on cultivated amniotic fluid cells revealed a very small mark- Human Genetics; Bucharest, Romania; 2Central Military Hospital; er chromosome (SMC) - nearly 0,5m in diameter - and a mosaic kary- Bucharest, Romania; 3N.Gh.Lupu Clinical Hospital; Bucharest, Romania otype of 47,XX,+mar(15)/46,XX(8) (GTG banding). Further FISH analysis odette@home.ro defined this SMC as a der(X)(p11.1?q11), with no evidence for additional Having no effective treatment as yet, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy euchromatic material. The SMC was not found in both parents, but in cells (DMD) can be fought only by means of prevention. The aim of the present of the placenta and umbilical cord blood of the phenotypic inconspicuous study was to assess the impact of genetic counseling in Romanian families child at birth. Conclusion; Preliminary results obtained in rapid prenatal affected by DMD. Atotal of 37 families having 47 offsprings diagnosed with diagnosis on uncultivated amniotic fluid cells should be carefully handled DMD between 1996 and 1999 were interviewed and asked to fill out a in genetic counselling. Even in combination with unspecific abnormal sono- questionnaire consisting of multiple choice and open ended questions. The graphic findings their preliminary character should be explained in detail data we recorded was structured into several categories ; general under- and one has to consider that 3 signals for a centromeric region of a chro- standing of the disease and of its hereditary nature; awareness of risk in mosome does not always and automatically indicate to a trisomy of that family planning; genetic counseling history; family pedigree. Some results chromosome. The interpretation of suspicion on a trisomy in rapid prena-256 Posters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education tal FISH diagnosis may be different in cases with trisomy specific sono- plete information including family history, correct diagnosis and examina- graphic findings. tion results, and he clarifies the clients request. We have a staff meeting once a week to discuss each case for providing the next suitable counsel- P0801.Genetic Counseling in Indian Milieu ing, and we discuss the ethical, legal and social issues (ELSI). At the sec- S. R. Phadke1, A. Pandey2, S. S. Agarwal1 ond visit, genetic counseling is provided by an MD specialist and a clinical 1Sanjay Gandhi PGIMS; Lucknow, India; 2Queen Marys Hospital,King psychologist or a genetic nurse. Information of genetics or genetic testing Georges Medical College; Lucknow, India is explained by an MD specialist, and psychological support is offered by a shubha@sgpgi.ac.in clinical psychologist or genetic nurse. Three hundred and eleven clients We have studied various psychosocial aspects of genetic counseling in visited the clinic from May 1996 to March 2000; 170 for birth defects, 37 for Indian milieu by analyzing questionaires filled by consultands and parents obstetric problems, 47 for familial cancers, 29 for neurological disorders of patients with genetic disorders; one on the first visit to genetic clinic and and 28 for other reasons. Regarding familial cancer, we performed genet- another after genetic counseling session. Multiple questions were used to ic testing in 44 cases, including familial adenomatous polyposis, multiple judge the expectations, anxiety level, change of decision and satisfaction endocrine neoplasia type 1 and 2, familial breast cancer, von Hippel-Lin- after genetic counseling. The analysis showed that most of the patients dau disease and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. We hope our approach will and parents came with the expectation of diagnosis and treatment. Only 30 become familiar to other hospitals, and genetic services in Japan will con- out of 83 came primarily for diagnosis and information about risk of recur- sequently be improved. rence and other aspects of the disease. There was no change in the repro- ductive decision in 74 of 83 consultands after genetic counseling while it P0804. Presymptomatic genetic testing in Myotonic dystro- changed in 5 and 4 remained undecided even after genetic counseling. phy; counselling patterns and general lessons. Presence or absence of normal live children and availability of prenatal S. Fokstuen1,2, J. Myring1, C. Evans1, P. Harper1 diagnosis were the major factors affecting reproductive decision. 91% of 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College; Cardiff, United those who decided against having more children had previous one or more Kingdom; 2Current address; Division of Medical Genetics, University Hos- normal children, while 67% of those who decided to plan for next child did pital; Geneva, Switzerland not have any live normal child. Perceived severity of risk of recurrence did SivFokstuen@gmx.ch not appear to affect the reproductive decision. Though most of the consul- Genetic counselling and presymptomatic genetic testing in myotonic dys- tands were satisfied with the genetic counseling, there was decrease in the trophy have to take into consideration the extreme variability in range of anxiety in 35 of 83 persons while anxiety increased in 22 of 83. The genet- severity and age at onset due to the instability of the mutation. So far there ic counseling was nondirective in all cases, but all of the parents though is no specific model for presymptomatic testing in Myotonic dystrophy as that the counsellor should have advised them about the decision to be for Huntingtons disease or familial cancers. In this survey we retrospec- taken. tively analysed the practice at the Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff. Since the availability of direct mutation analysis for myotonic dystrophy in P0802.Genetic testing, language and genetic counselling 1992, clinical geneticists in Wales have undertaken 72 presymptomatic J. Hartog investigations. Six different approaches were found. The most common Universitaet Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany one (n=46) was to take the blood sample at the first counselling session. A hartog880@aol.com two step approach as proposed for Huntingtons disease was practiced in Now that the precise genetic basis of some diseases has been determined, only 7 cases; it was offered but rejected by the applicants in two further new diagnostic possibilities (tests) have emerged. While the psychosocial cases. Factors which influenced on the choice of the counselling approach problems related to genetic testing are being explored, little attention has were mainly age, clinical assessment at the time of testing, familiarity with been paid to date to the underlying linguistic aspects of these psychoso- the disorder, family dynamic, the probands perception of symptoms and cial issues. Indeed, information is given in language and the processing of time pressure. This survey illustrated by specific cases, should provide the information occurs in language. The analysis of this linguistic level is fun- starting point for further more systematic study as well as giving a general damental to the understanding of the psychosocial problems arising from framework that may be useful for those involved with presymptomatic test- testing. In a qualitative pilot-study 10 counselling sessions (with 4 different ing for this important and exceptionally variable condition. counsellors) on genetic testing considerations in breast cancer patients were audiotaped, transcribed to the standards of discourse analysis and P0805. Counselling before and after predictive genetic diag- subsequently analysed linguistically. Testing for breast-ovarian cancer sus- nosis for Huntington disease; A psychotherapeutic experi- ceptibility was chosen as an example of problematic testing concerning its ence with 54 persons at risk benefits. Results; In the problem-presentation at the beginning of the G. Wolff counselling sessions, counsellees tended to have clear-cut expectations Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Freiburg, Germany about clear-cut benefits of testing. The linguistic analysis reveals how new gwolff@uni-freiburg.de chunks of knowledge and their assessment by professionals are gradu- Introduction; Huntington disease (HD) is a severe, autosomal dominantly ally processed and integrated (or not) in the counsellees knowledge struc- inherited, late-manifesting, neuropsychiatric disease characterized by a tures. By the end of counselling, in most cases, the benefits of testing were progressive movement disorder, cognitive decline, dementia, affective dis- seen by the counsellees as more problematic than at the beginning of turbances, psychotic disorders, personality changes, and physical decay. counselling, thus making decision-taking extremely difficult. The nature of Predictive testing by a direct molecular test of the CAG repeat expansion the dilemma concerning BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing are revealed and dif- is possible since 1993. In Germany, guidelines for predictive testing for HD ferentiated by the linguistic analysis. Conclusions for the practice of genet- require psychotherapeutic counselling before and after the test procedure. ic counselling are drawn. Methods; Patients have been counselled in a psychotherapeutic setting before and after the molecular genetic test. Counselling aimed at 1. the P0803. Proposing a Genetic Counseling System in Japan; clarification of possible psychological and social problems in the decision Experience in the Division of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, process, 2. a fully informed, autonomous decision in favour of or against Shinshu University Hospital the test, and 3. the elucidation of possible risks associated with a bad or Y. Fukushima, K. Yoshida, M. Fujimori, H. Kawame, H. Kusabuka, A. good test result, and 4. stimulating the process of coping with the test Sakurai, M. Kanai, M. Tamai, K. Wakui, S. Ikeda result and 5. the prevention of psychosocial risks associated with the Division of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Shinshu University Hospital; knowledge of the test result. In most of the cases, spouses or close friends Matsumoto, Japan of the person at risk were at least partly involved in the counselling yfukush@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp process. Results; 54 persons at risk for HD (22 male, 32 female) with a Although genetic counseling is fundamental before and after the genetic mean age of 32.4 years most of them (72%) living in a stable partnership, testing, there is no official system for genetic counseling in Japan. We pro- and 40% having at least one child were counselled. In 5, a second degree pose the team approach to genetic counseling. Shinshu University Hospi- relative was affected. 18 patient had symptoms, 5 had early signs of HD, tal established a division of clinical and molecular genetics as one of its 8 had symptoms indicative of HD, and 5 had psychosomatic symptoms. central service departments in 1996. It was officially approved by Ministry About half of the patients were firmly determined to have the test. There of Education in 2000. Our division is composed of several MDs from the was a negative correlation between the decisiveness and the period of departments of neurology, endocrinology, pediatrics, oncology, laboratory knowledge of the HD risk. The mean number of sessions before the test medicine and medical genetics, a clinical psychologist, and a genetic was 7.1, and after testing 6.5. Major themes in counselling before testing nurse. Persons who seek genetic counseling or genetic testing visit our were the experience of HD in parents and family, intrafamilial relationships clinic, usually twice or more. At the first visit, a staff member collects com- and conflicts, the personal experience of being at risk for HD, fear of earlyPosters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education 257 symptoms, self-observation, hope in prevention and therapy, aspects of ic information is not provided adequately. These inadequacy in counseling certainty and uncertainty, partner conflicts, and the private and profession- raise confusion and unnecessary arguments when a child with chromoso- al situation. The treatment of the questions why testing now?, and what mal abnormalities was born. (This study is supported by a grant from would be, if proved to be one of the most important measures in the coun- Department of Health, Executive Yuan, Taiwan) selling process, as well as the evaluation of the coping capacity. Nearly all patients dealt well with the test result up to now. Besides coping with the P0808. Individual approach, predictive genetic testing and new situation and the relief due to certainty, major themes in the coun- help decision making system. selling after a bad test result were loss and gain of future, uncertainty about H. Baranova1, E. Albuisson2, L. Chapy3 the age at onset and the possible course, coping with early signs of HD 1Medical Faculty; Clermont-Ferrand, France; 2Medical Faculty, University and future disability, the reaction of the partner, relatives and others, per- dAuvergne; Clermont-Ferrand, France; 3IPPM; Clermont-Ferrand, France spectives of family planning, and in general finding sense and a positive Baranova@nat.fr attitude. Besides the relief after a normal test result, major themes in those Expert System (ES) is a highly personalised help decision making system cases, in which problematic issues had been addressed, were loss of ori- for interpretation of different laboratory testing results (fatty acids spectrum entation in life planning, changes in intrafamilial relations, survivor guilt, and cardiovascular risk assessment, immune analyses with lymphocyte partner conflict, and problems at work. Conclusions; Apsychotherapeutic typing and protein profile;nutrition) and also predictive genetic testing. ES setting focussing on the basis and possible conflicts of the decision allows to perform more precise analysis and prognosis for each individual process before, and on foreseeable risks after testing, and integrating patient according to his peculiarities ; lifestyle factors, anamnestic and clin- medical, genetic, and psychological aspects of the disease is an adequate ical data. Genetic program includes HLAtyping and predictive genetic test- and suitable measure for counselling persons at risk for HD. It helps ing, where 54 main metabolic and predisposition genes are included up to patients to reach an informed decision regarding the test and fulfills the date. Special goal of ES genetic program is education and presentation of requirements demanded by the national and international guidelines for genetically-based individual approach in modern medicine. Interpretation predictive molecular testing of this up to now unpreventable and untreat- and all explanations in genetics are written in flexible and interactive man- able disease. This setting seems to prevent at least short-term problemat- ner with the other chapters of ES. Moreover, so called  3 dimentional prin- ic reactions of those being tested irrespective of the test result. ciple  is applied for all parts of ES, including genetics ; first brief result interpretation is followed by the second detailed explanation confirmed by P0806. Living with Marfan syndrome; the European experi- the references (3d step). Other major goals of ES are ; 1) ES structure, ence. which allows to add regularly new information and methodologies accord- I. Delvaux1, S. De Bie1, R. Hennekam2, B. Loeys1, A. De Paepe1 ing to the latest achievements;2) applied research and possibility to per- 1University Hospital Ghent; Gent, Belgium; 2University of Amsterdam; form epidemiological studies based on the ES data bank. In conclusion, ES Amsterdam, The Netherlands provides a physician with explanations, clinicobiological interpretations and anne.depaepe@rug.ac.be advice, which helps to obtain a global vision of the patients status. It also Aspecialised questionnaire, containing 88 multiple choice questions on opens new opportunities for statistical analyses and mathematic modelling medical and psychosocial aspects, was sent to patients with Marfan Syn- for investigation of possible new trends in different populations due to envi- drome (MFS) from 7 European countries. The results were statistically ronment-gene interactions. analysed with SPSS (9.0 for Windows). We present data from 857 individ- uals on the quality of life and the psychosocial well being as experienced P0809. Mis-representation of genetic transmission during by persons affected by MFS. Ascoring system was established to assess hereditary breast/ovarian and colon cancer genetic testing the objective severity of the condition in each individual. The subjective process severity that stands for the patients own perception of their condition was C. M. Julian-Reynier1, H. Sobol2,3, F. Chabal1, F. Eisinger1,4,3 also questioned. We compared the results with an objective coping score 1INSERMU379; Marseille, France; 2INSERM E9939; Marseille, France; based on questions relating to the psychosocial adjustment. The data 3Regional Cancer Center (Paoli-Calmettes Institute); Marseille, France; show that MFS represents a significant burden on many aspects of daily 4INSERME9939; Marseille, France life but that most individuals are coping effectively with the disorder. The julian@marseille.inserm.fr level of coping and the quality of life is determined by the subjective rather In Hereditary Breast/Ovarian and Colon cancer families, the probability to than by the objective severity. This is illustrated by the fact that the sub- pass on mutated genes to offspring is a relevant knowledge issue to help jective attitude towards the condition significantly influences the attitude patients to understand the reason for family disclosure of genetic risk. This towards professional activities, relationships and reproductive options. factor could be considered as one indicator of informed choice. The objec- Many individuals have difficulties discussing problems associated with the tive of this study was to investigate the baseline level of knowledge, MFS. It remains important to stimulate the support of family, friends and according to the type of cancer and the gender of the gene carrier. An patient support groups since social isolation negatively correlates with ongoing prospective cohort survey (2000-2001) includes all patients depression and anxiety. Professional support must pay extra attention to attending at one cancer genetic clinics in France following the analysis of the threat of social isolation. We conclude that creating a positive frame of a first DNAsample (BRCA1/2; MLH1/MSH2). Face to face interviews were reference is a very important element for their psychosocial well being. carried out before a 2nd genetic consultation aiming to confirm both the decision to be tested and the results on a 2nd DNAsample. Preliminary P0807. Genetic counseling and follow up of livebirths with results were analysed in December 2000 (N=67; mean age 47, SD=12; chromosomal abnormalities in Taiwan 94% women, 72% cancer affected). Knowledge of the transmission of a S. Lin1, W. Tsai2, M. Huang3, M. Chen3 breast/ovarian cancer gene to children when the mother is gene carrier, 1National Cheng Kung University Hospital; Tainan, Taiwan Republic of was correct in 34% and when the father is carrier in only 10% (p<0.001). China; 2Chi Mei Hospital; Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China; 3School of In contrast, in the case of a colon cancer gene, the answers were correct Nursing, Cheng Kung University; Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China in 25% and did not vary whether mother or father were considered as car- sjlin@mail.ncku.edu.tw riers (NS). These results suggest that for sex-related diseases inherited as To evaluate the genetic service in antenatal care and counseling provided an autosomal dominant trait, such as breast/ovarian cancer, understand- in Taiwan, we conducted a nationwide study among women having chil- ing of risk transmission is particularly confusing. In this respect geneticists dren with chromosomal abnormalities. Interviewing with semi-structured should be aware of the possible impact of this mis-representation in the questionnaire were conducted by trained counselors. Patient information screening of male and their offspring. was recruited from registrations of cytogenetic laboratories located in dif- ferent regions of the island. In order to obtain the most recent data and pro- P0810.Genetic counseling and molecular testing for the most vided counseling for most needed population, only live-births born from frequent mutant genes of the coagulation factors V and II may January 1, 1998 till October 31,1999 were included in this study. Aamong increase five-fold the prevention of venous thromboembolic a total of 328 cases with chromosomal abnormalities obtained from 17 incidents in individuals with family history of idiopathic cytogenetic laboratories, 134 agreed to participate in the interview. 98% of thrombosis mothers received antenatal care and 69% of them received maternal C. N. Yapijakis1,2, Z. Serefoglou2, N. Koufaliotis3 serum screening with triple markers and with results within low risk range. 1Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Dept. of Neurology, University of Athens Although in Taiwan over 60% of mothers with advanced age received Medical School; Athens, Greece; 2Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genet- amniocentesis, there were 72% of them in this study group that did not ics, Bioerevna Diagnostic Center; Athens, Greece; 3Dept. of Biopathology, receive prenatal diagnosis. In addition, we found that although maternal Bioerevna Diagnostic Center; Athens, Greece serum screening is performed popularly in antenatal care in Taiwan, genet- cyapijakis_ua_gr@yahoo.com258 Posters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education Thrombophilia is a common inherited/multifactorial predisposition for complications occurred in gestations with congenitally affected children, venous thromboembolic incidents (estimated 10-15% in the Greek popula- the obstetric risks in myotonic dystrophy seem to be independently tion), caused by inborn hypercoagulation of the blood.When a persons increased due to the involvement of the genitourinary system. To conclude, genetic predispodition is known, preventive anticoagulant therapy may women with slowly progressive disease courses that exclusively affect vol- prevent life threatening incidents.In the present study, we assessed untary muscles, most likely will have uncomplicated pregnancies with a whether genetic counseling combined with molecular testing for the two favourable outcome. Since most neuromuscular diseases are inherited, most common thrombophilia mutations may increase prevention in healthy genetic counselling is recommended. It has also to be stressed that, even index cases with a family history of idiopathic thrombosis.Two groups of after complicated deliveries, most women are happy to have own children unrelated Greek individuals were tested. Group Aconsisted of 48 individu- given that enough support can be provided by the individual social net- als (26-55 years old), who asked for genetic counseling for various rea- work. sons, and they had at least one first degree and one second degree rela- tive with thromboembolic incidents (in brain, heart, lungs, deep veins, pla- P0813. Uncertainty management in genetic counselling for centa etc.).Group B consisted of 50 individuals (23-61 years old), who predictive testing were tested in frame of routine prognostic check-up. Molecular investiga- S. Sarangi, L. Howell tion of blood cell DNAsamples was performed with a combination of PCR Health Communication Research Centre, Cardiff University; Cardiff, Unit- and TaqI digestion analysis for thrombophilia mutations Leiden (G1691A) ed Kingdom and G20210Ain the genes of coagulation factors V and II(prothrombin), sarangi@cardiff.ac.uk which display frequencies of 5% and 4.5% in Greek population, respec- Most counselling settings  in education, divorce mediation, dispute reso- tively.23 individuals of group A(48%), and only 5 individuals of group B lution etc  are characterised by a climate of uncertainty management. (10%) were found to have at least one mutation.The observed frequencies Both professionals and clients see these encounters as information and correspond well to the expected respective risks of individuals with a par- advice exchange systems as they draw upon the descriptive and evalua- ent with an autosomal dominant disorder (group A) and individuals of the tive functions of language. In the context of genetic counselling generally, general population(group B). We conclude that genetic counseling may and for predictive testing in particular, the issue of uncertainty assumes increase five-fold the prevention of thrombotic incidents in individuals with particular significance in relation to delivery of genetic (risk) information. a family history of thrombophilia. Almost everything that is said by the clinician has the potential to be inter- preted by the client as being suggestive. In this paper, we approach the P0811. The Utilization of Prenatal Diagnosis in the African notion of uncertainty (as separate from ambiguity, vagueness and non- American Population in Metropolitan Detroit directiveness) from a qualitative, communication/discourse perspective. A. D. Gilbert1, B. Beyer1, R. Aatre1, S. Ramanadhan1, A. Johnson1,2 Based on detailed analysis of audio-recorded, transcribed data from Hunt- 1Hutzel Hospital; Detroit, MI United States; 2Wayne State University; ingtons Disease and Breast Cancer clinics, we focus on the nature and Detroit, MI United States role of various discourse strategies such as use of hedging and dis- gilbert@med.wayne.edu claimers, contrastive formulations, display of mutually shared knowledge As we expand our knowledge of genetic disease through the Human etc. We argue that the interactional tensions are most evident when clients Genome Project and its potential benefit to prenatal diagnosis, it is imper- orient towards resolving uncertainty in personal and categorical terms, ative to explore the use of this information by all ethnic groups. Previous whereas the clinicians restrict themselves to their existing medical knowl- studies have shown that African American (AA) women are less likely than edge base and their professional experience of families with similar genet- women of other ethnic groups to utilize prenatal diagnosis. We sought to ic disorders. explore whether or not there is a difference in the uptake of prenatal test- The paper is based on an on-going project titled Communicative Frames ing when access to genetic counseling services is equal. A20-month ret- in Counselling for Predictive Genetic Testing, funded by The Wellcome rospective study was performed to address these differences. During this Trust. time there were 486 AA and 977 non-AA women referred due to an increased risk of fetal aneuploidy based on maternal age ( >= 35) or a pos- P0814. Attitudes toward prenatal genetic testing and repro- itive maternal serum screen (MSS). Demographic comparisons noted a dif- ductive options among adults affected with achondroplasia ference in Metropolitan Detroit residency (86% AA vs. 28% non-AA; and their first degree relatives p<0.0001) and private insurance policy holders (27% AAvs. 61% non-AA; B. B. Biesecker1, H. Gooding1, K. Boehm2, D. Hadley1, C. Francomano1 p<0.0001). AAwomen were significantly less likely than non-AAwomen to 1NHGRI/NIH; Bethesda, MD United States; 2NIDCR/NIH; Bethesda, MD chose prenatal testing following genetic counseling, (36% AAvs. 62% non- United States AA; p<0.0001). This was consistent in both maternal age patients (38% AA barbarab@nhgri.nih.gov vs. 54% non-AA; p<0.001) and MSS patients (35% AAvs. 47% non-AA; Achondroplasia, the most common form of dwarfism, is caused by a muta- p=0.001). Further analyses will determine if certain demographic or cultur- tion FGFR3. Since the discovery of the most common mutation in 1994, al variables influence the utilization of prenatal diagnostic procedures with- prenatal testing has become available. This study sought to collect empir- in our study population. Preliminary findings from our study demonstrate a ic evidence for the awareness, interest in and use of prenatal genetic test- need for additional investigations to uncover the inherent biases regarding ing for achondroplasia by affected adults and their parents and siblings. prenatal diagnosis among specific ethnic groups. Overall, there were 325 respondents, including 178 affecteds, who answered a self-report survey instrument. The groups differed in age, mar- P0812.Pregnancy and delivery in women with hereditary neu- ital status and education level. The sex and ethnicity was similar, 71% romuscular disorders females and 92% white. 70% of respondents were aware of prenatal test- S. Rudnik-Schneborn, K. Zerres ing; 62% of whom learned about it through the Little People of America. 13 Institute for Human Genetics; Aachen, Germany affected individuals had used genetic testing compared to one relative. By srudnik-schoeneborn@post-klinikum.rwth-aachen.de regression analysis, affected individuals were 6.9X more likely than rela- Little advice can be given to women with rare hereditary neuromuscular tives to be interested in testing (p<0.001). Statistical modeling indicated disorders in child-bearing age who wish to have children. In a pro- and ret- that those in both groups who supported abortion were 3.4X more likely to rospective study on obstetric aspects, experiences of more than 100 moth- express interest in genetic testing; 4.6X more likely to want to know a pre- ers with various muscle diseases were documented. There were 15 natal diagnosis of homozygous achondroplasia; 3.1X more likely to want to patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) types II-III, who mostly had know a prenatal diagnosis of heterozygous achondroplasia; 2.9X more uneventful pregnancies even in entirely immobile state. Caesarean section likely to want to know a prenatal diagnosis of an average statured fetus; was undertaken in most cases with early onset SMA. Outcome was and 10.0X more likely to express interest in terminating a fetus diagnosed favourable in all infants. Despite some alarming reports, most pregnancies with homozygous achondroplasia. Overall, both groups were supportive of in 26 women with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease were uneventful and com- population screening for achondroplasia and of the availability of testing for pleted by spontaneous deliveries. Similar experiences were made by 10 those at increased risk. There was a lack of interest in abortion of average patients with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy or 5 women with statured fetuses out of preference for having a child affected similarly to congenital myopathies. The perinatal complication rate was increased in 5 themselves or their relative. patients with limb girdle muscular dystrophy (secondary caesarean section rate), and persistent worsening of weakness related to gestation occurred in 3/5 women. Adverse effects of pregnancy and delivery were dramatical- ly increased in 25 patients with myotonic dystrophy and included preterm birth, placenta praevia, fetal distress, and perinatal deaths. While mostPosters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education 259 P0815.DNAgoes to School! Apioneer educational project in among genetics professionals, professional associations, academic insti- Rio de Janeiro, Brazil tutions and funding agencies to assure that health professionals receive M. Lachtermacher Rocha, M. Rufier the genetics education needed to meet the increasing needs of clients with DNAgoes to School; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil genetic concerns. Questionnaires, survey results and model curricula will lachtermacher@yahoo.com be available to participants. As this new century begins, headlines about DNA catch our attention everyday and as the Human Genome Project approaches completion, it is P0817. Original Internet-System Myogene In The Process critically important to bring science closer to society, to have educational Of Teaching Medical Genetics projects that focus on DNA and to stimulate discussions of the issues L. Akhmadeyeva, R. Magzhanov inherent to the genetic era. Clearly, fundamental concepts as citizenship Bashkirian State Medical University; Ufa, Russian Federation as well as important principles of ethics will be reshaped according to a medic@agidel.ru new social order dictated by the introduction of this new technology in our We have created a Web-site titled MYOGENE oriented to inherited neu- society. In this sense, the young persons education should open horizons romuscular disorders (INMD). It is the result of our own study in Bashkor- and prepare the young person for life, considering all of the transforming tostan (Russia) and our search of recent literature and the Internet. The stages that our society is already facing. Because a free democratic soci- main aims of this project are to help medical doctors and students to study ety is not just a matter of having choices but of preparing the citizens to be INMD, to aid diagnosis, and to direct management and counselling. We able to understand these choices. For this reason, we have developed have included spinal muscular atrophies (3 classical types and Kennedy DNAgoes to school, a pioneer educational project launched in 1999 in Rio disease), hereditary neuropathies, Myotonic Dystrophies (both types), de Janeiro, Brazil. The project was developed in order to provide an oppor- myotonias (Thomsens, Becker-type myotonia, Paramyotonia congenita tunity for high school students to have closer contact with DNAscience. It and Potassium-aggravated myotonia), periodic paralysis, some congenital combines hands-on DNAexperiments with a variety of open discussions myopathies (Nemaline myopathy, Myotubular myopathy, Mini-core disease regarding different themes such as genetically modified food, cloning, The and Central core disease), several congenital muscular dystrophies (Clas- Human Genome Project, and other activities dealing with DNAand the sical congenital muscular dystrophy, Fukuyama congenital muscular dys- genetic era. During the first year of establishment, more than 400 stu- trophy, Muscle-eye-brain disease and Walker-Warburg syndrome) and 9 dents have attended the course. The complete course is a 12 hours class progressive muscular dystrophies. MYOGENE offers to its users sever- divided into 4 different sections of 3 hours and is limited to a group of 16 al menus as a multiple choice questionnaire to choose presenting symp- students. We have evaluated the course and 98% of the students pointed toms, family history, clinical signs and some basic data concerning elec- out that the course is adequate for their level of knowledge, it has clarified trophysiological and pathological investigations. Then it suggests a diag- important concepts and it has been a unique opportunity to have discus- nosis or a list of the most relevant disorders. On the site there is a sum- sions about different issues concerning the new genetic era. mary about each disorder and there are links to other Web-sites carrying more details, including OMIM. We continue to test and improving the sys- P0816.The Gap Between Services and Genetics Education of tem and recommend it for education in medical genetics. The preliminary Allied and Counseling Health Professionals; HuGEM Survey results show that it is an effective tool both for counselling and for teach- Results ing. One can find a version of MYOGENE at C. Kozma1, E. Lapham1, J. O. Weiss2, J. L. Benkendorf1, M. A. Wilson2 http;//www.bashedu.ru/konkurs/akhmadeeva/ and e-mail us with recom- 1Georgetown University Medical Center; Washington, DC United States; mendations to medic@agidel.ru. Aproject was supported by Open Society 2Genetic Alliance; Washington, DC United States Institute (Soros Foundation). laphamv@georgetown.edu Arandom sample survey of 3600 health professionals who are members P0818. Joining The Teaching Of Medical Genetics With Ethi- of 6 national professional organizations in the US showed that the majori- cal Theory ty of allied and counseling health professionals are providing genetic serv- T. J. Meier1, R. C. Baumiller2 ices to at least some of their clients even though they have minimal edu- 1Xavier University; Cincinnati, OH United States; 2Xavier University; cation in genetics. The study was carried out as part of the Human Cincinnati, United States Genome Education Model (HuGEM) Project of Georgetown University soberdiver@excite.com Medical Center and the Genetic Alliance and funded by the National Insti- The teaching of human genetics at this dawn of the twenty-first century tutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute. The collabo- must include consideration of the ethical and moral implications of the rating associations in the 1998 study included the American Dietetic Asso- information being presented. Advances in medical technology and under- ciation, American Occupational Therapy Association, American Physical standing are rapidly communicated and assimilated, so there no longer Therapy Association, American Psychological Association and National exists the luxury of detached, dispassionate reflection upon what was once Association of Social Workers. At the time of the survey, the memberships the incremental but slow progress of science. Geneticists and philosopher- of the six organizations totaled 570,000 with 330,909 members identified ethicians need to work more closely to understand the impact of genetic as direct service providers. Of the 1,958 (57%)responses received, 70% knowledge on the society and culture into which it is incorporated. The rev- have discussed the genetic component of presenting problems with at olution in the speed and trajectory of medical technology brought about by least a few clients, 29% have provided counseling about genetic concerns the advent of molecular biology techniques necessitates a revolution in the while only 19% made referrals for genetic counseling, and 15% have manner in which discoveries are taught in the classroom. Medical genetics referred for genetic testing. While the majority of respondents are provid- must be presented in concert with the ethical and moral implications of that ing genetic services, few have high confidence in what they are doing. information, because all students are conditioned by the ethical and moral Nearly two-thirds take family histories, however, only 1 in 4 is confident culture in which they live, and philosophical presuppositions must be about eliciting genetic information as part of the history. Most social work- brought to light so that the effects of the rapidly changing scientific knowl- ers (87%) and psychologists (79%) in the study provide counseling, how- edge base on people may be foreseen and rendered beneficial. We have ever only 26% and 29% respectively, have high confidence in counseling developed a course for upper-level undergraduates, entitled Medical clients making decisions about genetic testing. Although two-thirds of the Genetics and Its Implications which presents a challenging curriculum of health professionals hold graduate degrees less than 21% have had one advanced scientific information along with a consideration of ethical theo- or more courses in genetics, 44% have had genetic content in course work ries by which to evaluate the impact of this knowledge on individuals, fam- and 33% have had no formal education in genetics. High confidence is ilies, and societies. We believe that our course materials can be adapted related to amount of genetics education, independent of overall education. easily and fruitfully for use in other undergraduate, graduate, and profes- For example, 98% of psychologists have doctorates however their confi- sional school courses. dence in providing genetic services is correlated with amount of genetics education on eight measures (p<.05). Nearly two-thirds of respondents P0819. Genetic education material for upper secondary want continuing education in genetics. Priority topics identified were 1) schools Role of genetics in common disorders such as stroke, heart disease, and H. Kaariainen, M. Sipponen cancers, 2) Overview of human genetics, 3) Identifying genetic resources The Family Federation of Finland; Helsinki, Finland for clients, 4) Helping clients cope with new genetic diagnoses, 5) Genetic helena.kaariainen@vaestoliitto.fi information and racial/ethnic concerns, 6) New treatments, 7) Privacy and The development of molecular genetics has created new possibilities for confidentaility issues, and 8) Communicating genetic information to clients. clinical applications, sometimes for whole populations. Simultaneously, The survey supports the need for incorporating genetics into the practice human genetics has become a popular subject in the media which has and teaching of all health professionals. It will take a coordinated effort increased public interest. In clinical practice it appears, however, that pub-260 Posters: Genetic Counseling and Genetic Education lic understanding of these issues has not increased and misconceptions P0822.The haze of Bayes - how to improve diagnostic infer- are common. In Finland, after 9 years of basic education more than half of ence and the understanding of risk by patients and by physi- the students continue to upper secondary schools (gymnasiums). In the cians gymnasium curriculum there are two compulsory courses on biology and J. Pelz voluntary extra courses among which a course on genetics is very popu- Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany lar. However, the textbook used for this course is very theoretical and main- joerg.pelz@charite.de ly concentrates on molecular genetics. To complement this book, we cre- Genetic tests become increasingly accessible. Possible benefits of testing ated material for a course of 12 lectures on clinical/practical aspects of for susceptibility to chronic disease may be substantially outweighed by human genetics. The team consisted of a clinical geneticist (HK), a genet- confusion raised by test results. The concepts of sensitivity, specificity and ic nurse (MS), three teachers of biology and two groups of students. The positive predictive value of a test are all complex and therefore not neces- material consisted of texts and exercises for students, instructions for sarily understandable to an uninitiated patient. On the other hand in order teachers and solutions for the excercises. Many of the exercises were to make informed decisions on participation in genetic screening programs problems on many levels; mendelian calculations, personal dilemmas, and and in prenatal diagnosis patients should be told about these concepts. ethical problems on the level of the community. We have also organized Moreover several studies have shown that even physicians have a poor training for teachers based on this material. The response of both teachers understanding of probabilities and the predictive value of test results. and students has been enthusiastic but the real impact of such an Gigerenzer and coworkers hypothesised that due to human evolutionary approach to understanding of genetics will be difficult to assess. development mental algorithms were not designed for probabilities and a Bayesian reasoning but for the understanding of natural frequencies. They P0820. Genetics Education; Adapting Global Strategies to showed that the use of this latter kind of representation can serve as an Meet Local Needs effective tool in inferring the predictive values of a test and to improve the E. Balkite, S. Ray communication of risks between physicians and patients as well. In order Glaxo Wellcome Inc.; Research Triangle Park, NC United States to test their suggestions for genetic counselling four problems were pre- EAB52948@GLAXOWELLCOME.COM sented to more than 200 of our fellow students (representatives of an Education in both the science of genetics and the issues in genetics is key upper-middle class lay population) either as probabilities or as natural fre- to successful advancement of programs in the field and requires a combi- quencies; (1) positive triple test and the risk of trisomy 21, (2) insulin nation of strategies. When Glaxo Wellcome established a Genetics Direc- dependent diabetes mellitus and DR3/DR4, (3) breast cancer and torate in 1997 to incorporate genetics knowledge and technology into drug BRCA1/BRCA2, (4) inheritance of familial polyposis and symptom free research and development, it made a commitment to education about its ageing. Participants received in a randomised order all four problems, two genetics initiatives to both internal and external stakeholders worldwide. presented as probabilities and two as natural frequencies. They generally After identifying the stakeholders and assessing their needs, global strate- ranked the natural frequency questions as less difficult and yielded a sig- gies were developed to raise awareness of the scope of Glaxo Wellcome nificant better understanding of the risk. The representation of complex genetics research and educational materials targeted to specific audiences concepts in natural frequencies rather than in probabilities can improve the were produced. Stakeholders and strategies are presented in Table 1. understanding of patients and of physicians These strategies were adapted and modified to meet local genetics edu- cation needs depending on the country or regional needs. Evaluations P0823. Down syndrome - critical evaluation of information were conducted and information shared to enhance future genetics edu- available in the Internet cation initiatives. A. Zahn, J. Kunze, J. Pelz Table 1 Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany joerg.pelz@charite.de STAKEHOLDERS STRATEGIES Considering the increasing number of people using the internet as an Employees Symposia source of knowledge about medical issues, we analysed the information of Investigators Courses web-sites on Down Syndrome (DS). After a search for Down syndrome Ethics Committees Workshops with the search engines Altavista and Yahoo (in German and in English), Policymakers Meetings we examined medical and/or psycho-social information of web-sites within Regulatory Authorities Newsletters the first 100 hits yielded by each search engine. Apredefined catalogue of Patients Websites health related data was used for a ranking of web-sites. Basic (required) Public Videotapes and additional (facultative) information were evaluated separately, English Private Insurers and German web-sites were compared. The sample size was 324 hits (200 University Faculty English, 124 German) of which only 77 (24%) were medical web-sites. Among these were 34 relevant German web-sites (27% of 124 hits) and 43 P0821.Affective, Behavioural And Cognitive Components Of relevant English web-sites (22% of 200 hits). In both languages all levels University Students Regarding Genetics And Its Advance of information (poor/excellent) were found. Only 24% of the German web- M. I. Carb, O. Pliego, M. B. Bravo-Luna, J. A. M. Cesolari, N. F. Peret sites and 35% of the English web-sites gave more than 50% of the basic Faculty of Medicine-UNR; Rosario, Argentina medical information. Looking at the additional information, there were 1 mbravoluna@hotmail.com German and 5 English web-sites communicating more than 50% of the Attitudes are determinant of educational process quality; hence, they must expected content. An impact of language and authorship (universities/per- be included in its objectives. This proposal is a true change in Science- sonal homepage) on the substance could be established. English web- Didactics paradigm. The scientific, technological and social (STS) sites contained more material than Germans. Since many homepages approach emphasizes the importance of the ethical aspects as well as the dont cover and are not intended to present most of the required facts, the development of conscious opinion in the educational processes. Conse- usefulness of both the German and the English web-sites as a source of quently, in a first stage we have investigated attitude components in a sam- information on DS is limited. Careful work is essential to ensuring that the ple of students entering the medical career at the Faculty of Medicine, Internet takes shape in ways that support customers needs of health infor- National University of Rosario (Argentina). In order to evaluate the affec- mation. However, some examples show the potential of the internet, tive and behavioural components we have prepared, validated and applied although the possibilities to educate people about DS are not completely an instrument used in social psychology (Lickerts scale), analysing Genet- realised. ics social image (GSI), teaching-learning process (TLP) and shared responsibility (SR). The results show a favourable attitude global trend, P0824. Genetic disorders and congenital malformations in regarding Genetics and its advance [total mean; 3.73/5; GSI; 3.7/5; TLP; Iranian Population (Tehran) 3.7/5; SR; 3.8/5]. The cognitive component was assessed by means of an R. Mokhtari1, A. Bagga2 instrument demanding the solution of different activities offered to the stu- 1Self; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2University of Pune; Pune, India dents. Cognitive evaluation attained 34% of correctly resolved activities [x= royakiana@yahoo.com 5.29/15.5]. See Figure displaying results according scores. Thus, it is clear Over the last few decades there has been a gradual change in the pattern that the knowledge of the students, in Genetics, is poor, this is a challeng- of diseases in many western countries and genetic disorders have been ing goal to attain during the development of this first year of the career in important causes of morbidity and mortality. In the present research, 800 which we are currently working. patients coming to 3 genetic centers in Tehran (capital of Iran) were stud- ied. The study focused on the prevalence of various kinds of congenital malformations and genetic diseases in Iranian Population. The effect ofPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 261 consanguinity and the kind of congenital malformations and genetic disor- lation inhabiting the Western Cape of South Africa. Polymorphic analysis of ders associated with consanguinity, the present position of genetic coun- hsp70 and HLA-DR genes was performed on genomic DNAfrom patients seling facilities available in Iran and the extent of their utility, the role of suffering from TB (n=60) and matched control subjects (n=61) using PCR- education of the parents in prevention the spread of certain genetic disor- RFLPand PCR-SSPrespectively. Preliminary results showed no evidence ders and their association with the consanguineous marriages was for an independent role of hsp70 gene polymorphism in susceptibility to TB explored. Analysis of data revealed that major disorders were Downs syn- while DR3 (DRB1*0301-0302) and DR53 (DRB4*0101) were present at a drome, (22%), Primary Amenorrhoea (11%), {Psychomotor retardation higher frequency (p=0.068 and p=0.034 respectively) in TB patients, and (9.5%),Mental retardation(7.9%)and Turner Syndrome (5.1%). 43.6 % of DR12 (DRB1*1201-1203) in control subjects (p=0.028). An additional num- the patients were born to the consanguineous parents out of which major- ber of 300-400 cases and controls are currently analysed to meet statisti- ity (37.8%) were from Parallel cousin ,28.9% were from Cross cousin mar- cal standards and to investigate linkage disequilibrium of HLA-DR and riages, and 33.2% were from the distantly related parents.Psychomotor hsp70 alleles. An improved understanding of the underlying mechanisms retardation (20.8%), Primary Amenorrhoea (17.4%) and Mental retardation contributing to tuberculosis susceptibility may open new avenues in the (10.5 %) topped the list of disorders encountered in the children born to development of novel therapeutic approaches. consangineous parents. A Total of 45.4 % couples already having an affected child reported pregnancy wastage. In countries where the prob- P0827.ACE Polymorphism in National Turkish Athletes lems of malnutrition and infectious diseases have been overcome, society F. Ciloglu1, I. Peker2, N. ine3, A. Demirkan3 needs to turn its attention to the prevention and management of genetic 1GENLAB Medical Diagnostics and Research Laboratory; Istanbul, Turkey; diseases. This is what is strongly advocated for Iran because of its high 2Marmara University; Istanbul, Turkey; 3DETAM; Istanbul, Turkey rate of consanguinity. fciloglu@hotmail.com Cardiovascular performance is a key element in athletic success and cer- P0825. Hemoglobinopathies Newborn Screening In Hospital tain genes are thought to be candiates for regulating cardiac and vascular De Base From So Jos Do Rio Preto - Sp, Brazil. physiology. One of the candidate genes is is in the renin-angiotensin sys- F. A. M. Siqueira1, A. C. Fett-Conte2, L. N. B. Borin3, C. R. Bonini-Domin- tem. The angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) insertion allele (ACE I) is gos4 a genetic marker that might be associated with improved endurance per- 1UNESP; Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil; 2Hospital de Base; Sao Jose do formance. In this study ACE polymorphism was studied in past and pres- Rio Preto, Brazil; 3Hospital de Base; Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil; ent Turkish National male athletes who have been competing in national 4IBILCE-UNESP; Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil and international level for several years.. The athletes were seperated into famendes@bio.ibilce.unesp.br three groups consisting of 40 long distance runners, 25 sprinters and 30 The hemoglobinopathies, mainly the sickle cell anaemia and the tha- fotball players who are felt to have characteristics of both long and short lassemias, include a heterogeneous group of genetic alterations dissemi- distance athletes. The findings were compared to the results of 100 ran- nated over the whole world. They consist of a problem of public health in domly selected males from the sedentary Turkish population. Genomic several countries, including Brazil. The neonatal period is considerated the DNAwas obtained from white blood cells and and the I and D variants of most effective for the screening of this alterations. This allows prophylaxis the ACE gene were identified by PCR amplification of the polymorphic and prevention before the appearance of the first symptoms, allowing region. The findings show that compared to the normal population, the long improvement on the patients survival and guidance of the parents and het- distance runners have an excess of the ACE I allele (p<0.05)and the ACE erozygote carrier. The present work aims the early detection of the abnor- II genotype (p<0.05). On the other hand the sprinters show results very mal hemoglobins to establishiment standard analysis and examine the via- similar to the normal population. The fotball players show a slightly bility of the prevent program. The samples were heel stick collected and increased ACE I allele and ACE II genotype but it is not enough to be sta- through blood cord. Electrophoresis procedures, HPLC (Bio-Rad) and tistically significant. These findings suggest that atleast in the Turkish pop- cytological and biochemical analysis were made for the abnormal hemo- ulation, there does seem to be a positive association between endurance globins characterization. From April, 98 to November, 99, 1478 neonatal performance and ACE I allele. blood samples were analyzed from Hospital de Base, So Jos do Rio Preto, in which 216 (14,62%) hemoglobins alterations could be found, P0828. Folic acid prevents more than neural tube defects; a emphasizing 49 (3,32%) with Hb S, 9 (0,61%) with Hb C, 110 (7,44%) with registry-based study in the Northern Netherlands suggestive alpha thalassemia, 23 (1,55%) with suggestive beta tha- H. E. K. de Walle, J. Reefhuis, M. C. Cornel lassemia, and 25 (1,70%) with interation alpha/beta thalassemia. The sam- Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen; Groningen, The ples collected from the blood cord showed effectiveness in all analyses Netherlands suitable while the blood samples hell stick collected, in filter paper, were H.E.K.de.Walle@medgen.azg.nl applicable only to specific methodologies. The hemoglobinopathy suspect- Folic acid (FA) is not only protective for neural tube defects (NTDs) but ed cases were reassessed after six months and they were led to genetic could be for other defects as well. Using data from the EUROCATNorth- counseling and clinic attendance with their family members. The multipro- ern Netherlands registry, we have investigated the possible preventive fessional approach in programs of this kind is fundamental for its success. effect of FAin five selected groups of malformations; NTDs, heart defects, oral clefts, urinary tract defects, and limb reduction defects. Acase-control P0826. Hsp70 polymorphism and HLA-DR diversity; Implica- analysis was performed using the years 1981 through 1998. Information on tions for tuberculosis susceptibility in the Cape Coloured FA use was collected via the physician, pharmacist and mother. Odds population of South Africaility in the Cape Coloured popula- ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using chi- tion of South Africa square tests. Cases were defined as infants with FA sensitive defects T. Boshoff1, A. E. Brune1, E. G. Hoal van Helden2, L. Bornman1 (n=2,751), defects part of chromosomal or monogenic disorders were 1Biochemistry Division, Rand Afrikaans University; Auckland Park, South excluded. Controls were all children and foetuses with anomalies other Africa; 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Stellenbosch; than the sensitive anomalies (n=3,647). Use of FAduring the periconcep- Tygerberg, South Africa tional period was known for 69.5% (n=1,914) of the cases and for 70.0% LBO@na.rau.ac.za (n=2,553) of the controls. Of the FAsensitive cases 67 (3.5%) were peri- Tuberculosis (TB) being one of the leading causes of death from infectious conceptionally supplemented with FA, while this was true for 144 (5.6%) disease in the world, is also a major problem in the Cape Coloured popu- controls. Significantly less case mothers than control mothers took folic lation in the Western Cape of South Africa. Multiple genes influence sus- acid periconceptionally. More specifically, this study showed a significant ceptibility to TB. HLAclass II polymorphisms have been associated with reduction in risk of heart defects (OR=0.52, 95% CI; 0.35-0.78) and a susceptibility to inflammatory diseases, but linkage disequilibrium of alleles strong indication for a reduction in the prevalence of urinary tract defects in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complicates identification of (OR=0.54, 95% CI; 0.29-1.02). The OR for NTDs are indicative of a pro- disease-associated genes. Genes encoding members of the 70 kDa heat tective effect (OR=0.68, 95% CI; 0.35-1.30). Recall bias is an unlikely shock protein (HSP)family (Hsp70) are localised within the MHC. In the explanation, since sick controls were used as controls. The explanation light of the protective role of Hsp70 in infection and immunity it is hypothe- probably lies in the power of this study; there were not enough cases to sized that Hsp70 polymorhisms may contribute to disease susceptibility. detect a significant protective effect of FAfor NTDs. Birth defect registries Possible linkage disequilibrium of hsp70 alleles with HLA-DR alleles might will continue to monitor the future effect of FAon birth defects. Therefore lead to extended haplotypes which might act as additive TB susceptibility these registries will remain important tools for determining effects of pri- markers. Hsp70 gene polymorphism (hsp70-1, hsp70-2, hsp70-Hom and mary prevention on other severe congenital anomalies besides NTDs. the polymorphic PstI site within the coding region of hsp70-2) and HLA class II DR polymorphisms were investigated in the Cape Coloured popu-262 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics P0829.Postal collection of buccal wash samples for DNA; A (APEX) technology for SNPscoring all over the genome. The method is successful method for expansion of the ALSPAC DNA based upon an array of oligonucleotides immobilized via a 5-end amino resource. linker onto amino-silanized glass slide. Oligonucleotides are selected from S. Ring1, E. Spanakis2, T. Beavan1, B. Barratt3, R. Jones4, I. Day2, M. the sense and antisense genomic sequence so that 3-ends are one base Pembrey4, L. Tyfield1, A. Study Team5 upstream of the SNP. The amplified DNAtemplate, containing the SNP, is 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Southmead Hospital; Bristol, United digested enzymatically and then annealed to the immobilized primers, Kingdom; 2Division of Human Genetics, Southampton University Hospital; which promote sites for template-dependent DNApolymerase extension Southampton, United Kingdom; 3Department of Medical Genetics, Well- reactions. Four unique fluorescently labeled dye terminators are used to come Trust Centre for Molecular Mechanisma in Disease.; Cambridge, extend each primer by only one base. As a result of this reaction each United Kingdom; 4Institute of Child Health, London; London, United King- primer identifies one base in the target sequence. The Genorama imag- dom; 5Institute of Child Health, University of Bristol; Bristol, United King- ing system and software package is used for SNPscoring. In the present dom study APEX technology was successfully used for SNP-based genotyping. S.M.Ring@Bris.ac.uk We have selected 68 SNPs over the whole genome and estimated the The Avon Longitudinal Study of Pregnancy and Childhood is a large epi- allele frequencies and heterozygosities of these SNPs in Estonian popula- demiological study of approximately 14,000 children designed to investi- tion analyzing 240 chromosomes. From the 68 analyzed SNPs 58 were gate the interplay between genes and environment. ADNAresource has polymorphic according to the allele frequencies data. This current oligonu- been created using blood samples from approximately 10,000 children and cleotide array with 68 SNPs can be successfully used for paternity testing 9,000 mothers and is being used for several genetic studies. Cell lines will and forensic analysis. Oligonucleotide design, quality, DNAPolymerase, be created from the study participants in order to ensure long-term provi- dye terminators, template DNAquality and special software tools are all sion of DNA. Paternal blood is currently unavailable. Therefore a new critical for the optimal results. APEX method is a reliable tool in SNPstud- postal buccal wash collection and extraction method was piloted to create ies, which seem to have a great potential for large-scale genotyping in the mother;father;child trios for transmission tests and imprinting studies. This near future, although method has utility already now in paternity and foren- method was developed for trio studies by the Southampton group and sic testing, mutation analysis and SNPscoring. independently validated for ALSPAC in Bristol. Mouthwash kits were sent to 1386 mothers who were asked if they and their partners would return a P0832. Evolution and population genetics of the H-ras min- mouthwash sample for genetic studies. 63% of mothers and 55% of part- isatellite ners returned a sample. Samples were normally less than 48 hours old J. A. Langdon, J. A. L. Armour when returned although some mothers took up to 3 months to collect the Institute of Genetics, Queens Medical Centre, University of Nottingham; samples. DNAis extracted using a phenol-free method and concentration Nottingham, United Kingdom measured using picogreen. The mean yield is 62g of DNA (range 2- mrxjal@nottingham.ac.uk 300g) per 10ml sample. In initial genotyping studies a PCR success rate Studies of the H-ras minisatellite have shown that 94% of all alleles in of 94.6% has been obtained. Studies are underway to confirm sample native Europeans and Americans of European descent consist of 4 com- identity. We expect to generate trios from 52% of the targeted families mon alleles. The remaining alleles are designated as rare. Rare alleles when parent samples are associated with existing child samples. In con- have been reported to be associated with cancer in several studies. clusion this is a successful method of collecting DNAfor epidemiological In this study 11 substitutional polymorphisms within the sequence flanking studies by post the minisatellite have been detected in 40 Castillian and 20 Pygmy chro- mosomes, and used to construct an allele tree for this locus. The ancestral P0830. Whole Genome Amplification; A Means of Providing state has been inferred by analysing several non-human primates, allow- DNAfrom Limited Biological Sources ing the allele tree to be rooted. The internal structures of these minisatel- P. K. Bender1, M. Schmidt1, W. Beggs2, W. Beggs2, J. C. Beck1, R. T. lite alleles have been deduced by minisatellite variant repeat (MVR) map- Johnson1 ping. This information has been integrated with the tree constructed from 1Coriell Institute for Medical Research; Camden, NJ United States; 2Coriell flanking haplotypes, providing additional information regarding lineage Cell Repositories; Camden, NJ United States evolution. benderpk@umdnj.edu In addition a survey of allele lengths has been carried out in a UK control Whole genome amplification offers a means to prepare sufficient DNAfor population, demonstrating a higher rare allele frequency than was report- detailed genetic analysis from biological materials of limited availability. ed in previous studies. The rare allele frequency of 17% detected is signif- Samples such as biopsies that cannot be cultured, forensic samples, hair icantly greater than that of 6% reported by Krontiris et al. (1993). This is and cheek cell samples, and animal scat represent valuable sources of likely to be due to the increased power of the methods used in this study genetic material if sufficient DNAcan be obtained. The WGAmethod is to detect rare alleles, and may have implications for the interpretation of based on a technique called primer-enhanced-preamplification (PEP). the previously published case-control studies. PEPrelies on fully degenerate primers to target the PCR amplification of sequences throughout the genome without bias for sequence content. Bio- P0833. Classical association and TDT-type methods; power logical samples including a sliver of skin tissue from a deceased centenar- for detecting candidate genes influencing quantitative traits. ian, keratinocytes from foreskin, blood, and primate scat were subjected to D. A. Tregouet, C. Pallaud, C. Sass, S. Visvikis, L. Tiret WGAin order to evaluate the method. The WGAmethod yielded up to a INSERM U525; Paris Cedex 13, France 2,000-fold amplification of the genomic DNA providing up to 2.0 micro- tregouet@idf.inserm.fr grams of WGADNAfrom a 1.0 ng aliquot of genomic DNA. Several molec- Association studies based on candidate genes are one of the major strate- ular assays were undertaken to determine the allelic bias in the samples gies for identifying genes involved in complex traits. However, they suffer and to assess the utility of the material for genetic analysis. For the human from the fact that they do not overcome the risk of spurious association due samples, the allelic representation of the X- and Y-chromosome amelo- to uncontrolled stratification of the population. Therefore, the use of Trans- genin alleles and five microsatellites on different autosomes was compared mission Disequilibrium Test (TDT)-based methods has been advocated by between the WGAproducts and the original template genomic DNA. The several authors for checking that an observed association is actually due DNAsamples from primates similarly are being assayed using genomic to linkage and not to other uncontrolled phenomenon. In this paper, an esti- and mitochondrial markers. The results with the human samples indicate mating equation procedure is proposed to assess the power and the cost that WGAgenerates DNAthat is representative of the original genomic efficiency of a classical association and of two TDT-type analyses for quan- material at many loci, and potentially offers a method for amplification of titative phenotypes in sibship data. It is shown that an association analysis DNAfrom animal samples collected in the field. is generally more powerful, i.e. requires less informative sibs, than a TDT- type method when the allele frequency of the studied marker is close to P0831. SNP-based genotyping using arrayed primer exten- 0.5. Conversely, TDTmethods become more powerful when the allele fre- sion on the oligonucleotide array. quency is low or high, all the more since the sibship size is large and the E. Lhmussaar1, A. Lushnikov1, N. Tnisson2, T. Nikopensius1, I. Kask1, residual sib-sib correlation is strong. However, TDT methods always A. Kurg1, A. Metspalu1 require more sibs to be sampled, regardless whether or not they are 1Inst. of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu; Tartu, Estonia; informative, than an association analysis to get the appropriate number of 2AsperBio Ltd.; Tartu, Estonia informative sibs, differences between methods tending to decrease as the elin@ebc.ee sibship clustering increases. SNP-s offer a number of advantages with respect to population-based analysis of the human genome. We present Arrayed Primer ExtensionPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 263 P0834.Regression-based inference for association of haplo- applied a multivariate feature vector approach to quantify genetic diversity. type frequencies with the phenotype. Genotypes of 18 highly polymorphic microsatellite loci were analysed by a D. V. Zaykin1, P. H. Westfall2, S. S. Young3 genetic similarity function. The inter-individual genetic distances d(xi,xj) 1Statistical Genetics, GlaxoWellcome Inc.; Research Triangle Park, NC between the 18-dimensional feature vectors xi,xj (made up by the allelic United States; 2Texas Tech University; Lubbock, TX United States; 3Glax- patterns of any two subjects i, j) represent the level of genetic diversity oWellcome Inc.; Research Triangle Park, NC United States within a given population. Population; In an ongoing hypertension study, dvz90620@glaxowellcome.com the population of interest are the Sorbs, a putative slavic population isolate There are increasing efforts to relate clinically important phenotypes, such in Eastern Germany (sample n=326). Normalized data from 257 subjects as disease predisposition, drug efficacy or glucose level to single from Kanton Zuerich, and an earlier study of US-American samples and of nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Recent research gives examples Hutterites (as a proved isolated population) served as reference values. where several SNPs in haplotypes affect the phenotype so there are bio- Results; The US-American population displayed a significantly higher logical and statistical interactions. It is important to develop statistical genetic variation compared to the Sorbs and the Kanton Zuerich sample methods to identify and deal with these interactions. We give statistical (increase of 50 %). In the Hutterites, the genetic diversity was even more tests for association of haplotype frequencies with discrete and continuous reduced and displayed only 30 % of the variation observed in the Sorbs. traits in samples of unrelated individuals. There is a need to deal with unre- Surprisingly, the variability is similar in the Sorbs and the Zuerich sample. lated individuals as many data sets, e.g. clinical trials, will not have pedi- Conclusion; As expected, the heterogeneous US population showed the gree data. We present conditions for asymptotic equivalence of regression- highest and the Hutterites the lowest genetic variability. Asignificant reduc- based methods with methods that double the sample size in the case of tion was observed both in the Swiss and the Sorbs sample, indicating a known haplotypes. Then we extend these models to the case of statisti- reduced genetic diversity. cally inferred haplotypes. We confirm that our methods have excellent power while maintaining type I error. We present applications to gene map- P0837.POPULATION GENETICS; Proposed Guidelines for the ping using epidemiologic data with adjacent markers and show that our Ethical Conduct of Genetic Research in Populations methods improve the efficiency of genome scans by incorporating infor- M. Deschenes1, G. Cardinal1, B. Knoppers1, C. Laberge2 mation from consecutive markers. 1University of Montreal; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Quebec Network of Applied Genetic Medicine (RMGA); Montreal, PQ Canada P0835. Does accounting for gene-environment interaction mylene.deschenes@umontreal.ca increase the power to detect the effect of the gene ? Now that the human genome is mapped, genetic research will focus on E. Genin1, J. M. Norris2, H. Selinger-Leneman1, M. Khlat3 understanding the function of each gene. The genetic profile of an individ- 1INSERM U535; Le Kremlin Bicetre, France; 2University of Colorado, ual is shaped by geographical, cultural and socio-economic considera- Health Sciences Center; Denver, CO United States; 3INED; Paris, France tions, all of which are underpinned by biological evolution. Hence, the genin@kb.inserm.fr renewed interest in population research. The genetic profile of small iso- Despite tremendous efforts, few genetic risk factors involved in the sus- lated populations may ease the discovery of gene function. Indeed, popu- ceptibility for complex disorders have been identified so far. One reason for lation genetics holds the key to individual genetic medicine. Genetic epi- this may be that ignored gene-environment interaction conceals effects of demiology in heterogenous populations is also of interest to health author- genetic factors on disease. To investigate whether this could be an expla- ities. Consequently, we observe emerging national DNAbanks in Iceland, nation, we have studied the power to detect gene effects of family-based Estonia, England, Sweden, Newfoundland (Canada) and Quebec (Cana- tests of association in the presence of a gene-environment (GXE) interac- da). Genetic research has been framed by a wide set of legislation and tion. Family-based association tests that use case-parent trios can allow international guidelines. However, genetic research the scale of a popula- for the detection of a gene effect and a GXE interaction by the comparison tion brings issues which are not addressed by current frameworks. The of the allele transmissions from parents to exposed and unexposed cases. Quebec Network of Applied Genetic Medicine is working on the creation of We have compared the power of the test that account for the GXE inter- a population bank to study SNPvariation within the general Quebec pop- action and of the test that does not under different exposure frequencies ulation. To do so, it is developing guidelines for population genetic and several models of GXE interaction. We show that the gain of power research. Our presentation will first discuss the ten fundamental principles due to accounting for GXE interaction is highly dependent on the popula- on which the guidelines are founded. Second, we will focus on certain tion exposure frequency and on the exposure effect; it is higher when the themes elaborated in the guidelines such as population assent, communi- exposure is rare and when the exposure effect is low. When the exposure cation of research results, commercialisation and benefit sharing. frequency is high (>30%) and/or the exposure effect is strong, there may even be a decrease in power when accounting for the GXE interaction. For P0838.Optimal combination of marker-specific statistics in a given exposure frequency and effect, we found that the gain in power is two-stage SNPselection method for disease association data usually stronger for dominant as compared to recessive models. A. Wille1,2, J. Hoh1, J. Ott1 1Rockefeller University; New York, NYUnited States; 2IMBIE; Bonn, Ger- P0836.Quantifying genetic diversity in a putative German iso- many late by multivariate feature vector analysis wille@linkage.rockefeller.edu K. Hoffmann1, H. H. Stassen2, C. Planitz3, R. P. Bochmann3, M. Skorna4, Although single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) provide a good setting B. Lucke4, L. Haucke4, W. Gunia4, M. Zschornack5, A. Reis6, F. C. Luft7, C. for the fine mapping of complex traits, their density and abundance burden Scharfetter2, T. Wienker8 data analysis more than ever. In order to decide which SNPloci in a large 1Gene Mapping Center at the MDC and Franz Volhard Clinic at the Hum- pool synergistically influence a particular disease, the mere marker-by- boldt University; Berlin, Germany; 2Psychiatric University Hospital; marker method is not efficient because it ignores correlations among mark- Zuerich, Switzerland; 3University Clinic Carl Gustav Carus Dresden, Phys- ers and requires conservative multiple testing adjustment. Large-scale iology, TU Dresden; Dresden, Germany; 4Gene Mapping Center at the approaches in which information on multiple markers is bundled to a test MDC; Berlin, Germany; 5Malteser Hospital; Raeckelwitz, Germany; 6Insti- statistic should overcome these difficulties. Earlier, we proposed a two- tute for Human Genetics at the University Nuernberg-Erlangen, and Gene stage analysis of association data in which, first, a subset of markers is Mapping Center at the MDC; Erlangen and Berlin, Germany; 7Franz Vol- selected, and secondly, interactions between these markers and the dis- hard Clinic at the Humboldt University; Berlin, Germany; 8Institute of Med- ease are modeled. Here, we address a question that arose in the first ical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn; Bonn, stage of the analysis; how to combine marker-specific statistics in order to Germany achieve the optimal detection power. In principle, each SNP is initially khoffma@mdc-berlin.de assigned an index that measures the association strength between the Purpose; Population isolates are important for mapping both monogenic disease status and its genotypes. For example, this index can be the usual and complex traits. The success of genetic studies in isolated or founder Chi-square statistic. Then information is to be combined either by simply populations depends on the effective number of founders, and the popula- summing those indices or by the empirical Bayesian method. In doing so, tion history. Since reliable information on population history are not always it leads us to explore the whole class of the James-Stein estimators. available, the genetic diversity should be estimated in the present genera- tion. In an isolated population, we would expect a reduced heterogeneity. P0839.Logistic Regression analysis for case/control genetic Ethnological studies on populations use the genotypes of mitochondrial association studies; combining genetics and epidemiology and Y-chromosomal polymorphisms. However, these methods are not F. Macciardi1, R. Adolfsson2, D. Blackwood3, G. N. Papadimitriou4, R. absolutely representative for autosomal loci, where we would expect Kaneva5, M. Noethen6, L. Oruc7, A. Serretti8, C. Van Broeckhoven9, J. genes responsible for most diseases. Method; To address this issue, we Mendlewicz10, B. Lerer11264 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH); Toronto, ON Canada; P0841.Inflation of type I error when model-free statistics are 2University of Umea, Dept. of Psychiatry; Umea, Sweden; 3University computed between markers Department of Psychiatry and MRC Human Genetic Unit; Edimburgh, M. C. Babron, E. Genin, P. Margaritte-Jeannin, M. H. Dizier, F. Clerget- United Kingdom; 4Athens University Medical School, Department of Psy- Darpoux chiatry and University Mental Health Research Institute; Athens, Greece; INSERM U535; Le Kremlin Bicetre, France 5Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, MaternityUniversity Hospital of babron@ccr.jussieu.fr Obstetrics, Medical University; Sofia, Bulgaria; 6Institute of Human Genet- Several model-free methods of linkage analysis compare the observed ics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 7Department of Psychiatry, Uni- allele sharing of pairs of affected individuals with the one expected under versity Hospital Rebro, University of Zagreb; Zagreb, Croatia; 8Instituto no linkage given only the genealogical relationship. In multipoint analyses, Scientifico Ospedale San Raffaele, Department of Neuropsychiatric Sci- the allele sharing is estimated taking into account the joint information pro- ences; Milan, Italy; 9Neurogenetics Laboratory, Flanders Interuniversity vided by all the genetic markers in a region. Different statistics, such as the Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), Born-Bunge Foundation (BBS), Universi- MLS or the NPL, have been proposed. There is evidence for linkage if the ty of Antwerpen (UIA), Department of Biochemistry; Antwerp, Belgium; value of the statistics at a given marker exceeds a given threshold, func- 10Dept. of Psychiatry, Erasme Hospital, Free University of Brussels; Brus- tion of the number of markers tested. However, the statistics are often eval- sels, Belgium; 11Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Hadassah Medical Orga- uated at different locations on and between the markers. When looking at nization; Jerusalem, Israel the curves that give the value of the statistics as a function of the position fabio_macciardi@camh.net in the map of markers, one striking feature is the little bumps that can be The ultimate goal of genetic association studies, which should be viewed seen between markers indicating that the value of the statistic is higher within the larger framework of epidemiological studies of risk factor/dis- between than on the markers. The maximum value of the statistics over a ease associations, is to identify gene(s) responsible for a given disease. To region is indeed often found between two markers rather than on the mark- detect a genetic association the easiest design is the case-control ers themselves although the information content is smaller between the approach, which usually apply a chi-square analysis to look at the signifi- markers. In order to investigate whether this could lead to an inflation of the cance of an association. The test is simple and does not depend on any type-one error, we have performed simulations under the null hypothesis population genetic theory or model, other than that which supposes the of no linkage and compare the type-one errors under two analysis strate- strength of an association between genes increases when physical and gies ; including or excluding intermarker locations. The results are report- genetic distances between them decrease. The major problem with the ed for different marker map densities and between-marker steps. The inter- case-control design is the identification of an appropriate control sample, est of the two strategies is discussed. to avoid spurious associations due to potential confounding factors related to population admixture or stratification. To deal with these issues, various P0842. Genetic variation and linkage disequilibrium in 174 methods have been proposed, as, for example, using a set of unrelated human genes polymorphisms to evaluate the extent of random association (Devlin & T. Acharya, J. Schneider, R. Jiang, A. Wood, D. Tanguay, S. Stanley, W. Roeder, Biometrics, 1999). We propose an alternative strategy for genetic Newell, B. Koshy, R. S. Judson, G. F. Vovis, J. C. Stephens association in a case-control sample by applying a logistic regression (LR) Genaissance Pharmaceuticals; New Haven, CT United States model, which allows for the simultaneous consideration of other risk and/or t.acharya@genaissance.com confounding factors. Using a data set from a case-control multicenter 2,549 SNPs were discovered in approximately 465 kb DNAsequence from European Collaborative study, with a response variable (i.e., the diagno- 174 human genes with known genomic organization. DNAsequencing was sis), a predictor (i.e., a risk allele for the 5HT2C gene variant) and a con- performed on one chimpanzee and 82 unrelated individuals including founder (i.e., the ethnical origin of cases and controls), we show that the African-Americans, Asians, European-Americans, and Hispanic Latinos. LR outcome is equivalent to the Mantel-Haenszel test (MH) for multiple The data were collected from several gene regions including exons, exon- contingency tables. Both the statistical approaches lead to the same result, intron boundaries, untranslated regions and 5 flanking sequences. The showing a positive association despite substantial population variability average nucleotide diversity for 166 autosomal genes was p=0.063% and across the participating centers. The advantages of this alternative model q=0.103%, while the average nucleotide diversity for eight X-linked genes will be discussed. was p=0.052% and q=0.070%. Of the four ethnic groups considered, the African-American sample had the highest average nucleotide diversity fol- P0840.Advances in Genetic Epidemiology lowed by the Hispanic-Latino, European-American and Asian groups. Hap- N. E. Morton lotypes were inferred using a variation of the Expectation-Maximization University of Southampton; Southampton, United Kingdom algorithm, and linkage disequilibrium (D) was calculated between pairs of nem@soton.ac.uk SNPs within each gene. Because allele frequencies affect linkage disequi- After two decades developing statistical methods applicable to DNAmark- librium calculations, only SNPs that occurred at least five times in each ers, genetic epidemiology is emerging into the sunlight of modern biology. population were considered in these analyses. The ~8,000 remaining pair- Advances can be grouped into four categories; mapping, positional wise comparisons were stratified by ethnic group and physical distance cloning, nonclassical inheritance, and complex genetic systems. Physical between SNPs. In general, the European-American sample had the high- mapping is now sequence-based, constraining order on the linkage map est levels of linkage disequilibrium and the African-Americans the lowest, and interpolating for loci without linkage information. It will be shown that although the median D value for all ethnic groups was 1, suggesting high this gives dramatic reduction of error. Further improvement will come from overall levels of intragenic linkage disequilibrium. The observed relation- ways to define recombination hot spots and cold spots in small regions that ship between linkage disequilibrium and physical distance was highly cannot be reliably mapped by linkage. These approaches include the unpredictable; however, most of our inter-SNP physical distances were decline of allelic association between SNPs and identification of recombi- less than 10 kb. The complex relationship between linkage disequilibrium nation - prone repeat sequences. Positional cloning depends on linkage and physical distance within genes highlights the need to construct and linkage disequilibrium (LD) with markers localised on integrated maps, detailed, population-specific, empirical linkage disequilibrium maps of the LD providing the greater resolution. Examples will be given for both major human genome. loci and oligogenes, using the Malecot equation for allelic association, together with evidence that the latter is substantially more efficient than P0843.SNPs in the apo(a) unique kringles-population spectra alternative metrics. Nonclassical mechanisms include imprinted disease and effect on the Lp(a) plasma levels loci, dynamic mutation, and possibly concatenated mutation. Complex M. S. Ogorelkova1, H. Kraft2, C. Ehnholm3, G. Utermann4 inheritance has been approached by weakly parametric (nonparametric) 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Univ. of Innsbruck, methods including variance components and sib pairs that do not separate 6020 Innsbruck, Austria; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Instute if Medical Biology gene frequency and effect, as well as by parametric methods that combine and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria; 3Natl. Public Health Institute; segregation, linkage, and association with ascertainment correction. Both Helsinki, Finland; 4Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Inns- approaches allow synthesis of evidence over multiple studies, as illustrat- bruck, Austria ed by asthma and (at higher resolution) by SNPs within the ACE locus. miraog@netscape.com Finally, brief consideration will be given to current ethical, legal, and social Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a complex of apolipoprotein(a) [apo(a)] and low issues raised by population genetics. density lipoprotein which is associated with atherothrombotic disease. Lp(a) plasma levels are controlled to a large extend by the apo(a) gene locus. Known polymorphisms in the apo(a) gene including the kringle IV-2 variable number of tandem repeats explain only part of the large interindi- vidual variability and do not explain the differences in Lp(a) concentrationsPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 265 between major human ethnic groups. We here performed screening for point mutations, found in families of different geographical origins, may single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in exons and flanking intron have been transmitted by a common founder. sequences of the apo(a) kringle IV types 6, 8, 9, and 10 which represent 1.3 kb of coding sequence in two African (Khoi San, Black South Africans) P0846. Analysis of polymorphisms in the human beta- and one Caucasian (Tyroleans) populations and investigated whether they defensin 1 and 2 genes affect Lp(a) levels. Together 768 alleles were analysed. We identified four- A. L. E. Vankeerberghen1, O. Scudiero1, G. Castaldo2, H. Cuppens1, F. teen SNPs including eleven non synonymous, eight of which involved con- Salvatore2, J. J. Cassiman1 served residues, one splice site and two synonymous base changes. No 1University of Leuven; Leuven, Belgium; 2University of Naples, Federico II; sequence variants common to Africans and Caucasians were found. Some Naples, Italy of the newly identified SNPs showed significant effects on Lp(a) plasma anne.vankeerberghen@med.kuleuven.ac.be concentrations, e.g. the substitution G17R in K IV-8 was associated with The consequences of pulmonary disease are the main death cause of cys- Lp(a) levels significantly below average in the two African samples. On the tic fibrosis patients. Nevertheless, no complete association between the contrary the R18W substitution in K IV-9 which occurred with a frequency severity of lung disease and the CFTR genotype has been found. There- of ~8% in Khoi San resulted in a significantly increased Lp(a) concentra- fore, it is hypothesized that other genetic factors, like defensins, compo- tion. Together our data show that several SNPs in the coding sequence of nents of the innate immune system, might influence the sensitivity of CF apo(a) affect Lp(a) levels. patients to pulmonary infections. Mutations in these peptides could increase or decrease their activity and thereby influence the sensitivity to P0844. CYP21 gene SNPs and C4B Taq I RFLP disclose 54 bacterial infections. In order to analyze the possible modulatory role of haplotypes for the steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency alleles human beta-defensin (hBD)1 and 2 in pulmonary diseases associated with in Brazil CF, the hBD1 and 2 intron boundaries and exons of 60 Italian homozygous M. P. De Mello, M. de Araujo, S. H. V. Lemos-Marini, G. Guerra-Jr, M. T. F508 CF patients, showing different levels of pulmonary disease, and of M. Baptista 90 Belgian and 90 Italian control individuals were amplified by PCR and Universidade Estadual de Campinas; Campinas, Brazil sequenced on the ABI 377. Most of the nucleotide changes found in the mmello@unicamp.br 5UTR, the 3UTR and the introns are very frequent (more than 20%). How- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to steroid 21-hydroxylase defi- ever, no frequency differences were found between the control and the ciency is a common inherited defect of adrenal steroid hormone biosyn- affected populations and between the Italian and the Belgian controls. thesis. Unusually for a genetic disorder, the majority of mutations causing Also, no correlation with the age of first colonization of CF patients by CAH result from recombinations between the CYP21 gene encoding the Pseudomonas aeruginosa was observed. In hBD2 intron1, multiple inser- 21-hydroxylase enzyme and the closely linked, highly homologous tion/deletion polymorphisms were found. The coding regions of both genes pseudogene CYP21P. The CYP21 and CYP21Pgenes are located in the are prone to rare nucleotide changes with some of them causing amino major histocompatibility complex class III region on chromosome 6p21.3, acid changes, four in hBD1, G22C and C67S in Belgian controls, and a region that undergoes high recombination rates. Studies on the molecu- H34R and V38I in Italian CF patients, and only one in hBD2, M16I (Italian lar basis of steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency in Brazil have revealed the CF patient and Italian control). The promoters are very polymorphic but presence of fourteen mutations distributed among 117 chromosomes. The these nucleotide changes are mostly very rare. We can conclude that both percentages of individual mutations does not differ from those found in dif- genes are very polymorphic. No association with CF has been found up to ferent populations. We have performed haplotype analysis on a total of 111 now. Further analysis could, however, increase our insight into the role that chromosomes using Taq I CPY21 and C4 RFLP/Southern blotting, muta- defensins play in the innate immune system, our first defense against tion-specific PCR and PCR/RFLPfor two intragenic SNPs in order to eval- microbia. uate the chromosomal background of ten recurrent mutations and four new mutations. Fifty four different haplotypes were identified. P0847.Homogeneous Phase Assays Utilizing Novel Fluores- Number of CYP21 gene affected alleles and haplotypes cent Primers for Detection of Single Nucleotide Polymor- phisms in Allele Specific Amplification Reactions. CYP21 Number Number ofCYP21 Number Number of J. Solus, M. Darfler, A. Gallego, I. Nazarenko Mutation of alleles haplotypes Mutation of alleles haplotypes Life Technologies; Rockville, United States Gene Gene deletion 10 4 conversion 15 8 jsolus@lifetech.com Homogeneous phase fluorescence-based assays provide powerful tools A/C656 _ G 27 10 F306T+ 3 2 for detection of specific nucleic acid sequences. We have developed assays based on the use of primers labeled with a single fluorescent dye D8 3 2 Q318X 9 7 which do not require a specific quenching moiety. These fluorescent I172N 19 12 R356W 5 3 primers exhibit a large increase in intensity when incorporated into double Q318X/ V281L 8 3 4 4 stranded DNA. This property provides a platform for real-time or endpoint R356W detection of nucleic acids in a closed tube and requires no additional steps The number of haplotypes varied from five to nine for each the five most subsequent to PCR. We demonstrate the use of fluorescein-labeled frequent mutations. These data reflect the wide heterogeneity of the Brazil- primers to detect product in allele specific amplification (ASA) reactions on ian population, and show that most recurrent mutations on the CYP21 SNP targets. The effect of changes in the design of the ASAprimer for gene are from various independent origins and do not present founder improved discrimination is shown. We also demonstrate the use of a novel effect. Supported by Grants from; CAPES, CNPq and FAPESP DNA polymerase which improves discrimination. Homogeneous phase detection of the allele specific products is demonstrated by real-time analy- P0845.Origin of parkin gene mutations in Europe sis during the PCR or by endpoint analysis in a fluorescence plate reader. M. Periquet1, C. B. Lcking1, V. Bonifati2, A. Drr1, G. De Michele3, T. Alternatively, multiplex PCR of several SNPtargets of different sizes can Gasser4, M. M. B. Breteler5, N. W. Wood6, A. Brice1 be resolved on an automated fluorescence sequencer. This approach, 1INSERM U289; Paris, France; 2Universit La Sapienza; Rome, Italy; 3Uni- although not utilizing the potential for homogeneous phase detection, versit Federico II; Naples, Italy; 4Klinikum Grobhadern; Munnich, Ger- offers the advantage of higher throughput for analysis of multiple SNPtar- many; 5Harvard School of Public Health; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; gets. This system is shown to be readily adaptable to a universal allele for- 6Queen Square; London, United Kingdom mat where the ASAprimer contains a 5 tail identical to the 3 portion of the periquet@ccr.jussieu.fr labeled primer. The identification of alternate labels to fluorescein permits Awide variety of mutations in the parkin gene, including exon deletions single tube genotyping. The combination of improvements to allele specif- and multiplications, as well as point mutations, result in autosomal reces- ic amplification with a flexible homogeneous phase fluorescent detection sive early-onset parkinsonism. Interestingly, several of these anomalies system provide a simple and reliable method for genotyping of SNPtar- were found repeatedly in independent patients and may therefore result gets. from recurrent (de novo) mutational events or founder effects. In the pres- ent study, haplotype analysis with 10 microsatellite markers covering a 4.7 cM region containing the parkin gene, was performed in 48 families with early-onset autosomal recessive Parkinsons disease, mostly from Euro- pean countries. The patients carried 14 different mutations of the parkin gene that were detected more than once. Our results support the hypoth- esis that exon rearrangements occurred independently whereas some266 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics P0848. A demogenetic analysis of lipoprotein lipase D9N P0851.Association of Human IL-1b (-511) Polymorphism with mutation carriers in the Saguenay population (Quebec, Cana- early Onset Periodontal Disease (EOP) da) M. R. Bazrafshani1, W. E. R. Ollier1, M. H. Thornhill2, A. H. Hajeer1 M. Tremblay1, J. Lambert1, D. Gaudet2 1ARC Epidemiology Research Unit; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Oral 1University of Quebec at Chicoutimi; Chicoutimi, PQ Canada; 2Lipid Disease Research Center, The Royal London School of Medicine and Research Group, Chicoutimi Hospital; Chicoutimi, PQ Canada Dentistry; London, United Kingdom marc_tremblay@uqac.uquebec.ca Mohammad.R.Bazrafshani@fs1.ser.man.ac.uk D9N mutation in the lipoprotein lipase gene (LPL) is associated to a dom- Background; Early onset periodontal diseases (EOP) are a group of inflam- inant risk of coronary disease, with variable expression and penetrance, matory disorders characterised by a rapid rate of periodontal tissue and to arterial hypertension susceptibility. Clinical studies performed at the destruction, in young individuals. There is now substantial evidence to sug- Chicoutimi Hospital (Quebec, Canada) suggest a relatively high preva- gest that genetic factors play a role in the pathogenesis of EOP. Periodon- lence of this mutation in the Saguenay population. The present study aims tal disease is a major public health issue of worldwide significance. It is a at explaining the distribution and origins of the D9N mutation in this popu- chronic inflammatory disease of the supporting tissues of the teeth, start- lation with the use of genealogical data. Asample of 39 carriers was drawn ing with gingivae and progressing to gradual destruction of the bony sup- from files at the Chicoutimi Hospital Lipid Clinic. Genealogical data was port and peridontal attachment of the teeth. This results in significant mor- obtained from the BALSAC population register. This register was also used bidity, with loosening and loos of teeth the ultimate outcome. Indeed, to choose control individuals and reconstruct genealogies. These extend- improved prevention and treatment of tooth decay, has resulted in peri- ed and deep-rooted genealogies go back to the 17th century (up to 16 gen- dontal disease becoming the most common cause of tooth loss in Europe erations), with an average depth of 10 generations. More than 12000 dis- and the USA. Polymorphisms in cytokine genes, which may underpin inter tinct ancestors were identified in both groups (carriers and controls). Mea- individual differences in cytokine synthesis and secretion have been asso- sures of kinship, inbreeding and ancestors concentration showed signifi- ciated with other diseases which have an inflammatory pathogenesis, cantly higher levels within the carriers group. Intergroup kinship coeffi- Genetic variations found within candidate genes in EOPpatients may rep- cients were also higher than controls intragroup kinship coefficients. How- resent a mechanism by which individuals are rendered susceptible to dis- ever, no great difference was observed between the two groups as regards ease. Objective; To investigate whether a biallelic polymorphism (Aor G) to the ancestors geographical origins. Most regional founders (19th centu- occurring within the promoter region of the IL-1b gene (position -511) is ry) came from the adjacent region of Charlevoix, while early founders (17th associated with EOP. Methods; The -511 polymorphism was detected century) came mainly from the French regions of Normandie, Ile-de- using a PCR-RFLP method. IL-1b polymorphism was examined in 97 France, Poitou and Aunis. patients with EOPand 91 healthy matched UK controls. Result P0849.Establishment of a DNAbank from the European pop- ulation as a resource for studies of genetic variability IL-1-511 polymorphism allel and genotype Y. Hua, S. Cichon, N. Kluck, P. Propping, M. Nthen distribution in EOP patients Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany Controls EOP patients y.hua@uni-bonn.de IL-1 genotype n % n % ADNAbank is compiled including 96 samples of 30 European countries Allele frequency representing different population size. Cell lines have been established -511*G 53 29.1 831 42.8 from every individual to ensure an unlimited DNAsource. The DNAbank -511*A 129 70.9 111 57.2 will be available on request to interested research groups from 2001. The DNAbank forms the basis for the second part of the project that aims at a Genotype systematical survey of genetic variability in target proteins of CNS-active G/G 7 7.7 172 17.5 drugs. Receptor genes of neurotransmitters as well as genes that are G/A 39 42.9 49 50.5 located downstream in the intracellular signaling pathways are considered A/A 45 49.4 31 32.0 primary candidate genes. We are using a high-throughput sequencing 1O.R.=1.8 C.I. 95% 1.2-2.8, P<0.05 approach to identify genetic variants. 2O.R.=2.6, C.I. 95% 1.0-6.3, P<0.05 P0850. TaqMan Genotyping of 64 drug metabolizing enzyme Conclusion; Several polymorphisms exist in the IL-1 cluster that influences polymorphisms and their allelic frequencies in 4 different the IL-1b biological activity. Our results demonstrated a possible role for IL- populations 1b gene in the development of EOP. Key Words; 1- EOP2- Polymorphism S. R. Asquith1, A. Yeo1, D. J. Dow1, T. M. Saunders1, R. Hussein1, B. 3- IL-1b 4- RFLP Bahari1, D. S. Montgomery2, S. X. Pillai3, M. Dickins1, E. Foot2, I. J. Purvis1, M. J. Stubbins1 P0852.The Polymorphism Detection of Human Genomic AA- 1GlaxoWellcome R&D; Ware, United Kingdom; 2GlaxoWellcome R&D; NAT Gene Greenford, United Kingdom; 3GlaxoWellcome R&D; Research Triangle W. Ying Park, NC United States National University of Singapore; Singapore, Singapore ms85772@glaxowellcome.co.uk medp9087@nus.edu.sg The study of polymorphisms in enzymes associated with the absorption, The role of melatonin in normal sleep-wake regulation has been inferred distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) of xenobiotics is a critical from the temporal relationships between its rhythmic synthesis and the 24 factor in our ability to rationalise an individuals response to different med- hours cycle. The biochemical basis of this hormone rhythm is the penulti- icines. To date, there has been very little data presented on the frequency mate rate-limiting enzyme in melatonin synthesis, Arylalkylamine N-acetyl- of these so-called metabolic polymorphisms in specific poplulations, the transferase (AANAT). [Axelrod, 1974; Klein, 1985; Namboodiri et al., most detail being available currently for the cytochrome P450 isozymes 1985]. Specifically, our current study focuses on characterizing the AANAT CYP2D6 and CYP2C19. Here we have attempted to expand our knowl- gene in a local population and looking for possible genetic variability that edge in this area by developing a panel of TaqMan assays for the routine may explain the widely documented variation in sleep pattern among nor- genotyping of over 60 metabolic polymorphisms. This study will also mal human individuals. Aself-assessed sleep pattern survey was conduct- enable us to begin to answer a question which is perhaps more important ed among 210 healthy, young and drug-free human subjects based on a for the Pharmaceutical Industry - how representative are clinical trials of whole week practice. Data pertaining to normal sleep onset, offset, and the general population? Further statistical analyses may enable us to cor- total nocturnal sleep duration was obtained. Circulating blood samples relate the genotype data with various phenotypic parameters (measured were collected from 4 individuals with early onset and long sleep length, during clinical studies), thus enabling us to move towards the prediction of and 5 individuals with late onset and short sleep length. Polymerase chain an individuals metabolic capability with respect to a medicine, by virtue reaction (PCR) amplification of the genomic DNAcontaining all of the four of their genotype. In conclusion, this report describes the design and devel- exons of AANAT gene was done. Analysis of PCR products by direct opment of low volume TaqMan genotyping assays for 64 potentially func- sequencing demonstrated that all the 36 sequences were identical with the tional polymorphisms in various ADME-associated genes. We have sub- published data. Therefore, there is no evidence of genetic variability in the sequently used these assays to determine the allele frequencies of these coding region of AANATgene that may explain the extreme differences in polymorphisms in four defined populations. The information presented sleep pattern. More studies are being conducted to examine the promoter here will be a valuable aid to the further understanding of population dif- regions for AANAT. ferences in this important area of research.Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 267 P0853. Segregation Analyses of Asthma and Respiratory model for this trait admitting MH without ruling out polygenes and environ- Allergy; The Humboldt Family Study mental influence. Y. Chen1, A. Schnell2, D. Rennie3, R. Elston2, L. Lockinger3, J. Dosman3 1University of Ottawa; Ottawa, ON Canada; 2Case Western Reserve Uni- P0856.Analysis of the modifying effects of TAP1 and TAP2 versity; Cleveland, United States; 3University of Saskatchewan; Saska- genes on Cystic Fibrosis phenotype toon, Canada F. Ozbas Gerceker1, U. Ozcelik2, D. Anadol2, N. Kiper2, A. Gocmen2, E. chen@zeus.med.uottawa.ca Yilmaz3, H. Erdem Yurter3, M. Ozguc1 We performed segregation analyses of asthma and respiratory allergy 1TUBITAK DNA/Cell Bank & Gene Research Laboratory; Ankara, Turkey; based on data from 309 nuclear families comprising 1,053 individuals liv- 2Hacettepe University Medical School Pediatric Chest Disease Unit; ing in the town of Humboldt, Saskatchewan in 1993, using the REGD pro- Ankara, Turkey; 3Hacettepe University Medical School Department of Med- gram of the S.A.G.E. program package. For adults, information on asthma ical Biology; Ankara, Turkey and history of respiratory allergy was provided by the subjects themselves, ozbas@hacettepe.edu.tr and for children by their parents. When asthma was considered as the trait Cystic Fibrosis is an autosomal recessively inherited genetic disease in segregation analysis, models of no major effect, with or without familial which results from the mutations in the gene encoding Cystic Fibrosis effects, were rejected, but were not rejected after adjusting for history of Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR)protein. It is important to respiratory allergy. The major gene hypothesis was not rejected before analyze the modulating and modifying effects on phenotype since we have adjusting for history of respiratory allergy. When respiratory allergy was genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity among patients. In our study, we analysed as the trait, both major gene and multifactorial models fitted the investigated TAP1 and TAP2 gene polymorphisms in CF. The TAPgenes data well regardless of whether there was adjustment for asthma or not. (transporter associated with antigen processing) encode two membrane- Other covariates adjusted for in the segregation analyses were age, sex, spanning ABC proteins that translocate antigenic peptides from the cyto- number of household smokers, current smoking, number of household plasm into the endoplasmic reticulum. TAP1 and 2 genes are localized members, generation, and house type. The data suggest that a major gene within the MHC class II region. Polymorphisms in the TAPgenes are asso- related to respiratory allergy may explain the familial aggregation of asth- ciated with the specificity of the binding of antigenic peptides. Comparison ma. of 58 CF patients whose CFTR mutations were determined previously and 100 Turkish controls revealed a significant increase in the Ala/Ala dimor- P0854.GLN223ARG SNPin the leptin receptor gene; studies phism at position 665 of TAP2 gene in CF patients as compared to con- in anorexia trols (p<0.025). Furthermore, Gly phenotype at position 637 of TAP1 gene A. I. F. Blakemore1, N. D. Quinton1, D. W. Meechan1, L. F. Pieri2, K. M. O. was seen in CF patients in a significantly higher ratio (p<0.05). Brown3, H. Eastwood3 1Sheffield Hallam University; Sheffield, United Kingdom; 2Yorkshire Centre P0857. Apolipoprotein E genotypes in a Turkish Population for Eating Disorders; Leeds, United Kingdom; 3University of Leeds; Leeds, with renal disease; Preliminary findings United Kingdom A. Be?er1, H. Sar2, R. Bircan1, S. Manay1, M. Ko2, I. Gney1, . zen- a.i.blakemore@shu.ac.uk er2, B. rako?lu1 Leptin, a cytokine expressed and secreted by the adipose tissue, is 1Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Dept. of Medical Biol. & Genet- involved in the regulation of body weight. Leptin levels in subjects with ics; ?stanbul, Turkey; 2Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Internal anorexia nervosa are low, although the correlation with body mass index is Medicine Nephrology Department; ?stanbul, Turkey still evident. We, and others, have shown an association between the lep- arbeser@hotmail.com tin receptor SNP, GLN223ARG, and fat mass, body mass index (BMI) and Background; Apolipoprotein E plays an important role in regulation of cho- leptin levels. The aim of this study was to determine if this association lesterol and lipid metabolism. This study is performed to investigate the could be found in young female, Caucasian control subjects and if differ- APO E allele genotypes in Turkish population and to determine the asso- ences in allele frequency existed in female Caucasian subjects with ciation among the APO E genotype, serum cholesterol levels, blood lipid anorexia nervosa. 175 subjects with anorexia nervosa (divided into binge- profile and renal disease in a population of 286 people including 186 end ing/purging and restricting anorexics) were recruited from the Yorkshire stage renal disease patients (100 on hemodialysis and 86 on chronic Centre for Eating Disorders at Seacroft Hospital. 145 controls were recruit- ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD))and 100 control cases. Methods; ed from the University of Leeds. In both cohorts, allele frequencies for The APO E genotypes are investigated with polymerase chain reaction. GLN223ARG, did not differ significantly from published frequencies (A Amplified DNAfragments are digested with Hha I enzyme and analyzed allele 0.61 and 0.56, G allele 0.39 and 0.44, in anorexia and control cohorts with %4 agarose gel electrophoresis. Trigliseride and total cholesterol lev- respectively). There was no significant difference in genotype frequency els are determined by enzymatic colorimetric assay and HDLby homoge- between the control and the anorexic cohorts or between restricting and nous enzymatic colorimetric assay. VLDL, LDLand body mass index are bingeing subjects with anorexia. The previously published association calculated. Results; The results of apolipoprotein E genotyping obtained in between BMI and genotype was not observed in either cohort. This may 55 patients are; 20 analyzed in the CAPD group;4 E2/E2, 12 E3/E3, 1 strengthen the existing evidence that this association is only observed in E4/E4, 1 E2/E3, 1 E2/E4, 1 E3/E4; 15 analyzed in the hemodialysis older middle-aged males and postmenopausal subjects. group;11 E3/E3, 4 E3/E4; 20 analyzed in the control group;15 E3/E3, 3 E2/E3, 2 E3/E4. Conclusion; Recording of the biochemical data is com- P0855.Segregation Analysis (sa) Of Heart Rate (hr) plete but the number of subjects whose APO E genotypes have been M. B. Bravo-Luna, C. A. R. Marcon, I. R. Tunkieviez, B. M. Perez determined is not sufficient to make statistical calculations. After comple- Faculty of Medicine; Rosario, Argentina tion of genotyping, the APO E genotypes will be correlated with the cho- mbravoluna@hotmail.com lesterol levels, lipid profile and the body mass index. Finally the distribution Genetic variation, important feature regarding any trait is desirable. In of APO E alleles between the normal population and the patients with hypertension loss of heart rate (HR) variability leads to poor prognosis. HR, ESRD will be evaluated. semiquantitative discrete trait, regulated by the ANS, is involved in blood pressure (BP) regulation, which is admitted that is genetically determined, P0858. Glutation S-transferase polymorfism in populations although the mechanism is controversial, due to the many regulation com- with different ethnisity. ponents. There are papers supporting the BPMendelian inheritance (MH) S. N. Popova, P. Slominsky hypothesis, though mixed models admitting the involvement of polygenes Institute of Molecular Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation and environmental influences are more appropriate. We have published popova@img.ras.ru (Med Hypotheses(2000)54(2)307-9 a hypothesis considering the probable The glutation S-transferase (GST) are widely expressed in mammalian tis- MH of HR. Objective; To demonstrate through SAmethods HR-MH. Meth- sues and involved in phase II detoxification reactions. The GST form a ods; 544 individuals (148 pedigrees) were monitored, in basal and compa- supergene family consisting of four distinct families, named alpha (GSTA), rable conditions, during 5 minutes in 3 different occasions. Data were mu (GSTM), theta (GSTT) and pi (GSTP). Several of GSTare polymorphic entered in an ad hoc software to perform SA, mixed model of Morton- in humans. Among the GSTgenes we examined GSTT1 and GSTM1 poly- Maclean, taking into account 15 parameters to be analysed through 11 pro- morphism in some populations from Russian Federation; Russians from posed models, estimating [-2Ln (LH)] (log. likelihood ratio), in a most par- Holmogory and Oshevensk (Arkchangelsk region) and three populations simonious model. Heritability (H2) (regression coefficient) and D2 with different level of Mongoloid component; Chant, Kalmyk and Buryat. [D2=H2+(1-H2)R2], variance proportion of the trait measuring genetic and We observed that frequency of GSTM1 null genotype are significantly non-genetic factors, were estimated. Results [X2;d.f.;p;H2;D2], Mendelian higher in Chant, Kalmyk and Buryat than in Russians from Arkchangelsk model, transmissibility set free; 3.586;2;n.s.;0.60;0.70, proved the best reg. For GSTT1 gene null genotype frequency was statistically higher for268 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics Kalmyk (p=0,03), but in Chant and Buryat it was similar as in Russians onase gene (PON1) due to an A-> G substitution at amino acid position from Arkchangelsk region. Frequency GSTM1 (0/0), GSTT1 (0/0) in sum 192, which has been found associated with cardiovascular diseases, for Kalmyk was 18%, there as in other populations it wasnt bigger than though with conflicting results. Agroup of late-onset sporadic AD patients 5%. Comparing Mongoloid populations with Russians using Chi squred-cri- and a group of patients with CAD were studied in order to compare the terium and G-statistic one can see that Kalmyk population mostly varies results between them and with normal subjects. Most of the patients were from Russians populations, and differences between Chant, Buryat and ultraoctuagenarians. Significant differences in the allele frequencies Russians are less expressed. We can note that population differences are between patient groups and correspondent controls were observed. In par- more conditioned by difference in GSTT1 genotype frequency. Gene ticular the AD patients aged ? 80 (n= 152) showed a frequency of the GSTM1 has less marked divergence in populations, and this gene fre- PON1*Q allele significantly higher than the control group (0.832 vs 0.741, quencies hardly vary for Oshevensk, Holmogory and Chant populations. p = 0.003). Also CAD patients aged ? 80 (n=56) had a PON1*Q allele fre- quency (0.848) higher than their controls (0.743) (p=0.04). ACAD patient P0859.The TNFRSF6 gene is not implicated in familial early- group aged < 80 (n= 144) showed an opposite pattern with an PON1*R onset Alzheimers disease allele frequency (0.260) significantly higher than their controls (0.154) J. Theuns1, L. Feuk2, M. Cruts1, J. Del-Favero1, B. Dermaut1, G. Roks3, D. (p=0.01), confirming the previously reported association of PON1 *R allele Van den Bossche1, E. Corsmit1, M. Van den Broeck1, C. M. van Duijn3, A. with CAD. In summary our data suggest that the association of PON1*Q Brookes2, C. Van Broeckhoven1 with both AD and CAD is peculiar to ultraoctuagenarian patients. 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Antwerp (UIA); Antwerpen, Belgium; P0862. The dynamics of congenital malformations in Tomsk 2Center for Genomics Research, Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, Sweden; region according the results of 20-years epidemiological 3Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical research School; Rotterdam, The Netherlands N. Kricunova, L. Nazarenko theuns@uia.ua.ac.be Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation The tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 6 (TNFRSF6) kricunova@img.tsu.ru gene encoding FAS, a cell-surface receptor involved in apoptosis initiation, The variation of structure and frequencies of congenital malformations was recently reported to constitute a genetic risk factor for early-onset (CM) in Tomsk region during the 20- years period of monitoring (1979  Alzheimers disease (EOAD). Dynamic allele-specific hybridization (DASH) 1998) has been analysed. Epidemiological study has revealed the cyclic analysis of the 670 G/Apolymorphism showed enrichment of the homozy- character of the CM frequency fluctuation in range from 13,9 to 35,2, gous GG-genotype in Scottish sporadic EOAD cases, almost completely with the mean 23,65. Significant increasing in the frequency of overall attributable to enrichment within the subset of APOE4 carriers (Feuk et CM spectrum has been disclosed (from 22,8 up 26, P<0,01). The sum- al.,2000). In this study, we analyzed the promoter polymorphism in a Dutch mary frequency of the isolated forms of CM has increased significantly, but population-based EOAD case-control sample, using the same technique, the frequencies of multiple CM and Downs syndrome have decreased. but could not detect a significant disease association. Thus our study does The average frequency of 19 forms of CM registered according the Euro- not reinforce the hypothesis of an independent involvement of the pean register EUROCAThas been estimated as 14,2, not differing from TNFRSF6 -670 G/Apolymorphism in AD risk. In this study we also com- the basic level of CM. In CM structure, the most frequent were the defects pared the reliability of DASH and pyrosequencing analysis and demon- of osteomuscular system, multiple CM, nervous system, cardiovascular strated the robustness of the two techniques by genomic sequencing. system, face and neck. Regarding the separate CM forms, the most fre- quent were congenital heart defects, Down syndrome, hydrocephaly and P0860. The frequencies of chemokine receptor CCR5 poly- hypospadia. morphisms affecting susceptibility to human immunodefi- ciency virus (HIV) and the rate of progression to AIDS in P0863. Epidemiological data about birth defects in Urals Kuwaitis region (Russia, Ekaterinburg) A. Voevodin M. Devaikina1, N. Demikova2, G. Pavlov1, E. Nikolaeva1, I. Sklyar1, N. Faculty of Medicine; Kuwait University, Kuwait Nikitina1 voevodin@hsc.kuniv.edu.kw 1Medico-Genetic Center; Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Chemokine receptor CCR5 serves as the major co-receptor for HIV-1. Sev- pediatria and child surgery; Moscow, Russian Federation eral polymorphisms in the CCR5 gene are known to affect the susceptibil- gvp@online.ural.ru ity/resistance to HIV-1 and/or the rate of progression to AIDS. The fre- Since 1992 birth defects of newborns have been registered in Urals quencies of these polymorphisms as well as their infection/disease modi- region. fying effect vary in different populations. Most of the data available in this Since 1999 International Clearinghouse for Birth Defects Monitoring Sys- field were obtained in the studies of Americans of various ethnic/racial ori- tem was introduced into practice. 21 birth defects are due to be registered. gin. Very little in this respect is known about Arabic populations. We stud- Multiple sources of information are registration forms from maternal hous- ied the frequencies of two CCR5 gene polymorphisms; m303 and 59029- es, child clinics, pathology departments. A/G in Kuwaitis. The genotyping for both polymorphisms was carried out From 1992 to 2000 348075 newborns were borne in the region, and 6161 by PCR-RFLPtests. The m303 allele was not found in any of 230 Kuwait- of them had birth defects. Frequency of birth defects was 17 in 1000 births is genotyped for this marker (the allele frequency is less that 0.002). The (1,7%). frequency of protective allele 59029-G in Kuwaitis (0.66, no. of chromo- The structure of birth defects diagnoses; hearts defects  21%, neural somes = 266) was higher than that in other populations for which the fre- tube defects 13%, defects of musculoskeletal system  10%, defects of quencies of the allele have been reported. The modifying effect of 59029- urinary system  9%, multiple congenital anomalies  8%. A/G genotype as well as two other genetic markers associated with slow- In 1999 35877 newborns were borne, and 1161 of them had birth defects. er progression to AIDS (CCR2-64I and SDF-3A) is being investigated in Frequency of birth defects was 32 in 1000 births ( 3,2%). The structure of HIV-infected Kuwaitis. Acknowledgement. This study was supported birth defects diagnoses; hearts defects  25%, defects of musculoskele- Research Grant MI 120 from Kuwait University. tal system - 15%, neural tube defects  12%, multiple congenital anomalies  11%, defects of urinary system 8%. P0861. Association of paraoxonase Gln -Arg 192 polymor- Frequency of some birth defects in 1999; anencephaly  0,6 in 1000, spina phism with late-onset sporadic Alzheimers disease and coro- bifida  1,2 in 1000, hydrocephaly  1,6 in 1000, cleft lip with or without nary artery disease in ultraoctuagenarians. cleft palate  1,2 in 1000, polydactyly  1,6 in 1000, anotia and microtia  R. Corbo1, G. Gambina2, T. Vilardo3, L. De Bernardini4, R. Scacchi5 0,8 in 1000, total Uml reduction defects  0,3 in 1000, Down syndrome  1Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University La Sapienza; Rome, 1,3 in 1000 births. Italy; 2Division of Neurology, Hospital; Verona, Italy; 3Surgery for the Pre- For drawing well- grounded conclusion about epidemiology of congenital vention of the Vascular and Metabolic Diseases, S. Giovanni Hospital; anomalies, its necessary to monitor birth defects during next two years. Rome, Italy; 4Geriatric Hospital Villa delle Querce; Rome, Italy; 5CNR Center of Evolutionary Genetics; Rome, Italy P0864. Polymorphism of Apo AI-CIII Gene Cluster in Korean Corbo@axcasp.caspur.it Essential Hypertensives Recent advances suggest a possible relationship between Alzheimers dis- J. Shin1, B. Kang2, K. Kim2, C. Lee1 ease (AD) and atherosclerosis. This makes interesting to examine the 1School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University; Seoul, Republic coronary artery disease (CAD) candidate gene polymorphisms in AD too. of Korea; 2Seoulin Bioscience Institute, Seoulin Bioscience, Co., Ltd.; In the present investigation we examined a polymorphism in the paraox- Seoul, Republic of KoreaPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 269 nariann77@yahoo.com diabetes type I, inflammatory process takes place in the pancreas. In the The apolipoprotein AI and CIII (apo AI and CIII) play an important role in present study we have determined the frequency of the ccr5delta32 allele the metabolism of plasma lipoproteins and lipids. The apo AI-CIII gene in diabetes type I (n=38; age 15-62, average 34,5y) and diabetes type II cluster is located in chromosome 11q23 and more than 20 different RFLPs (n=113; age 42-77, average 63,3y) patients. In control group of healthy, have been described in this gene cluster. To search for a useful genetic unrelated native Estonians (n=504; age 14-94; average 54y) the marker for the essential hypertension in Korean population, the distribution ccr5delta32 allele frequency was 0,148. In diabetes type II cohort and in of two restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLPs) of the apo AI-CIII diabetes type I group the deleted allele frequency was 0,106 and 0,141 gene cluster and their association on essential hypertension was investi- respectively (p>0,05). Results indicated, that the deleted allele of the gated in total 163 Korean individuals. The distribution of the genotypes of CCR5 receptor gene has no significant association with disease frequen- all the RFLPs was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in this population. the G- cy in both types of diabetes. In the case of type I diabetes there was a sig- 75?Apolymorphism of the apo AI gene was significantly associated with nificant (p<0,05) difference in the onset time and duration of the disease essential hypertension in Korean population (P<0.05). Therefore, this being earlier and longer in the wild-type homozygotes compared to result suggest that the G-75?Apolymorphism of the apo AI gene may be ccr5delta32 heterozygotes. In the type I diabetes the analysis of the corre- useful as a genetic marker for essential hypertension in Korean population. lation between clinical signs and ccr5delta32 genotype is in progress. P0865. Apolipoprotein E Genotypes And Diabetic Retinopa- P0868. Genetic Susceptibility To The Evolution Of Liver Dis- thy In Iddm Patients ease; Chronic Hepatitis C Model N. S. Shcherbak1, A. Stroykova2, E. Schwartz1 C. Gritti1, L. Sonzogni1, L. Silvestri1, L. Rossi1, E. Civardi1, E. M. Silini2 1St.Petersburg State Medical University; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- 1Associazione Studio Avanzato Epatiti Virali (ASAEV); Bonate Sotto (BG), tion; 2St.Petersburg Diabetic Center; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation Italy; 2Department of Pathology, University and IRCCS S. Matteo; Pavia, nshch@yahoo.com Italy Apolipoprotein E (apoE) was discovered as a plasma protein involved in asaev@tin.it lipoprotein metabolism. There are three common variants of apoE, result- The association between gene polymorphisms affecting drug metaboliz- ing from common genetic variation, called E2, E3 and E4. Three-allelic ing enzymes (DMEs) activity and chronic hepatitis C severity was studied variation in the apolipoprotein-E (APOE) gene have been suggested as by univariate and multivariate analysis. Two classes of DMEs genes were risk factors for the development of diabetic micro- and macrovascular com- considered; phase I enzymes involved in oxidative metabolism (CYP2E1, plications. We investigated the association between APOE genotypes and CYP2D6) and phase II enzymes involved in conjugation of toxic com- development diabetic retinopathy by case-control study in a Russian pop- pounds (GSTM1, GSTT1, Epoxide Hydrolase-EPHX). Polymorphisms ulation. We studied 76 type 1 diabetic patients with diabetic retinopathy were screened on cohort of 400 anti-HCV+ Italian patients divided into four (34/42 m/f, age (mean+/-SD) 30+/-10 years, diabetes duration 18+/-8 groups; asymptomatic carriers, chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocel- years) and 96 patients without diabetic retinopathy (50/46 m/f, age 25+/-8 lular carcinoma (HCC) patients. Acohort of 100 healthy subjects was con- years, diabetes duration 16+/-6 years). APOE polymorphisms were detect- sidered as reference category. Inherited differences in several DMEs activ- ed by the restriction fragment lenght polymorphism method after a poly- ities were found to be significantly associate with liver disease expression. merase chain reaction. No did APOE allele frequencies In particular, high activity phase I enzymes variants and low activity phase (epsilon2/epsilon3/epsilon4) differ between diabetic patients with and with- II enzyme alleles occurred more frequently among subjects with advanced out retinopathy; 0.138/0.776/0.086 vs 0.099/0.802/0.099, respectively. liver disease. This effect was more pronounced in males and considering Genotype distributions were also similar, n.s. No associations between dia- extreme patient categories (carriers and cirrhosis/HCC). Two multivariate betic retinopathy and APOE polymorphisms were observed. These results analysis techniques (logistic regression and correspondence analysis) suggest that APOE genotype are not assosiated with the development dia- were used to model the unconfounded contribution of these genetic traits betic retinopathy in patients with IDDM in a Russian population. and their interaction, controlling for known variables of liver disease pro- gression (age, sex, HCV genotype and alcohol consumption). An inde- P0866. Genetics of Human Female Pelvic Morphology and pendent and synergistic effect in predicting cirrhosis and/or HCC was Menarcheal Status; a Twin Study observed for two characters, EPHX T113H homozygosity, and CYP2D6 K. Sharma EM phenotype. Genetic epidemiology techniques may provide clinically Department of Anthropology, Panjab University; Chandigarh, India meaningful information useful for the dissection of complex disease traits neelamkuki@usa.net such as those involved in chronic hepatitis C progression. To examine the relative role of genetic and environmental factors on pelvic morphology and menarcheal status, data on 60 pairs of female twins (30 P0869. Risk of osteoporosis in carriers of 9G>C polymor- MZ and 30 DZ) were analyzed. Various pelvic mesurements were normal- phism in osteoprotegerin (OPG) gene. ly distributed except for two of sixteen instances. Association of twin type R. Slomski1, R. Kalak2, W. Horst-Sikorska3, D. Baszko-Blaszyk3 with the mean value was found in only one out of eight traits, which might 1Institute of Human Genetics; Poznan, Poland; 2Department of Biochem- be attributed to type 1 error. Heterogeneity of variance between zygosities istry and Biotechnology; Poznan, Poland; 3Endocrinology Clinics, Medical was observed for four pelvic traits (50%) suggesting considerable amount School; Poznan, Poland of hidden environmental influence. No evidence of stronger environmental slomski@au.poznan.pl covariance for MZ than DZ twins was observed. Significant genetic com- Scanning of the 5 exons of OPG gene was performed for 85 patients with ponent of variation was observed for pelvic height, bi-ischeal breadth, age osteoporosis or osteopenia. PCR-HD and PCR-SSCPanalyses of genom- at menarche and pelvic area. In instnces where inequality of variances ic DNArevealed 6 polymorphisms localized in the intronic region and one between zygosities were demonstrated, total among pair and within pair polymorphism in exon 1. Five of these different polymorphic variants were mean squares were larger for dizygotic than for monozygotic twins. This is substitutions; IVS1+15C>T, IVS2+4C>T, IVS3-5C>T, IVS4-24C>A, interpreted as evidence of greater environmental influence between IVS4+8A>C and one was a 2 bp deletion; IVS3+46delTC. One polymor- zygosities. Environmental modification shawing phenotypic plasticity was phism, 9G>C, detected in exon 1 resulted in a change in the encoded not of same magnitude in various pelvic traits thus indicating differential amino acid from positively charged lysine to neutral asparagine and was selection pressures. Similar differences were observed in the magnitude of previously observed in cDNAclones. Because this polymorphism affects cultural inheritance. conserved region of the osteoprotegerin signal peptide and could influence of secreted protein, we studied the polymorphic allele frequencies in the P0867. CC - chemokine receptor CCR5 gene polymorphism patient and control population and looked for evidence of association analysis in diabetes type I and type II patients in Estonia. between the polymorphism and osteoporosis. The change 9G>C does not I. Kalev1, K. Oselin1, P. Prlist1, T. Podar2, A. Mikelsaar1 create a new restriction site, and therefore PCR-SSCPanalysis was used 1University of Tartu; Tartu, Estonia; 2Clinicum of Tartu University, Depart- to determine allele status, by comparison with sequenced control samples. ment of Endocrinology; Tartu, Estonia First, we observed that genotype distribution was in Hardy-Weinberg equi- ingridk@ut.ee librium for control population (CC=23/97, GC=45/97, GG=29/97, c2=0.458, Chemokines are small chemotactic proteines, that mediate innate and df=2, p=0.79) we then determined OPG genotype distribution for patients adaptive immune responses and inflammatory processes through the G- with severe osteoporosis; CC=13/56, GC=36/56, GG=7/56. The genotype protein-coupled receptors. Previous studies have shown, that the temporal and allele frequencies in a combined group of 85 patients with osteoporo- expression of certain CC-chemokines and the CCR5 chemokine receptor sis or osteopenia revealed CC=25/85, GC=47/85 and GG=13/85. There in the pancreas is associated with the development of the insulitis and were no significant differences in lumbar spine BMD for groups of osteo- spontaneous type I diabetes. It is known, that some time before onset of porotic women and men with different genotypes but genotypes with allele270 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics C were over-represented in patients with severe osteoporosis as com- P0872. Factor VII promoter decanucleotide insert polymor- pared with population group (c2 =5.69, df=1, p<0.02). This is equivalent to phism not associated with decreased Factor VII activity in odds ratio for osteoporosis of 2.99 for individuals who carry allele C (95% African American confidence interval 1.20-7.42). Significant differences in combined group of A. Ratti1, R. Kudaravalli1, T. Tidd1, R. Santacroce2, M. Margaglione2, M. patients with severe osteoporosis or osteopenia, as compared with popu- Devoto3, P. Fortina1, E. S. Pollak1 lation group (c2 =5.31, df=1, p<0.025), was also observed (odds ratio 2.36, 1University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 2IRCCS Casa 95% confidence interval 1.13-4.94). Sollievo della Sofferenza; San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 3duPont Hospital for Children; Wilmington, DE United States P0870.Familial Aggregation of Quantitative Traits for Insulin fortina@mail.med.upenn.edu Resistance; The IRAS Family Study Factor VII is a procoagulant protein that initiates blood clotting with its S. S. Rich1, J. Norris2, M. Saad3, S. Haffner4, L. Henkin1, D. Zaccaro1, L. cofactor Tissue Factor. Polymorphic variations in the Factor VII (FVII) gene Wagenknecht1, R. Bergman5 correlate with cardiovascular disease risk in both familial and non-familial 1Wake Forest University School of Medicine; Winston-Salem, NC United studies. The FVII A2 allele contains a 10 nt insert (CCTATATCTTat -323 in States; 2University of Colorado Health Sciences Center; Denver, CO Unit- the FVII promoter where +1 is the start of translation) and occurs in 10- ed States; 3UCLA School of Medicine; Los Angeles, CA United States; 20% of the population. The A2 allele is associated with a 15-30% 4University of Texas Health Sciences Center; San Antonio, TX United decreased FVII level per allele. Two additional SNPs at -122(C/T) and - States; 5USC School of Medicine; Los Angeles, CAUnited States 401(G/A) have been reported to occur in complete linkage disequilibrium srich@wfubmc.edu with the decanucleotide insert in the Italian population. In vitro assays have Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a complex disease with strong familial aggre- previously shown a significantly decreased FVII promoter strength of the gation but relatively low genetic risk (?s ~ 2). The strongest risk factors for A2 compared to the A1 allele and have further shown that this requires the type 2 diabetes include family history, obesity and factors associated with concurrent presence of the -122 and -401 polymorphisms. Using both DNA insulin resistance and -cell dysfunction, each of which may be mediated sequence analysis and the Nanogen NanoChipTM, we analyzed 28 in part by genetic factors. The IRAS Family Study characterizes important African-American individuals for the presence of the -401/ -323/ and -122 diabetes-related traits with respect to their familial aggregation and, ulti- polymorphisms. Twenty-eight percent were found to have a new allele con- mately, linkage to polymorphic DNAmarkers, in African-American (AA) and taining the -401 and -323 but not the -122 polymorphisms. The average Hispanic-American (HA) families. FVII level in individuals with this allele was similar to that with the A1 allele Atotal of 61 families (22 AAand 39 HA) comprising 650 individuals with whereas the combined -401/-323/-122 allele showed the expected signifi- phenotypic data were used for these analyses. Frequently sampled intra- cant 30% decrease in Factor VII levels. In summary, we have shown in vivo venous glucose tolerance tests (FSIGT) were performed on eligible sub- that the decanucleotide insert in the absence of the -122 polymorphism jects and analyzed using the minimal model to obtain estimates of insulin does not alone cause a decrease in Factor VII coagulant levels. sensitivity (SI), glucose effectiveness (SG) and insulin secretion (acute insulin response to glucose, AIR). The disposition index (DI), a measure of P0873. Mutations in Kringle IV-2 of the human apolipopro- insulin resistance-corrected  -cell function, was also derived (DI = tein(a) gene AIR*SI), as was the HOMAmeasure (HOMA=fasting insulin*fasting glu- H. G. Kraft1, W. Parson2, H. Niedersttter2, A. Lingenhel1, S. Kchl2, F. cose/22.5). Variance components analyses were employed to estimate Fresser1, G. Utermann1 familial aggregation (heritability, h2) using the SOLAR software package. 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria; After adjustment for age, sex, race and BMI, h2estimates were SI; 19 +8% 2Institute of Legal Medicine; Innsbruck, Austria (p < 0.001); SG; 19 +11% (p < 0.02); AIR; 5 +8% (p = 0.26); DI; 4 +7% hans-georg.kraft@uibk.ac.at (p = 0.29); and HOMA; 15 + 9% (p < 0.03). These results suggest that The identification of mutations in one of many large identical repeated there is modest heritability for SIand SGas diabetes-related quantitative sequences requires special strategies because the detection of the muta- traits in this population. tion is hindered by the background of a high number of unchanged sequences. We have applied a brute force approach to detect mutations in P0871. Hsp70 polymorphism and HLA-DR diversity; Implica- the 5.6 kb Kringle IV type 2 domain of human apolipoprotein(a) which is tions for tuberculosis susceptibility in the Cape Coloured present in 2 up to > 40 almost identical copies in individual alleles and is population of South Africa responsible for the size polymorphism of the protein. The procedure con- T. Boshoff1, A. E. Brune1, E. G. Hoal van Helden2, L. Bornman1 sisted of isolation of a single apo(a) allele from a heterozygote by PFGE, 1Biochemistry Division, Rand Afrikaans University; Auckland Park, South two independent amplifications by PCR, cloning of the amplicons and final- Africa; 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Stellenbosch; ly sequencing of a number (93) of clones high enough to represent by Tygerberg, South Africa chance most individual repeats. The application of this strategy to an Tuberculosis (TB) being one of the leading causes of death from infectious apo(a) allele with 26 K-IV-2 repeats yielded the following results; i) K-IV disease in the world, is also a major problem in the Cape Coloured popu- types 2Aand 2B were both detected in 74 % of the analyzed clones, ii) the lation in the Western Cape of South Africa. Multiple genes influence sus- ratio of 2A;2B was different from the published cDNAsequence, iii) an ceptibility to TB. HLAclass II polymorphisms have been associated with additional K IV type 2 (designated K IV 2C) was detected in 5 % of the susceptibility to inflammatory diseases, but linkage disequilibrium of alleles clones iv) in addition different mutations (4 silent, 2 nonsense and 5 mis- in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complicates identification of sense ) were detected, and v) all mutations were detected in the first exon disease-associated genes. Genes encoding members of the 70 kDa heat of the K-IV structure and none in the second. The bona fide nature of one shock protein (HSP)family (Hsp70) are localised within the MHC. In the non-sense mutation was supported by the finding that the corresponding light of the protective role of Hsp70 in infection and immunity it is hypothe- isoform was smaller than predicted by K IV-2 repeat number and by an sized that Hsp70 polymorhisms may contribute to disease susceptibility. independent PCR procedure based on genomic DNA. These results Possible linkage disequilibrium of hsp70 alleles with HLA-DR alleles might demonstrate a higher than anticipated sequence heterogeneity in K IV-2 of lead to extended haplotypes which might act as additive TB susceptibility apo(a). markers. Hsp70 gene polymorphism (hsp70-1, hsp70-2, hsp70-Hom and the polymorphic PstI site within the coding region of hsp70-2) and HLA P0874. Heritability of Coronary Artery Calcium in Families class II DR polymorphisms were investigated in the Cape Coloured popu- with Type 2 Diabetes lation inhabiting the Western Cape of South Africa. Polymorphic analysis of D. W. Bowden, L. E. Wagenknecht, J. J. Carr, C. D. Langefeld, B. I. hsp70 and HLA-DR genes was performed on genomic DNAfrom patients Freedman, S. S. Rich suffering from TB (n=60) and matched control subjects (n=61) using PCR- Wake Forest University School of Medicine; Winston-Salem, NC United RFLPand PCR-SSPrespectively. Preliminary results showed no evidence States for an independent role of hsp70 gene polymorphism in susceptibility to TB dbowden@wfubmc.edu while DR3 (DRB1*0301-0302) and DR53 (DRB4*0101) were present at a Type 2 diabetes is a major risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis- higher frequency (p=0.068 and p=0.034 respectively) in TB patients, and ease. Subclinical atherosclerosis, measured as coronary artery calcifica- DR12 (DRB1*1201-1203) in control subjects (p=0.028). An additional num- tion (CAC), depends on both genetic and environmental factors. To evalu- ber of 300-400 cases and controls are currently analysed to meet statisti- ate evidence for genetic factors (familial aggregation) contributing to vari- cal standards and to investigate linkage disequilibrium of HLA-DR and ation in CAC, we studied 122 type 2 diabetics and 13 nondiabetics (medi- hsp70 alleles. An improved understanding of the underlying mechanisms an age 59 years; range 38-80) in 56 families. CAC was measured by fast- contributing to tuberculosis susceptibility may open new avenues in the gated helical computed tomography. Other measured atherosclerotic risk development of novel therapeutic approaches. factors included blood pressure, body size, lipids, HbA1c, and medical his-Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 271 tory. Generalized estimating equations were used to test for association E4 is also a risk factor for AD in Iranian population. between CAC and the risk factors while accounting for underlying correla- tion due to family membership. CAC was detectable in 80% of patients with P0877. CCR5 and CCR2 gene polymorphisms in essential diabetes (median score = 84, range 0 - 5776). CAC, adjusted for age, was hypertension associated with male gender (p=0.0003), reduced HDL(p=0.02), albumin- V. Romano-Spica1, M. Mettimano2, A. Ianni1, A. Migneco2, D. Arzani1, L. creatinine ratio (p=0.008), and cigarette pack-years (p=0.03). CAC was Savi2 associated with history of angina, myocardial infarction, stroke and vascu- 1Inst. of Hygiene and Public Health (Dir. Prof. G.C. Vanini), Catholic Uni- lar procedure (all p<0.005). HbA1c (p=0.14) and fasting glucose (p=0.08) versity Medical School; Rome, Italy; 2Hypertension Center, Dept. of Inter- were positively, but non-significantly associated with CAC. After adjust- nal Medicine, Catholic University Medical School; Rome, Italy ment for age, sex, race and diabetes status, CAC was significantly herita- vrs@rm.unicatt.it ble (h2 = 0.50; p=0.009). In multivariate analysis with additional adjustment Blood pressure is a common trait of multifactorial origin. Evidence indi- for HDL, BMI, hypertension, and smoking, the residual heritability cates that the immune system plays a role in the development of hyper- remained significant (h2 = 0.40; p=0.038). These results suggest that tension in both animal models and humans. Genes for CC-chemokine genetic factors, independent of known risk factors for atherosclerosis, con- receptor (CCR) 5 and CCR2 map to human chromosome 3p21.3, within a tribute to the variance of CAC in type 2 diabetes and that searching for cluster of 350 kb. A32-bp deletion in the CCR5 gene (CCR5D32) and a G- QTLs for CAC will be an important phenotype for mapping genes for ath- to-Apoint mutation in the CCR2 gene (CCR264I) have been first associat- erosclerosis and type 2 diabetes. ed to resistance to HIV-1 infection and recently involved in several immuno-related disorders. In the present study we evaluated allelic distri- P0875. Estimation of individual admixture in Trinidad; appli- bution of CCR5 and CCR2 genes in essential hypertension through a cation to a case-control study of systemic lupus erythemato- case-control study. Genotype frequency was compared between a group sus (SLE) of essential hypertensive patients (stage I-II; n=53) and a group of Cau- M. Molokhia1, A. L. Patrick2, M. Shriver3, E. Parra3, J. Ye3, A. J. Silman4, casian unrelated healthy subjects (n=340). Case selection was made by P. McKeigue1 means of strict clinical evaluation and careful laboratory investigation, 1London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine; London, United Kingdom; according to international guidelines. Genomic DNA was isolated from 2Kavanagh Street Clinic; Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago; 3Dept Anthro- peripheral blood cells, and gene polymorphisms were analyzed by poly- pology, Penn State University; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 4ARC Epi- merase chain reaction (CCR5) and restriction enzyme analysis after ampli- demiology Research Unit; Manchester, United Kingdom fication (CCR2). Chi-square analysis and Fishers exact tests were used to mariam.molokhia@lshtm.ac.uk compare data between cases and controls and test for conformity to the Objective: To distinguish between genetic and environmental explanations Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. A statistically significant difference was for high risk of SLE in west Africans compared with Europeans by studying observed for CCR5 and CCR2 mutant alleles in essential hypertensive the relation of risk to individual admixture. patients in comparison with controls (p<0.01). Both CCR5D32 and Methods: Cases of SLE and controls were sampled from an admixed pop- CCR264I alleles showed a 0.11 frequency among cases. Genotype distri- ulation in Trinidad. The first 63 cases and 90 controls were typed with a set bution was in equilibrium among cases and controls, according to the of 26 SNPs chosen to have large frequency differentials between the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Our results suggest an association between parental populations (west African, European and Native American). Indi- polymorphisms at CCR genes and essential hypertension. vidual admixture was estimated in a Bayesian analysis using Markov chain simulation. P0878. Interaction between allelic variants of Cystathionine Results: Mean admixture of the population was estimated as 51% west beta synthase (CBS) and Metilenetetrahydrofolate reductase African, [95%CI 46%-56%]; 31% European [95%CI 27%-36%]; and 17% (MTHFR) genes as risk factor for Neural Tube Defects (NTD) in Native American [95%CI 14%-20%]. The estimated proportions with >75% Argentina. and <25% African ancestry were 27%[ 95%CI 24-34%] and 31%[95%CI R. Cortese1, N. Buzzalino1, E. Goldschmidt2, G. Mercado1, L. Dain1 25%-37%], respectively. Marker-based estimates of individual African 1Centro Nacional de Gentica Mdica; Buenos Aires, Argentina; 2Servicio admixture correlated [r= 0.86] with estimates based on reported grand- de Gentica. Hospital de Nios R.Gutirrez; Buenos Aires, Argentina parental ancestry, which were available for 70% of the sample. The slope renecortese@s6.coopenet.com.ar of the relationship of risk ratio for SLE and renal SLE to African admixture Allelic variants of CBS and MTHFR have been suggested as risk factors were estimated as 2.3 (95% CI 0.7-7.2) and 3.2 (95% CI 0.5-19.1) respec- for NTD. We have demonstrated an increased risk factor for the allele Tof tively. The confidence interval for these slopes are wide because the cur- MTHFR in our population. The aim of this study was to assess the pres- rent marker set extracts only 23% of the information that we would have if ence of a 68 bp insertion (68bp ins) in the CBS gene with the development admixture were measured accurately. of NTD, isolated or in association with the mutation C677T in MTHFR Conclusion: Individual admixture varies widely within Trinidad so that the gene. We have studied both mutations in a group of 79 Argentine patients relationship of disease risk to admixture can be studied, but for accurate with NTD, 78 mothers and 67 fathers. Control group consisted of 105 estimation of this relationship it will be necessary to type more markers healthy adults and 39 healthy children. DNA from blood samples was informative for ancestry. genotyped by PCR and BsrI and HinfI digestion for CBS or MTHFR respec- tively. We found an allelic frequency of 0.05 for the 68bp ins in our popu- P0876. Apolipoprotein E Polymorphism In Patients With lation. No statistical differences were found when the presence of the 68bp Alzheimer Disease In Iranian Population . ins in the control group and the affected one were compared (0.11 vs. 0.15, M. R. Keikhaee1, P. Pasalar2, F. Sahebjam1, H. Najmabadi1,3 OR= 1.39, 95% CI; 0.59-3.21, p>0.1). However, when comparing the 68bp 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; ins in association with the C677TMTHFR mutation with the absence of 2Biochemistry dept., Tehran University of Medical Sciences; Tehran, Islam- both allelic variants, a significant difference was found (0.15 vs. 0.33, ic Republic of Iran; 3Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, p<0.05). Afrequency of 0.14 (n=145) for both allelic variants in parents of Islamic Republic of Iran affected children and 0.15 for parents of non-affected ones (n=40) was maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk observed. Our results suggest that the 68bp ins is not a risk factor for NTD Alzheimers Disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, in the studied population unless combined with the thermolabile mutation which is one of the most common forms of dementia in the age of 65 years in MTHFR gene. and older. Diagnosis is based upon evaluation of cognitive skills, elimina- tion of other dementia associated diseases and cranial CTexamination. P0879.Study of two candidate loci to susceptibily for leprosy However, definitive diagnosis is proved only by neurohistological findings. (NRAMP1 and MBP) The etiology of the disease is unknown and effective treatment is not avail- H. Buchmller, P. H. Cabello able. Intensive research in the pathomechanism of the disease revealed a Funda o Oswaldo Cruz; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil connection between increased frequency of apolipoprotein E4 allele and buchlima@infolink.com.br late onset of AD. The objective of this study was to characterize Genetic factors can contribute to susceptibility to infectious diseases. The apolipoprotein E polymorphisms in late onset AD patients in Iranian popu- Mannose Binding Protein (MBP) is a seric protein that recognizes patogen lation. Therefor, in this study 100 AD patients were examined. The poly- microorganisms by carbohydrates present on its cell wall. The MBPacts as morphic area was amplified by PCR, subjected to 8% polyacrylamide gel an opsonic agent inducing the fagocitosis by macrophages. Low concen- electrophoresis, and visualized by silver staining. The results shows that trations of this protein are considered to be the most common immunode- E4 allele was significantly more frequent in both early and late onset ficiency in humans. In mice, natural resistance to intracellular infectious groups compared to controls ( p<0.001 ). This data indicate that the Apo disease is associated to the gene Nramp1. The effects of the human gene272 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics homologue, NRAMP1, are not well known yet. In this study we genotyped of the early onset patients (hazard ratio = 0.50, p=0.023). the gene MBPand the locus D543N of the gene NRAMP1 of 204 leprosy Conclusion: We report the results of the first population-based study in Italy patients and 211 blood-donors controlling sample, to evaluate the genes in which recurrence risks are computed within a sufficiently large popula- effects on infection or disease development by the Mycobacterium leprae. tion to provide figures for patient counselling. Due to the ascertainment No significant differences were noticed of the genic and genotypic fre- scheme we used where each case is ascertained independently on the quencies of these systems, between the affected group and the normal others, our study is not likely to be affected by ascertainment bias (families control, neither the haplotypes MBP/NRAMP1 between the different types with a higher number of MS cases are more likely to be ascertained). of leprosy. Therefore, the genetic variations studied do not seem to be The higher risk observed in sibs of the less susceptible sex (male) can be related to susceptibility to leprosy, as suggest by some authors in studies interpreted as evidence in favour of a liability threshold model for MS. done on other populations. The recurrence risks for different categories of relatives can be used to counsel patients and their families. P0880.Inheritance study of hand osteoarthritis (HOA) in Ice- Our results agree with those obtained by similar studies. land I. Manolescu1, H. Jonsson2, S. Stefansson1, T. Ingvarsson3, H. Jonas- P0882. The association alleles of VDR3, COL1A1, CALCR son1, A. Manolescu1, J. Gulcher1, K. Stefansson1 genes and severe osteoporosis in women from Russia. 1DeCode Genetics Inc.; Reykjavik, Iceland; 2University Hospital; Reyk- M. Moskalenko1, M. Aseev1, I. Zazerskaya2, V. Baranov1 javik, Iceland; 3General Hospital; Akurery, Iceland 1Otts Institute of Obs.& Gyn.; St-Petersburg, Russian Federation; ileana@decode.is 2Pavlovs State Medical University.; St-Petersburg, Russian Federation Objective; To investigate the genetic contribution in a large scale study of mvmos@yahoo.com HOAin Iceland using an extensive genealogy database of the Icelandic The pathogenesis of osteoporosis is controlled by genetic and environ- population. Patients and methods; As part of an ongoing study, patients mental factors. Although genetic predisposition seems to be a factor in the with HOAhave been actively registered through nationwide clinical and pathogenesis of osteoporosis, the precise cohort of genes that may be surgical registers, radiology clinics and ergotherapy centers. At present involved is not well defined. We investigated the association of VDR3, 2950 HOApatients, comprising 1% of the Icelandic population, have been COL1A1 and CALCR genes polymorphism with osteoporosis in two registered through the above channels. The patient phenotypes used are groups of osteoporosis patients and unrelated controls of north-west Rus- mild and severe finger OAand mild and severe thumb base OAbased on sia. The first group of patients consisted of 64 women with osteoporosis clinical and radiological findings. Three methods were used to investigate complicated with fractures, while the second group (78 women) contained the genetic contribution; (1) the Minimum Founder Test (MFT), to estimate patients with osteoporosis in postmenopausal (surgical or physiological). the minimum number of ancestors (founders) needed to account for all The statistical analysis proved preponderance of allele t of Taq I polymor- patients at various years in the past, (2) the average pairwise kinship coef- phism in 9 intron of VDR3 in the first group of patients (53,1 %) compared ficient (KC) of the patients, and (3) the relative risk of HOAfor relatives. In to the control group (31,1 %)( ?<0.01).The frequency of allele s of Apa I each case the results were compared with 1000 control sets of similar polymorphism in a recognition site for the transcription factor Sp1 of composition with regard to number, age and sex, generated from the COL1A1 gene was three times higher in patients (48,4%) compared to the genealogy database. Results; The MFTindicated that the study group had controls (16,7%) and this difference appears to be significant (?<0.01). The descended from fewer ancestors than controls (p<0.001). The KC was sig- frequency of allele T of Alu I polymorphism in CALCR gene was also nificantly higher than in the control sets (p<0.001). The relative risk of HOA authentically higher (?<0.01) in this the group of patients (91,7%)(72,5% in for siblings and parents was higher than in spouses. The KC obtained for control). In the second group of patients we had not elucidated any authen- patients with severe finger OAwas notably high whereas that for thumb tic differences in frequencies of alleles of these three genes, compered to base OA without finger involvement was not significantly different from the control group. The frequencies of alleles of these genes were 33,9% controls. Conclusions; Patients seeking medical services for HOA are (VDR3), 21,8% (COL1A1) and 77,6% (CALCR). Our date indicate that dif- more related to each other than matched controls, supporting the role of a ferent alleles of VDR3, COL1A1 and CALCR genes correlate with severe genetic component in the disease. Our methods may also contribute to the osteoporosis in women. understanding of the inheritance of different subsets of hand OA. P0883. Association of polymorphisms in the NRAMP1 gene P0881.Risks for Relatives of Patients with Multiple Sclerosis and susceptibility to tuberculosis in Chinese in Central Sardinia, Italy Y. Lam, S. W. K. Im, W. C. Yam I. Prokopenko1, L. Bernardinelli1, C. Montomoli1, B. S. Murgia2, R. Ferrai2, The University of Hong Kong; Hong Kong, China A. Ticca2, A. Caria2, L. Musu2, M. Piras2, A. Mander3 krissylamyin@yahoo.com.hk 1Dep. Applied Health Sciences, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 2Divisione Evidence for the genetic factor, human natural-resistance-associated- di Neurologia, Ospedale San Francesco; Nuoro, Italy; 3MRC Biostatistics macrophage-protein 1 (NRAMP1) gene to have a role in susceptibility to Unit; Cambridge, United Kingdom tuberculosis was found in West Africans, Koreans and Japanese. The inga@fisher.unipv.it objective of the study is to investigate whether the polymorphisms in the Objectives: We calculated age-adjusted relative risks for different cate- four regions of the NRAMP1 gene; 5microsatellite, Intron4, D543N and gories of relatives of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients from the case regis- 3UTR are associated with the host susceptibility to tuberculosis among ter of Central Sardinia (Italy) and examined some covariates that may influ- Chinese population in Hong Kong. Polymorphisms in NRAMP1 gene were ence the risk in sibs. investigated in a case-control study of tuberculosis in Hong Kong, China. Background: MS is a multifactorial disease determined by genetic-environ- Polymerase Chain Reaction Restriction Fragment Length Polymor- mental interactions. A genetic component to MS is indicated by an phism (PCR-RFLP) analysis was used to type the polymorphisms and to increased relative risk in siblings, by an increased concordance rate in determine the allelic frequencies of the different regions of the gene among monozygotic compared to dizygotic twins, by studies from adoptees, half- paitents and controls. Patients suffering from tuberculosis were diagnosed siblings and by familial recurrence risk data. by positive findings in chest X-ray and sputum culture, while the controls Design: Pedigrees were routinely obtained on prevalent patients of the MS were healthy blood donors with no history of tuberculosis. Relationship of case register. As a consequence most of the cases were independently the polymorphisms in the 4 regions of NRAMP1 and the host susceptibili- ascertained. ty to tuberculosis among Chinese population in Hong Kong will be high- We used life tables techniques to calculate age-adjusted recurrence risks. lighted and discussed. We estimated the effect of the studied covariates by fitting a proportional hazard model. P0884.BRCA1 and BRCA2 founder mutations account for 5% Results: We included in our analysis 313 probands and a total of 14173 rel- of 233 unselected Finnish ovarian carcinoma patients atives. The mean size of a pedigree was 47 family members. The age- L. M. Sarantaus1, P. Vahteristo2, E. Ostermeyer2, A. Tamminen2, L. Unki- adjusted risk in parents was 1.26 (0.60-2.63), in children 9.44 (9.32 - la-Kallio2, R. Btzow2, H. Nevanlinna2 25.25), in sibs 4.76 (3.57-6.32), in second-degree relatives 0.71 (0.41- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central 1.21), and in third-degree relatives 1.75 (1.24-2.45). Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 2Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Helsinki, The relationship of the studied covariates to the sibling risk was examined Finland using Cox proportional hazards model. Sex of the proband and proband Laura.Sarantaus@hus.fi onset age were significant. More specifically, the hazard ratio for siblings Germ-line mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 predispose to hereditary of a female MS proband compared with a male proband was 0.62 (p=0.05). breast-ovarian cancer syndrome. In Finland, 20 different BRCA1/2 muta- The risk for siblings of the oldest onset patient was lower than for siblings tions have been identified and 13 of the mutations are founders andPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 273 account for the vast majority of Finnish BRCA1/2 families. The purpose of rently 350 carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 have been identified. The primary our study was to determine the prevalence of BRCA1/2 mutations in uns- purpose of the CFRBCS has been the development of a unique resource elected Finnish ovarian carcinoma patients and to evaluate the relationship for interdisciplinary studies of genetic and environmental risk of breast and between mutation status and personal/family history of cancer. Two hun- ovarian cancer. Several hypothesis-driven research projects are being dred and thirty-three patients were screened for all BRCA1/2 mutations conducted by CFRBCS investigators and international collaborators using known in the Finnish population. Additionally, a subgroup of patients with the data and biospecimens; additional investigators are encouraged to personal history of breast cancer and/or family history of breast and/or develop research proposals for submission to the external Advisory Com- ovarian cancer was screened for novel BRCA1/2 mutations. Thirteen mittee. Information about the CFRBCS and application procedures are patients (5.6%) had mutations; eleven in BRCA1 and two in BRCA2. available on the NCI website www-dccps.ims.nci.nih.gov/CFRBCS. Seven of the 13 known Finnish BRCA1/2 founder mutations were identified in this study, and they accounted for 12 of the 13 mutations detected. A P0887. Glutathione S-transferase GSTM1 and GSTT1 poly- logistic regression analysis was used to determine the odds of mutation for morphisms and the risk of oral and laryngeal cancer. ovarian carcinoma patients. The most significant predictor of a mutation A. Hatagima1, C. F. S. Marques1, F. S. Rajoy1, R. J. Koifman1, J. S. Capel- was the presence of both breast and ovarian cancer in the same woman, li1, M. B. Kneipp1, P. Boffetta2, P. Brennan2, N. Munoz2, R. Herrero2, S. but family history of breast cancer was also strongly related to positive Koifman1 mutation carrier status. Although BRCA1/2 mutation testing is not warrant- 1Funda o Oswaldo Cruz; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2IARC; Lion, France ed in the general ovarian cancer patient population, patients with person- hatagima@gene.dbbm.fiocruz.br al/family history of breast cancer could benefit from referral to genetic Glutathione S-transferases are important xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes counseling and mutation testing. and several studies have showed that their genetic polymorphisms may contribute to individual susceptibility for some cancers. Oral and laryngeal P0885.Prostaglandin H synthase 2 (PTGS2/COX-2) variant in cancers are important due to their incidence in several countries. Genetic African Americans and a case-control study of colorectal ade- and environmental factors are involved in the development of these can- nomas. cers. Many of GSTenzymes are involved in the desintoxication of active H. J. Lin1, K. M. Lakkides2, T. O. Keku3, H. D. Frankl4, E. R. Lee5, R. M. metabolites from tobacco smoke, what makes them important on modulat- Garavito2, R. S. Sandler3, R. W. Haile6, W. L. Smith2 ing the susceptibility to tobacco-related cancers. As part of a wide case- 1Harbor-UCLA Medical Center; Torrance, CA United States; 2Michigan control study conducted in Latin America by the International Agency for State University; East Lansing, MI United States; 3University of North Car- Research on Cancer, we studied GSTM1 and GSTT1 genetic polymor- olina; Chapel Hill, NC United States; 4Kaiser Permanente; Los Angeles, phisms in 200 oral and 73 laryngeal cancer patients from Rio de Janeiro CAUnited States; 5Kaiser Permanente; Bellflower, CAUnited States; 6Uni- (Brasil). Polymorphisms were analyzed in DNA from peripherical blood versity of Southern California; Los Angeles, CAUnited States extraction by Polymerase Chain Reaction and restriction enzymes diges- henry_lin@humc.edu tion. The null homozygotes frequencies were 45% (GSTM1) and 24% Prostaglandin H synthase 2 (PTGS2; also known as cyclooxygenase-2) is (GSTT1) in oral cancer patients and 44% (GSTM1) and 21% (GSTT1) in thought to take part in prevention of colorectal cancer by nonsteroidal anti- laryngeal cancer group. The observed differences among these frequen- inflammatory drugs, which are inhibitor of the enzyme. We used DNAhet- cies and the ones from a sample of healthy individuals were not statistically eroduplex analysis to screen the PTGS2 gene for naturally-occurring meaningful. No associations were observed concerning laryngeal cancer enzyme variants, in order to obtain further information on a biochemical and polymorphisms studied here. However, for the GSTM1 polymorphism mechanism of prevention. We found a single-base substitution in 10% of both healthy and oral cancer samples were not under the Hardy-Weinberg African Americans (g.5939T>C; GTT>GCT; Val511Ala). The amino acid equilibrium (p<.001 and p=.003, respectively). Among healthy controls it change is predicted to open a large cavity near the PTGS2 active site and happens due to the excess of AB heterozygotes, but in the oral cancer may change conformations of key residues. No changes in Vmax, Km, or group this genotype was absent, suggesting its protective role in oral can- thermal stability were observed for the mutant enzyme in Cos-1 cell assays cer in our population. Support; CNPq, FAPERJ-FIOCRUZ, European with arachidonic acid as substrate. However, the conditions of the assay Community DG XII. were expected to differ substantially from the normal intracellular environ- ment. Case-control analyses of 380 African Americans from 2 study popu- P0888.Frequency distribution of ATM gene alterations in Ger- lations showed odds ratios (and 95% confidence intervals) for colorectal man breast cancer patients and in the general population adenomas of 0.50 (0.18-1.44) and 0.56 (0.13-2.44) among subjects with P. Yamini, K. Klpper, R. Bendix, M. Bremer, D. Rades, J. H. Karstens, T. the mutation. The results are potentially consistent with a protective effect D rk of the mutation, mimicking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Larger Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany sample sizes are needed to confirm. doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de The ATM gene that is mutated in the autosomal recessive syndrome atax- P0886.AUnique Resource for Breast Cancer Research; The ia-telangiectasia (A-T) encodes a 350 kDa protein kinase which controls Cooperative Family Registry for Breast Cancer Studies radiation-induced DNAdamage responses via regulation of downstream R. T. Senie1, I. Andrulis2, M. Daly3, J. Hopper4, S. Buys5, D. West6, H. targets such as p53, c-abl or BRCA1. Heterozygosity for ATM germline Anton-Culver7 mutations has been implicated as a genetic predisposition in breast cancer 1Columbia University; New York, NYUnited States; 2Cancer care Ontario; and other age-related disorders. We have sought to determine the relative Toronto, ON Canada; 3Fox Chase Cancer Center; Cheltenham, PAUnited frequencies of common ATM gene alterations in a hospital-based series of States; 4University of Melbourne; Carlton, Australia; 5Huntsman Cancer 1000 consecutive breast cancer patients and in 500 random individuals Research Center; Salt Lake City, UT United States; 6Northern California from the general population of Lower Saxony in order to gain more insight Cancer Center; Union City, CA United States; 7University of California, into the potential clinical relevance of these genetic variations. We have Irvine; Irvine, CAUnited States developed a hexaplex ARMS based method for a rapid and specific rts15@columbia.edu screening of the most frequent ataxia-telangiectasia mutations in Ger- Although increased susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer has been many, and we have screened for an additional six common amino acid associated with genetic mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2, risk may also be substitutions using restriction-enzyme or SSCP-based methods. The most modified by lifestyle factors, health behaviors, environmental frequent ATM truncating mutation in Germany is the leaky splicing muta- exposures,and other genetic components. To provide resources for stud- tion IVS10-6T->G that we have identified in seven (0.7 %) breast cancer ies of these complex interactions, the National Cancer Institute funded the patients but also in three (0.6 %) control individuals. The most common Cooperative Family Registry for Breast Cancer Studies [CFRBCS], a con- amino acid substitution, D1853N, was present at an allele frequency of sortium of six international research centers with an Informatics Support 0.13 in both the breast cancer and control cohorts. However, the rarer ATM Center. Family recruitment was initiated in 1997 at the three population- amino acid substitutions were, in a composite test, more frequent in the based and three clinic-based sites. As of December 2000 more than 6,000 breast cancer patients than in the general population (7.9% vs. 5.3% of families including 15,000 individuals are participating. Data and biospeci- alleles, p<0.01). These results suggest that ATM missense substitutions mens are collected from probands and their relatives using common instru- could play a role in the genetic predisposition towards cancer. ments and protocols. Coded personal health information, dietary intake, treatment for breast and/or ovarian cancer, and pedigree data are routine- ly transmitted to the Informatics Center. Biospecimens including blood and tumor tissue samples are banked at each collaborating site following rigid quality control procedures. Genetic analyses are being conducted; cur-274 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics P0889. Evaluating the APEX-based resequencing assay of Jeanne DArc; Lyon, France p53 tumour suppressor gene bonadona@lyon.fnclcc.fr N. Tnisson1,2, J. Zernant1, A. Kurg2, H. Pavel1, A. Metspalu2,1 Studies have suggested the role of gene-environment interactions on 1Asper Ltd.; Tartu, Estonia; 2Estonian Biocentre / IMCB, University of Tartu; breast cancer risk, since the effects of known risk factors differ according Tartu, Estonia to the existence or not of a family history of breast cancer. The recent iden- neemet@asper.ee tification of susceptibility genes for hereditary breast cancer provides fur- Mutation data of the p53 gene have relevant prognostic and therapeutic ther insight into the evidence of such interactions. The purpose of this value in several types of cancer. We are developing and evaluating an study was to evaluate the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in APEX (Arrayed Primer Extension) - based test for the gene with goal of early-onset breast cancer cases and to analyse gene-environment inter- getting the full mutation data at both DNAstrands in a single assay. A actions. From a population-based cohort of women with breast cancer patient DNAsample is amplified, digested enzymatically, and annealed to diagnosed before age 46 years, we collected information about environ- arrayed primers, which promote sites for template-dependent DNApoly- mental and familial risk factors and blood sample for genetic testing. We merase extension reactions using four fluorescently labelled dideoxynu- used a case-only design to study gene-environment interactions. Atotal of cleotides. The Genorama imaging system and genotyping software are 269 women were included and genetic analyses were performed for 232 used for imaging and semiautomatic sequence analysis. The p53 gene women. Twenty-one BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations carriers were identi- chip is scanning exons 2 to 9 plus two introns from both strands (1218 fied. Mutation prevalence was higher in women with breast cancer before bases). An average of 98 % of the arrayed p53 gene sequence can be age 41 years than the other women (12.8% versus 5.2%). We found a non- analysed from either sense or antisense strand and 85 % from both significant interaction of some reproductive factors; an increased breast strands. In best cases the readable sequence is up to 99.8 % and 96 %, cancer risk was associated with a late age at menarche (>15 years) (odd respectively. Tumour samples with known mutations were analysed in a ratio=2.5; p=0.2) and parity (odd ratio=1.8; p>0.2) in carriers of BRCA1 and blind test. Predominantly the results were concordant with TTGE (Tempo- BRCA2 mutations. No effect of age at first-full term pregnancy and oral ral Temperature Gradient Electrophoresis) plus dideoxy sequencing. One contraception were found. These results indicate a possible interaction case showed the presence of double mutation in codon 290. In addition, between BRCA1 and BRCA2 susceptibility genes consistent with the pre- one heterozygous SNP and an SNP with minor allele were found. The vious studies. However, they need confirmation with further larger studies. entire resequencing procedure can be completed in less than six hours The implications of our findings for the high prevalence of BRCA1 and and at 5 to 10 times less cost compared to ABI sequencing per sample. BRCA2 mutation in women with breast cancer before 41 years will be also Once fully developed, the p53 gene chip should become a medium for discussed. accurate and efficient DNAsequence analysis of this or other frequently mutated genes. P0892.Characterization of a subcloned fragment (pBA0.6) of pCMM86 located on 17q21 and its potential use in generating P0890. Introduction and diffusion of the BRCA1 mutation an individual-specific DNA profile and detection of genetic R1443X in the French Canadian population variability in Indian population and sporadic breast cancer H. Vezina1, F. Durocher2, L. Houde1, C. Szabo3, S. Delos4, M. Dumont4, M. tissues Jomphe1, M. Plante4, R. Laframboise4, J. Chiquette5, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet6, A. Saha, R. Bamezai D. Goldgar3, D. Easton2, P. Bridge7, J. Simard4 Jawaharlal Nehru University; Delhi, India 1Universite du Quebec a Chicoutimi; Chicoutimi, PQ Canada; 2CRC anjana14@hotmail.com; bamezai@hotmail.com Genetic Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, United Sequence analysis was carried out of a human clone pBA0.6 generated Kingdom; 3Unit of Genetic Epidemiology, International Agency for after ExoIII/S1nuclease digestion and subcloning of pCMM86 (GDB; Research on Cancer; Lyon, France; 4Centre hospitalier universitaire de 168382, D17S74), which was not available in the database. It revealed the Quebec, Laval University; Quebec City, PQ Canada; 5Hopital St-Sacre- presence of a reiterating core motif of 24mer GTGGGTGTGTTG- ment; Quebec City, PQ Canada; 6Oncology Genetics, Institut Curie; Paris, GAGGGGGTGAGG present 23 times (Accession no. AF079321), which France; 7Alberta Childrens Hospital, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB was GC-rich and minisatellitic in nature. Genomic blots of HaeIII-digested Canada human DNAwhen hybridized to pBA0.6, generated a ladder of polymor- hvezina@uqac.uquebec.ca phic bands which were individual specific in nature .The probability of iden- In the 17th century, about 5 000 immigrants, coming mostly from France, tity ranged from 5.07X10-14 to 2.64X10-16 in different population groups. settled in Canada. Among them, 3 500 to 4 000 have descendants in the Out of three isomorphic bands of 29.0 kb, 2.4 kb, 2.1 kb, 29.0 kb band was contemporary Quebec population and they account for the major part of observed to be Homo sapiens specific (Saha et al., 2000, DNAand Cell the gene pool of the 5 million Quebecers of French descent. The present Biology, vol. 19 no. 4; 219-226). Dendrograms based on UPGMAmethod study was designed to analyse the role of this founder effect and the result- with Jaccards coefficient values suggested high genetic diversity in all the ing population demogenetic structure in the introduction and diffusion of population groups suggesting that the samples taken were random. Maxi- the BRCA1 recurrent R1443X mutant allele. The highly conserved haplo- mum likelihood estimates through bootstrap sampling method showed that type observed in 46 R1443X carriers from 11 French Canadian families Punjabis, Bengalis and UPites formed one cluster whereas South Indians and generated using seventeen microsatellite markers spanning a 9.3 cM formed a separate cluster altogether thus showing the proximity of these region surrounding the BRCA1 locus confirms that the R1443X mutation is three population groups as compared to that from South India. Further with a founder mutation in the Quebec population. Ascending genealogies of another minisatellite sequence (Accession no. AF157691) dendrogram at one carrier individual per family (n=10) and of controls (n=30) were recon- the individual level led to the formation of several small clusters which were structed using the BALSAC population register. These genealogies have interleaved; also, the subgroups for each of the populations were inter- an average depth of ten generations but many lineages go as far back as mingled with the subgroups for the other populations (Saha and Bamezai, 13 generations. We identified the founder couple with the highest proba- 2000, J Hum Genet vol. 45; 207-211). Further, pair studies comparing the bility of having introduced the mutation in the population. Genetic contri- lymphocyte and tumor DNAof 19 sporadic breast cancer patients indicat- butions of this founder couple to the contemporary regional populations of ed a genetic variation in 32% of the cases studied, pointing towards its util- Quebec were measured in order to understand the spread in time and ity in screening for somatic changes in the breast cancer tissues. Aprelim- space of the mutation and to detect the presence of spatial stratification in inary study of Northern hybridization with pBA0.6 resulted in two tran- the diffusion pattern of the mutation. Finally, we also performed haplotyp- scripts of 0.63 kb and 0.29 kb. This was further corroborated with RT-PCR ing analysis of R1443X carriers from 10 French families and although the results where 2 amplicons, matching with the expected size of two reading results are consistent with a common origin for this mutant allele in both frames within the minisatellite sequence, were obtained. Interestingly, populations, a distinct haplotype was obtained in two French families, thus amplicons were also generated when tumour samples of breast cancer suggesting multiple origins for the R1443X mutation. patients were analyzed. The role of the two transcripts from the minisatel- lite sequence is not clear as yet. P0891. Interaction between BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and environmental risk factors in early-onset breast cancer. P0893. A common variant of the methylenetetrahydrofolate Results from a French population-based study. reductase gene (MTHFR, 1p36) is associated with an V. Bonodona1, O. Sinilnikova2, A. Bremond1, H. Mignotte1, P. Mathevet3, increased risk of cancer A. Martin4, C. Zinzindohoue3, J. Bobin3, P. Romestaing3, D. Raudrant3, R. B. T. Heijmans1,2, J. M. A. Boer3, C. J. Cornelisse4, D. Kromhout3, R. G. Rudigoz3, G. Lenoir2, C. Lasset1 J. Westendorp5, E. J. M. Feskens3, E. Slagboom2 1Centre Lon Berard; Lyon, France; 2International Agency for Research on 1TNO Prevention and Health; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Dept. of Medical Cancer; Lyon, France; 3Hospices Civils de Lyon; Lyon, France; 4Clinique Statistics, Leiden University Medical Centre; Leiden, The Netherlands;Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 275 3Dept. of Chronic diseases, National Institute of Public Health and the deficit of homozygotes and an excess of heterozygotes for both variants Environment; Bilthoven, The Netherlands; 4Dept. of Pathology, Leiden Uni- (p<0.01). In a set of ~2400 new-born individuals, new-born girls also versity Medical Centre; Leiden, The Netherlands; 5Gerontology and Geri- showed a deficit of homozygotes and an excess of heterozygotes for both atrics, Leiden University Medical Centre; Leiden, The Netherlands genes, consistent with the adult females. The new-born boys, however, bt.heijmans@pg.tno.nl showed the opposite effect, with an excess of homozygotes, which was Folate metabolism is thought to play an important role in carcinogenesis significant in BRCA2 (p=0.001). This suggests that common variants of through its involvement in both DNAmethylation and nucleotide synthesis. BRCA1 and 2 are subject to selection, which appear to affect foetal sur- Acommon Ala/Val variant in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene vival in a sex-dependent manner. (MTHFR) leads to a mildly disturbed folate metabolism. We previously reported that the MTHFR Val/Val genotype was associated with increased P0896. Folate and breast cancer; the role of polymorphisms cancer mortality in men aged 85 years and over (Eur J Hum Genet in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 1999;7;197-204). To further explore the deleterious effects of the MTHFR A. C. Schofield, L. Sharp, E. Pavlidov, Z. Miedzybrodzka, S. D. Heys, J. genotype, we studied the association of the genotype with overall cancer Little, N. E. Haites risk and the risk of cancer of specific organs in 860 men aged 65-84 years University of Aberdeen; Aberdeen, United Kingdom who were followed over 10 years. During follow-up, 150 new cases of can- a.schofield@abdn.ac.uk cer occurred among the 793 men without cancer at baseline. The risk of Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies affecting women cancer was 1.81-fold (95% CI, 1.09-3.00) increased among men with the in the UK. Recent evidence has highlighted the importance of nutrition in Val/Val genotype as compared to men with the Ala/Ala genotype. The the aetiology of breast cancer. In particular, diets with higher intakes of fruit higher incidence of cancer could be attributed to an increased risk of can- and vegetables are considered protective. Vegetables are a major source cer of the prostate (RR, 3.48; 95% CI 1.05-11.6), the colorectum (RR, 3.65; of dietary folate, which is involved in DNAsynthesis and methylation. An 95% CI, 1.07-12.5) and the kidney and bladder (RR, 5.48; 95% CI, 1.67- association between higher folate intake and reduced risk of breast cancer 18.0), but not to an increased risk of lung cancer. The risk of cancer has been observed. Functional polymorphisms in MTHFR, an enzyme appeared to be particularly increased among men with lower folate intake, involved in folate metabolism, have been reported (C677Tand A1298C). higher alcohol consumption and of an older age. In conclusion, our current We undertook a case-control study to investigate associations between and previous studies in two independent populations indicate that a com- breast cancer, dietary folate and MTHFR polymorphisms. Sixty-five breast mon Ala/Val variant in the MTHFR gene may have a deleterious effect on cancer cases were recruited at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary. Age-sex the risk of cancer in the general population. matched controls (without breast cancer) were selected from general prac- titioner registers. Subjects completed a food-frequency questionnaire and P0894. Thiopurine methyltransferase polymorphism; geno- provided a mouthwash sample to enable MTHFR genotyping. Atrend of type-phenotype correlation analysis in a Portuguese sample decreasing breast cancer risk with increasing dietary folate intake was S. Alves1, A. Amorim1, F. Ferreira2, M. Prata1 observed (OR=0.49, 95% CI 0.2-1.2). For the C677Tpolymorphism, the 1IPATIMUP; Porto, Portugal; 2Servio de Hematologia Clnica, Hospital TTgenotype had a protective effect (OR=0.38, 95% CI 0.12-1.24). Asimi- Geral S. Joo; Porto, Portugal lar protective effect was observed for women with the CC genotype for the sandra.alves@ipatimup.pt A1298C polymorphism (OR=0.24, 95% CI 0.06-0.97). Asignificant protec- Thiopurine methyltransferase is a polymorphic enzyme that catalyses the tive effect was observed for women with homozygosity for the A1298C S-methylation of thiopurine drugs used in immunosupressive and anti- variant only with higher folate intake (OR=0.09, 95% CI 0.01-0.82). cancerigenous therapy. Therefore, characterisation of all the variation at A1298C homozygote individuals with high folate intake appear to have the TPMTgene which can produce changes in TPMTactivity should be con- strongest protective effect against breast cancer. Both dietary and genetic ducted. We set out to perform genotype-phenotype correlation analysis in variation in folate status may be implicated in the pathogenesis of breast 143 Portuguese individuals for several TPMTSNPs (including silent and cancer. intronic substitutions) and for a VNTR located in the promoter region of the gene. The SNPs and the VNTR were studied by PCR based methods and P0897.Relation between childhood leukemia and ABO and Rh the phenotype quantification of TPMT was performed using a HPLC blood groups in Serbian population method. As expected a statistical significant association was found R. Papovic1,2, S. Cvjeticanin2, B. Tri?ic2 between the presence of TPMTmutant alleles and reduced TPMTactivity. 1Medical Faculty University of Belgrade; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 2Institute For the other silent or intronic substitutions analysed, no signs that they for Biology and Human Genetics; Belgrade, Yugoslavia could influence TPMTactivity were detected. The VNTR at the promoter bebrapap@eunet.yu region is characterised by a composite internal structure due to the pres- In the sample of 214 children with leukemia(ALL-acute lymphoblastic ence of 3 different types of repeats - A, B and C. Therefore each VNTR N=163;ANLL-acute nonlymphoblastic N=43 and HGL-chronic granulocite allele is defined by a particular pattern of repeat arrangement. We found a leukema N=8)the frequencies of ABO and Rh blood types were similar to statistical significant association between VNTR*6 and reduced levels of the average value of the Serbian population. Comparation of the frequen- TPMTactivity. Since VNTR*6 is the allele with more B type repeats, we can cies of ABO blood types between samle of affected individuals with ALL hyphotesize that the high number of B repeats is the responsible for the and control sample we can see that O blood type is slightly increased and association registered. However the question needs further support. Final- A,B and AB blood types are slightly decreased. But, in the sample of ly we reported linkage disequilibrium between VNTR*6 and TPMT*3Aand affected children with ANLLthe frequencies of A,O and AB blood types are between VNTR*4 and TPMT*2. slightly increased and B blood type is statisticaly decreased (X2=3.8, p<0.05)compared with incidence of ABO blood groups in Serbian popula- P0895.Evidence For Deviation From Hardy-weinberg Equilib- tion.If we compared frequencies of ABO blood groups between affected rium In Brca1 And Brca2 children of ALLand ANLLwe can see that percentages are similar for A,O C. S. Healey1, A. M. Dunning1, F. Durocher1, D. Chase2, J. Burn3, B. A. J. and AB blood types but frequences of blood type B is statisticaly Ponder1, D. F. Easton1 decreased in the groop of ANLLaffected (X2=3.9,p<0.05). Taking all this 1University of Cambridge; Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2Westlakes into account we may conclude that most frequently affected individuals in Research Institute; Cumbria, United Kingdom; 3University of Newcastle; whole sample and group of ALLare with blood types O;A;B;AB. But,in the Newcastle, United Kingdom sample of ANLL the most affected children are with blood types in this katie@srl.cam.ac.uk order A;O;B=AB. We have investigated a number of common polymorphisms in both BRCA1 and 2 for an association with low penetrance breast and ovarian cancer P0898. Cytochrome P450 (CYP1A1 and CYP2E1) Genetic susceptibility. Two of the most common variants in BRCA1 (P871L and Polymorphisms and Susceptibility to Oral and Laryngeal Can- Q356R) and six variants in BRCA2 (a-26g, N289H, N372H, T1915M, cer. R2034C and K3326X) have been studied in population-based series of C. F. S. Marques1, F. S. Rajoy1, S. Koifman1, R. J. Koifman1, J. S. Capel- ~2000 breast cancer cases from the ABC study, 500 ovarian cancer cases li1, M. B. Kneipp1, P. Boffetta2, P. Brennan2, N. Munoz2, R. Herrero2, A. and 1500 controls from the EPIC cohort. We have found a significant Hatagima1 increase in risk of breast cancer associated with the BRCA2 N372H poly- 1Funda o Oswaldo Cruz; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2IARC; Lion, France morphism (OR=1.3 [95%CIs; 1.07-1.61]) The BRCA1 polymorphisms tiane.ntg@terra.com.br show no association with breast cancer risk. We have also observed a sig- Oral and laryngeal cancers are responsible for about 7% of new cancer nificant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) in adult females cases worldwide. Many studies have provided evidences of their associa- for both the BRCA2 N372H and BRCA1 P871L polymorphisms, with a tion with tobacco and alcohol intake, while others suggest the role of276 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics genetic factors contributing to carcinogenesis. Polycyclic aromatic hydro- sistent with the data published for most European populations and con- carbons (PAH) and other chemicals present on tobacco smoke and envi- firms the hypothesis that the F508 mutation has derived from a single ronmental pollutants are submitted to a biotransformation process. Its first mutational event.Taking into consideration the values of recombination part is mostly attributed to P450 superfamily enzymes, which function is to rates between F508 and extragenic polymorphic markers,the estimate of transform these chemicals into intermediates that will be metabolized by the number of generations elapsed since the mutation F508 was first other enzymes into the excretion way. The disability to eliminate toxic prod- introduced into Latvia, approximates 101 (2020 years).These data are in ucts due to an enzymatic deficiency may contribute to individual risk for contrast with those published for other populations. chemical-induced carcinogenesis. Enzymes encoded by polymorphic CYP1A1 and CYP2E1 genes were previously associated with oral, esoph- P0901. Why is cystic fibrosis so common? agus and lung cancer. In this case-control study we genotyped 277 M. Super1, J. Chadwick2, T. Roberts1, N. Andrew3 patients with oral and laryngeal cancer and 200 healthy controls from Rio 1Royal Manchester Childrens Department of Clinical Genetics; Manches- de Janeiro (Brasil) in order to compare genotypic and allelic frequencies ter, United Kingdom; 2Medical Student, Manchester University; Manches- between the groups. Using Polymerase Chain Reaction and restriction ter, United Kingdom; 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory; Royal Manchester enzymes techniques we analyzed this sample, which is part of a greater Childrens Hospital; Manchester, United Kingdom study coordinated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer. Maurice.Super@man.ac.uk The observed allelic frequencies between cases and controls were similar It is widely accepted that a heterozygote advantage must be operating to for CYP2E1 polymorphism and we found no association with the cancers maintain a carrier frequency of 1 in 25 associated with the 1 in 2500 inci- studied. However, the CYP1A1 polymorphism seems to be associated with dence children born with cystic fibrosis. This could operating prenatally, an increased risk for oral cancer, as this group had twice more mutant through meiotic drive, after birth or both. We have explored meiotic drive homozygotes (GG) than the control one, although the allelic frequencies by counting the number of carriers born to couples where only one parent were similar between them. Support; CNPq, FIOCRUZ-FAPERJ, Europ- is a carrier proven on DNAtesting and the partner negative. In 519 off- pean Community DG XII. spring born to such couples 313 have been found to be carriers instead of the expected 259 (chi squared =11.4, p<0.01. This phenomenon is seen P0899. Molecular-Genetic Study of CFTR Gene Mutation most strongly in female offspring born to female carriers. Implications and delF508 in Cystic Fibrosis Families from Bashkortostan possible mechanisms will be discussed. G. Koritina1, T. Viktorova1, E. Khusnutdinova1, G. Baykova2 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Bashkir medical university; Ufa, Russian Federation ekkh@anrb.ru P0902.The FV Leiden and prothrombin G20210Amutations in Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal autosomal recessive dis- healthy and thrombophilic Yugoslav population ease among Caucasians. It is caused by defects in the CF transmembrane L. B. Rakicevic1, D. Mikovic2, M. Kovac2, V. Djordjevic1, D. Radojkovic1, counductance regulator (CFTR) gene. More then 900 molecular defects A. Savic1 have been reported to date. The distribution of these mutations is modify 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering; Belgrade, among different human populations. Fifty five patients with CF from Yugoslavia; 2Hemostasis and Hemophilia Center, National Blood Transfu- Bashkortostan were tested for mutation delF508. We have analyzed 110 sion Institute; Belgrade, Yugoslavia unrelated CF-chromosomes (53 - Slavians, 39 - Tatars,12 - Bashkirs,4 - qwert@eunet.yu Chuvashes, 2 - Udmurts). The common mutation delF508 was found only Purpose; The development of thrombotic disorders in humans is one of the on 31,8% of tested CF-chromosomes; 30 were homozygous and 5 were most common causes of morbidity and mortality in the Western world. The compound heterozygous. It is one of the lowest incidence of this deletion risk of venous thrombosis is increased in individuals who carry specific reported in Russia. Taking into account, that CF-patients from Bashkor- genetic abnormalities in blood coagulation proteins.The FV Leiden, and tostan characterised by high ethnical heterogeneous, we have analyzed prothrombin G20210Amutations are the most prevalent genetic defects frequency of delF508 in different ethnical groups of CF patients. Among which increase risk of venous thrombosis. Their allelic frequencies in Cau- Slavians probands (Russians, Ukrainians, Belorussians) delF508 was casian populations vary between 1 and 8%, and 0.35 and 2% respective- detected on 45% CF-chromosomes, among Tatars - on 28% and among ly. For Yugoslav population there are no data for either one. Purpose of this Bashkirs, Chuvashes, Udmurts delF508 was not found. We suppose, that study was to establish the prevalence of the FV Leiden and prothrombin the absence of delF508 in Bashkirs CF-families could be explained by the G20210A mutations in normal and thrombophilic subjects inYugoslavia. features of formation of this population, resulting from mixing of different Methods and matherials; Astudy was carried in a group of 100 unrelated ethnical components (Turkic, Mongolian and probably Finno-Ugric and blood donors and in 87 unrelated thrombophilic patients. Criteria for selec- Indo-European). By the data of archeology and anthropology the Turkic tion of patients for this study were; the occurrence of the first episode of and Mongolian components in Bashkirs gene pool is highest among other thrombosis at the age below 50 years and at least one clinical feature of investigated populations. The delF508 practically does not meet in Turkic the inherited thrombophilia. FV Leiden and prothrombin G20210Amuta- and Mongolian populations. So our results showed the little portion of Sla- tions were detected by polymerase chain reaction, followed by digestion vians component in Bashkirs gene pool. with allele-specific restriction enzymes. Normal and mutated genes were distinguished by the sizes of the restriction fragments. Results; In 100 con- P0900. The major cystic fibrosis mutation in Latvia; frequen- trol subjects 4 carriers of FV Leiden and 3 carriers of prothrombin cy, origin and age of the F508 mutation G20210Amutations were detected, wich gives the frequencies of mutated A. Krumina1, V. Kroshkina1, V. Svabe1, Z. Krumina1, L. Krumina1, I. alleles 2% and 1.5% respectively. Among 87 trombophilic patients, the fre- Tamane1, M. Lazdinsh2, V. Baumanis2 quencies of mutated alleles were higher. For FV Leiden mutation, 23 car- 1Medical Academy of Latvia; Riga, Latvia; 2Latvian State University; Riga, riers (21 heterozygous and 2 homozygous) were detected, giving the allel- Latvia ic frequency of 14%. For prothrombin G20210Amutation, 8 heterozygotic Astrida.Krumina@rsu.lv carriers were discovered, i.e. the allelic frequency of 4.5%. Conclusions; CFTR gene mutation F508 is the most frequent cystic fibrosis (CF) muta- The frequencies of FV Leiden and Prothrombin G20210Amutations in our tion, accounting for 70% of CF chromosomes. Strong linkage disequilibri- population are within the range for general Cucasian populations. The um found between F508 and different polymorphic DNAmarkers have prevalences of these mutations in thrombophilic patients, show the usual substantiated the hypothesis of a single origin of this mutation. The aims higher frequencies than in control. of our study were 1) to characterize the prevalence of mutation F508 among normal and CF chromosomes;2)to estimate the age and origin of P0903.The correlation of the genotype and phenotype in Slo- the F508 mutation in Latvia. 31 CF patients,30 their healthy family mem- vak Huntingtons population. bers and 136 healthy unrelated Latvians were subjected to analysis of M. Kvasnicov1, L. Kad?i2, M. Luksov3, F. Cisrik4, J. Baro?ov5, E. mutation F508, three extragenic and three intragenic polymorphic DNA Nebes kov6 markers. The F508 allele frequency in the overall CF patient population 1Hospital Roosevelt; Bansk Bystrica, Slovakia; 2Institut of Molekular Biol- was 59.7%.An average incidence of F508 mutation carriers among ogy Scientific Faculty; Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Centrum of Medical Genetics healthy Latvians was 1;42.Absolute linkage disequilibrium was found Faculty Hospital; Bratislava, Slovakia; 4Department of Medical Genetics; between F508 and loci IVS6a and XV-2c,highly significant -between ?ilina, Slovakia; 5Department of Medical Genetics; Nitra, Slovakia; F508 and loci TUB18 and KM-19.The results of extended haplotype 6Department of Medical Genetics Faculty Hospital; Ko?ice, Slovakia analysis showed different distribution of haplotypes between fdr@isternet.sk normal,F508 and non-F508 CF chromosomes.These results are con- Since Huntington disease (HD) mutation was identified a direct molecularPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 277 test has become an integral part of diagnosis of the disease. The aim of ding to the region of new settlement, which comprise of 37% of the Finnish our study was to find out the relationship between number of CAG repeats population in the 1930s (khi square = 15.4, p < 0.001). Clustering of the in IT-15 gene and some phenotype signs of disease in Slovak Huntingtons grandparents birthplaces with in a few smaller areas was also observed. patients. Since molecular test has been available in our country diagnostic Conclusions; Founder mutation(s) predisposing to left-right asymmetry positive molecular test has been confirmed in 63 individuals. In accordance abnormalities are likely to be present in the region of new settlement of Fin- with the range of mutation these individuals were divided into 3 groups; I. land. Given the small number of sibpairs found, a complex inheritance pat- With the number of CAG repeats 40 - 45 II. -- 46 - 50 III. -- over 50 The tern is more likely than monogenic. majority of our patients belong to the group I. The mean age at onset HD in this group was 40 years (with the range 20 - 59 years). The less patients P0906. CAG/CTG repeat polymorphism of IT-15 and DMPK belong to the group III with the mean age at onset of disease 22 years (with genes and prevalence of myotonic dystrophy and Huntington the range 15 - 29 years). Except the relationship between the size of muta- disease in different populations tion and the age of onset HD we have found also the relationship between O. Malysheva, T. Ivaschenko, V. Baranov, V. Baranov the mutation and the first observed symptoms of the disease. While in the Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation I. and II. group majority of patients showed neurological symptoms at the omal99@mail.ru onset of the disease in the III. group that were the changes in behavior and It is considered that in many cases the frequency of alleles with tandem cognition. Our study was the first study of the Slovak Huntingtons popula- trinucleitide repeat number more than 20 correlates with prevalence of cor- tion. We confirmed correlation of the size of mutation in HD gene with the responding expansion diseases in population. We studied distributions of age at onset disease and with some of the clinical symptoms of the dis- CAG/CTG repeat alleles of DMPK and IT-15 genes in four populations; ease. North-West Russia (St-Petersburg), Moldavians, Georgians and Uzbeks. The frequencies of more than 20 CTG-repeat alleles were in a good cor- P0904.Congenital Cataract  Autosomal Recessive Form  in relation with prevalence of MD in Russians, Uzbeks and Europeans (liter- An Ethnic Isolate, Intensely Inbred ature data). There werent a statistically significant differences between fre- D. Bembea1, L. Spineanu1, M. Bembea2, O. Vancsik2, C. Jurca2, R. quencies of IT-15 gene alleles with more then 20 CAG repeats in Russians Spineanu2 and in Uzbeks compared to East England (Rubisztein et al., 1994). HD is 1Clinical Adults Hospital, Department of Ophtalmology; Oradea, Romania; the most common in England, 2-5 times more rare in Russia and practically 2Clinical Children Hospital; Oradea, Romania absent in Uzbeks. We also compared the distributions of long normal diabem@yahoo.com CAG/CTG repeat alleles of IT-15 and DMPK genes in many populations. Introduction; The most common lens defect in the neonate is cataract. It In some populations there werent alleles with more then 16-17 CTG- may occur as an isolated defect or it may be associated with other ocular repeats in DMPK gene. In IT-15 gene alleles with 20-22 CAG repeats were or systemic abnormalities. Cataract may be inherited or sporadic. The common in all populations, while longer alleles were represented only in most common type of inheritance is autosomal dominant; autosomal part of them. Taken together, these facts indicate that the alleles groups recessive inheritance occurs less frequently and it is sometimes found in which are a reservoir for de novo mutations could differ in their repeats populations with high rates of consanguinity. Objective; The study of con- number in two genes. According to our suggestion, the threshold value genital cataract in an isolate, in order to identify the aetiology, the type of between stable alleles and alleles predisposed to expansion is 17-18 inheritance and the genetic and clinical characteristics. Material and repeats for DMPK gene and 22-23 repeats for IT-15. method; The study group comprises an isolate population of approx. 200 individuals, with 8 cases of congenital cataract identified so far. The pedi- P0907.Genetic epidemiology of mendelian diseases in Yaku- gree, segregation study and the probability calculation using the Bayes for- tia mula have been accomplished for each family. Results; Endogamy in this L. Nazarenko, A. Nogovicina, O. Saljukova isolate is of 80%. The consanguinity coefficient of the population forming Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation the isolate is 0.004373 and the frequency of consanguineous marriages is lnaz@img.tsu.ru of 20%. Congenital cataract has been noticed in 8 patients of 4 siblings, We have studied the incidence and prevalence of monogenic disorders in which yields a prevalence of the disease of 7.4% inside the isolate (1/14). 100000 inhabitants of native population of Yakutia, situated at nothern-east The calculated risk for the 4 families varies between 1/513 and 1/5. The part of Siberia. The maximal morbidity rate of autosomal dominant (AD) frequency of heterozygous carriers is 32%. The chances of maintaining the diseases was defined for eastern Yakutian subpopulations (2.4 x 10-3) and frequency of the disease in the isolate and particularities of genetic coun- minimal  for western subpopulations (1.4 x 10-3). The values of morbidi- selling in this case are discussed. Conclusions; Congenital cataract, usu- ty rate of autosomal recessive (AR) diseases ranging from 0.4 to 0.9 x 10- ally rare, can reach an unusually high incidence in isolates. Its study 3. The mean values of morbidity rate of mendelian diseases for Yakutian becomes more interesting today, as isolates are disappearing. population were 1.7 x 10-3 for AD, 0.7 x 10-3 for AR and 0.4 x 10-3 for X- linked diseases. The total morbidity rate of monogenic diseases is 2.8 per P0905. Geographic clustering of left-right axis abnormalities 1000 person. In Yakutian population we observed a high frequency of spin- in Finland - evidence of a founder mutation? iocerebellar ataxia I (SCA1 - MIM 164400), dystrophia myotonica (DM - E. Kajantie1, A. Eerola2, T. Boldt2, K. Virkola3, M. Eronen2, K. Aittomki4 MIM 160900) and methemoglobinemia (NadH-Cytochrome b5 Reductase 1Department of Clinical Genetics and The Hospital for Children and Ado- deficiency - MIM 250800). The study of hereditary diseases will give us the lescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 2The Hos- opportunity to create a prophylactic register of hereditary diseases and pital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital; come to the prospective medico-genetic consultations. Helsinki, Finland; 3Department of Radiology, Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland; 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki Uni- P0908.Haplotype Analysis of Apolipoprotein B Gene in Kore- versity Central Hospital; Helsinki, Finland an Essential Hypertensives eero.kajantie@hus.fi B. Kang1, K. Kim1, J. Shin2, C. Lee2 Backgorund; The population history of Finland with regions of old (around 1Seoulin Bioscience Institute, Seoulin Bioscience, Co., Ltd.; Seoul, Repub- 2000 years ago) and new (about 500 years ago by a small number of lic of Korea; 2School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University; founders) settlement has created an unique model to study genetic disor- Seoul, Republic of Korea ders on the basis of their geographical distribution across the country. Left- kby_99@yahoo.com right axis abnormalities constitute a clinically well-defined but genetically Essential hypertension is considered to be a multifactorial disease that is heterogeneous disorder manifesting as congenital defects in the sided- influenced not only by environmental factors but also by genetic factors. ness of the heart, great vessels, bronchi, spleen, liver and intestine. Objec- Alterations of lipid metabolism in plasma have been reported to be related tive; To determine whether left-right axis abnormalities in Finland occur to an increased risk of essential hypertension. The purpose of this study more frequently within the new founder settlement than the old settlement. was to estimate haplotype frequencies of apolipoprotein B(apo B) gene in Methods; The database of the Helsinki University Central Hospital was Korean population and investigate the relationship between haplotypes of searched for suggestive diagnoses which were confirmed by chart review. this gene and essential hypertension. In order to estimate the haplotype In Finland, almost all patients having left-right axis abnormalities with car- frequencies, Pvu II, Xba I and Eco RI RFLPs of apo B gene were used as diovascular malformations are evaluated in this hospital. To exclude the genetic marker. There were no significant differences in allele, genotype or effect of modern migration, the birthplaces of the patients grandparents, haplotype frequencies between normotensives and essential hyperten- collected from population records, were analysed. Results; 42 patients sives. However, Xba I and Pvu II RFLPs of apo B gene were significantly were found, among them 2 sibpairs (total number of siblings 131). An associated with plasma total cholesterol and triglyceride levels in essential excess, 94 (59%), of the grandparents was born in provinces correspon- hypertensive groups, respectively(P<0.05). Therefore, our result suggest278 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics that these two RFLPs of apo B gene may be genetic components of car- R408W (41.0%), F39L(12.1%) and I65T(10.1%). The predominant haplo- diovascular risk factors in Korean essential hypertensives. type associations for these common mutations were; R408W-1.8-242, F39L-1.8-238 and I65T-1.8-246. The R408W-1.8 mutation exhibits an East P0909. High Incidence of 550delA Mutation in Limb-Girdle to West gradient of increasing relative frequency across Europe peaking in Muscular Dystrophy Type 2A(LGMD2A) in Croatia Ireland. Our data demonstrates that this gradient continues across Ireland A. Milic1, B. Kovac2, F. Leturcq3, N. Zurak1, N. Canki-Klain1 and peaks in Connacht, the most Westerly province. Combining our data 1Croatian Institute for Brain Research and Department of Neurology, with that from Northern Ireland (Zschocke et al., Am J Hum Genet 1995; Zagreb University Medical School; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Department of Neu- 57; 1311-1317) we have produced a merged data-set for the island of Ire- rology, University of Osijek; OSIJEK, Croatia; 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et land. Our analysis of this data concurs with previous suggestions that the GenetiqueMoleculaire, Hopital Cochin; Paris, France English contribution to the Irish genepool was small and that gene flow stella24hrv@yahoo.com between Ireland and Scandinavia was unidirectional. It further demon- We report preliminary data concerning 28 LGMD2Apatients from Croatias strates that the province of Ulster has been a zone of population admixture population of 4,8 million people. Sequence analysis of patients from six between Ireland and Scotland. apparently non related families from a small rural community revealed homozygocity for a 550delA. Analysis of additional 4 families from different P0912. Study of the mutations causing familial hypercholes- parts of the country revealed homozygous 550delApatients in two families, terolemia in St.-Petersburg compound heterozygotes 550delA/ Y537X in one family, and compound J. Tatisheva, F. Zakharova heterozygotes for a 550delA/one unknown mutation. These results moti- Institute for Experimental Medicine; St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation vated us to develop rapid screening method for 550delA. The fact that July@postbox.spb.ru 550delAcreates restriction site for Bsa AI enzyme was used to distinguish Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited metabolic disease with wild type PCR product (210bp) unchanged after the incubation with the a dominant mode of inheritance. It is quite common in most human popu- enzyme, from mutated type (cut in two bands of 120 and 90 bp). Applica- lations (1;500) and results in drastical reduction of low-density lipoprotein tion of this method on 28 patients from 18 families permitted us to identify; (LDL) catabolism followed by premature coronary heart disease (CAD). homozygous 550delApatients in 8/18 families; compound heterozygotes The disease is caused by mutations in the LDLreceptor gene. In order to 550delAin 7/18 families. Second mutated allele is not identified in 4 fami- develop presymptomatic diagnostic tools for management of the FH we lies. In five typical LGMD2A patients from 2 families both alleles are aimed to study the LDLreceptor gene mutation spectrum in St.-Petersburg unknown. In conclusion our preliminary study shows that 550delAmutation (Russia). We have created a DNAbank from 100 unrelated patients with accounts for 63,8 %( 23/36) of CANP3 chromosomes. clinical picture of FH. Separate exons of the receptor gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and screened for presence of the P0910. Distribution the most common cystic fibrosis muta- mutations via combined single-strand conformation polymorphism-het- tions in Balkans, Central & Eastern European populations. eroduplex analysis (SSCP-HA). The fragments showing shifted mobility in M. Macek Jr.1, M. Macek1, T. Doerk2, E. Dequeker3, J. Cassiman3 polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis were sequenced by method of Sanger. 1CF Center-Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics; Prague 5, Czech Up-to-date, we have identified six mutations - C74X, 347delGCC, ?130?, Republic; 2IHG, MNH; Hannover, Germany; 3Cnt. Med. Genet. Univ.; Leu- ?146R, C188Y, G578E, all of them besides C74X were novel. Rapid meth- ven, Belgium ods for mutation detection were developed. Cosegregation of mutations pavel.roubic@lfmotol.cuni.cz, milan.macek.jr@lfmotol.cuni.cz and high cholesterol levels proves the role of mutations in disease devel- We have analyzed 151 CFTR mutations in representative groups of CF opment. St.Petersburg population was found to be polymorphic in many patients from 20 Balkans, Central and Eastern European countries (BCEC; postions of the LDLreceptor gene - 447 ?/?, 750C/T, 1170A/G, 1413 G/A, 73 AL, 290 A, 94 BY, 216 BG, 138 HR, 247 CZ, 30 EE, 359 EL, 488 HU, 1545 ?/?, 1773 T/C, 2177 C/T, 2231 G/A(exons 4, 5, 8, 10, 10, 12, 15, 15 18 LV, 47 LT, 113 RM, 863 PL; 28 RO, 1,281 RU, 117 SK, 66 SI, 335 TR, correspondingly). Using DNAmethods we have confirmed or set diagnosis 260 UA, 199 YU; a total of 5262 cases). All centers screened for the 12 of FH in 34 patients and confirmed absence of FH in 14 relatives of most common CF mutations, while the entire CFTR coding region was patients. scanned in A, BG, CZ, EE, EL, PL, RM, RU, SI and TR. The 25 most com- mon CF alleles comprise; deltaF508 (n=5636/53.55% of all CF chromo- P0913.International variation in the prevalence of the C677T somes), G542X (227/2.16), N1303K (164/1.56), CFTRdele2,3/21kb/ variant of the 5,10 methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (120/1.14), 3849+10kbC->T (67/0.64), 621+1 G->T (63/0.59), R553X (MTHFR) gene among well-defined populations. (62/0.59), W1282X (56/0.53), 1677delTA (47/0.45), G551D (44/0.42), R. Tenconi1, P. Mastroiacovo1, -. MTHFR study group2, -. MTHFR study 1717-1G->A (34/0.32), 2184insA (32/0.30); 2143delT, R334W (28/0.27 group2 each); R347P (27/0.26); 2183AA->G (24/0.23), 2789+5 G->A (21/0.20), 1International Center for Birth Defects; Rome, Italy; 2International Clear- R1162X (19/0.18), 394delTT (17/0.16), 1898+1G->A (16/0.15), R1070Q inghouse Birth Defects Monitoring Systems; -, Italy (15/0.14), G85E (13/0.12); 457TAT->G, E822X (13/0.12 each) and R1158X icbd@icbd.org (11/0.1). The spectrum and distribution of mutations markedly differs from MTHFR encodes a critical enzyme in folate and homocysteine metabolism. that observed in Western Europe (Hum Mutat 10;135,1997 extrapolated The C677Tallele of the MTHFR gene is reportedly common in some pop- data) with statistically significant differences being observed in deltaF508, ulations and has been associated with an increased risk for spina bifida G542X, CFTRdele2,3 /21kb/ and G551D mutations (p<0.001). Inclusion of and for adult cardiovascular diseases. Although many reports the C677T common BCEC mutations into screening panels will considerably improve prevalence are available, few were based on well-defined populations. We the genetic diagnosis of CF. Supported by grants;#6250-3, 6411-3, report data from 12 countries in Europe (Finland, France, Hungary, Italy, 000000064203; #111300003, ME258, OK192; LN00A079; ERB IC20 CT96 Netherlands, Spain), Israel, Russia, China, and the Americas (Canada- 0058. (*)We acknowledge contribution of members of the INCO-BIOMED Alberta, United States-Georgia, Mexico). We attempted to sample popula- CF Mutation Analysis Consortium that could not be listed by their names tions that were well defined; our approaches included using newborn blood due to abstract space constraint. spots from specific geographic areas or from consecutive liveborn babies from hospitals. Typically these populations were also under birth defect P0911.The mutation spectrum of Hyperphenylalaninaemia in monitoring. We found a high prevalence of C677Thomozygotes in Mexico Southern Ireland; the population genetics of the Irish revisit- (32%), Northern China (20%), and Southern Italy (20% in Catania, 26% in ed Campania). Such prevalence was intermediate in Northern Italy, France, D. T. Croke and Spain (15, 13, and 12%, respectively), and it was low in Finland, the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland; Dublin, Ireland Netherlands, and Russia (4,6, and 7%, respectively). In the sample from dtcroke@rcsi.ie the United States (Georgia), we noted racial variations; prevalence was Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most severe form of hyperphenylalaninaemia high among Hispanics (18 percent), low among African Americans (3 per- (HPA), has an incidence in the Republic of Ireland of approximately 1 in cent) and intermediate among Whites (11 percent). These findings under- 4,500 live births. The purpose of this study was to investigate the HPA score the geographical and racial variability of the C677T variant. Such mutation spectrum in the Republic, to determine mutation-haplotype asso- data should be useful to better design studies of gene-environment inter- ciations and to investigate genotype-phenotype correlations. Mutational actions involving the MTHFR gene, as well as for future applications in analysis was carried out on a cohort of 279 unrelated hyperphenylalani- population-based prevention of conditions related to such gene. naemic patients (558 independent alleles) by standard methods. Mutations were detected in 92% of alleles revealing a total of 29 mutations. Alarge proportion of alleles (63.6%) were accounted for by three mutations;Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 279 P0914.Two novel mutations in the HEXAgene found in TSD studied families. All three markers were informative in seven families. In carriers of Iraqi Jewish origin and haplotype analysis sug- seven cases deletion of the DMD(CA)45int marker in affected children gesting a founder effect. occurred. It gave possibility of direct identification of mutations in female L. Peleg1, M. Karpati1, B. Goldman1, E. Gazit2, A. Frisch3 relatives. Additionally direct carrier detection was possible in one family 1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center; Tel with large deletion including the DMD(CA)5II marker. However, in order to Hashomer, Israel; 2Department of Pediatrics, Sheba Medical Center; Tel distinguish homozygous and hemizygous females, DNAsamples of both Hashomer, Israel; 3Felsenstein Medical Research Center; Rabin Medical parents are necessary. Three cases of homo-/hemizygous mother Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel occurred in our investigation. Unfortunately, grandparents DNAs were not lea_peleg@hotmail.com available and in these cases carrier status of mothers was not determined. Among Jews, Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) was thought to be restricted to Direct approach failed also in two families, in which both mother and father individuals of Ashkenazi (carrier frequency of 1;29) and Moroccan (1;110) had the same allele and it was impossible to estimate whether a sister is descent. However, an elevated carrier frequency of 1;140 was found also homo- or hemizygous. New mutations were observed in seven families. In among Iraqi Jews (IJ). AG749 to Tchange resulting in the substitution of four of them deletion of marker occurred in an affected child while mother Glycine250 to valine was recently identified by us in 41% of the TSD car- was heterozygous. In three other cases the same haplotype occurred in an riers (24/58). We now report an additional novel mutation; a C1351 to G affected child and a healthy brother. Additionally, seven cases of intragenic transversion resulting in a change of Leucine451 to valine in 29% (17/58) recombination events were detected. Five of them occurred in DNA of IJ carriers. Neither of the mutations was found in 100 non-carriers of the obtained from sisters. Only two markers were informative in all these same ethnic group. Haplotype analysis was conducted using 6 markers cases, so it was impossible to determine which marker is linked with a closely linked to the HEXAgene. Mutation G749 to Twas associated with mutation. allele #1 of D15S131 in 70% of heterozygotes compared with 10% in eth- nically matched controls (chi square=46.9, p=10-5) and with allele #2 of P0917.(AC) repeats of 5beta globin gene and its relation with D15S1025 in 68% of heterozygotes compared with 43% in controls (chi sickle cell anemia in Mexican population. square=4.4, p=0.03). The calculated linkage disequilibrium was 0.66 and R. I. E. Pealoza1, P. Delgado1, T. Sedas2, C. Hernandez3, L. Buentello4, 0.44 respectively. Mutation C1351 to G was also associated with allele #1 D. Arenas1, F. Salamanca1 of D15S131 (chi square=7.0, p=0.008) yielding a linkage disequilibrium of 1Unit of Medical Investigation in Human Genetics; Mexico City, Mexico; 0.3 yet, no significant linkage was found with D15S1025. These results 2Regional Hospital; Veracruz, Mexico; 3Regional Hospital; Acapulco, Mex- suggest a possible common ancestor for each of the HEXAmutations in ico; 4Institute of Antropological Investigations,UNAM; Mexico City, Mexico Iraqi heterozygotes. The C1351 to G mutation had probably occurred ear- rosenda@servidor.unam.mx lier than G749 to T, as it shows less association with the adjacent markers. The (AC) repeats are been found in the human genomic very frequently. Since these mutations have not been documented in Ashkenazi Jewish Some of them are related with pathologies. The (AC)n of 5 beta globin carriers, they were probably introduced after the 70 AD Exile. gene end was studied in normal Mexican population. We founded three alleles. The first Awas the most common, B was intermidiat frequency and P0915. Notification of Cystic Fibrosis as primary cause of C only in Purpecha and Mestizo population was found . Now we reported death in South and Southeast Brazil, from 1981 to 1995 its relation with sicle cell anemia of Mexican patients. The allele B it was C. L. A. Paiva, L. Janotti, C. Naurath, A. Essinger, R. Gonalves, E. Bal- found more frequente in beta-S mutation. Moreover, two news alleles there tazar, S. R. Middleton, S. R. dos Santos are in the Mestizo Mexican population studied, that have high African com- Universidade do Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil ponent. This finding are useful for better knowling of this human group. clapaiva@prolink.com.br Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autossomal recessive chronic disease mapped P0918.The Distribution of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Loci in the to 7q31-q32. Lung disease accounts for ~95% of its morbidity and mortal- Newfoundland Population ity. The lungs of CF patients are compromised by persistent bacterial infec- W. S. Davidson1, M. O. Woods2, J. S. Green2, P. S. Parfrey2 tion from early age. Of the congenital disorders CF is one of the most com- 1Simon FRaser University; Burnaby, BC Canada; 2Memorial University; St. mon with ~1 in 2000 Caucasians affected, with carrier frequency as high Johns, NFCanada as one in 25 in Caucasians of northern European ancestry. There was wdavidso@sfu.ca ample motivation to investigate the notification of CF as primary cause of Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is a rare, genetically heterogeneous (>6 death in South and Southeast Brazil, since these regions have a multira- loci), recessive disorder characterized by dysmorphic extremities, retinal cial mixed population including Caucasians from European origin. Our dystrophy, obesity, male hypogenitalism, and renal disease. We have iden- hypothesis was that there was under estimation of deaths from CF, since tified 22 families with BBS in Newfoundland, 17 of whom participated in a the disease has not been currently recognised mainly in the inland parts of genetic linkage study. Afounder effect was associated with BBS1 in 5 fam- the country. CF symptoms, such as pulmonary infection, and diarrhoea,as ilies, 2 families have BBS2, and 1 is linked to BBS3. Another Newfound- well as malnutrition (caused by lack of pancreatic enzymes secretion) are land family positioned BBS5 on chromosome 2q. No BBS4 families have also common causes of death of non-CF infants in Brazil. Our data were been identified. Agenome wide scan of family B13 (excluded from BBS loci extracted from the Brazilian CD-rom entitled Sistema de informacao sobre 1-5) suggested that the locus for BBS6 was at 20p12. Fine mapping mortalidade/1979-1997 which contained data of all death declarations of reduced the critical interval to 1.9cM encompassing a chaperonin-like gene the country.The frequencies of CF death notifications per 100,000 inhabi- associated with McKusick Kaufman Syndrome (MKKS). Mutation screen- tants per year for Brazil and for each south or southeast state were calcu- ing of the MKKS gene identified combinations of 3 mutant alleles in five lated for comparison. Chi-square test was performed by comparing the val- BBS families and confirmed that MKKS and BBS6 result from mutations in ues of each state against that of Brazil and of Sao Paulo(SP),the more the same gene. Of the 3 unassigned families, one has been excluded at developed state. Our results may indicate that SPhas a more precise noti- BBS1-6, implying that another disease locus exists. The remaining 2 fam- fication of CF as primary cause of death than other states of Brazil ilies are uninformative due to pedigree structure. We conclude that, unlike the rest of North America and Europe, BBS6 accounts for approximately P0916. Intragenic recombination events and de novo muta- one third of BBS in Newfoundland. We have no explanation at this time for tions in the DMD gene; rapid detection by analysis of the high incidence of BBS in this relatively small, isolated population or for microsatellite markers. the presence of such a diversity of loci (at least 6) or the number of differ- M. Kaczmarek1, D. Napierala1, M. Szalata1, R. Slomski1,2 ent mutations (at least 8). 1Institute of Human Genetics; Poznan, Poland; 2Department of Biochem- istry and Biotechnology; Poznan, Poland P0919. Analysis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney slomski@au.poznan.pl disease (ADPKD) in the Newfoundland population. Studies of allele frequencies of three microsatellite markers revealed few D. S. Compton1, W. S. Davidson1, J. S. Green2, E. L. Dicks2, P. S. Par- new alleles of each marker in Polish population. All new alleles are very frey2 rare. The number and frequency of alleles are similar for Polish and Cau- 1Simon Fraser University; Burnaby, Canada; 2Memorial University of New- casian population. Only one discrepancy occurred between our studies foundland; St. Johns, Canada and previous data and it concerned size of the most common allele of the dcompton@sfu.ca DMD(CA)5II marker. The three markers were run in a multiplex reaction to The Newfoundland population is ideal for examining founder effects and determine carrier status for sisters of affected child from 36 DMD/BMD for studying the incidence of hereditary disease in what is essentially a families. In two families carrier analysis concerned an aunt of an affected closed community. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease child and in one case a cousin. At least one marker was informative in all (ADPKD) is one of the most common genetic diseases in humans. Muta-280 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics tions in any one of at least two different genes are thought to be responsi- a IVS8-T variant. The patients with obstructive azoospermia were addi- ble for this disease and two genes, PKD1 and PKD2, have been mapped tionally tested for more mutations by INNO/LipaTMCFTR12 and to 16p13.3 and 4q21-23, respectively. Fifteen Newfoundland families with INNO/LipaTMCFTR17+Tn kits. In the result of these tests only F508 ADPKD have been examined using microsatellite markers flanking and mutation and 5T allele were revealed. We identified two heterozygotes within the PKD genes on chromosome 16 and chromosome 4. Eight of the F508/5T and two heterozygotes with 5T allele in one chromosome in fifteen families showed linkage to PKD1 whereas four were linked to PKD2. obstructive azoospermia group. One compound heterozygote The other three families were uninformative due to the structure of the fam- F508/P508C, one 5Thomozygote and one patient with only one 5Tallele ily. Comparisons of the haplotypes of the families linked to PKD1 revealed were detected in nonobstructive azoospermia group. Among the oligo- that four families share a partial haplotype suggestive of an ancestral zoospermic men 14 patients revealed 5T in one allele and one carried founder disease chromosome. The other four PKD1 haplotypes suggest F508 muation on one chromosome. In comparison with the control group that these all resulted from independent mutation events. Comparisons of of normal men, the frequency of F508 mutation and 5Tallele was con- the PKD2 haplotypes revealed that two families shared a haplotype and siderably higher only in patients with obstructive azoospermia; 5% versus sequencing of exon 6 showed that both families shared the same R464X 0,6% for F508 and 10% versus 4,2% for 5T.Therefore CFTR gene muta- mutation. The other two PKD2 haplotypes suggest that they resulted from tion screening and genetic counselling should be recommended to males independent mutation events. Mutational analysis is currently underway to with obstructive azoospermia and there partners to reduce there risk for CF determine the exact number of founder mutations for ADPKD in the New- child by assisted reproduction procedures. foundland population. (Supported by the Kidney Foundation of Canada and the Medical Research Council of Canada) P0922.Factor V Leiden and Factor II Mutation frequencies in Turkish pregnant women ; preliminary findings P0920. Frequency of the C282Ymutation of the HFE gene in R. Bircan1, C. Erzik1, F. Akbas2, I. Gney1, E. Oral2, B. Cirakoglu1 Ukraine. 1Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Dept of Medical Biol&Genetics; V. Pampuha1, A. Cherchenko2, V. Rozumenko3, I. Lubyanova4, L. Livshits5 Istanbul, Turkey; 2Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty Dept of 1Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics National Academy of Science of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Istanbul, Turkey Ukraine; Kyiv, Ukraine; 2Institute of Neurosurgery Academy of Medical rifatbircan@yahoo.com Science of Ukraine; Kyiv., Ukraine; 3Institute of Neurosurgery Academy of Objective; The studys objective was to evaluate association between Medical Science of Ukraine; Kyiv, Ukraine; 4Institute for Occupational hereditary coagulation abnormalities including factor V Leiden and pro- Health Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine; Kyiv, Ukraine; 5Institute of thrombin G20210Aand obstetrical complicalitions such as preeclampsia, Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of Ukraine; abruptio placentae, intrauterine fetal growth retardation (IUFGR)and still- Kyiv, Ukraine birth in Turkish population. Material and Methods ; DNAwas extracted from livshits@imbg.org.ua whole blood of 84 women -42 complicated pregnancies and 42 control Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a common autosomal recessive cases. The polymerase chain reaction was used to amplify exon 10 of fac- genetic disorder in Caucasians. Hemochromatosis is characterized by tor V gene and untranslated end of prothrombin gene followed by enzy- increased gastrointestinal iron absorbtion in excessive uptake and persis- matic digestion with Mnl I and Hind III for mutation detection respectively. tant accumulation of iron in the body. Classical symptoms of hemochro- Results ; The mutation at nucleotide 1691 in factor V gene was detected in matosis include liver disease, diabetes mellitus, myocardiopathy, arthral- 8 of the women with obstetrical complication and in 3 of the women with gia, skin siderosis. The gene of hemochromatosis HFE is located on the normal pregnancies (19% and 7.1% respectively; p<0.005). This mutation short arm of the chromosome 6 telomeric to major histicompatibility com- was detected 5 of the 28 women who had preeclampsia (17.9% p<0.005), plex. A single missence mutation C282Y is responsible for hemochro- 2 of the 5 women who had stillbirth (40%) and 1 of the 7 pregnant women matosis in approximately 80% of all cases. C282Yfrequencies of 1-10 % who had IUFGR (14%). Prothrombin G20210A polimorphism detection are observed in Europeans. We analysed the frequency of the C282Yin results under evaluation. Conclusions ; The Leiden mutation is relatively 260 individuals with Slavic origin from three Ukranian regions (West, Cen- common in pregnant women with preeclampsia. Although the mutation tral , East) and in 100 individuals from isolated Crimean tartars. Frequen- was detected in women who had stillbirth and IUFGR, the number of sub- cy of C282Ymutation in different regions of Ukraine ranged from 2% to ject is not meaningful for statistical evaluation. It is suggested that factor V 3%; frequency of this mutation in pooled Ukrainians was 2,5% and in Leiden and prothrombin G20210A mutation detection screening can be Crimean tartars was 1%. The high prevalence of the C282Ymutation in used for pregnant women under risk. Ukraine suggests that population screening for the C282Ymutation could be highly advantageous in terms of preventive health care. P0923. Variable expression of presenilin 1 is not a major determinant of risk for late-onset Alzheimers Disease P0921.Detection of the CFTR gene mutations in cystic fibro- R. Rademakers1, G. Roks2, M. Cruts1, J. Theuns1, J. Houwing-Duister- sis patients and in men with azoosperma from Estonia. maat2, S. Serneels1, A. Hofman2, M. Breteler2, C. Van Broeckhoven1, C. M. Teder1, T. Kahre2, K. Kaasik3, M. Punab4, A. Sritsa5, A. Metspalu6 van Duijn2, B. Dermaut1 1Estonian Biocentre; Tartu, Estonia; 2Centre of Molecular Diagnostics, 1Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB); Antwerpen, Bel- Tartu University Clinics; Tartu, Estonia; 3Institute of Cell and Molecular gium; 2Erasmus Medical Center; Rotterdam, The Netherlands Biology, University of Tartu; Tartu, Estonia; 4Surgery Clinic, Tartu Universi- rrademak@uia.ua.ac.be ty Clinics; Tartu, Estonia; 5The Private Clinic; Tartu, Estonia; 6Institute of We have demonstrated a significant association between early-onset Molecular and Cell Biology, Centre of Molecular Diagnostics, University of Alzheimers disease (EOAD) and an allele in the promotor of presenilin 1 Tartu; Tartu, Estonia (PSEN1),significantly decreasing PSEN1 expression in vitro. For late-onset mteder@ebc.ee Alzheimers disease (LOAD),numerous studies have reported inconsistent Since the identification of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance associations with a polymorphism in intron 8 of PSEN1. We hypothesized regulator (CFTR) gene more than 900 mutations, responsible for CF have that these conflicting reports in LOAD might be due to linkage disequilibri- been described. Involvement of CFTR gene mutations has also been con- um between this intronic PSEN1 polymorphism and the functional promo- firmed in otherwise healthy but infertile men with obstructive azoospermia tor polymorphism. To determine the genetic contribution of the PSEN1 from congenital bilateral or unilateral absence of vas deference, and epi- intronic and promotor variations to LOAD we analyzed both variations in didymal or ejaculatory duct obstruction. The aim of the study was to iden- 356 LOAD patients and 230 controls in a population-based case-control tify the spectrum of CFTR gene mutations in CF patients and in infertile study. In addition, we reanalyzed all published literature on the PSEN1 men with azoospermia and oligozoospermia in Estonia. Thirty families with intronic polymorphism in a meta-analysis. No significant association was CF patients were studied. All 27 exons and their flanking sequences were found with the PSEN1 intronic or promotor polymorphism in our case-con- scanned by SSCPand DGGE analyses. Two CFTR gene mutations were trol sample. In the meta-analysis no major differences between patients and found to be common in Estonia; F508 in 31 (51.7%) alleles and 394delTT controls were found for the PSEN1 intronic variation. Together our results in 8 (13.3%) alleles. Eight rare mutations were detected, all described ear- donotsupportamajorroleforvariableexpressionofPSEN1in LOAD. lier in other populations. We did not find any of the mutations more com- mon in the European populations like G542X(2.6%), N1303K(1.6%), P0924. Genotype and gene frequency analysis of beta tha- G551D(1.5%) or W1282X(1.0%). In conclusion, about 80% of mutations lassemia in Chaharmahal Bakhtiary Province (Iran) were identified in CF patients. The study group of men with fertility prob- M. Hemmat lems included 20 individuals with obstructive and 29 individuals with Shahrekord University; Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran nonobstructive azoospermia and 107 men with severe oligozoospermia. MO_hemmat@yahoo.com Patients were tested for three CF mutations F508, 394delTT, R117H and The beta thalassemia is an autosomal ressesive genetic disease, causedPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 281 by a loss in activity in one or both alleles of the beta globin gene. The beta be the major mutation in Iranian PKU patients. This result is in accordance thalassemia is well known as one of the major genetic disease in ten with the prevalent mutation in Mediterranean populations. provinces located in north and south of Iran. It has been estimated that more than 3000000 gene carriers exist in these regions. The present study P0927. Molecular diagnosis of Rett syndrome; Detection of has been focused on beta thalassemia in Chaharmahal Bakhtiary province the prevalent mutations in MeCP2 gene in Czech and Slovak located in south of Iran. Hardy-Weinberg principle was utilized in order to patients. determine the genotype and gene frequencies and estimation of the per- R. Rosipal1, J. Zeman1, J. Hada?2, N. Mi?ovi?ov3, S. Nev?malov1, P. centage of homozygote and heterozygote carriers in this population. The Martsek1 frequency of all the affected genes (q)and normal gene (p)were estimated 1Charles University, Faculty of Medicine I; Praha, Czech Republic; as 0.016 and 0.984 respectively. The frequency of the number of people 2Thomayer Hospital; Praha 4, Czech Republic; 3Faculty Hospital; Martin, expected to be homozygous normal, heterozygous carriers (minor tha- Slovakia lassemic) and homozygous affected (major thalassemic) were determined rrosipal@hotmail.com as p2=0.9682, 2pq=0.0315 and q2=0.0003 respectively. From these data Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder it was concluded that, 96.82 percent of human population in this province affecting 1 in 10,000 to 15,000 females worldwide (1) and is caused by were homozygous normal, 3.15 percent were heterozygous carriers (minor mutations in X-linked MECP2 gene, encoding for methyl-CpG-binding pro- thalassemic)and 0.03 percent were homozygous affected and demonstrat- tein 2 (2,3). It plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression. ed major thalassemia. There are 5 prevalent mutations in methyl-CpG binding protein 2, causing Rett syndrome. Four of them are detectable by restriction analysis. In this P0925. Incidence of XmnI RFLP among Iranian Phenylke- study we present the results of the search for four prevalent mutations in tonuria Patients as a Marker Contributing to Carrier Detection the gene for methyl-CpG binding protein 2 in Czech and Slovak patients M. seifati1, M. Hosseini Mazinani1, N. Hosein Pur1, M. Koochmeshgi2, B. with Rett syndrome. Twenty two females with clinical diagnosis of Rett syn- s. Behboudi3 drome from Czech and Slovak Republics were investigated. Restriction 1national research center for genetic engineerig and biotechnology; tehran, analysis and direct sequencing of PCR products of methyl-CpG binding Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Iran medical university; Tehran, Islamic Republic protein 2 gene revealed 3 different mutations [473 C to T (T158M) in 3 of Iran; 3Tehran university; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran patients, 502 C to T(R168X) in 2 patients, and 808 C to T(R270X) in 1 mseifati@nrcgeb.ac.ir patient] in six unrelated patients with Rett syndrome. The results of restric- Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common error of amino acid metabo- tion analysis were confirmed by bi-directional direct sequencing. The first lism. It is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a variety of mutations study of Rett syndrome in Slavic population shows that three from hot spot in the Phenylalanine Hydroxylase (PAH) gene. These mutations exhibit a mutations in exon 3 of MECP2 gene are present in 27% of the patients high degree of association with specific haplotypes in different populations. and dictates therefore the strategy in molecular diagnosis of Rett syn- These haplotypes are composed of different kinds of genetic markers. An drome. Mutation R306C, frequent in Swedish patients (4), was not found Extended- haplotype is a combination of different RFLPs (EcoRV, XmnI, in 22 Czech and Slovak patients. 1. Rett, A.; Wien Med. Wochenschr., 116, MspI, EcoRI, PvuIIb, PvuIIa, BglII,), while a mini-haplotype consists of 1966, 723-726. 2. Amir, R.E., et al. ; Nature Genet., 23, 1999, 185-188. 3. one specific STR, one specific VNTR and XmnI RFLPof the PAH gene. Sirianni, N., et al.; Am. J. Hum. Genet., 63, 1998, 1552-1558. 4. Xiang, F., Since STR and VNTR are polymorphic markers, they have higher poly- et al.; J. Med. Genet., 37, 2000, 250-255. Supported by Czech Granting morphism information contents (PICs) in comparison with RFLPs (each Agency (GACR 301/01/P068 and 302/99/0648). having only two forms), and thus they represent to be more suitable mark- ers in carrier detection procedure done by segregation analysis. However, P0928. Haplotype Analysis of the Most Common Beta-Tha- some RFLPs are needed beside these polymorphic markers to yield high- lassemia Mutation Intervening Sequence II-1 (IVSII-1) in Iran ly efficient carrier detection results. One of the several markers we have T. Parsian1, N. Ghobadian1, A. Javadian1, S. Teimourian2, F. Pourfarzad1, studied in order to identify their degree of heterozygosity and PIC is XmnI, S. Amjadi1, H. Najmabadi1,2 which is the only common marker in extended- and mini-haplotype. For this 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; purpose we extracted DNAfrom PKU patients blood samples and ampli- 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of fied exon 8 of PAH gene in them. Among 124 alleles, only 8 alleles (6.5%) Iran were digested with related enzyme (ASP700) . Thus the degree of het- maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk erozygosity and PIC of XmnI RFLPin Iranian PKU patients are 0.12155 IVSII-1 is considered the most common beta-thalassemia mutation in Iran. and 0.11416 respectively. Combining this RFLPwith STR and VNTR poly- In the North of Iran by the Caspian Sea, over 50% of affected individuals morphic markers in segregation analyses will increase the efficiency of car- carry this mutation and the overall frequency in Iran is 30%. Restriction rier detection procedure. enzyme mapping for beta-globin gene cluster is important in systematic studies of single copy genes causing beta-thalassemia. The most frequent P0926. Identification of the Major Mutation in PAH Gene mutation in the Iranian population, which leads to beta-thalassemia is the among Iranian Phenylketonuria Patients substitution of G to Ain the intervening sequence II, nucleotide number 1. N. Hosein Pur, M. Hosseini Mazinani, J. Koochmeshgi, K. Moshiri, Z. We have studied ten affected homozygous for IVSII-1. After restriction Khazaee, K. Anisi, M. Seifati digestion for six polymorphic loci (XmnI, HindIII/Ggamma, HindII3/wb, National Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology; AvaII/b,RsaI/b, HinfI/b) . We constructed chromosomal haplotype that are Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran related to this mutation. Our result shows that the IVSII-1 mutation is nasim@nrcgeb.ac.ir essentially in company with two types of haplotypes about 40% and 30% Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most common inborn error of amino acid respectively. These haplotypes are quite different from Mediterranean hap- metabolism, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by more than 400 lotype for IVSII-1. mutations in Phenylalanine Hydroxylase gene (PAHdb). This gene, 90 kilo bases long, includes 13 exons and is located in 12q22-q24 region. Distrib- P0929.MEFV gene mutations and high carrier rates for famil- ution patterns of mutations in the PAH gene are specific to each popula- ial Mediterranean fever in Turkish FMF patients and healthy tion. In this study,the incidences of IVS10nt546, R261X, R261Q and population R408Q mutations among a group of Iranian PKU patients from all over the B. Balci, E. Yilmaz, S. Ozen, R. Topaloglu, N. Besbas, A. Bakkaloglu, M. country were determined. IVS10nt546, occurring in intron 10 of PAH gene, Ozguc is the most common mutation among Mediterranean populations. The next Hacettepe University; Ankara, Turkey two ones have a good chance to occur since they belong to a hotspot in banubalci@hotmail.com exon 7 of this gene,and R408Q mutation,existing in exon 12, is one of the Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessive disorder characterised only two reported mutations among Persian ethnicity in PAHdb to date. In by episodes of fever and neutrophil-mediated serozal inflammation. The order to study these mutations, we amplified exons 7, 11 and 12 of PAH most serious complication of FMF is the development of amyloidosis. gene, extracted from blood samples of PKU patients. PCR products were Colchicine has been shown to be effective in preventing the attacks of FMF then digested with DdeI, HinfI, DdeI and HaeIII restriction enzymes for as well as the development of amyloidosis1. The disease affects primarily detecting R261X, R261Q, IVS10nt546 and R408Q mutations respectively. ethnic groups living around the Mediterranean basin; Ashkenazi Jews, Among 130 alleles studied, 40 alleles (33.3%) were positive for Armenians, Turks, and Arabs. The gene causing FMF has been cloned in IVS10nt546 mutation and among 80 alleles, 5 alleles(6.25%) were positive 1997, and several mutations characterised in MEFV gene. The aim of this for R261Q and 2alleles(2.5%) for R261X mutations. No allele was positive study was to determine the carrier rate in the Turkish population and the for R408Q mutation. According to this data, IVS10nt546 mutation seems to mutation frequency in the clinically diagnosed FMF patients. We found a282 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics high frequency of carriers in the healthy Turkish population (20%). One ed CAG repeats in mutant alleles. In 1999 a novel CTG trinucleotide healthy asymptomatic individual was found to carry mutations in both alle- expansion in 3 untranslated region of SCA8 gene on chromosome 13q21 les (V726A/E148Q). The distribution of the five most common MEFV muta- was identified. Studies established on controls and patients with linkage to tions among healthy individuals (M694V 3%, M680I 5%, V726A2%, M694I chromosome 13q21 showed tetramodal distribution of CTG repeat num- 0% and E148Q 12%) was significantly different (p <0.005) from that found ber. The prevalence of three non-pathogenic ranges with different fre- in patients (M694V 51.55%, M680I 9.22%, V726A2.88%, M694I 0.44%, quency was shown. The pathogenic range was estimated as approximate- and E148Q 3.55%). The high incidence of MEFV gene mutations in the ly 100 and more CTG repeats and was observed in patients with clinical Turkish population (gene frequency of 0.011; 95% CI = 0.06-0.15, and car- signs of SCA(we observed such alleles in 3 families). However, alleles with rier rate of 0.20; 95% CI = 0.12-0.28) indicate that new-born screening may more than 100 CTG repeats were also observed rarely in healthy controls be discussed in the future. and in unaffected patients relatives. This phenomenon may be the result of reduced penetrance of the gene. To establish a non-pathogenic range of P0930.Carrier frequencies of DHCR7 mutations in West-Aus- CTG repeats for Polish population we performed an analysis of CTG poly- tria indicate that Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is among the morphism in a group of 250 Polish healthy controls. In one subgroup con- most common autosomal recessive disorders sist of 100 persons aged 18-69 years two alleles were found with number J. Loeffler, M. Witsch-Baumgartner, H. J. Menzel, H. G. Kraft, G. Uter- of CTG repeats 82 and 100, respectively. In the second subgroup 150 Pol- mann ish controls age of 65-82 we observed one allele with 95 CTG repeats. The Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria results of our study suggest that only CTG repeat number above 100 may witsch-baumgartner@uibk.ac.at relate to neurological signs. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS, MIM 270400) is an autosomal reces- sive multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome of variable P0933.Sensoryneural Hearing Loss (snhl); AComplex Trait severity. Its incidence has been estimated to be approximately one in 20 A. Z. Spadoni1, M. T. Trincavelli1, G. E. Dotto2, M. C. Fumagalli1, M. V. Dal- 000 to 60 000 based on case frequency surveys in populations of Cau- maso1, M. V. Chinellato1, A. Jannelli2, M. B. Bravo-Luna1 casian origin. Identification of the underlying gene defect has paved the 1Faculty of Medicine-UNR; Rosario, Argentina; 2Faculty of Medicine; way for molecular methods to identify carriers. Using allelespecific PCRs Rosario, Argentina we screened 640 anonymous and random blood donor samples from Tirol mbravoluna@hotmial.com (part of West-Austria) for the presence of the three most common cau- SNHLis a mono or multifactorial hearing deficit of great significance in our casian SLOS mutations (IVS8-1G>C, W151X, V326L). For the mutation culture, that can be prevented in some cases. Objective; to assess, in a IVS8-1G>C a carrier frequency of 1 in 50 (1;26-1;75, 95% CI) was identi- first stage, the prevalence of SNHLetiology in a qualified population aged fied. W151X was much less frequent (1;141-0, 95% CI). V326Lwas not 0-15 yr. in order to analyse the involvement of the genetic component. found in the sample analysed. Based on this data an incidence of SLOS of Methods; Retrospective study through the analysis of professional records about 1;10.000 (1;1666  1;22 201, 95% CI) is expected. Remarkably, we of children and adolescents (N= 250) with hearing disorders, attending know only of two unrelated Tirolean SLOS patients. The discrepancy public and private specialised institutions of the city of Rosario, that were between the expected and observed incidence could be due to misdiag- diagnosed of hearing impairment by audiometry and evoked potentials. nosed severe cases, death prior to diagnosis, or fetal loss. The high fre- Results (%) are presented according the following summarised etiological quency of the functional null mutation IVS8-1G>C suggests a founder classification; I) Congenital [32%]; 1) Genetic [35]; 2) Non genetic [65]; a) effect and/or heterozygote advantage. infections; [96]; b) toxics; [4]. II) Acquired [19]); 1) infections [66]; 2) toxics [17; 3) others [17]. III) Indeterminate [40]; and IV) multifactorial [9]. Con- P0931.The Genealogy of Fanconi Anaemia Patients Homozy- clusions; It is striking the high prevalence of the indeterminate and multi- gotic for the Type I and Type II Afrikaner Mutations factorial groups, within these groups it is probable the occurrence of genet- T. Pearson1, N. V. Morgan2, A. J. Tipping2, L. P. Kuyt3, C. G. Mathew2, S. ic disorders, either syndromic or no syndromic, that have not been ade- Jansen1 quately diagnosed. Presently, we are studying this population, considering 1Division of Human Genetics, University of the Orange Free State; Bloem- SNHL as a complex trait, which is our hypothesis, through segregation fontein, South Africa; 2Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, GKT analysis, and improving diagnosis regarding its etiology. School of Medicine; London, United Kingdom; 3Department of Human Genetics, Free University of Amsterdam; Amsterdam, The Netherlands P0934.Mutation Spectrum of Connexin 26 in Iranian Patients gnmgtp@med.uovs.ac.za with Autosomal Recessive Non-syndromic Sensorineural Fanconi anaemia (FA), a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder, is Hearing Loss known to occur at a higher than normal incidence among the white S. Sahebjam1, N. Kouchakian1, S. Arzhangi1, M. Daneshmandan1, M. Afrikaans speaking population of South Africa. The disease is charac- Javan1, B. Cucci2, M. Menezes2, R. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1 terised by progressive bone marrow failure, starting predominantly in 1Genetics Research Center,Welfare Sciences and Rehabilitation Universi- childhood, various phenotypic abnormalities as well as an increased sen- ty; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research sitivity to the clastogenic agents diepoxybutane (DEB) or mytomycin C Laboratories,Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,Uni- (MMC), resulting in chromosomal aberrations. Initial genealogical investi- versity of Iowa; Iowa, IAUnited States gations on 12 families affected by FAbut with unknown mutational status, sahebjam.s@angelfire.com identified GN and/or his spouse JDLB as common ancestors. Afounder Hereditary deafness is one of the most common inherited sensory disor- effect, the cause of the high incidence of FAamong this population group, ders, which affects 1;2000 newborns. About 70% of hereditary deafness is was further substantiated by results obtained through complementation non-syndromic. Autosomal recessive forms (DFNB) make up about 85% of studies and mutation screening, showing the predominance of comple- these cases. Mutations in the connexin 26 (Cx26) gene are associated with mentation group Aand mutation types I, II and III. The existence of three a type of autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss mutation types among the descendants of GN and JDLB raised the possi- (ARNSHL) known as DFNB1. DFNB1 accounts for about 50% of congeni- bility of more than one founder pair or family being involved. For this rea- tal severe to profound ARNSHL. The most common mutation 35 del G is son an additional genealogical investigation was carried out, limited to found in over two-thirds of individuals with DFNB1. The present study seven and six FAparents carrying respectively the Afrikaner types I and II investigates the mutations of connexin 26 found in patients with ARNSHL mutations. Apart from GN /JDLB, HDPand wife CD also featured promi- in the Iranian population. Fifty-five unrelated patients with congenital ARN- nently as possible founders for the FANCA Afrikaner type I mutation, SHL were studied. DFNB1 mutations were found in 9 patients. Four whereas either PV/MDPare candidate founders of the FANCAAfrikaner patients were homozygotes for 35 del G mutation. Compound heterozy- type II mutation. gousy of 35 del G/ W24X and R184/ splice site mutation G-to-A5ss was the cause of ARNSHLin 2 patients. Three patients carried only a single 35 P0932. Analysis of CTG polymorphism in untranslated 3 del G mutation. Asecond mutation is under sequencing. Mutations of other region of SCA8 gene in Polish control group patients are under study. The frequency of 35 del G allele was much lower A. Sulek, D. Hoffman-Zacharska, M. Bednarska-Makaruk, J. Zaremba than reported studies from other countries. These results suggest that the Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology; Warsaw, Poland different types of mutations affect ARNSHL according to ethnic back- sulek@ipin.edu.pl ground. The study is ongoing. Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are a group of neu- rodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive ataxia, dysartria and other neurological signs. Genes responsible for different types of SCA (SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7) have been cloned, showing in coding regions an expand-Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 283 P0935. Why are Mutations at the Connexin 26 Locus Such a between nucleotide positions 30 and 35 of the GJB2 cDNA(35delG) is Frequent Cause of Genetic Deafness? found in 40-70% of NSRD cases, and was shown to have a high allele fre- W. E. Nance, A. Pandya, X. Liu quency (2-5%) in several randomly selected populations. Another deletion, Virginia Commonwealth University; Richmond, VAUnited States the loss of a timine in position 167 was found in the Ashkenazi Jewish pop- nance@hsc.vcu.edu ulation in 4% frequency. Asimple polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based Heterosis, founder effects and mutation hot spots, have been suggested to test was used to detect both mutations in order to establish the allele fre- explain the high frequency of Cx26 deafness. Alternatively, we have pro- quencies in the Hungarian control, Gypsy, and Ashkenazi populations. We posed that Cx26 deafness may have been specifically amplified during the screened 173 randomly selected Hungarian first time blood donors and past 200-300 years by relaxed selection and assortative mating. In the 351 unrelated, unaffected Gypsy individuals for the Cx26 35delG mutation. past, the genetic fitness of the deaf may have approached zero. However, We found 2 heterozygous in the control population, which gives a carrier the social, economic and educational circumstances of the deaf have frequency of 1,17% (0%-2.81%) which is lower, but does not differ signifi- improved dramatically, and have been accompanied by an increase in fer- cantly from the published data for Caucasian populations. The heterozy- tility, and the onset of assortative mating in some but not all countries. Con- gous carrier rate in the Gypsy population was 1.4% (0.1%-2.7%) (5 het- ventional wisdom holds that curing a rare recessive disease will not affect erzygous from 351). We identified 2 heterozygous individuals for mutation the phenotype frequency appreciably for many generations. However, this 167delTamong 48 Ashkenazi samples analysed so far. Our data support conclusion assumes random mating, and with phenotypic or genotypic the assumption that the G track containing the deletion may represent a assortative mating, the approach to a new equilibrium can be much more region with higher mutation rate, since we detected similar carrier frequen- rapid. Since Cx26 marriages account for a disproportionate share of non- cies in two populations with distant origin. complementary matings and can only produce deaf offspring, intermar- riage among the deaf has preferentially increased this phenotype. With P0938.Acarrier frequency of the 35delG deafness mutation in data from the 19th century, we have shown that the frequency of Cx26 several populations of Russia deafness has doubled during the past 100 years. Furthermore, the current A. Anichkina1, T. Kulenich1, I. Shagina1, T. Viktorova2, A. Polyakov1, E. prevalence is lower in countries without a long tradition of intermarriage Khusnutdinova2, E. Ginter1, O. Evgrafov1 among the deaf. If our hypothesis is correct, the availability of premarital 1Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; genetic testing to either avoid or ensure the birth of deaf children could 2Ufa Research Center; Ufa, Russian Federation have even greater effects on the phenotypic frequency, but only if geno- dnalab@online.ru typic mate selection became a universal and uniform practice among the The connexin-26 (Cx26) gene has been shown to be a major cause of non- deaf. syndromic recessive deafness. Although many mutations have been found, a single mutation is responsible for the majority of alleles in differ- P0936. Spectrum of Connexin 26 gene (GJB2) mutations in ent populations (35delG). Ahigh frequency of this mutation was revealed Turkish families with inherited non-syndromic deafness and in populations of Northern, Central and Southern Europe with higher determination of the GJB2 35delG mutation carrier frequency prevalence in Southern Europe, and the highest percentage in Estonia. We in Turkish population decided to expand this study further to the East, and investigate several O. Uyguner1, M. Emiroglu2, G. Hafiz2, M. Yuksel-Apak1, A. Ghanbari1, N. populations of Russia. First, we consider this investigation to be important Basaran2, B. Wollnik1 for defining the strategy of diagnosis and genetic counseling of congenital 1Division of Medical Genetics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University; deafness in Russia. Second, this study could clarify the origin and the his- Istanbul, Turkey; 2Ear, Nose, and Throat Department, Istanbul Medical tory of 35del mutation. Taking into account high frequency of this mutation Faculty, Istanbul University; Istanbul, Turkey in Estonia, we paid a special attention to related Finno-Ugric populations, muyguner@superonline.com namely Mari and Komi. Three other populations, Bashkirs, Chuvashs and Congenital deafness occurs in about 1 in 1000 infants and approximately Yakuts, belong to Turkish speaking populations. In ethnogenesis of 80% of the cases are non-syndromic and inherited in an autosomal reces- Bashkirs and Chuvashs participated not only Turkish but also some other sive pattern. Mutations in the gene encoding connexin 26 (Cx26), GJB2, populations including Finno-Ugric populations. Altogether 560 persons are the most common cause of recessive non-syndromic hearing loss from 5 ethnic groups of Russia were analyzed for 35delG mutation. Twelve (NSHL). Cx26 mutations account for 30-60% of recessive NSHLin Euro- mutations were found, resulting in average carrier frequency 1/46,7. It cor- pean and American populations. Aspecific mutation in the GJB2 gene, responds to the frequency of more than 1% chromosomes with mutation. known as 35delG, represents a hot spot mutation and is found in approx- imately 2/3 of the detectable Cx26 mutations. Nothing is known yet about P0939. Hereditary Deafness - Genetic And Epidemiological the spectrum of Cx26 mutations in Turkish population. In the present study, Aspects - we have studied 37 index patients from consanguineous Turkish families S. Bembea1, M. Bembea2, O. Vancsik2, C. Skrypnyk2, C. Jurca2, S. Ciuchi- with autosomal recessive NSHL. The entire coding region of the Cx26 na2 gene was sequenced and a homozygous mutation was found in 27% of the 1Clinical Adult Hospital, ORLDepartment; Oradea, Romania; 2Clinical Chil- cases. The 35delG mutation was present in 78% of all Cx26 mutations dren Hospital; Oradea, Romania identified. One new mutation and two polymorphisms were identified. To diabem@yahoo.com determine the prevalence of the 35delG mutation in Turkish population we Introduction; The relative incidence of different types of neuro-sensorial established a recently described screening method using PCR-mediated deafness has clearly changed for the last 25 years. Maternal rubella, post- site-directed mutagenesis, followed by a BsiYI digestion. We tested 359 natal ototoxicity and meningitis are much better controlled today. Mean- unrelated individuals and found 3 heterozygous carriers giving a carrier fre- while, theres only little achievement in what prevention or reduction of quency of 0.84% (1 in 120). Our data show that both, frequency of Cx26 hereditary deafness (HD) incidence is concerned. Therefore, the tendency mutations in recessive NSHLand the carrier rate of Cx26 35delG mutation in the present and probably for the coming years, is an increase in the HD in normal Turkish population is much lower than described for other relative incidence, with a lowering of acquired deafness of any kind. Objec- Mediterranean countries. This finding reflects the mixed origin of Turkish tive; Determining the incidence and the genetic characteristics of the HD in population. Bihor county (with a population of 630000). Material and method; Anum- ber of 59 cases have been studied. The pedigree, following the segrega- P0937. Determination of the carrier frequencies of two com- tion and establishing the type of heredity have been studied for each case. mon Cx26 mutations (35delG and 167delT) in the Hungarian Results; The incidence of HD is approx. 1/10000. The model of inheritance population is autosomal recessive in 55% of cases, autosomal dominant in 40% of A. Bors1, H. Andrikovics1, L. Kalmar1, Z. Liska1, A. Borbely1, S. Galam- cases and undetermined in 5% of the cases. Most of the times, HD is bos2, A. Losonczi2, S. Furedi3, I. Balogh4, C. Szalai5, A. Tordai1 neuro-sensorial. Syndromic and non-syndromic HD are described, with 1National Institute of Haematology and Immunology; Budapest, Hungary; examples from the personal experience of rare cases of deafness, like 2Jewish Community Hospital; Budapest, Hungary; 3Institute for Forensic Deafness + Sinphalangism S., Waardenburg S., Deafness + Oculo-cuta- Sciences; Budapest, Hungary; 4University of Debrecen; Debrecen, Hun- neous albinism S., Alport S., Treacher-Collins S. Conclusions; Any case of gary; 5Heim Pal Paediatric Hospital; Budapest, Hungary deafness should be suspected as having a genetic cause. Therefore, the bors@biomembrane.hu family history, a meticulous clinical examination, audiogram and a try to sit- The most common form of non-syndromic neurosensory autosomal reces- uate the case in one of the genetic mechanisms are all recommended. sive deafness (NSRD) is caused by mutations in the gene GJB2 located on chromosome 13, encoding the gap-junction protein connexin 26. One mutation, which represents a deletion of a guanine within a strech of six Gs284 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics P0940. Connexin26 mutation 35delG in non-syndromic hear- of USH are recognized. USH I; profound congenital sensorineural deaf- ing loss in Northern Finland ness, vestibular areflexia and RP. USH II; congenital moderate to severe T. L pp nen1, M. Visnen1, M. Allinen1, P. Lindholm2, M. Luotonen2, H. hearing loss, normal vestibular function and RP. USH III; progressive hear- L pp nen2, E. Mki-Torkko2, M. Sorri2, M. Vyrynen2, J. Uusimaa3, J. ing loss, progressive vestibular deficiency and RP. MATERIALS AND Leisti1 METHODS. The study was an epidemiological, population-based survey, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital; Oulu, Finland; based on examination of data from medical researches, schools and 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Oulu University Hospital; Oulu, Fin- organizations. Alarge number of the patients underwent clinical and genet- land; 3Department of Pediatrics, Oulu University Hospital; Oulu, Finland ic assessment by the authors. RESULTS. Atotal of 366 deaf-blind subjects tuija.lopponen@oulu.fi were assessed. 21% (77 subjects) previously diagnosed as having USH OBJECTIVE; The aims of the study were to evaluate the role of the most were excluded because of incorrect diagnosis. In total, 140 patients with common mutation reported, 35delG, of the connexin26 gene (Cx26/GJB2) USH I, 122 patients with USH II and 27 patients with USH III were diag- in children with non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss and to evaluate nosed. The prevalence of USH I was1.6/100 000, USH II 1.4/100 000 and the carrier frequency of this major mutation in Northern Finland. STUDY USH III 0.3/100 000. The prevalence rate varied in different counties. USH DESIGN; The study population comprised children, who were referred to I was most common in the three northernmost counties, (7.4 /100 000). the Oulu University Hospital and who had non-syndromal congenital sen- CONCLUSION. The total prevalence rate of USH is lower then previously sorineural hearing loss. Atotal of 70 patients were analyzed. The estima- reported. Alarge variation was found in USH I . While the three major types tion of carrier frequency was carried out in a random sample of 313 control of USH are clearly different, the subtypes within type I, II are so far persons. METHODS; Detection of the 35delG mutation was performed by believed to be clinically indistinguishable.Thus, there is a critical need to PCR amplification of the Cx26 sequence followed by direct sequencing of further study phenotype-genotype correlation in USH. This study of USH is purified PCR products. Simultaneous sequencing to both directions was the most complete ascertainment that so far has been undertaken. carried out by automated sequencer (Li-Cor 4200) using forward and reverse primers labeled with IRD800 and IRD700, respectively. Conforma- P0943. Haplotypic determinants of instability in the FRAX tion sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) of PCR products was applied to region; concatenated mutation or founder effect? detect the heterozygous carriers in control population and positive samples S. M. Ennis1, A. Murray2, N. E. Morton1 in this screening were confirmed by direct sequencing. RESULTS; Of the 1Wessex Human Genetics Institute, Southampton General Hospital; 70 patients with the hearing loss 11 were found to be homozygous for the Southampton, United Kingdom; 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, 35delG mutation. These belonged to 7 families, three from one, two from Salisbury District Hospital; Salisbury, United Kingdom two and a single patient from four different families. Out of these 11 se@soton.ac.uk patients three had severe and 8 profound hearing loss. In the control pop- The fragile X triplet repeat expansion at Xq27.3 has been shown to be ulation four individuals heterozygous for the 35delG mutation were found, associated with mutation or instability 600 kb distal at the FMR2 repeat which donotes a carrier frequency of 1/78 in Northern Finland. The screen- locus. Concatenated mutation, whereby a mutation at one locus somehow ing of the Cx26 coding sequence for other mutations is under study. CON- interacts with mutation, recombination, deletion or transposition at another CLUSIONS; The present results indicate that the Cx26 mutation 35delG is locus is a possible explanation. In this study we examine evidence from a an important contributor to recessive inherited non-syndromic hearing loss sample of over 7000 independent haplotypes from the FRAX region. We also in Finland. The carrier frequency of this mutation was found to be of adopt the use of cladistic groups to more thoroughly define the properties the same magnitude as reported previously in Central and Northern of these haplotypes, and in doing so isolate one group of haplotypes which Europe. may be predisposed to the phenomenon of concatenated mutation. Distin- guishing concatenated mutation from founder effects is difficult within a P0941. Statistical analysis of non-syndromic genetic deaf- single population. We present our evidence for and against concatenated ness in Iranian population mutation, and in the process describe a previously undefined mutation at N. Kouchekian1, N. Daneshmandan1, H. Sheikh-Al-Eslamy1, H. Najmaba- FRAXE. di1,2 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; P0944.Different distribution of DXS548 and FRAXAC1 haplo- 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of types between normal and fragile X population in Croatia Iran R. Bago1, S. Hecimovic1, I. Barisic2, V. Culic3, K. Pavelic1 maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute; Zagreb, Croatia; 2Childrens Hospital Zagreb; Genetic deafness affects 50% of patients. Agreat portion of this kind of Zagreb, Croatia; 3Clinical Hospital Firule; Split, Croatia disorder is Non-syndromic which respect to the mode of inheritance is cat- bago_r@yahoo.com egorized to autosomal recessive (AR),autosomal dominant (AD) ,X-linked The fragile X syndrome is caused by expansion of the (CGG)n repeat in 5 and mitochondrial. In order to illuminate these ratios in Iranian population, end of the FMR1 gene. In order to look for linkage disequilibrium between we started a retrospective study. A total of 180 patients were selected the fragile X locus and its flanking markers, we analyzed the DXS548 and based on genetic background. The genetic counseling and pedigree analy- FRAXAC1 microsatellite markers in normal and unrelated fragile X males sis were performed for each individual. Our results demonstrate 155 fami- of Croatian origin. Different distribution of alleles and haplotypes was found lies (86.11%) AR, 21 families (11.67%) AD and for 4 families (2.2%) we between these two samples. Asignificant increase in frequency of DXS548 could not determine the mode of inheritance exactly. The statistical analy- allele 2 was found among fragile X patients when compared to normal indi- sis of data showed that distribution of mendelian inheritance of non - Syn- viduals (31,3% vs. 2.86%). We also noticed a different distribution of dromic genetic deafness in Iranian population is similar to other studies. In FRAXAC1 allele A(18.8% in fragile X group vs. 10.0% in normal popula- our study the results showed that 38% of AR had moderate to severe and tion). Haplotype 7-C was the most represented in normal population 61.9% had profound hearing impairment. More over among AD cases (57.14%), while haplotypes 2-C, 8-C and 2-Awere more frequent in fragile 61.9% had moderate to severe while 38% had profound hearing loss. The X group (accounted for 43.75% of all fragile X chromosomes and less than results also revealed that 57% of AD and only 17% of AR cases had pro- 4% of normal population). This difference may suggest the existence of gressive hearing loss. The investigation of consanguine marriage of the linkage disequilibrium between the two loci and/or selective advantage of parents was revealed as 79.4% of AR and 7.4% of AD cases. From all the this haplotypes among fragile X affected individuals in Croatia. patients 68.6% had consanguineous parents who 99.2% of them were AR and 0.8% were AD. In the future most of these families can be used for P0945. Epidemiological Study Of Some Sentinel Anomalies linkage analysis. and Downs Syndrome E. Nikula, O. Tymchenko, O. Turos, T. Pokanevich, L. Piotrovich, O. P0942. The prevalence of Usher syndrome in Sweden; A Makaruk nation - wide epidemiological and clinical study. Institute of hygiene and medical ecology; Kyiv, Ukraine C. G. Mller1, M. Sadeghi2, W. Kimberling3, L. Tranebjrg4 elena@ushc.kiev.ua, otimch@usch.kiev.ua 1dep. audiology Gothenburg Univ sweden; 41345 Gothenburg, Sweden; It is known that the sentinel anomalies (SA) and Downs syndrome (DS) 2Dept. of Audiology, Sahlgrenska University Hosptial; Gothenburg, Swe- make a considerable contribution into infant morbidity and mortality. These den; 3Dept. of genetic; Omaha, NE United States; 4Dept. Of Medical defects are diagnosed well and can provide important clues in the detec- Genetics; Tromsoe, Norway tion of teratogenic agents. An anencephalia, spina bifida, limb reduction, claes.moller@audiology.gu.se oesophageal atresia and traheo-oesophageal fistula, ano-rectal atresia, BACKGROUND. Usher syndrome (USH) is characterized by hearing loss, cleft of a labium with / or without cleft of a palate, multiple congenitals vestibular dysfunction and Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP). Three clinical types anomalies and Down syndrome were taken into account. Objective. ToPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 285 estimate the relative risk (RR) of the live-borns with SAand DS in different P0948.Social selection against X-linked intelligence? Ukrainian regions. Methods. Data on live-borns only were received from N. V. Kovaleva the annual reports of seven medical genetic centres of Ukraine (Southern, InstituteofObstetricsandGynecology; St. Petersburg, Russian Federation Western, North, Northern-Eastern, Central, South-Eastern, South-West- kovaleva@robotek.ru ern). Period of the observation - from 1993 to 1999. The precise data about Social selection against X-linked intelligence? Natalia V. Kovaleva Institute still-borns with birth defects are unknown in Ukraine. RR was calculated of Obstetrics and Gynaecology RAMS, Mendeleev line, 3, 199034, according to Epi Info program for each selected defects. Results. It was St.Petersburg, Russia, e-mail; kovaleva@robotek.ru During the past established that RR evenly disseminated among the new-borns of the decade, several different genes involved in learning capacity were identi- country. RR was lower in the Northern and the South-Eastern regions (0,86 fied on human X-chromosome. They were discovered because of muta- at the 0.81-0.90 confidence interval; 0.88; CI 0.84-0.93). RR was the high- tions causing nonspecific mental retardation in males. On the other hand, est in the Southern (1.10; CI 1.02-1.19) and the Northern-Eastern regions these genes are reasonably considered to be the genes for higher intelli- (1.19; CI 1.14-1.25). Conclusion. The distinctions in the rates of observed gence and even have been discussed as genes by which Homo may have defects can reflect not only the difference of incidence in population, but become sapiens [Turner, 1996]. As the pattern of X-chromosome inheri- mainly the difference in the levels and the quality of medical care and other tance is very specific (men transfer X-chromosome to their daughters socio-economic factors. only), the process of transmission and spreading of such genes in popula- tion may be influenced by social factors. In times when there was no effec- P0946.Epidemiology and Relative Incidence of Rare Metabol- tive birth control, and even women with high intellectual potency had no or ic and Genetic Disorders in IRAN and the results of 50 Prena- little chance of self-realization, outstanding and successful men and their tal Testings daughters had many offspring, which ensured maintenance of X-linked Y. Shafeghati1,2, R. Karimi-Nejad1, F. Azimi1, M. Karimi-Nejad1, J. Huij- genes for intelligence in population. At present, intelligent women who had mann3, W. J. Kleijer3, O. VanDiglen3 inherited excellent genetic material from their father tend to have few chil- 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of dren because childbearing hampers their social development. This leads Iran; 2University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of to a decrease in frequencies of the clever alleles in population. Thus, Iran; 3Genetics and Metabolic Department of Erasmus University; Rotter- social selection against genes for higher intelligence has been putting into dam, The Netherlands effect through successful women. The genetic drift of the clever alleles maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk away from initial values is expected to be stronger in societies with tradi- Since 10 years ago, our Genetics Center has been evaluating 128 families tional attitude to gender roles in household. including 196 cases with the collaboration of the Genetic and Metabolic Department of Erasmus University based in Rotterdam, the Netherlands. P0949. Trinucleotide repeat polymorphism of some X-linked The result has been the diagnosis and discovery of these rare but very loci in a normal West Siberian Slavic population important disorders in the families under scrutiny. Out of the above num- E. N. Tolmacheva, V. N. Evdokimova, S. A. Nazarenko ber of families mentioned, the final diagnosis in 41 was MPS, the most Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation common type being MPS III. Also, 48 families with 77 patients were suf- kate@img.tsu.ru fering from Lipid Storage Diseases. The most common disorder was AR, FMR1 and FMR2 genes have been mapped to the X-chromosome. Metachromatic Leukodystrophy followed by Niemann-Pick, Gauchers and The expansion of CAG (AR), CGG (FRAXA/FMR1) and GCC-repeats Tay-Sachs diseases respectively. 39 families with 67 cases were diag- (FRAXE/FMR2) is the mechanism associated with Kennedy disease and nosed to have micromolecular Metabolic Diseases. Organic Acidemias fragile X-syndromes correspondingly. The distribution of these loci is var- was the most common type. Totally, in 50 families prenatal testing was car- ied and characterized by the positive asymmetry among the world popula- ried out showed that 11 (22%) of the fetuses were affected. Details of dif- tions. This means they tend to accumulate the repeats over time. Ahypoth- ferent clinical subtypes would be presented in this article. In dealing with esis does exist that the transition from normal-sized to expanded alleles is this patients especially while planning for prenatal testings, genetic coun- a result of a mutational bias towards larger repeat sizes of the repeat selling was carried out to provide the families with detailed information arrays in the normal population. The distributions for AR, FRAXA and about their suffering children. In doing so, Ethical principles also fully rec- FRAXE loci were analyzed in a West Siberian Slavic population. Automat- ommended in Islam for different contexts such as Autonomy, Beneficence, ed genotyping of these loci was perfomed by PCR amplification with fluo- Non-maleficence, Justice and confidentiality were carefully observed. rescently labeled primers on the ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer and Genescan softwere. We detected among 113 unrelated healthy individu- P0947. Screening for fragile X syndrome among mentally als; 12 alleles for the AR locus, ranging in size from 21 to 32 repeat units; retarded children in Greece 31 alleles for the FRAXAlocus, ranging in size from 8 to 56 repeats; and C. Sofocleous1, H. Fryssira1, L. Thomaidis2, A. Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, C. 18 alleles for the FRAXE locus, ranging in size from 9 to 27 repeats. The Metaxotou1 alleles frequency distribution for AR and FRAXE loci was unimodal with 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, School of Medicine; Athens, Greece; the size of modal allele in 27 repeats (18%) and 17 repeats (19.9%) cor- 21st Dept. of Pediatrics, Athens University; Athens, Greece respondingly. The FRAXA locus showed a bimodal distribution with the csofokl@cc.uoa.gr modal alleles in 18-20 repeats (11.5%) and 28-29 repeats (24.6%). Alleles Fragile X syndrome (FXS), second most common cause of mental retar- distribution for AR locus in Slavic population had a narrower spectrum and dation (MR) affects 1; 4000 males and 1;7000 females. The CGG repeat a higher size of modal allele compared with another studied populations. of FMR-1 gene varies from 6 to 54 triplets in normal individuals, whereas The FRAXAlocus showed very high frequency of gray zone alleles. Alle- in FXS families prermutations (PM) of 55 to 200 repeats and full mutations les containing more than 40 repeats share 12.4% and more than 45 - 8.0% (FM) of more than 230 repeats are observed. Hypermethylation of CpG of all alleles in population. In contrast, the alleles distribution for FRAXE island, upstream the CGG repeat, causes the transcriptional shutdown of locus was characterized by the predominance of the short-size alleles (<15 FMR-1 gene resulting in the absence of FMRPprotein in FXS patients. repeats). Intriguingly, each investigated locus has the special features in 1687 individuals, 590 MR boys and 88 MR girls, their parents and other alleles distribution compared with another world populations. family members (759) were tested for FXS and 250 normal individuals were used as controls. DNAextraction from peripheral blood lymphocytes P0950.Etiology of moderate to profound mental retardation ; followed by modified non radioactive Southern blot and PCR (CGG sizing) a retrospective study of 1242 patients analysis were performed. Immunocytochemical detection of FMRP on A. Destree1, A. Vokaer2, Y. Gillerot1, L. Van Maldergem1 blood smears was also performed for 300 individuals. The results con- 1Centre de Genetique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Genetique; firmed the clinical diagnosis of FXS in 28 males and 2 females with FM and Loverval, Belgium; 2CHU Brugmann, Centre de Prinatalogie; Brussels, 1 male with PM. In the remaining individuals an allele distribution of 7 to 58 Belgium CGG repeats with a mean of 28-30 triplets was observed. The FMRPanti- secret.genet@ipg.be body test confirmed the diagnosis in 15 patients and revealed 3 more FXS Objective ; To carry out a retrospective epidemiological survey of the etiol- families with no CGG expansion. The combination of non radioactive ogy of moderate to profound (IQ  50) mental retardation in a population of Southern and PCR analysis, enhanced by the FMRPtest was highly effi- 1242 patients and to compare this data with those from previous studies. cient for diagnosis and thus supportive of large scale population screening Method ; We analysed the files of 729 moderately to profoundly retarded especially since a rough estimation, revealed an FXS frequency at about patients evaluated in our centre for Human Genetics. Most of these 1;4250 boys in Greece. patients underwent karyotyping, brain imaging and a search for inborn errors of metabolism. The files of 513 additional patients from institutions for the mentally retarded were also studied. In these cases, the work-up286 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics was often minimal. The study of this heterogeneous population gave the paring frequencies of Rh blood groups we can see that there is no differ- following results ; Constitutional disorders ; Down Syndrome ; 193 cases, ences between tested samples. In the sample of children affected with partial chromosomal duplication and/or monosomy ; 32 cases, apparently acute lymphoblastic leukemia (N=163)the frequencies of ABO blood types balanced reciprocal translocations ; 5 cases, sex chromosomes aneu- was similar to the average value of Serbian population, while the percent- ploidy ; 6 cases, mosaic triploidy ; 1case, partial tetrasomy ; 2 cases, age of blood group O is slightely increased.The percentages of Rh blood microdeletion syndromes ; 22 cases, autosomal dominant disorders ; 31 types are not showing any differences between tested samples. It is inter- cases, autosomal recessive disorders ; 79 cases, X-linked MR syndromes esting that in the group of top sportsment, including 61 winners of interna- ; 39 cases, Known MCA/MR syndromes ; 18 cases, undiagnosed MCA/MR tional champions, the frequencies of A and B blood groups were ; 281 cases, CNS-malformations ; 5 cases. An acquired etiology was like- decreased,AB was absent and O group was about twice more frequent ly in 171 cases. No etiology was found for 349 patients. Conclusion ; The (71%)than an average value of Serbian population.The percentage of Rh study of a heterogeneous population of 1242 moderately to profoundly negative individuals is significantly lees (10%)in the group of top sports- retarded patients indicates a proportion of 28.1% for which no etiological men comparing with percentage of those individuals in Serbian popula- clue is found. This population includes 513 patients with a minimal work- tion(17%). Taking all this into account we may see that variation in physi- up. cal abilities can bee correlated with their immunogenetics properties. P0951.Consanguinity and Mental Retardation in North India P0954.Haptoglobin (Hp) and Transferrin (Tf) polymorphism - M. Afzal1, M. S. Ahmad2, B. Shadab3, G. G. H. A. Shadab1 a population genetic study of Romanian population 1Section of Genetics, Department of Zoology, AMU; Aligarh, India; 2Section G. G. Meianu1, V. Stoian2, A. Rodewald3, C. Glavce4 of Genetics, Department of Zoology, AMU; India; 3Department of Human 1Biology Faculty Bucharest Universyti; Bucharest, Romania; 2Laboratory of Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University; Amritsar, India Genetics - Faculty of Biology, Bucharest University; Bucharest, Romania; hep_amu@usa.net 3Institute of Human Biology, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; We have studied mental retardation from different States of North India viz. 4Center of Anthropological Research - Academy of Science; Bucharest, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and Punjab. Consanguinity is prevalent widely Romania among muslim groups, the first cousin unions being most common. From pisica_ii@hotmail.com our field survey (Ansari and Qureshi groups) and hospital samples (Jawa- The aim of this study is to present the distribution of the Hp subtypes (by har Lal Nehru Medical College and Hospital, Aligarh & All India Institute of means of the polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis - method by Linke, 1984) Medical Sciences, New Delhi), we tried to find out the genetic load due to and of the Tf subtypes (by polyacrylamide gel isoelectric focusing at pH 4- mental retardation classified as chromosomal disorders, fragile sites, sin- 6, method described by Weidinger et al., 1984) in the Romanian popula- gle gene disorders and low IQ in polygenic variation. Among chromosomal tion. EDTA- plasma samples were obtained from 120 unrelated donors disorders, trisomy 21 was most conspicuous, again free trisomy 21 being from a premountain Carpatian region of Romania (Prahova - Valley), and the most prevalent one, followed by G/G and D/G translocation. Turners, only this individuals were considered as autochthonous. X2 - tests and Klinefelters and intersex cases showed lower IQ levels. Fragile site cases genetic distance analysis were used to compare the data with those of comprised Xq.27 cases being most common. Amino acidopathies, and other studies of Mediterranean and European populations. The number of enzymatic disorders were more common among consanguineous off- the phenotypes observed in both systems showed no significant differ- springs than non-consanguineous ones. Surprisingly age of the mother ances to the data expected according to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. show highest number of defectives at around 40 years, but the downship The comparison with the other European and Mediterranean populations invariably was toward the last/later parity. Verbal, performance and total shows that the genes and the phenotype frequencies of the tested sam- IQ, scores on WISC R-74 (Hindi/Urdu rendition by the author) shows low- ples lines nearer to those of Southeuropean -Mediterranean population ering of IQ, the effect being statistically significant. Loss of mental age due than to Balkan or Slavic groups. Our results are interpretable in the back- to consanguinity, percentage inbreeding depression and genetic load have ground of historical and ethnical events, which have played an important been calculated. We are looking ahead for molecular markers, and pedi- role in changing the genepool of the Romanian population. Linke R.P.; gree analysis for non-specific aetiology of mental retardation, and work out Analytical Biochemistry, 141, 55-61 (1984) Weidinger et al.; Human a model for genetic epidemiology for North India. Genet., 66, 356-360 (1984) P0952.Autosomal allele frequencies and the search of ances- P0955.Mesolithic-Neolithic population relationships in Portu- tors in Hungarian populations gal; the evidence from mtDNA C. R. Guglielmino1, A. De Silvestri2, J. Beres3 F. J. Bamforth, K. Albertson, A. ONeill, M. Jackes, D. Lubell 1Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Universit di Pavia, & Istituto di University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada Genetica Biochimica ed Evoluzionistica- CNR; Pavia, Italy; 2Dipartimento FBamfort@cha.ab.ca di Genetica e Microbiologia, Universit di Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 3National Analyses of Mesolithic and Neolithic samples from Portugal have led to Center for Epidemiology, Dep. of Human Genetics and Teratology; new methods for the investigation of paleodemography and to the formu- Budapest, Hungary lation of an hypothesis that the population increased during and after a pro- guglielmino@ipvgbe.igbe.pv.cnr.it tracted period of shift from hunter-gatherer to agricultural subsistence. Autosomal gene frequencies allow to describe the genetic structure of pop- While culturally the two populations are distinct, there is evidence on non- ulations, in particular to reveal the effects of drift or of admixture. Applying metric analysis of dental traits that the two populations may be genetically specific models to population samples, it is also possible to infer a rate of continuous. We report on the analysis of mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA) from admixture of a population with respect to hypothetical parent populations. Mesolithic (Moita, Arruda, Amoreira, Melides) and Neolithic (Casa da Some Hungarian ethnic groups claim to be descendant either of Turks , Moura, Feteria, Furninha) skeletal samples and the implications of this Iranian or of the ancient Huns. Hungarian nation was founded in the 9th data in understanding the prehistoric population relationships in this century from people caming from eastern regions close to the Ural moun- region. The analysis of mtDNAhaplogroups in ancient remains provides a tains and since then people speak an Uralic language belonging to the means of mapping human population divergence and adds a new tool to Finno-Ugric language group. We compared the gene frequencies of eight the investigation of biocultural evolution. We will examine the prevalent ethnic groups and seven hypothetical ancestral populations, including mtDNAhaplogroups from Neolithic and Mesolithic remains from Portugal Uralics, applying a model of admixture. The results, most of which confirm to establish the degree of relatedness between individuals from different historical hypotheses or the oral tradition, show that only one ethnic group burial sites. The haplogroups selected for the study are based on data from highly resembles the Uralic population. modern Iberian populations. These are H, I, J, K, T, U3, U4, V, W and X. Fourteen Neolithic dental and skeletal samples from five sites and fifteen P0953.Occurance of ABO and Rh blood groups in three sam- Mesolithic samples from three sites are available for analysis. Our work to ples of Serbian population date has shown absence of haplogroups V and I in this population. While S. Cvjeticanin1,2, B. Tri?ic3, R. Papovic3 haplogroup I is predominantly a Northern European haplogroup, it is inter- 1Medical Faculty University of Belgrade; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 2Institute of esting that haplogroup V is not represented as this is a significant hap- Biology and Human Genetics; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 3Institute for Biology logroup in modern Portugal. Work on haplogroup K is in progress and we and Human Genetics; Belgrade, Yugoslavia have identified a novel polymorphism in one Neolithic and one Mesolithic bebrapap@eunet.yu sample. In the group of patients with congenital hip dislocation (N=93) the frequen- cies of ABO blood types were similare to the average value of Serbian pop- ulation, while the percentage of blood group Ais slightly increased.Com-Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 287 P0956.Portuguese influence in Atlantic islands using 5 STRs and rapidly increased to 1994 (202), and remained nearly constant there- (CD4,FES/FPS,VWA31/A,TH01andTPO)andCD4/Aluhaplo- after. Then, during the last 23 years, the DZ twinning raate increased 2.5- type fold, 2.8-fold for DZ triplet rates, and 11.2-fold for TZ triplet rates. The high- R. Velosa1, A. T. Fernandes2, H. Spnola2, A. Brehm2 er DZ twinning and triplet rates, and the TZ triplet rate since 1987 have 1Departamento de Biologia, Universidade da Madeira; Funchal, Portugal; been attributed to the higher proportion of mothers treated with ovulation- 2Centro de Cincias Biolgicas e Geolgicas, Universidade da Madeira; inducing hormones and partially attributed to in-vitro fertilization in Japan. Funchal, Portugal atgf@uma.pt P0959. Phylogeography of the human mitochondrial hap- This work presents a survey of 5 STRs and a polymorphic marker based logroup L3e; a snapshot of African prehistory and Atlantic on the association between an STR and an Alu element. The survey slave trade includes the Madeira archipelago, composed by two inhabited islands, the J. Alves-Silva1, P. E. M. Guimares1, A. Brehm2, A. Torroni3, V. F. Prado1, Azores and Cabo Verde by nine islands each (the former divided into two S. D. J. Pena1, H. Bandelt4 groups, Windward and Leeward) and So Tom e Principe by two inhabit- 1Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 2Universi- ed islands. Madeira was discovered in 1419, the Azores in 1427, Cabo dade da Madeira; Funchal, Portugal; 3Universit La Sapienza; Roma, Italy; Verde in 1460 and So Tom e Prncipe in 1470. All these Atlantic islands 4Universitt Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany were colonized by the portuguese but with different populational inputs. jumps@icb.ufmg.br Madeira and the Azores were populated mainly by Portuguese from the The mtDNAhaplogroup L3e, identified by the restriction site +2349 MboI mainland although the former island received a non-negligible amount of within the Afro-Eurasian superhaplogroup L3 (-3592 HpaI), is omnipresent slaves in the 15th and 16th centuries originated from Cabo Verde islands, in Africa but virtually absent in Eurasia (except for neighbouring areas with then a portuguese colony. Cabo Verde was essentially populated with limited genetic exchange). L3e was hitherto poorly characterised in terms slaves brought from Guin (West African coast) and relatively few euro- of HVS-I motifs, as the ancestral HVS-I type of L3e cannot be distin- peans, and So Tom and Principe received their black population from guished from the putative HVS-I ancestor of the entire L3 (differing from the slave trade with Angola. STRs (Short Tandem Repeat) are polymorphic the CRS by a transition at np 16223). An MboI screening at np 2349 of a markers mainly used for forensic and population genetics. We used 5 large number of Brazilian and Caribbean mtDNAs, now reveals that L3e is STRs (CD4, TPO, FES/FPS, TH01 and VWA31/A) and a haplotype subdivided into four principal clades, each characterised by a single muta- CD4/Alu. Our aim is to verify the genetic input of the European Portuguese tion in HVS-I, with additional support coming from HVS-II and partial RFLP population in the Atlantic islands they colonized. We used DNAfrom unre- analysis. The apparently oldest of these clades (transition at np 16327) lated individuals originating from 3 archipelagos with known ancestors occurs mainly in central Africa and was probably carried to southern Africa from the same island for at least 3 generations; Madeira (N=210); Azores with the Bantu expansion(s). The most frequent clade (transition at np (N=135); Cabo Verde Leeward (N=202); Cabo Verde Windward (N=110) 16320) testifies to a pronounced expansion event in the mid-Holocene and and from 3 areas in mainland Portugal; North (N=120); Center (N=127); seems to be prominent in many Bantu groups from all of Africa. In contrast, South (N=151). DNA extraction followed the chelex method and PCR one clade (transition at np 16264) is essentially restricted to Atlantic west- amplification was done with specific primers for each STR. PCR products ern Africa (including Cabo Verde). We propose a tentative L3e phylogeny were separated in polyacrilamide gels and visualized by silver staining. All that is based on 197 HVS-I sequences. We conclude that haplogroup L3e populations were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Frequences originated in central or eastern Africa about 46,000 (+/-14,000) years ago, and heterozigozity values were estimated according to standard method- and was a hitchhiker of much later dispersal and local expansion events, ologies. Values were compared with different populations including one with the rise of food production and iron melting. Enforced migration of from So Tom islans, and the results are discussed. African slaves to the Americas translocated L3e mitochondria, the descen- dants of which in Brazil and the Caribbean still reflect their different region- P0957. Polymorphism of the HLA-DRB1 gene in Volga-Ural al African ancestries. region Populations I. Khidijatova, R. Fatkhlislamova, E. Khusnutdinova P0960. Mitochondrial DNA Analysis of Populations of Iran, Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation Turkmenistan and Southern Russia ekkh@anrb.ru B. A. Malyarchuk1, M. V. Derenko1, G. A. Denisova1, E. I. Rogaev2, I. A. HLA-DRB1 gene polymorphism is investigated in population of Bashkirs Zakharov3 (n=60), Tatars (n=60), Chuvashs (n=55) belonging to Turkic brunch of Altai 1Institute of Biological Problems of the North; Magadan, Russian Federa- language family by linguistic classification, and in population of Komis tion; 2Center of Mental Health; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Vavilov Insti- (n=50) belonging to the Finnich-Ugric branch of the Uralic language fami- tute of General Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation ly using PCR technique. 11 alleles were detected in Bashkir population and ibpn@online.magadan.su till 10 identical ones in remaining, with frequency from 2% to 27%. An allele Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) polymorphism in populations of Iran, Turk- DRB1*09 was detected only in Bashkirs. Among identified DRB1 gene alle- menistan and southern part of Russia was examined by RFLPanalysis of les the most frequent are *07 (26%) and *17 (16,5%) in Bashkirs, *04 haplogroup-specific sites. The Iranians, Turkmenians and Russians were (16%) and *15 (14%) in Tatars, *04 (27%) and *11 (17%) in Chuvashs, *04 found to have a large portion of mtDNAs belonging to haplogroups (18%) and *11 (22%) in Komis. The Bashkir population is significantly dif- observed in West Eurasian populations. However, the relative frequencies fer from Chuvash and Komi ones in allele distribution. Allele distribution in of this continental fraction of the mtDNApool vary considerably over the Tatars, Chuvashs and Komis is the some as in East Europe populations. populations studied. In Iranians and Turkmenians, the majority of the Later on these alleles will be included in pattern of genetic markers for mtDNAlineages belong to haplogroups T, J, U, K, W, I. However, hap- analysis of genetic structure and ethnogenesis of the Volga-Ural region logroup H, which encompasses 19% of Turkmenian and 42% of Russian populations, and also for medical genetic aims for HLA-associated dis- mtDNAs, is virtually absent in Iranians. The East Asian-specific fractions of eases prevalence forecasting. mtDNAs were observed in 12% of Iranians (haplogroups M*, D, A, B) and in 20% of Turkmenians (haplogroups C, D, E), but were not found in the P0958.The Twinning and Triplet Rates by Zygosity in Japan, Russian mtDNApool. Therefore, the Russians exhibited a high portion of 1975-1998 identical haplotypes in relation to those observed in other Europeans. Y. Imaizumi Based on the mtDNAhaplogroups composition analysis, the Turkmenians Hyogo University; Kakogawa City, Japan were found to be the closest population to the Caucasus populations. This Hyogo University, Hiraoka, Kakogawa City, Hyogo Prefecture work was supported by the Russian Fund for Basic Research (grant 00-06- Twinning and triplet rates by zygosity in entire Japan were analyzed using 80448) and the State Program Frontiers in Genetics (grant 99-4-30). vital statistics for 1975 to 1998. These rates by zygosity were estimated using Weinbergs method for twins and Allens method for triplets. The P0961. The analysis of CTG/CAG repeats in populations of monozygotic (MZ) twinning rate in Japan had remained nearly constant Volga-Ural region from 1975 (3.74 per 1,000 births) to 1998 (4.25), whereas the dizygotic R. I. Fatkhlislamova1, I. M. Khidijatova.1, I. A. Kutuyev1, P. Slominsky2, E. (DZ) twinning rate had remained nearly constant from 1975 (1.86) to 1986 K. Khusnutdinova1 (2.27), and had gradually increased up to 1998 (4.64). As for triplets, the 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Institute DZ triplet rate increased during the period from 1975 (14 per million births) of the Molecular Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation to 1998 (39), reflecting the increase in the DZ twinning rate in the period. ekkh@anrb.ru MZ triplet rates remained constant from 1975 (28) to 1998 (23). The trizy- Trinucleotide repeats are the class of highly polymorphic STRs, expansion gotic (TZ) triplet rate gradually increased from 1975 (18) up to 1985 (29), of which leads to several of human diseases. The expansions of CAG in IT288 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 15 and CTG repeats in DMPK are associated with Huntingtons disease contribution of HLADRB1 polymorphisms to inter-individual variation of and myotonic dystrophy respectively. The aim of the present research was human longevity we have compared their genotype distribution between to study polymorphism of CAG and CTG repeats in 10 populations of the older and young control group of Macedonian population. We studied 170 Volga-Ural region and test the hypothesis about unstable transmission unrelated healthy aged subjects, between 65 and 93 years (55 man and within normal range. 24 CTG allelic variants with bimodal frequency distri- 115 women ) selected according to Senieur protocol. The control group bution and 19 CAG ones were detected. CTG/CAG repeats distribution is consisted of healthy individuals, age 25-35 years. The HLAtyping was per- characterized with a high range of variations; from 5 to 34 repeats for CTG formed by dot-blot analyses using 24 nonradioactively labeled probes. In and from 10 to 32 for CAG repeats. Amajority of alleles in these popula- the group of aged subjects we found that the most frequent alleles are HLA tions contain 5 and between 11-14 for CTG and 13-15 for CAG repeats. DRB1 *11, *04 and *01. Comparing the frequency of alleles found among Investigated populations reliably differ, that is evidence of subsistence of the group of older people with the alleles in the control group of young peo- populations heterogeneity. Heterozygotes frequency varies from 70% to ple significant difference of the DRB1 *11 allele was observed (x2=3.54, 92% for CTG and from 51% to 59% for CAG repeats. CTG repeats trans- p<0.05). These results support the finding of other authors that the DRB1 mission within 50 healthy families showed change CTG22 to CTG26 and *11 allele is associated with survival advantage. CTG32 to CTG20. Within normal repeat range frequency of new mutations is 4% and passage unstability occurs in alleles CTG>19. So it has been P0964.Genetic Diversity and Distance Among the Hill-Tribes demonstrated that the populations of Volga-Ural region are between Euro- of Northern Thailand pean and Asian populations, and are more close to the Asian. D. Kangwanpong1, M. Srikummool1, S. Suttisarakorn1, M. T. Seielstad2 1Chiang Mai University; Chiang Mai, Thailand; 2Harvard School of Public P0962. Molecular characterisation of two Mongoloid popula- Health; Boston, MAUnited States tions(Khasi and Garo ) of Meghalaya, India, using Ychromo- scidkngw@chiangmai.ac.th some and mtDNAmarkers In Thailand the term hill tribes, or more recently used highland Thai, B. T. Langstieh1, K. Thangaraj2, B. M. Reddy1, L. Singh2 designates ethnic minorities, most of whom live in the remote mountainous 1Anthropology and Human Genetics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute; Cal- areas of the north and the southwestern parts of the country. These groups cutta, India; 2Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology; Hyderabad, India of people migrated from neighboring countries and from south China with- banrida_2000@yahoo.com in the last century. Great varieties of languages and traditions have been India is a country with rich diversity in language, caste, religion, culture, practiced, depending on where they came from. For better understanding socio-economic structure, food and marriage practices. The Northeastern of the population structure of these ethnic minorities, we aim to investigate part of India is distinct in being a home to many indigenous ethnic mon- the degree of genetic variation within and between these populations and goloid populations, which are not found elsewhere in the country. The to analyze their phylogeny. Y chromosome tetranucleotide repeat region itself is described as a narrow bridge or passage between the east microsatellites at 3 loci, DYS19, DYS389I and DYS393 were employed for and west of the Asian continent. Two major language groups divide this genetic diversity investigation of 6 hill-tribe populations in Northern Thai- region one with an ancient history and the other with a recent past. The for- land. DNAwas extracted from white blood cells of 107 males; 21 Karen mer is represented by the only MonKhmer Austro Asiatic speaking tribes and 15 Lahu (matrilocal groups); 29 Hmong, 15 Iu Mien, 15 Akha and 12 of India while the other involves many other migrant tribal populations of Lisu (patrilocal groups) by inorganic salting out procedure, amplified by Tibeto Burman origin. Geographically they inhabit the young fold mountain polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique using Ampli Tag Gold (Perkin- belts of the eastern Himalayas and the Austrics is particularly located in the Elmer). Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and silver stainning were used geologically oldest plateau of the region. It is postulated that the present to identify allele sizes. Five alleles were observed at the locus DYS19, land mass was an island which drifted away and got attached to the Indi- while four alleles were detected at both DYS389I and DYS393 loci, with an continent. Hence, our interest is to find the possible origin and possible different frequencies among populations. The genetic diversity is 0.264, migration of these populations (Khasi and Garo) using Ychromosome and 0.313. 0.5323, 0.5769, 0.6503 and 0.6623 in Akha, Lisu, Hmong, Karen, mitochondrial DNAmarkers, as they are uniparentaly transmitted and does Lahu and Iu Mien respectively. Aneighbor-joining tree based on Fst dis- not undergo recombination. Recent findings suggest that this language tance reveals that the genetic distance between Karen and Iu Mien is the group represents one of the oldest inhabitants of this country and most nearest while Akha and Lisu are furthermost apart. probably the origin of the language itself. We substantiate our findings with tracing the paternal and maternal lineages using Yspecific markers and P0965.Analysis of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin deficiency allele PI S in mitochondrial DNAon two matrilineal population group of Mon KhmerAus- healthy Latvian population tro Asiatic Khasi and the recent migrant Tibeto Burman speaking Garo I. Tamane1, L. Krumina1, B. Maliseva1, V. Baumanis2, A. Krumina1 tribes from the state of Meghalaya in North east India. Of the 310 individ- 1Medical Academy of Latvia; Riga, Latvia; 2University of Latvia, Biomedical uals studied 4 showed a 9 bp deletion in the mtDNAbetween COII and Research Centre; Riga, Latvia tRNAgene. The frequency is very less when compared to other Mongoloid ievuska@inbox.lv populations. In the HVRI sequence these population showed a very unique AATdeficiency is an inherited disease, which usually manifests as COPD haplotype. Analysis of YAlu polymorphism (YAP) in these populations did and early pulmonary emphysema. The most common mutations associat- not show any YAP+ alleles, however YAPrelated M15 showed 9bp dele- ed with lowered serum AATare PI type Z and PI type S. Allele PI S being tion, which is an ancestral allele. In addition analysis is also being carried in homozygous state does not result in disease but in compound het- out with 400 unrelated blood samples with Ychromosome STRs (DYS19, erozygosity with allele PI Z causes clinical manifestation. The frequency of 389I and II, 390, 391 AND 393), Biallelic markers, SNPs and Southern allele PI Z in Latvian population is 0,040 which is the highest frequency based markers. Results obtained from the above mentioned markers will reported so far (Beckman L. et al.,1999;Maliseva B. et al.,2000). The aim hopefully throw more light in tracing the origin of this linguistic group. of this research was to detect prevalence of allele PI S in Latvian popula- tion. DNAwas extracted from venous blood of 236 healthy Latvians whose P0963.HLA-DRB1 alleles and longevity in Macedonian popu- relatives for at least 3 generations are Latvians living in Latvia. The analy- lation sis was performed by PCR. The products were digested by TaqI, and R. S. Jankova1, L. J. Simjanovska2, M. Z. Spiroski3, G. D. Efremov4 analysed on 6% PAAgel. From 472 chromosomes analysed 15 PI S alle- 1Institute of Immunology,Faculty of Medicine; Skopje, The former Yugoslav les were found. Consequently the allele frequency in Latvian population is Republic of Macedonia; 2Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; 0,032. The PI S allele frequency is the highest in southern part of Latvia. Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; 3Institute of Finding the reason of such geographical distribution differences might be Immunology, Faculty of Medicine; Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic the subject of following studies. of Macedonia; 4Macedonian Academy of Science and Arts; Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia P0966. Some Gene Frequencies Of GSTM1, GSTT1 And renjankova@yahoo.com CYP2D6 In The Population Of South - West Poland Aging involves many factors and processes. Several hypotheses have T. Dobosz, M. Sasiadek, K. Schlade - Bartusiak, A. Beszlej, M. Grzesiak, been suggested, such as the effect of non specific free radical damage of M. Zakrzewska macromolecules, their repair which includes genetically determined fac- Medical University of Wroclaw; Wroclaw, Poland tors, or the theory that aging is programmed in cellular genome. The genet- tdobosz@forensic.am.wroc.pl ic effects on human longevity were found at a few loci. The most interest- The supergene family of glutathione S-transferases is divided into four ing is the association between HLAgenes and longevity directly connect- classes; the classes mu (GSTM1) and theta (GSTT1) showed genetic ed to their physiological function. Numerous studies have indicated that the polymorphism, that involves a gene deletion. This deletion has been longevity is associated with HLADRB1 locus. With an aim to reassess the shown to be associated with the susceptibility to mutagen - induced cyto-Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 289 genetic damages. The P450II supergene family comprises five subfamiles, P0969. Genetic Diversity Of Volga-ural People; Dna Markers one from this, the reduced activity of P450IID subfamily has been related Of Nuclear And Mitochondrial Genome to Parkinson disease and responsible for poor metabolism of more than 30 E. Khusnutdinova, T. Victorova, I. Khidiatova, M. Bermisheva commonly prescribed drugs. The aim of the paper was to calculate the null Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation gene frequency in GSTM1 and GSTT1 systems and the frequencies of the ekkh@anrb.ru two most occurred defective alleles of CYP2D6 systems, *2 and *3. The The Volga-Ural region, occupying the central place on a map of Euroasia. DNAsamples were prepared by Chelex methods and phenotypes were With the aim of knowledge of the factors of gene pool formation, genetic established using PCR method. In GSTM1 the population sample was 160, differentiation, evolutionary development and genetic interaction of the 53% of tested persons have the phenotype GSTM1(-), and the gene fre- modern peoples of the Volga-Ural region the study of three types DNA- quencies were GSTM1+ = 0.27 and GSTM1- = 0.73. In GSTT1 the popu- polymorphisms of nuclear genome, restriction fragments length polymor- lation sample was 170, the GSTT1(-) phenotype occurred in 26% of test- phism and analysis of nucleotide sequences of HVSI mtDNA, polymor- ed persons, and the gene frequencies were GSTT1+ = 0.49 and GSTT1- phism of seven Y-chromosomal microsatellite loci were carried out. The = 0.51, respectively. The frequencies of two main defective alleles of results of claster analysis on the data of polymorphism of autosomal DNA- CYP2D6 gene, named CYP2D6*3 and CYP2D6*4 are under calculation in loci has allowed to reveal the greatest similarity of gene pool of Bashkirs the moment. All obtained results were compared with results of other Pol- with Tatars, least with gene pools of Mordvinians and Komi. Other matrix ish or Central Europe population samples. of genetic distances between populations comes to light on mtDNAmito- types; correlation between genetic distances that revealed by two inde- P0967. The distribution of D1S80 (pMCT118) and D17S5 pendently evolutioning genomes - nuclear and mitochondrial - is absent. (YNZ22) alleles in a Vietnamese population We think that these differences is possible to explain by different type of N. H. Giang inheritance of nuclear and mtDNA. Genetic distances between populations Center of Biotechnology, Vietnam National University; Hanoi, United of the Volga-Ural region received by test with phage 13, will most be coor- States dinated to the complex information about ethnogenesis of these peoples. nhgiang@netnam.org.vn It testifies to efficiency of use of this marker for the population-genetic For the first time, Vietnamese population in the North was studied for the analysis of modern population structure. The genetic distances received on D1S80 (pMCT118) locus at a large amount. Blood, bloodstain, hai and sali- a basis of polymorphism of seven Y-chromosomal microsatellite loci reflect va samples of 217 individuals were tested by PCR technique. philogenetical relation between the Volga-Ural peoples on fathers line. Those samples were extracted by chelex, then using directly as DN tem- The data of claster analysis only in general will be coordinated to linguistic plates for PCR with the specific primers of D1S80 locus. After amplification, classification, according to which these peoples belong to different lan- PCR products were separated by 6% of polyacrylamide gel electrophore- guage families. So, phylogenetic analysis shows their genetic connection sis (PAGE) and stained by silver staining. by fathers line, that is explained by centuries-old ethnical and cultural From 217 samples amplified on D1S80 locus; 57 different genotypes and communications and territorial interactions of close ethnic components. 24 alleles were observed. Alleles 15, 35, 37, 40 and 42 had not bee found yet. Allele 24 (14,3%) and allele 22 (14,1%) were the most common alle- P0970. Polymorphic Markers to Assessment of Ecogenetic les, whereas alleles 14, 33, 34, 36 and 39 were the less popular ones Adaptation of the Population of Large Chemical Centre (0,2%) in Vietnamese population. The D1S80 locus demonstrated a het- S. N. Petrova1, A. P. Goloshchapov1, E. K. Khusnutdinova2 erozygosity of 80,18%. All mother/child pairs (42 cases) shared at least 1Laboratory of Medical and Biological Problems, Bashkir Academy of Sci- one D1S80 allele. ence, Research Genetic Laboratory; Sterlitamak, Russian Federation; Similar method was applied for D17S5 locus. The study shows that 12 alle- 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian les were observed and 2 ones (B12 and B13) not found yet in Vietnamese Academy of Science; Ufa, Russian Federation population. B8 was the most spread allele (14,7%). Heterozygosity of genlab@strl.bashmail.bashnet.ru D17S5 locus is 83,76%. In conditions of toxic effect of the factors of environment of the large chem- Those data show that D1S80 and D17S5 loci are highly polymorphic in ical centres it is vital important to evaluate character of interrelations Vietnamese population and can be used as the important markers for between the acting of influence of environmental and distribution of poly- forensic, medical analyses and paternity tests. morphic markers of blood the adaptive importance of which is known in cohorts of inhabitants. Character of distribution of five biochemical markers P0968. Genetic diversity in Central Asian populations including transferrin (Tf), group-specific component, proteinase inhibitor, assessed by eight autosomal microsatellite loci haptoglobin (Hp), AB0 blood groups and its significance for ge-netic-bio- D. Luiselli1, S. Pelotti2, F. Facchini1, S. Fuselli1, E. Tarazona Santos3, D. chemical adaptation were studied by isoelectricfocusing in 75 families (14- Pettener1 16 years children and their parents, which represent two generations) and 1Dipartimento di Biologia, Area di Antropologia, Universit di Bologna; in two national groups (79 Bashkirian and 129 Russian) of constant inhab- Bologna, Italy; 2Dipartimento di Medicina Legale e Sanit Pubblica, Uni- itants of large indus-trial centre of the Republic Bashkortostan  Sterlita- versit di Bologna; Bologna, Italy; 3Departamento de Bioquimica e mak. The peculiarity of the gene pool of citizens was studied by way of a Immunologia, ICB. Universidade de Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brazil comparison of features of the distribution frequencies of phenotypes, alle- luiselli@alma.unibo.it les and genotypes in the investigated groups both in some other urban and Historical, archaeological and anthropological data show that Central Asian rural populations of Russia - about Russians of Egorievsk city (Moscow populations are admixed groups which received cultural and biological con- range) and Asbest (Sverdlovsk range) and Bashkirians of rural districts of tributions from Europeans and Eastern Asian. To test the impact of these Republic Bashkortostan. The characteristic feature of every investigated historical events on the genetic pool of Central Asian populations we have group is de-tected, namely - the high density of alleles Tf*C3 and Hp*2. analysed eight autosomal microsatellites (DM, DRPLA, AR, TH01, TPOX, The redistribution of concentrations of alternative alleles is ob-served; for CSF1PO, VWA, LPL) in more than 200 individuals from the following four the locus Tf are peculiar lowered frequency Tf*C1 and increased for the populations settled in a vast region at the crossroads of different cultures gene Tf*C2, for the locus Hp reduction of the allele Hp*1 is featured. The and habitats; Kazakhs from the Kegen mountain valley (Kazakhstan), Huig- considerable density of the alleles Tf*C3, Tf*C2, Hp*2 in the investigated urs from Penjim (Kazakhstan), Kirghiz from the Pamir mountains and cohorts on one hand is being represented rather of adverse, in view of a Kirghiz from the Talas plains (Kirghizstan). The same individuals were pre- correlation of the given alleles with the formation of an increased number viously studied for D-loop mt-DNA sequences, RFLPs, Y-chromosome of the hydroxyl free radicals (Eckfeldt, 1985) and with the intensive current markers (STR and SNPs) and classical markers. The statistics measuring of the lipoperoxidation (Mironov, 1992). It allows to an-ticipate that a share internal variation within populations evidence high level of diversity, as of individuals inclined to the damage of subcellular structures is growing, expected in the case of admixed populations. Analysis of molecular variance and as the consequence they are more subjected to diseases. However, (AMOVA) showed a very low degree of genetic differentiation among the the earlier carried out researches on health of the citizens within frame four populations using the autosomal markers (Fst=0.01), in agreement with works of biochemi-cal monitoring, have established of more than in twice the results given by HVR-I mtDNAsequences (Fst=0.05), but in discordance the activation of processes of the lipoperoxidation along with high inten-sity with the Y-chromosome markers results (Fst=0.22). Non-metric multidimen- of the microsomal oxidation, which has a positive influence at a stage of sional scaling was used to represent genetic distances between Euro-Asi- the fast detoxification of considerable amount of xenobiotics. Probably atic populations. The Central Asian populations present an intermediate persons with the alleles TfC2 and Hp2 have the increased level of detoxi- position between Europeans and eastern Asians, in agreement with the his- fication, in a connection with this are more adapted to the influence of a torical record. Eastern Asian and European sex-specific contributions to the chemical environmental pollution, however, the given assumption is only current gene pool of Central Asian populations differ significantly. preliminary, by virtue of a limited proportions of investigated groups. The290 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics analysis of the genetical attitudes between investigated cohorts was car- Both NJ and UPGMAtrees bring out distinct clusters that are consistent ried out on a complex of the data about frequencies of sixteen alleles out with ethnic, linguistic and/or geographical affiliations of the studied popula- of five independent locuses researched. In a course of clustering it is tions. The fit of Harpending and Ward model of regression of average het- revealed that three investigated cohorts are very genetic similar. Most erozygosity on the gene frequency centroid (Rii) is good and the observed detached from all other groups of the towns-people was cohort of bashkiri- outliers in line with the known history and population structure of the stud- ans of Sterlitamak. This group was enough removed from cohort of ied groups. Our study suggests that the 9 STR loci, employed thus far bashkirians of rural districts, also group of Russians of Sterlitamak occu- mostly in forensic investigations, can be fruitfully used in microevolutionary pies the detached position in comparison with cohorts of Egorievsk and studies as well, and for reconstructing phylogenetic histories of the human Asbest, which unite into one cluster. Use of procedure of Maximum Likeli- populations, at least at the local level. hood Factor has allowed to lead research of joint variation of frequen-cies of alleles of the investigated populations and to frame mathematical P0973.Genetic Variation at the STR Loci vWA, THO1, D21S11 model which describe differentiation of groups in the whole with the help and HPRT in Three Bulgarian Population Groups of sizes of more common order - of the factors. Two factors (1 and 2) with B. Zaharova1, A. Gilissen2, J. Cassiman2, R. Decorte2, I. Kremensky1 dispersion 3,54 and 3,01, which totally depict 93,56% of total variance of 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Laboratory for Foren- frequencies of alleles were considered. It is revealed that all four cohorts sic Genetics and Molecular Archaeology, Center for Human Genetics; Leu- of the towns-people are subject to influence of the factor 1 and occupy in ven, Belgium expanse of factors unified compact range. Whereas specified cohorts zaharova@ns.medfac.acad.bg unites residing in city with a high toxic load, it is possible to interpret con- Over 400 unrelated individuals from the three largest population groups in ditionality of the factor by 1 specific influence of me-dium of city with the Bulgaria (Bulgarians, Bulgarian Turks and Gypsies) have been analyzed developed chemical industry. The locating in expanse of factors of groups for the highly polymorphic STR loci vWA, THO1, D21S11 and HPRT. The of the townspeople differs essen-tially from peasants of the Bashkir nation- study was performed by quadruplex amplification of the loci followed by ality. The load of the factor 2, at our glance, is attributable to absence of denaturing electrophoresis on ALF DNAsequencer (Amersham Pharmacia unsuccessful toxic influence in cohort of Bashkirians of a countryside. The Biotech). No deviations from Hardy-Weinberg expectations were observed cohort of the Russians of Sterlitamak in expanse of two factors also is for studied loci. Forensic efficiency values (H, MEC and DI) of the studied removed from compared cohorts of Russians of Asbest and Egorievsk. STR set indicate its applicability for identity and paternity testing in the Bul- Apparently the found shifts in frequencies of alleles are demonstrating two garian population. Significant differences in allele frequency as well as in parties of the genetic processes occurring among the Sterlitamak citizens; genotype distributions across all loci except vWA have been observed on the one hand - adaptive plasticity of the population, and on the other between studied population groups. The observed heterogeneity supports hand - adaptive reorganisation with the essential payment for the adap- our previous suggestion based on Y-chromosome STR data that popula- tation. tion differentiation should be taken into account in forensic case analysis and paternity testing in Bulgaria. P0971.Polymorphism of minisatellite loci ApoB and D1S80 in Russian populations. P0974.Paternity Testing experience and Genetic Data Analy- D. A. Verbenko1, O. P. Balanovsky1, T. V. Pogoda1, L. V. Bets2, A. V. sis for nine STR loci in 5th Region Population, Chile. Stepanova2, V. P. Ivanov3, M. A. Solodilova3, N. A. Bebyakova4, S. A. Lim- S. Smalley, G. Molina, R. Almarza, F. Gonzlez borska1 Laboratorio de Biologa y Gentica Molecular. Centro de Investigaciones 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences; Moscow, Mdicas. Escuela de Medicina. Universidad de Valparaso; Valparaso, Russian Federation; 2Moscow State University; Moscow, Russian Federa- Chile tion; 3Kursk Medical University; Kursk, Russian Federation; 4Arkhangelsk Lab.Biomolecular@uv.cl State Medical Academy; Arkhangelsk, Russian Federation Background; In October 1999, the countrys new filiation law begun, and dav@img.ras.ru paternity testing by DNAprofiling has increased in importance. Genetic Genetic diversity in native peoples from six Russian areas (Arkhangelsk, data analysis of STR loci in the chilean population has only been done in Kostroma, Kursk, Novgorod, Ryazan and Smolensk regions) has been the Metropolitan region. Chilean population is mainly the result of the analysed. We examined the polymorphism of minisatellite loci D1S80 and admixture of Spaniards and Amerindian women during the XVI and XVII 3ApoB because of their high discrimination power. More than 700 unrelat- centuries. Later inmigrations never reached over 4%. Aim; Describe our ed individuals from 13 population samples were studied. Allele distributions experience in paternity testing and present the results of genetic data of these loci have been obtained. Allele typing was performed using PCR analysis of CSF1PO, TPOX, TH01, F13A01, FESFPS, vWA, D16S539, technique and PAAG electrophoresis followed by silver staining.For pre- D7S820, D13S317 loci in the 5th region population. Subjects and methods; cise determination of 3ApoB alleles specially designed allelic ladder was 36 non-related subjects attending our paternity testing service were ana- used. Observed allele distributions were found to be similar with that lyzed for the nine loci. PCR amplification and analysis was done as shown for other Caucasoid populations. Both loci revealed high degree of described by Promega Corp. Results; CSF1P0, TPOX, F13A01, vWAloci, polymorphism - we detected more than 20 alleles for each - and geterosy- presented a departure from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium. Only in four pairs gosity level above 76 per cent. These data make us possible to suppose of alleles of 3 loci, show linkage dissequilibrium. The allele frequency was that differencies between Russian populations are statistically insignificant. alike to other population of similar ethnic origin. The power of exclusion of Comparative study of Mongoloid group (Jakut population sample) has the nine loci is 0.9998. We discarded paternity in 4 cases and confimed in educed statistically confirmed difference with Russians. 13 cases with an average probability of 99.97637 (99,89-99,99999). Con- clusions; Despite that the alleles frequency is similar to the observed in P0972. Patterns of Genetic Diversity at the 9 Forensically other populations, the power of exclusion of these loci is higher than the Approved STR Loci in the Indian Populations reported for hispanic populations. To confirm these preliminary results and M. Battini1, R. Datta2, P. Chattopadhyay2, G. Sun3, V. Kashyap2, R. Deka3 get a better knowledge of our population, we are going to sample it by 1Indian Statistical Institute; Calcutta, India; 2Central Forensic Science Lab- screening and typing. DIPUV 20/2000. oratory; Calcutta, India; 3University of Cincinnati; Cincinnati, United States bmr@isical.ac.in P0975.Genetic characterization of Afro-derived Brazilian pop- Genetic diversity at the 9 STR loci, which are universally approved and ulations based on YSTRs and classic markers widely used for forensic investigations, has been studied among the 9 Indi- S. F. Oliveira1, R. R. Lima1, C. E. V. Wiezel2, A. L. Simes2, E. M. B. an populations representing diverse ethnic linguistic and geographic back- Beira2, E. J. S. Pilla1, M. Klautau-Guimares1 grounds. The 9 STR loci were profiled on 902 individuals using fluorescent 1Universidade de Brasilia; Brasilia, Brazil; 2Universidade de So Paulo; detection methods on ABI377 System with the aid of Profiler Plus Kit. The Ribeiro Preto, Brazil studied populations represent two upper castes, Brahmin and Kayastha, silviene@unb.br and a tribe (Garo) from West Bengal, Meitei, a Hindu caste with historical In Brazil there are several rural, afro-derived populations (dubbed as links to Bengal Brahmins, a migrant Muslim group and three tribal groups- quilombo remnants) founded, in their majority, at the end of the 19th cen- Naga, Kuki, and Hmar- from Manipur State in Northeastern India, and a tury by fugitive and/or freed slaves. These populations maintain substan- middle ranking semi-nomadic herders caste called Golla from Andhra tial genetic and cultural African derived characteristics, in spite of migrato- Pradesh. Gene diversity analyses suggest that the average heterozygosi- ry contributions by other neighboring populations. We have been working ty is uniformly high (>0.80) in the studied populations and the coefficient of with three main quilombo remnant populations from northeastern Brazil gene differentiation highest so far observed for any class of markers (Rio das Rs, Riacho de Sacutiaba and Mocambo). We have used Y-chro- among Indian populations at any hierarchy- local, regional, or national. mosome STRs markers (DYS 390, DYS 391, DYS 392, DYS393 and DYSPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 291 394) as well as protein markers (ESD, CAII, GLO, PGM 1 HPand Hb) in P0978. African influence in actual population of the atlantic order to study gene diversity and interpopulational heterogeneity. Protein islands Madeira and cabo Verde using an Ychromosome hap- analysis revealed mean heterozigosity levels of 0.26 (s.e.=0.074) for Ria- lotype YAP/SY81 cho de Sacutiaba (n=41), 0.26 (s.e.=0.073) for Mocambo (n=99) and 0.28 A. Rosa1, A. T. Fernandes2, A. Brehm2 (s.e.=0.059) for Rio das Rs (n=176). Mean gene diversity for the STRs 1Departamento de Biologia, Universidade da Madeira; Funchal, Portugal; was, respectively, 0.62 (s.d.=0.177), 0.53 (s.d.=0.273) and 0.66 2Centro de Cincias Biolgicas e Geolgicas, Universidade da Madeira; (s.d.=0.078). There is very significant heterogeneity between these popu- Funchal, Portugal lations as estimated by protein markers (Chi-square=54.65; df=14; atgf@uma.pt P<0.001). Pairwise comparisons between the three populations indicates Madeira and Cabo Verde archipelagos were discovered by the portuguese that the Rio das Rs population is distinct from the two others, due mainly in 1419 and 1460 respectively. Madeira is composed of two inhabitated to the presence of the HB*C allele and to the high frequency of the CAII*2 islands, Madeira and Porto Santo, while Cabo Verde has nine islands allele. STRs markers also revealed significant heterogeneity between the divided in Barlavento (Windward) and Sotavento (Leeward) groups. Both three populations (Chi-square=89.53; df=38; P<0.05). Pairwise compar- archipelagos were part of the slave trade route which flourished in the 15th isons indicated that all three populations are distinct from one another. and 16th centuries. Slaves originated from the West African coast (spe- Therefore, we conclude that the Y-specific markers are more informative cially Guinea) were sold in Cabo Verde and then proceeded to Lisbon. and show greater gene diversity between these populations. Acknowledg- They were also used to colonize the islands of Santiago and Brava in Cabo ments; Funda o Cultural Palmares Verde. Here we used markers YAP/SY81 from the Ychromosome to char- acterize the populations from both archipelagos plus a population from P0976. Frequencies of Y-Chromosomal Haplogroups in sev- Portugal. YAPpolymorphism is due to Alu insertion in chromosome Y, while eral European Populations SY81 is a mutation from an Ato G. It is believed that the insertion in YAP M. Adojaan occurred only once in human history, and it appears to have happened Estonian Biocentre; Tartu, Estonia after the out of Africa event. The SY81 mutation supposedly happened maarja@ropka.ut.ee only after the migration from the South to the North of Africa. Thus, this There are several features that make the Y-chromosome a very valuable marker allows the separation of subsaharians from other africans. Our aim tool in human population studies. Unlike other human chromosomes, the is to verify the african genetic influence in the atlantic islands of Madeira Y-chromosome is haploid and most of it does not recombine in meiosis, so due to the slave trade. We collected DNAfrom unrelated individuals which it is passed as a whole from father to son and in principle it is possible to are originary from the same island at least for three generations. Sample reconstruct the histories of paternal lineages by comparing modern Y-chro- sizes and origin were the following; Madeira (N=130); Cabo Verde mosomes. The aim of this study was to find out about population histories Sotavento (N=120); Cabo Verde Barlavento (N=110) and Guinea (N=130). by measureing the frequencies of different Y-chromosome types in differ- DNAextraction and amplification were done using the chelex method and ent populations of eastern Europe and the Caucasus area by using unified specific primers for each Y marker. In case of SY81 marker, we used protocols of the European Y-chromosome Diversity Project. Atotal of 980 restriction enzyme NlaIII to digest the PCR product, and separated the DNAsamples were screened for 8 unique biallelic Y-chromosome markers. fragments in polyacrilamide gels visualized by silver staining. Haplotype The set of markers included SRY-1532, SRY-8299, DYS 257, DYS 287, frequency values of all populations were compared and the results dis- M9, 12f2, Lly22g and Tat. All populations differed considerably and every cussed. population had an unique pattern of haplogroup occurrencies. Distinct cli- nal distribution of HG9, HG1 and HG3 was detected, allowing to speculate P0979.Human genetic characterization of Madeira and Porto in terms of founding populations. Ageneral demographic conlusion of this Santo islands using Ychromosome haplotypes study suggests, that none of the studied populations underwent recent Y- A. T. Fernandes1, L. Gusmo2, A. Brehm1, A. Amorim2,3 chromosomal bottleneck. Further progress of this study depends on study- 1Centro de Cincias Biolgicas e Geolgicas, Universidade da Madeira; ing as many as possible uncharacterised populations, enlargement of the Funchal, Portugal; 2IPATIMUP; Porto, Portugal; 3Faculdade de Cincias, repertoire of the informative SNP-s and parallel analysis of microsatellite Universidade do Porto; Porto, Portugal variation. atgf@uma.pt The Madeira archipelago is composed of two inhabited islands, Madeira, P0977. Analysis of human Y-microsatellite haplotypes in with about 250 000 inhabitants, and Porto Santo with 5000. Colonised in Ukraine 15th century by the Portuguese, it suffered many different influences S. Kravchenko, L. Livshits through the centuries. In the 15th and 16th centuries, Madeira was part of Institue of Molecular Biology & Genetics NAS of Ukraine; Kiev, Ukraine the slaves route and received many of the slaves going to mainland Por- livshits@imbg.org.ua tugal. On the 18th century, there was a British commercial influence with Five Y-chromosome-specific human STR-loci (DYS393, DYS392, entire families settling there. Known by its favourable climate, a lot of peo- DYS391, DYS390 and DYS19) were analysed in 222 samples of Ukraini- ple came to recover from diseases such as tuberculosis. In this century ans with Slavic origin from different regions of Ukraine (West, East, North tourism certainly contributed to the various inputs on its inhabitants. Porto and Central) and in 68 samples from isolated Crimean tatars population. Santo, unlike Madeira, was exposed to attacks by North African pirates, DNAtyping of STRs loci was performed by fluorescent PCR followed by especially during early colonisation. Here we present a survey on the high-throughput fragment analysis on a single-wavelength automated DNA genetics of Madeira population using YSTRs (short tandem repeat) which sequencer. The allelic variation analysis has not revealed differences in all are currently applied in forensic, genealogical and evolutionary studies. loci between four Ukrainian populations. Allele frequency distribution Our aim is to verify the different male influences in the existing population showed high significant differences between pooled Ukrainian and the from these two islands. We collected blood samples from unrelated male Crimean tatars populations for all loci. Gene diversity index (D), average individuals originated from Madeira (95) and Porto Santo (16) with known number of repeats index for each locus (R) and genetic distances between local ancestors at least until 3 generations back. The STRs (DYS19, Ukrainian and Crimean tatars population were estimated. Five loci DYS389I and II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392 and DYS393) were deter- (DYS393/DYS392/DYS391/DYS390/DYS19) were found to generate 222 mined by PCR multiplexing, using a Perkin Elmer ABI 370 sequencer. We different haplotypes; 78 - in Ukrainian population and 46 in Crimean tatars compared the haplotype frequencies found with other population studies populations, but only 14 of which were shared by these two populations. and discuss the results. The most common haplotype (13/11/11/24/16) was found in 28 out of 222 (13%) Ukrainians (D = 0.94). Assuming a stepwise mutation model, haplo- P0980. MtDNA and Y chromosome polymorphisms in Hun- type tree was constructed. Haplotype analysis in Crimean tatars revealed gary; inferences from the palaeolithic, neolithic and Uralic a high level of heterogenity - D = 0.97. It was hard to find ancestral influences on the modern Hungarian gene pool Crimean tatars haplotype because of nine relatively common haplotype J. Beres1, O. Semino2, G. Passarino3, L. Quintana-Murci2, A. Liu2, S. San- were observed. Such high level of diversity within Crimean tatars suggests tachiara-Benerecetti2 that this population is likely to consists of a set of discrete lineages with dif- 1National Center for Epidemiology; Budapest, Hungary; 2Univ. of Pavia; ferent origin. Pavia, Italy; 3Univ. of Pavia, Dept. of Cell Biology Univ. of Calabria; Cal- abria, Italy beres.oek@antsz.hu Magyars imposed their language on Hungarians but seem not to have affected their genetic structure. We analysed some mtDNAand Ychromo- some polymorphisms in a sample of the Hungarian ethnic group, Palc292 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics who, for historical reasons, could have retained genetic traces of Magyars ans. These findings corroborate previous reports that indicates (a) a high- more than other groups. In addtion, we examined a mixed Budapest sam- er interpopulational diversity among Amerindian populations and (b) high ple. 100 individuals were tested for the markers defining all the European informativeness of Y-linked polymorphisms in populational studies. Finan- and Asian mtDNAhaplogroups and 50 individuals for Ychromosome mark- cial support; FAPESP, FAEPA ers, namely the 12f2 and 49a,f/TagI RFLPs, the YAP insertion, the microsatellites YCAIIa, YCAIIb, DYS19 and the Asian 50f2/C deletion. In P0983. Y chromosome haplotype diversity in populations of the mtDNAanalysis only two subjects belonged to the Asian B and M hap- North Eurasia logroups. The Y chromosome analyses showed that the Palc differed V. A. Stepanov1, V. P. Puzyrev1, M. G. Spiridonova1, V. N. Kharkov1, Z. O. from the Budapest sample by the absence of YAP + allele and by the Soltobaeva2 DYS19 allele distribution;that the proto-European 49a,f Ht 15 and neolith- 1Institute of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation; 2Medical Acad- ic 12f2-8Kb were rather uncommon in both groups;that there is a high emy; Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan prevalence of the 49a,f Ht11 and the YCAII a5-b1;and that the Asian vadimst@img.tsu.ru 50f/2C deletion is absent. The influence of Magyars on the Hungarian gene Distribution of Y-chromosome haplotypes in 10 ethnic groups of Siberia pool has been low through both females and males and Hungarian lan- and Middle Asia (Tuva, Buriat, Altai, Evenk, Kirghiz, Uzbek, Siberian Tatar, guage could be an example of cultural dominance. An expansion centred Tadjik, Russians, Ukrainians) was investigated in order to reconstruct the on YAP; 49a,f Ht 11 is revealed by the median network based on com- evolution of paternal lineages in North Eurasia. Compound haplotypes pound haplotyes. 49a,f Ht 11 could represent either a paleolithic marker of were constructed for more than 400 Ychromosomes using five biallelic loci eastern Europe which underwent expansion after the last glacial period, or (SRY3225, YAP, DYF155S2, Tat and DYS199) and seven microsatellites a marker of more recent spread of the Yamnaia culture from southern (DYS19, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392 and DYS393). Ukraine. Automated genotyping of STR loci was performed with HEX-, TET- or FAM-labeled primers with the ABIPrism310 genetic analyzer and Genes- P0981.YChromosome Haplogroups Detect ASharp Genetic can software. High level of gene diversity and substantial degree of genet- Boundary In Eastern Central Europe ic differentiation of male-specific gene pool (Fst = 0.212) in modern North A. Novelletto1, M. Stefan2, G. Stefanescu3, L. Gavrila2, L. Terrenato4, M. Eurasian populations were found. Haplotypic lineages and their evolution- A. Jobling5, P. Malaspina4 ary relationships were reconstructed. It was shown that most haplotypes in 1University of Calabria; Rende, Italy; 2Genetics Dept.; Bucharest, Roma- modern North Eurasian population have common ancestry traced back to nia; 3Institutul Cercetari Biologice; Iasi, Romania; 4University Tor Vergata; the Upper Paeleolithic period (about 15000 years ago). Using the molecu- Rome, Italy; 5Department of Genetics; Leicester, United Kingdom lar variance of microsatellites within the biallelic haplogroups the age and novelletto@bio.uniroma2.it origin of ancestral haplotypes for DYF155S2 - (6900 years) and TatC Nine single nucleotide (SNP) or indel binary polymorphisms were used to (4200 years) lineages which are specific for population of North Eurasia determine the frequencies of 12 Ychromosomal haplogroups in 219 males were estimated. belonging to 8 administrative districts of Romania and 70 males from the Republic of Moldova. The Romanian samples represented the countrys P0984.Genetic Differentiation In South Amerindians Is Relat- three main geographical regions, i.e. Transylvania in the North-West (Sam- ed To Environmental And Cultural Diversity; Evidence From ples 1-5), Walachia in the South (Sample 6) and Moldavia in the East The YChromosome (Samples 7-8) up to the right bank of the Prut river, setting the border with E. Tarazona Santos1, D. R. Carvalho-Silva1, D. Pettener2, D. Luiselli2, G. the Republic of Moldova (Sample 9). After carrying out a hierarchical De Stefano3, O. Rickards3, C. Tyler-Smith4, S. D. Pena5, F. R. Santos6 grouping of population samples into two major groups, the different quotas 1Departamento de Bioqumica e Imunologia, Universidade Federal de of genetic diversity were evaluated by AMOVA. The five highest Fct were Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 2Area di Antropologia. Dipartimento found when one of the groups included the Western Samples 1, 3 and 6 di Biologia e. s., Universit di Bologna.; Bologna, Italy; 3Dipartimento di and the other included the Eastern Samples 7, 8 and 9. Thus the Carpathi- Biologia, Universit di Roma Tor Vergata; Rome, Italy; 4Department of ans turn out to be a breaking point in the gene geography of Eastern Cen- Biochemistry. University of Oxford; Oxford, United Kingdom; 5Departa- tral Europe, providing a finer definition of one of the possible sharp genet- mento de Bioqumica e Imunologia, Universidade Federal de Minas ic changes between Western and Eastern Europe. We suggest that the Gerais.; Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 6Departamento de Biologia Geral, Univer- association between the mountain ridge and this genetic discontinuity is sidade Federal de Minas Gerais.; Belo Horizonte, Brazil not a mere coincidence, being the Carpathians also representative of an edutars@mono.icb.ufmg.br ecological boundary. This latter may have acted as a barrier to gene flow The geographic structure of Y-chromosome variability has been analyzed over long periods of time, allowing a divergence whose signature is still in native populations of South America using the high-frequency Native detectable in the population samples examined in this work. Work sup- American haplogroup defined by the DYS199-T allele and 6 Y-linked ported by PRIN MURST 1999, and C.N.R. grants 97.00712.PF36, microsatellites (DYS19, DYS389A, DYS389B, DYS390, DYS391 and 99.02543.CT04. M.A.J. is a Wellcome Trust Senior Fellow, grant n. DYS393) typed in 169 individuals. The following pattern of within- and 057559. among- population variability emerges from the analysis of microsatellite data; 1. The Andean populations exhibit significantly higher levels of with- P0982. Autosomal and Y-linked microsatellites in Amerindi- in-population variability than the Eastern populations of South America. 2. ans from the Brazilian Amazon. There is a weak but significant correlation between genetic and geograph- A. L. Simes, L. M. W. Santos, C. T. Mendes Jr ic distances, which explains 5-10% of the observed variability between Dept.Genetics, Fac.Medicina, Univ.So Paulo; Ribeiro Preto(SP), Brazil populations. 3. The isolation-by-distance model for the geographical struc- alsimoes@rge.fmrp.usp.br ture of variability in South America, tested by spatial autocorrelation analy- In 1976, about 2,000 blood samples pertaining to 7 Amerindian tribes was sis, was rejected. 4. Genetic distance analysis suggests higher homo- collected in the central-west portion of the Brazilian Amazon. It was stud- geneity between Andean populations than non-Andean ones. Based on ied for a great number of classic markers and recently, DNAwas extracted these results, we propose a model for evolution of the male lineages of from some of these samples. The amount obtained was enough to study South Amerindians, based on differential patterns of genetic drift and gene microsatellites by PCR followed by PAGE (silver stained). Results from 10 flow. In the West of the continent, associated with the Andean area, popu- autosomal and 5 Y-linked microsatellites in about 320 Amerindian distrib- lations have relatively high effective sizes and gene flow levels among uted in 8 villages pertaining to 4 tribes (4 villages Tikna, 2 Kaxinwa, 1 them, which creates a trend to homogenization of the gene pool. On the Kanamar and 1 Banwa) are here presented. Thirteen of the eighty exact other hand, Eastern populations, settled in the Amazonian region, Central tests performed indicates Hardy-Weinberg deviation. The heterozigosity Brazilian Plateau and Chaco region, exhibit higher rates of genetic drift and for the ten autosomal loci ranged from 0.46 to 0.68, with an average of lower levels of gene flow, with a resulting trend to genetic differentiation. 0.58. Interpopulational diversity revealed by Y-linked microsatellites This model is consistent with the linguistic and cultural diversity of South (Gst=0.333) is much higher than that revealed by autosomal STRs Amerindians, the environmental heterogeneity of the continent and the (Gst=0.045); intrapopulational gene diversity obtained from the first mark- available paleo-ecological data. ers set (Hs=0.188) is much lower than that from the second one (Hs=0.593). These estimates, from both sets of markers, show that inter- P0985.Ychromosomal polymorphisms in two Lithuanian eth- populational diversity values are higher than those usually described for nolinguistic subgroups the major ethnic groups and lower than the observed for other Amerindi- D. Ambrasiene, V. Kuzinskas ans from Brazil. The intrapopulational diversity obtained here is lower than Human Genetics Center, Vilnius University; Vilnius, Lithuania reported values for other populations, including South-American Amerindi- Daiva.ambrasiene@mf.vu.ltPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 293 Polymorphisms in the Ychromosome have been already recognised to be P0988.The Y-chromosomal haplotypes diversity in Turkic and highly valuable in human evolutionary studies and population genetics. We Finno-Ugric people of Russia are presenting results of the study of Ychromosome haplotypes variation T. Viktorova1, M. Bermisheva1, E. Khusnutdinova1, O. Evgrafov2 in two main Lithuanian ethnolinguistic subgroups; Aukstaiciai (A) and 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Med- Zemaiciai (Z), using three biallelic markers; 92R7, SRY-1532 and R5. ical-Genetical Scientific Centre of Russian Acad. of Sciences; Moscow, Blood DNAsamples were extracted from 201 individuals (A; 107, Z; 94). Russian Federation The biallelic markers were amplified by PCR and the resulting 730-bp tvict@imail.ru product was screened, by digestion with Hind III (C was cut; Twas uncut) Polymorphism of Ychromosomal microsatellite loci are very useful tool to for the 92R7 polymorphism; for SRY-1532; 432-bp, AdeI (DraIII) (Awas investigate the origin and the history of human populations. We studied 9 uncut, G was cut); for R5; 1450-bp, Hsp92II (Twas cut, C was uncut). 201 ethnical groups from Volga-Ural region of Russia, that is the eastern part individuals have been analysed, and fall into four haplotypes; 1, 2, 3 and of Europe. It has been an area of constant genetic contacts between 16. The frequency of the 1 haplotype among males is 5% (A; 3%, Z; 7%), Finno-Ugric, Indo-Iranian, Turkic, Siberian and other ethnical for-mations 2  13% (A; 15%, Z; 11%), 3  46% (A; 46%, Z; 47%), and 16 - 36% (A; during the long historical period. The Bashkirs, Tatars and Chuvashes are 36%, Z; 37%). Haplotype 3 shows a highest frequency of chromosomes, a Turkic-speaking populations. The Mari, Mordvinians, Udmurts and Komi defined by Aallele of SRY-1532 marker, and haplotype 16 shows a high are a Finno-Ugrian populations. Being horse breeders and cattle-herders, frequency of chromosomes, defined by a Tto C transition (these frequen- they are of great anthropological interest, because they differ in their cies are different from dates of T. Zerjal et al., unpublished). The haplotype lifestyle and language one from another. The haplotypes diversity based distribution frequency showed a very small variation between Lithuanian on Y-chromosomal short tandem repeat polymorphisms (STRs) and fre- ethnolinguistic groups. Comparison of our results with the date of other quency of biallelic T/C transition (Tat-mutation) of RBF5 locus in Volga-Ural European populations shows that Lithuanian population is old homoge- populations have been typed. The specific putative ancestral Y-chromoso- nous group residing on its territory for a long period and various migration mal haplotypes were observed in everyone ethnical groups. Median-Join- forces influenced its formation. ing microsatellite networks and neighbour-joining trees were constructed. Our results revealed high intrapopulation variation in the male gene pool. P0986. Y Chromosome Polymorphism in Central Anatolian We demonstrate that the several ancestral Y-chromosomes taken part in Region of Turkey formation of the modern Volga-Ural people on a male line. The age of A. Rstemov1, G. Gumus2, H. G. Karabulut3, A. I. Kaya2, G. Pekkurnaz2, ancestral haplotype in each population was estimated at 9000 or 10000 A. Kadikiran1, I. Bokesoy3 years. It will be coordinated to the archeological and historical data about 1Ankara University Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences, occurrence of the first man in territory of Volga-Ural about 10000 years Department of Biology; Ankara, Turkey; 2Ankara University School of Med- ago. icine, Department of Medical Biology; Ankara, Turkey; 3Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics; Ankara, Turkey P0989.YChromosome Microdeletions in Infertile Males karabul@dialup.ankara.edu.tr R. Dada1, N. P. Gupta2, K. Kucheria1 Determination of frequency and distribution of human Y-chromosome short 1Department of Anatomy, All India institute of Medical Sciences; New Delhi, tandem repeats (STR) alleles and haplotype analysis plays an important India; 2Department of Urology, All India institute of Medical Sciences; New role in forensic medicine, paternity testing and tracing back to genomic drift Delhi, India in human evolution. Though disadvantages due to its sex-limited nature, rdada@hotmail.com Y-STRs also have some advantages since they present as single copy Infertility affects 15% attempting pregnancy and in 40-50% of these cases sequences in genome and do not necessitate complex molecular methods the male partner has qualitative or quantitative abnormalities of sperm pro- which differs from autosomal STRs. In this study, eight Y-STR loci includ- duction. In 60% of cases the origin of reduced testicular function is ing DYS19, DYS388, DYS389/I, DYS389/II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, unknown. Microdeletion of the long arm of the Ychromosome (distal part DYS393 in males from Central Anatolian Region were investigated. Nor- of band 5 and 6) are associated with spermatogenic failure and have been mal healthy males living in the same geographical region for at least three used to define three regions on Yq (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc) which are crit- generations were included in the study. PCR analysis were carried out with ical for spermatogenesis and are recurrently deleted in infertile males. Y-STR specific primers on genomic DNAfrom peripheral blood samples Eighty infertile males males with oligozoopsemia and azoospermia were after obtaining informed consent. Size determination of PCR products included in this study. Semen analysis was done in each case to determine were detected by silver staining following %6 polyacrylamide gel elec- the spermatogenic status. They were subjected to detailed clinical exami- trophoresis (PAGE). Distribution of alleles for each Y-STR locus was deter- nation, endocrinological and cytogenetic study. 30 G-banded metaphases mined and haplotype analysis was carried out and compared with data in were analyzed and in all cytogenetically normal cases (n=60) microdele- the literature from other geographical regions. tion analysis was carried out using PCR. For this genomic DNA was extracted using peripheral blood. The STS primers tested on each subject P0987.Y-linked Microsatellites in African-Derived Black Com- were sY84, sY86 (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); sY254, sY255 (AZFc). munities of Northeastern Brazil. PCR amplifications found to be negative were repeated at least 3 times to C. E. V. Wiezel1, S. M. B. Sousa2, C. T. Mendes Jr3, Z. Arpini-Sampaio4, confirm the deletion of a given marker. The PCR products were analyzed A. L. Simes5 on a 1.8% agarose gel. 1Fac.Medicina, Univ. So Paulo; Ribeiro Preto (SP), Brazil; 2Depto.Cin- Seven of the sixty cases (11.7%) showed deletion of at least one of the cias Biolgicas, Univ.Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia, Brazil; Jequi(BA), STS markers. Three cases had AZFc deletion, three cases had AZFa and Brazil; 3Depto.Gentica, Fac.Medicina, Univ. So Paulo; Ribeiro Preto AZFb deletion and one case showed AZFb deletion alone. Correlation of (SP), Brazil; 4Univ.Uberaba (MG); Uberaba (MG), Brazil; 5Depto.Genetica, phenotype with microdeletion was done in each case to determine any Fac. Medicina, Univ. So Paulo; Ribeiro Preto (SP), Brazil phenotype association with deletion of particular AZF locus. The overall alsimoes@fmrp.usp.br frequency of microdeletions varies from 1-55%. In the present study the Historic data and population genetics studies demonstrate that the Brazil- frequency of microdeletion was 11.7%. These differences in deletion fre- ian population is tri-hybrid (composed by Amerindians, Africans and Euro- quency and loci may reflect genuine geographical and ethnic dfferences. peans) and heterogeneous in its composition. About 4 million Africans were brought to work as slaves between 1600 and 1870; in different P0990.Isonymy and the genetic structure of Colombia. regions of Brazil, slaves often fled their masters, founded independent A. Giraldo, I. Bustos, C. E. Pardo communities in remote locations with difficult access, called quilombos or Universidad Nacional de Colombia; Bogot, Colombia mocambos. Many of these communities remain isolated still preserving alegiraldo@usa.net their identity today with little cultural influence from the surrounding com- Population genetic studies in Colombia have been scarce and limited to munities. Because of that they become an important resource for studies few regions. Surname studies can be used to approach the genetic struc- of the origin and characterisation of Brazilian blacks. Results of 5 Y-linked ture of a population in a relatively simple and economic manner. We pres- microsatellites (DYS19, 390, 391, 392, 393) in 4 communities (northeast- ent the genetic structure of Colombia based on a sample of 48054 individ- ern Brazil) are here reported. Interpopulational diversity (Gst=0.044) is uals and 4015 surnames, distributed in 20 regions, representing the whole similar to those described for the major ethnic groups; however intrapopu- Country. Different estimators of population structure were calculated, lational diversity (Hs=0.567) exhibits a very high value. Financial support among them random isonimy (Iii) the coefficient of kinship (phi-ii), Fishers by CNPq, CAPES, FAEPA. alpha and the Karlin-McGregors ni. The lowest alpha values were observed in Antioquia (156.33) and Viejo Caldas (136.31), regions sharing common culture. The highest alpha values were observed in Atlntico294 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics (313.76) and San Andrs (294.52), regions of relatively recent immigration. was extracted from bones of the two adults and two children, and the Consistently, the first two aforementioned regions showed the lowest ni mtDNAhaplotype determination was carried out through RFLPand mtDNA values (0.036455 and 0.044484) and the other two, the highest ni values D-loop sequencing. The RFLPanalysis revealed that three individuals, the (0.189841 and 0.656652). Other estimators were calculated, estimator A, female, the male, and one child found physically next to the female the proportion of population with single surnames, and estimator B, the remains, belong to haplogroup B. The analysis of the hypervariable region proportion of population included in the twenty more common surnames. A I, showed the presence of characteristic Amerindian nucleotide changes highly significant correlation were observed between ni and the estimator for this haplotype in the female and in the child DNA. However the male A(0.98; test value 10.35), and between phi-ii and the estimator B (0.93; adult mtDNAdid not present any of these characteristic changes. The sec- test value 7.39). Also, negatively, between alpha and phi-ii (-0.87; test ond child present haplotype C, either through RFLP, or D-loop sequence value -5.9). Principal component analysis showed that the two first axes analysis. Additionally, we extracted and PCR amplified DNAfrom ground represent the 72.79% of the total variance. Adendrogram, according the sloth (Mylodon) ossicles, estimated to be 11000 years BP, and from Wards method, showed six main clusters, representing geographic, cul- Camelidae bones dated to 9000 years BP. Afragment of the 12S rRNA tural and ethnic similarities. The Euclidian and geographic distances gene was analyzed for these two samples and the human bones. The among regions also showed significant correlation. sequences obtained for these samples are different between them, and each one is homologue to the corresponding published sequence. These P0991. Report of the Postnatal Evaluation of the Program of results strongly support an early arrival of haplogroup B to the south of Amniocentesis in Panama South America and suggest that early colonizers carried other haplotypes C. S. Canton besides the characteristic Amerindian haplogroups described for living Centro Nacional de Gennetica, Hospital Nacional; Panam, Panama populations. celiacanton@hotmail.com Clinical and laboratory outcome was made that include metabolic neona- P0994. ccr5 mutation in Afro-derived Brazilian populations tal screening of patient coming from 388 amniocentesis, made in the Social M. W. P. Carvalho1,2, A. P. M. Leboute2, S. F. Oliveira3, S. M. B. Souza2, Security Hospital of Panama from August 1997 until November of the N. Klautau-Guimares3, A. L. Simes2 2000. Until that moment 292 children was born. 9 pregnancies were inter- 1Universidade Federal de Pernambuco; Recife - PE, Brazil; 2Universidade rupted for parents request. We find 88.1% fenotipically normal and 11.9% de So Paulo; Ribeiro Preto - SP, Brazil; 3Universidade de Braslia; with alterations. Of these 10.3% of the cases had non cromosomic alter- Braslia - DF, Brazil ations and 1.6% with cromosomics alterations (1.0% in diagnostic pitfalls mwpc@rge.usp.br and 0.6% alterations detected prenatally). Additionally was made in all Atotal of 722 rural communities founded mainly by fugitive slaves at the patients, neonatal metabolic screening, finding 1.0 % altered. The early end of the 19th century has already been identified in Brazil. Many of them detection of some alterations allowed to apply therapeutic measures remain similar to the founder populations in terms of their genetic and cul- according to the case for the improvement of the quality of the patients life. tural characteristics. Adeletion of 32 pb in the CCR5 gene (ccr5 allele) is considered to be an European genetic marker since it occurs in European P0992.Novel Maternal Lineages During the Early Peopling of populations (highest observed frequency = 10%) but it is absent in African, South America; The presence of mtDNALacking the Classical Asian and South American Indian populations. Thus, its presence in non- Amerindian Haplotypes in Mummies from the North of Chile European populations must reflect European contribution in their origin or M. P. Carvallo1, M. L. Moraga2,1, D. A. Merriwether3, F. Rothhammer2 the occurrence of inter-ethnic admixture. In this work we investigated the 1Department of Cell Biology, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas, P. Universi- incidence and distribution of the ccr5 allele in three Afro-derived popula- dad Catolica de Chile; Santiago, Chile; 2ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, Uni- tions from northeastern Brazil  Rio das Rs (n=100), So Gonalo (n=53) versidad de Chile; Santiago, Chile; 3Department of Anthropology, Univer- and Mocambo (n=71). The allele ccr5 was observed in these three com- sity of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI United States munities, which indicates European contribution to all of them. However, its pcarvall@genes.bio.puc.cl frequency in Mocambo (5,6%) is higher than in Rio das Rs (1,0%) and in Ancient DNAwas successfully extracted from 35 mummy bones from the So Gonalo (0,9%), which may reflect different origins or different histo- North of Chile, dated 4000 to 700 years BP. Our main objective was to ries of inter-ethnic contact. The frequency of ccr5 in Mocambo is similar compare the mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA) diversity of pre-Columbian pop- to urban Brazilian populations, which have a high degree of European con- ulations with contemporary Chilean aboriginal lineages and to examine tribution. This corroborates our phenotypic observation of high frequency hypotheses about the peopling of South America. We determined the pres- of mixed people (European and Amerindian contributions) in this commu- ence of the main four Amerindian haplotypes by RFLPanalysis. We found nity. On the other hand, the high frequency of ccr5 in Mocambo can also 14 individuals belonging to haplogroup A, 7 to haplogroup B, 7 to hap- have resulted of founder effect. Acknowledgments; Funda o Cultural Pal- logroup C, 3 to haplogroup D and 4 individuals who did not harbor any of mares, CAPES and FAEPA the classical Amerindian haplotypes, representing 11.5% of the sample. Twelve DNA samples corresponding to different individuals were P0995.Mitochondrial DNAvariability in native Andean popu- sequenced for the D-loop hypervariable region I between positions 16081 lations and 16380. Most of the haplotypes determined as A, B, C and D, through S. Fuselli1, E. Tarazona Santos2, A. Conventi1, D. Luiselli1, D. Pettener1 restriction analysis and 9 bp deletion determination, were confirmed by 1Dipartimento di Biologia. Area di Antropologia. Universit di Bologna.; sequencing. Three of the samples not presenting any of the classical Bologna, Italy; 2Departamento de Bioqumica e Imunologia. ICB. UFMG.; Amerindian haplogroups, neither show any of the described Amerindian Belo Horizonte, Brazil nucleotide changes.The results indicate that haplogroups A, B, C, and D luiselli@alma.unibo.it were the most common among Amerindians who peopled South America The genetic variability in 100 individuals from three native Quechua popu- in the past. Interestingly other mtDNAlineages that were also carried to the lations of Northern-Central, Central and Southern Peruvian Andes was continent at least 4000 years BP, remain until 1300 BP. In conclusion we examined on the basis of mitochondrial-DNAby RFLPanalysis and partly suggest that early Amerindian aboriginal populations showed a greater (n=65) by D-loop (first hypervariable control region) sequencing. The mito- diversity than living populations. The apparent loss of some mtDNAline- chondrial DNAhaplotypes of these three South American populations clus- ages over time may be explained by the extensive decrease in the aborig- tered into the four main Amerindian haplogroups; A, B, C and D, with fre- inal population size due to the European colonization.(Fondecyt 198-1111) quencies 13%, 53%, 9% and 25% respectively. Intra-population variability analysis evidences higher variability of Andeans in comparison with other P0993.Presence Of Haplotype B In Human Skeletal Remains Southamerindian populations (nucleotide diversity=0.02 +/- 0.01). The Dated To The Early Holocene From The Chilean Patagonia neutrality test of Fu (Fs) and mismatch distribution show that Andean pop- M. L. Moraga1,2, O. Reyes3, F. Mena3, M. P. Carvallo2 ulations conserve the sign of an ancient expansion, probably predating the 1ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile; Santiago, Chile; peopling of South America. This result suggests that the peopling of the 2Department of Cell Biology, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas, P. Universi- Andes has not been associated with a bottleneck-founder effect. The three dad Catolica de Chile; Santiago, Chile; 3Departamento de Antropologia, Andean samples analysed are significantly differentiated (Fst=0.065, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de Chile; Santiago, Chile p<0.05, calculated by AMOVA). The analysis of mitochondrial variability mmoraga@canela.med.uchile.cl gives further support to the Andean-Brazilian differentiation hypothesis Skeletal remains from five human individuals in good stratigraphic (Fsc=0.11, p<0.01 by AMOVA) previously proposed using classical mark- sequence were discovered in 1996 at Bao Nuevo cave site in the Chilean ers. This result is consistent in part with data from Y-chomosome variabili- Patagonia. All of them have been dated between 9000-8000 years BP, thus ty. The east-west differentiation of Southamerindian populations probably being the earliest human skeletal remains found to date in Patagonia. DNA constitutes the major continental pattern of genetic structure in SouthPosters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 295 America. However, little information is available up to now on mtDNAvari- P0998. A Study of Natural Selection In Tharus of Uttar ation to perform a reliable and detailed phylogeographic analysis. More Pradesh populations should be investigated to identify spatial patterns of genetic S. Rastogi1, A. Srivastava2, B. R. K. Shukla2 variability with higher resolution. 1NSN College,Lucknow University; LUCKNOW, India; 2Lucknow Universi- ty; Lucknow, India P0996.mtDNAdiversity in the Antioquian population rastogiak@rediffmail.com L. G. Carvajal-Carmona1,2, I. D. Soto2, C. Duque2, J. Ospina-Duque3, M. This paper examines the Genetical demography of Tharus, a tribal group McCarthy4, G. Bedoya2, A. Ruiz Linares1,2 of Uttar Pradesh of North India. This tribal group is divided into six endog- 1Galton Laboratory, Department of Biology,University College; London, amous divisions representing six genetic isolates viz. United Kingdom; 2Laboratorio de Genetica Molecular, Universidad de Rana,Gosain,Rawat,Katharia,Dangora,and Pachchimaha.Rana and Dan- Antioquia; Medellin, Colombia; 3Departamento de Psiquiatria,Universidad gora are further regionally subdivided and are reproductively de Antioquia; Medellin, Colombia; 4Complex Trait Analysis Group, Imperi- isolated.These endogamous groups inhabit areas having diverse al College Genetics and Genomics Research Institute,Imperial College; social,geographic,occupational and economic conditions. These variations London, United Kingdom in habitat are reflected in their reproductive patterns. Astudy of opportuni- lgcarvajal@yahoo.com ty of selection based on the reproductive pattern reveals that the index of In a previous attempt to investigate the maternal origins of Antioquia, we mortality is high in all the endogamous groups except one,but variation can evaluated in this population 4 biallelic markers that identify the major be observed in the index of fertility. Tharus practice family planning and the Amerind mtDNA haplogroups. In that survey, 90% of the samples had mean of live births and surviving children is less in groups which are edu- Amerind diagnostic sites while the remaining 10% could have represented cated. Thus the total index of selection has contribution of both , the fertil- either other Amerind linages (e.g. by reversion of diagnostic sites) or non- ity and mortality.Only in two groups the index of total selection has the con- Amerind linages introduced by the Spanish and African immigrants during tribution of the index of mortality and the index of fertility is very small. The colonial times. In order to have a more refined estimation of the origins and effective population size depicts that genetic drift does not seem likely to diversity of the Antioquian mtDNA; here we have sequenced the mtDNA be a significant force in the general history of these populations. control region hypervariable segment I in a sample of 87 Antioquians, including all those individuals previously identified as non-carriers of P0999.ALU Genetic Diversity in Indian Populations. Amerind diagnostic sites. Acomparison of mtDNAsequence diversity with S. S. Mastana1, S. Papiha2, P. Singh,3, K. Das4, A. Pacynko1, P. Fisher1, published data for Amerind and non-Amerind Latin American populations N. Malik5, M. Das6, P. Reddy7 was also done. Our results indicated that Africa has the second largest 1Loughborough University; Loughborough, United Kingdom; 2University of maternal contribution to the Antioquian gene pool , while Europe had an Newcastle upon Tyne; Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 3Panjabi unexpectedly low contribution Diversity estimates seen in Antioquia are University; Patiala, India; 4ISI,; Calcutta, India; 5Raipur University; Raipur, comparable to those seen in Amerind populations and lower than in other India; 6ISI; Calcutta, India; 7Neurological Sciences Institute, Oregon Health non-Amerind Latin American populations. The larger African female contri- Sciences University; Portland, OR United States bution to Antioquia could be explained by several factors including their s.s.mastana@lboro.ac.uk earlier arrival, higher reproduction rate and higher number of immigrants ALU polymorphisms provide a useful tool to population geneticists for during colonial times. These views are supported by historical data. The understanding the population dynamics that have occurred over time. We diversity analysis supports the genetic isolation of the pre-Columbian report here a study of Six Alu insertion loci (TPA25, D1, APO, PV92, FXII- Antioquian population and a population expansion after the arrival of the IB and ACE) from 18 endogamous caste and tribal populations (900 sam- Spanish and African immigrants. ples). The regions studied include North (5 populations), Central and South (9 populations) and Western India (4 populations). Overall spectrum of P0997. Investigation Into The Genomic Meaning Of racial variation in these populations is very interesting at different geographical Phenotypic Traits In Brazil and cultural levels. High level of insertion frequencies was observed in F. C. Parra1, R. Amado2, J. R. Lambertucci3, C. M. Antunes2, S. D. J. some highly inbred groups. Average levels of heterozygosities were found Pena1 to be relatively high in these populations (range 41% to 49.8%). The genet- 1Depto. Bioqumica e Imunologia - Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais; ic diversity coefficient GSTamong this group of populations was observed Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 2Depto. Parasitologia - Universidade Federal de to be high. Phylogenetic trees and principal components analysis (PCA) Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 3Faculdade de Medicina - Universi- computed from Alu frequencies provide support for socio-cultural and geo- dade Federal de Minas Gerais; Belo Horizonte, Brazil graphical assignment of these populations in Indian population structure. fparra@mono.icb.ufmg.br Results are discussed with reference to population origins and human evo- We classified 173 Brazilian individuals as White, Black or Brown, based on lution in India. a standardized multivariate phenotypic analysis that included skin color, hair color and texture, and the format of the lips and nose. DNAsamples P1000. Microsatellite variation in three endogamous groups were collected from the same subjects and typed with the 10 population of Uttar Pradesh,India specific polymorphisms defined by Parra et al (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63; S. D. Agrawal1, B. Muller2, U. Bharadwaj3, S. Bhatnagar3, A. Sharma3, S. 1839-1851, 1998). As geographic controls we used 70 African, European S. Agarwal4 and Amerindian individuals. Based on the DNA typing, we assigned to 1Sanjay Gandhi,PGIMS; Lucknow, India; 2Bernhard Nocht Institute for each individual an Index of African Ancestry (IAA) that consisted of the Tropical Medicine; Hamburg, Germany; 3SGPGIMS; Lucknow, India; ratio of the likelihoods of observing the persons findings on the hypothe- 4SGPGIMS; Luknow, India ses of African or European origin. The logarithm of IAA(LIAA) proved to be suraksha@sgpgi.ac.in an extremely reliable tool for differentiating African from Euro-Asiatic indi- We have examined variation in twenty-four microsatellite markers amongst viduals, with absolutely no overlap. Although analysis of the Brazilians 150 individuals each from the three endogamous groups of Uttar Pradesh, showed a small correlation between average LIAAscores and the pheno- India. DNAwas amplified using fluorescently labelled primers, run on a typic classification, individual analysis revues, in several instances, com- standard 6% denaturing sequencing gel using ABI, 373 sequencer. Statis- plete dissociation between the two parameters. For instance, one black tical packages used for data analysis were POPGENE and PHYLIP. The individual had the fourth lowest score while one Brown individual had the number of alleles varied from 4-10, with an average of 6, at each locus. highest observed. Our study clearly demonstrates that genetic markers Total number of alleles found for 24 STR markers under study were 145. permit an individual classification in respect to African versus Euro-Asiatic Heterozygosity was found to be quite high at all the loci. The average het- geographic ancestry. Moreover, in Brazil, phenotypic racial traits are sev- erogygosity varied between 0.44 to 0.84 among Bhargava, 0.44 to 0.80 eral orders of magnitude worse as predictors of genomic origin than stud- among Chaturvedi and 0.42 to 0.85 among Brahmin. Populations under ies involving indigenous populations of Africa and Europe. study were in genetic equilibrium and obeyed the null hypothesis. High het- Financial support; CNPq of Brazil erozygosity was observed within these populations showing high diversity within these pupulations. Our results reveal that Bhargavas and Chaturvedis differ significantly from one another.There might have been an ancestral pupulation i.e. Brahmin which expanded rapidly and subse- quently split into largely isolated (endogamous) pupulations viz Bhargavas and Chaturvedies. Centroid analysis revealed that maximum gene flow has taken place in Brahmins.However, Bhargvas experienced the lowest gene flow. From the present study it may be postulated that Brahmins may296 Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics be the ancient population as the genetic distance of Brahmins from the P1003.Population Structure and opportunity of Natural Selec- over all gene freuency centroid of the three populations was found to be tion among the Bhoksa tribals of North India lowest among the three populations. B. R. K. Shukla, U. P. Singh Lucknow University; Lucknow, India P1001. Genetic diversity of Apolipoproteins in North Indian rastogiak@rediffmail.com Populations. The Bhoksas inhabit the Garhwal foot hills and the tarai areas of the P. P. Singh1, M. Singh1, S. S. Mastana2 Kumaon division of newly formed State of Uttaranchal,which was hither to 1Department of Human Biology, Punjabi University; Patiala, India; 2Human part of State of Uttar Pradesh,North India.Tharu another tribal group lives Genetics Lab. Department of Human Sciences Loughborough University; in close vicinity and shares the same eco-zone and eco-niche. Bhoksas Leeds, United Kingdom are divisible in two subgroups; the foot hill Bhoksas and the Tarai Bhoksas. s_puneet@angelfire.com Both these groups are maritally isolated. Tharus on the otherhand are Various epidemiological studies have showed that genes coding for divisible into five sub groups viz. Rana, Jogia,Dangaria,Kathuria and apolipoproteins (APOB, APOE,APOAI-CIII-AIV and ACI-CII-E gene clus- Pachchimaha.These sub-groups are also reproductively isolated. An ters, Lp(a)) are the candidates for determining genetic variation in plasma attempt has been made to compare two tribal groups namely the Bhoksas lipid levels and risk of atherosclerosis. Most of these studies evaluating the and Tharus on the basis of population composition like age, sex ,marital risk of atherosclerosis vis-a-vis apolipoprotein were carried out mainly in status,education,occupation etc., and population dynamics on the basis of European populations.Such type of polymorphic studies are limited in Indi- their fertility and mortality. Further, genetical considerations based on mar- an Populations.We have analysed APOE,APOCII,APOH and APOAIV in 9 riage pattern, mean marriage distance,reproductive pattern and the oppor- endogamous populations from North Indian state of Punjab.1075 individu- tunity of Natural Selection have also been studied. Many similarities and als belonging to Brahmin, Bania, jatsikh, Kahatri,Rajput,Scheduled Castes, differences have been noted on the basis of population competition, fertil- Lobanas, Ramdasias and Ramgarhia castes were genotyped using iso- ity, mortality and genetic considerations. Further, inter group electric focusing and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.The overall level variations,have been found on the basis of above parameters between the of polymorphism in these populations is extensive and comaparable to foot hill Bhoksas and Terai Bhoksas and also with the endogamous group many Caucasian populations.Anumber of interesting genetic features and of Tharus. The opportunity of total selection is slightly low in the Tarai clines emerged from our extensive analyses.The worlds lowest APOE*4 Bhoksa as compared to Foot hill Bhoksa. However, the Index of Mortality allele frequency was observed in Ramgarhia, while Ramdasia had the is slightly higher in the Tarai group as compared to the foot hill group. The highest APOA-IV*2 allele frequency (0.093). The frequency of APOCII-2 index of fertility is higher in Foot hill Bhoksas. With index of Mortality slight- was observed to be the highest in Punjabi [populations.Multivariate analy- ly higher in the Tarai Bhoksa group and index of fertility higher in the Foot ses (Correspondence analysis, multidimensional scaling analysis) of the hill group, the total Opportunity for Selection is low among the Tarai Bhok- Punjabi and the world population highlights the potential of these markers sas as compared to the foothill group.On the other hand the five groups of for human genetic diversity studies in addition to medico-genetic implica- Tharu tribals have a slightly higher level of the Index of Opportunity for tions. selection.Thus it is clear that both groups of Bhoksas exhibit low Opportu- nity of Selection as compared to the five groups of Tharus. P1002. Tribal Communities show Inverse Relationship between Sickle Cell Hemoglobinopathies and G-6-PD Defi- P1004.HLAClass II antigen distribution in Maratta population ciency in Central-East India from Mumbai.Maharastra. Western India. R. S. Balgir, B. Murmu, B. P. Dash U. Shankarkumar Division of Human Genetics, Regional Medical Research Center (ICMR); Institute of Immunohaematology; Mumbai, India Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India shankarkumar16@hotmail.com immunol@dte.vsnl.net.in The HLADR and DQ antigen maximum likelihood gene frequency esti- Tribal communities in India constitute the largest tribal population in the mates in 95 marattas revealed that HLADR2 and DR7 had highest fre- world. There are about 461 tribal groups which constituted 8.08% (about quency(0.27;0.15) while DR3 and DR9 had low frequency(0.04). HLADR8 68 million) of the total population of India as per 1991 Census. In India, trib- was absent. HLA DQ1 and DQ2 presented with high frequen- al communities are highly vulnerable to hereditary diseases and have a cy(0.40;0.13).Two locus haplotype frequency analysis revealed that DR2- high degree of malnutrition, morbidity and mortality. Tribal health is com- DQ1 and DR7-DQ2 had highhaplotype frequency with significant T pounded by poverty, illiteracy, ignorance of causes of diseases, hostile value(>2) and in positive Linkage disequilibruim(LD).The haplotype DR4- environment, poor sanitation, lack of safe drinking water, exploitation, faith DQ1 had less frequency with negative LD. Molecular Low resolution PCR- in traditional beliefs, etc. SSP typing for DRB1 and DQB1 gene revealed that Out of 461 tribes, 62 tribes live in Orissa alone forming about 10.8% of the DRB1*02;DRB1*07;DQB1*06 and DQB1*0203 had frequencies as tribal population of India. The Orissa state occupies an important place, 17.85%,14.28%,50% and 12.5%. being the 3rd in rank for high concentration of tribal population in the coun- try. P1005.Biological Affinity of Brahmins of Uttar Pradesh (India) Hemoglobinopathies and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) V. Agnihotri1, B. R. K. Shukla2 enzyme deficiency are important genetic and public health problems in 1NSN Degree College; Lucknow, India; 2Lucknow University; Lucknow, Orissa. In order to map out these genetic disorders among the tribal peo- India ple, 15 major tribal communities were randomly screened from different arastogi@lw1.vsnl.net.in parts of Orissa. High frequency of sickle cell hemoglobinopathy and G-6- In India the caste system is a living reality.The caste are characterized by PD deficiency, the range being 0-22.4% and 5-15.9%, respectively with - hierarchy,economic specialization and endogamy. The caste are divided thalassemia trait taking an intermediate position, was observed in 15 major into endogamous groups.These endogamous groups vary in their gene tribes. For G-6-PD deficiency, males as well as females and both female frequencies even though they share the same econiche.Principles of heterozygote and homozygote cases were detected. Twelve cases endogamy regulate their gene pool and are normally not disturbed except showed double heterozygosity for sickle hemoglobinopathy and G-6-PD by selection effect and mutation. In Uttar Pradesh like other parts of India deficiency. there are several endogamous groups of Brahmins. Probably these endog- The state of Orissa is one of the hyper endemic areas for malaria espe- amous groups are split product of a larger group. Therefore in order to cially for Plasmodium falciparum. Moreover, the inverse relationship examine the hypothesis that whether these endogamous groups are the between the sickle cell hemoglobinopathy and G-6-PD deficiency in major product of fission of a common parental population or independent reali- tribal communities of Orissa is interesting one. When the frequency of sick- ties,which have evolved during the course of time and continue to exist as le cell disorders decreases in the population, the frequency of G-6-PD individual genetic isolates, studies were made on their demographic,mor- enzyme deficiency increases and vice versa. It seems that the Natural phological and genetic traits. These traits indicate similarities between the Selection has played a major role in favour of sickle cell and G-6-PD Brahmin groups, suggesting the belief of a common parental stock or orig- enzyme mutations so that they have probably evolved as a protective inal oneness. The statistical test for natural selection (of Crow),Morpho- mechanism against the lethal effects of malaria in this part of the country. logical distance- T2(Of Sanghwi), and G2 for genetic distance(Sanghwi) Intervention and genetic counselling strategies among these affected trib- were also used to assess quantitatively the biological affinities between al communities are being planned and implemented for the control and these groups. On the basis of these statistics, it appears that probably the prevention of hereditary hemolytic disorders. All the above related issues process of fission following adaptation to new ways of life has been at work have been discussed in this paper. ( as historical evidence with various myths and legends also suggests), and resulted in the formation of different endogamous groups of Brahmins.Posters: Genetic Epidemiology and Population Genetics 297 P1006. Incidence of haemoglobin-E in tribal population of an important contribution to the study of the diseases inheritance. Classi- Tripura especially among school children cal segregation analysis, carried out on data from the population based M. De1, B. Sengupta2, G. Talukder2 Registry of Nuoro, indicated that MS may be attributed to a possible auto- 1Vivekananda Institute of Medical Sciences,; Calcutta, India; 2Vivekanan- somal recessive gene, with reduced penetrance. This concept of incom- da Institute of Medical Sciences; Calcutta, India plete penetrance, can conceal a complex pattern; the presence of more madhusnata_de@yahoo.com genes with modifying effects may results in a reduced penetrance, espe- Tripura - a small state in the Eastern India close to Bangladesh with a pre- cially when the analysis is performed on a small sample. This hypothesis dominant tribal population (80%) showed a high incidence of haemoglobin- seems supported by complex segregation analysis. In fact, after the split- E in an unrelated cohort of age group between 7 to 70 years(1). This ting up of the sample, according to parental mating type, the polygenic encouraged us to screen adolescent tribal school children with a view to model was the most suitable for crosses between unaffected parents, start counselling at an early age, by agarose gel electrophores followed by whereas when one parent was affected the best fitting model was a mixed PCR-ARMS confirmation. This study comprised of 196 school children model with a polygenic component and a major locus. Segregation analy- aged 9 to 14 years of both sexes showed 57.65% HbE carriers, 20.41% sis on MS may be considered only an exploratory tool, since MS is a com- homozygous E and normal 21.94%. The incidence of HbE has been estab- plex entity. However our results based on classical and complex segrega- lished to be the highest in the indigenous Tripuri and Tripuri Deb Barman tion analyses indicate that the possible genetic basis could be a polygenic tribes who have migrated to this area at an early date and are supposed to system. This indication is in complete agreement with the well known com- be Tibeto- Burmans with admixture of tribes from the West. Other tribes plexity of the disease. like Chakma, Neotia and Jamatia also showed HbE carrier status but the numbers were not adequate. Study of a parallel cohort of 114 tribal and P1009. An Item Response Theory Approach to Phenotype local populations have shown an increased incidence of E beta-thalas- Refinement for Genetic Studies saemia cases (10.53%), which was absent in our previous study (1). This B. S. Maher, M. M. Vanyukov, M. L. Marazita, H. F. Simkevitz, L. Kirisci, R. suggests evidence of racial admixture with the surrounding beta-thalas- E. Ferrell, G. P. Kirillova, R. E. Tarter saemia carrier population, which may pose a public health problem in University of Pittsburgh; Pittsburgh, PAUnited States future. The HbE haplotypes found in Tripura has been established to be dif- maherb@cpc.pitt.edu ferent from that found in West Bengal.2 This milder gene action, opens up Substantial evidence suggests that the liability to attention deficit hyperac- possibilities of study of regulatory or interactive gene functions specially in tivity disorder (ADHD) is highly heritable. To disentangle the complex sys- the populations belonging to over 30-40 tribal groups populating North tem of the determination of this latent quantitative trait, it is critically impor- Eastern India. REFERENCES ; 1. De M, Chakraborty G,Bhattacharya DK, tant to use informative phenotypic definitions. Item response theory is Talukder G. Molecular studies of haemoglobin-E in tribal populations of capable of providing unbiased trait estimates that take into account both Tripura. Lancet 1997; 349; 1297. 2. Das SK, De M, Bhattacharya DK, Sen- the individual trait level and the properties of the traits indicators (items). gupta B, Das N, Talukder G. Interaction of different haemoglobinopathies Segregation analysis in a sample of 602 families supported a transmissi- in Eastern India with a view to establish genotype - phenotype correlation. ble, but non-Mendelian, sex-dependent effect for ADHD symptom count. In Am. J. Human Biol. 2000; 12; 454-59. a clinical subgroup of 184 pedigrees, segregation analysis supported a dominant Mendelian model. Factor analysis of the ADHD symptoms yield- P1007. Genetic Register of Nervous System Hereditary Dis- ed two factors representing the dimensions underlying ADHD liability (inat- eases in Moscow Region tention and hyperactivity-impulsivity). Item response theory modeling was S. V. Kotov, V. Y. Neretin, B. V. Agafonov, B. M. Geht, V. G. Tsuman, M. applied to derive latent trait estimates for the dimensions, using informa- A. Lobov, O. P. Sidorova, S. G. Kalinenkova, A. E. Nalivkin, O. S. Nazarov, tion from multiple instruments and raters. Measured genotype analysis N. E. Shcherbakova (MGA) was conducted to examine the relationship between the latent traits Moscow Regional Research & Clinical Institute (MONIKI), Research Insti- and polymorphisms at several candidate genes of the dopamine system in tute of General Pathology and Pathologic Physiology; Moscow, Russian a sub-sample of 169 Caucasian males. Significant association was detect- Federation ed between a polymorphism in the DRD2 gene and IRT-derived indices of kunpe@orc.ru attention (p=0.0249) and activity-impulsiveness (p=0.0066). Moderate The register of hereditary diseases is intended to currently record all cor- association was found between the DRD4 gene and the IRT-derived atten- responding medical cases. The object of the present study is creation of a tion index (p=0.0389). register of hereditary neuropathologic cases in Moscow region to widely apply up-to-day methods of diagnosis and treatment. Direct and indirect P1010.Research on Genomic Polymorphisms in Patients with registration methods were used. Today our register includes the following Abnormal Saliva numbers of families with hereditary neuropathology; essential tremor 29 A. Yimit1, H. Upur1, I. Sabit1, O. Kasim2, R. Sabir2 families, Wilson-Konovalov disease 36, myotonia 82, Huntington 1Institute of Xinjiang Uighur Medicine; Urumqi, Xinjiang, China; 2Hotan chorea 111, hereditary ataxia 126, progressive dystonia 24, Uighur Hospital; Hotan, Xinjiang, China Strumpell disease 66, paroxysmal myoplegia 15, hereditary sensori- askaryimit@hotmail.com motor neuropathy 294, Duchenne myopathy 124, Beckers myopathy Polymorphism in genomic fingerprints generated by arbitrarily primed PCR 10, distal myopathy 3, ophthalmic myopathy 18, limb-girdle (AP-PCR) can distinguish between strains of almost any organism. We myopathy 49, Landouzy-Dejerine myopathy 34, rigid spine syndrome applied the technique to the four-patient group (n=116, in it Hyperten- 12, muscular dystrophy with Dreyfus contractures 2, non-progress- sive=55, Diabetic=20, Tumor=15, Athma=26) and Normal group (n=50) ing myopathy 12, Stark-Kaiser neural scapuloperoneal amyotrophy DNAof Abnormal Saliva and obtained 42 fragments, among them 64.2% 1, spinal amyotrophy 138, undetermined cases of hereditary neuro- did not show gene polymorphism. In addition, on the 220-344bp regions muscular pathology 279, multiple sclerosis 1103, and myasthenia we had detected six AP-PCR productions. Their figure are: 5/5,4/5,3/5,2/5 60. The patients currently undergo medico-genetic consulting and DNA- (the 5/5 and 4/5 figure of Tumor group and 5/5 figure of Asthma group analysis. Their relatives also undergo current examination. Prenatal diag- P<0.05 that compare with normal group), which will be the molecular index noses are ordered to prevent ill children birth. of gene diagnosis for the patients of Abnormal Saliva. P1008.Classical and complex segregation analysis in an iso- P1011. Genoprotection Activity Of Blood Of Men And Its lated population; a study on Multiple Sclerosis in Sardinia. Mechanisms C. Scapoli1, C. Montomoli2, I. Prokopenko2, B. S. Murgia3, A. Ticca3, R. E. S. Koshpaeva Ferrai3, A. Caria3, L. Bernardinelli2 Kazan State Medical University; Kazan, Russian Federation 1Department of Biology, University of Ferrara; Ferrara, Italy; 2Department medbiogen@mail.ru of Applied Health Sciences, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 3Neurology Antimutagenic properties of plasma and proteins (albumin and gamma- Department, S. Francesco Hospital, ASLn 3; Nuoro, Italy globulin) of blood of men were studied using seeds of Crepis capillaris scc@dns.unife.it (chromosome aberration assay). Antimutagen p-aminobenzoik acid was Genetic epidemiological data strongly indicate that Multiple sclerosis is a used as a comparative reagent. Antimutagenic activity dependent on pro- complex trait. The most acceptable theory is that susceptibility to MS is cessing conditions of the biosubstratum used; for the pre-processing and inherited and environmental factors trigger the autoimmune process that combined processing antimutagenic effect was higher than for post-pro- leads to the disease. Since the Sardinians are an ethnically homogeneous cessing, the processing properties of the blood being higher than those of population, having a genetic structure quite different from that of other Ital- the bloods proteins. Antimutagenic potential of biosubstrata did not ian and European populations, we believed that this population could give depend on mutation inductor. Complex-forming properties of plasma and298 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy blood albumen have been revealed using spectrophotometry through the ther was it possible to correlate dose and frequency of exposure to pesti- substantial spectral displacement  relative to the expected spectrum  for cides with DNAdamage, since the national registries of kind of products, the mixture of biosubstrata and mutagens. All plasma, albumin and the length of time of their use and the periods when they were used, are gamma-globulin concentrations have been shown using chemolumines- very deficient. Genetic monitoring to detect DNA damage through the cence to increase the generation of hydroxyl radical of the Fenton reagent, comet assay is recommended in order to surveillance the health of work- especially for albumin in 1.0 g/l concentration. The general trend for all ers in contact with pesticides. experiments was that the said substances decreased the stimulating effect as their concentrations grew. Peroxidation of yolk lipoproteids showed that P1014.Impact of wheat flour fortification with folic acid on the only high concentrations of bloods plasma and albumen have antioxidiz- prevention of neural tube defects (NTD)in Chile; preliminary ing properties. gamma-Globulin did nor reveal any ability to inhibit lipid per- results. oxidation of yolk lipoproteids. Complex-forming mechanisms of the bloods F. Cortes1, E. Hertrampf1, C. Mellado1, S. Castillo2 albumen and antioxidizing property of plasma and proteins of men have 1INTA, University of Chile; Santiago, Chile; 2Clinical Hospital, University of been proved to form the bloods amtimutagenic potential. Chile; Santiago, Chile fcortes@uec.inta.uchile.cl P1012. To the problem of genetics of ageing; programmed Starting in January 2000, the Chilean Ministry of Health legislated to add increasing of long-lasting cells death caused by low doses folic acid (FA) to wheat flour (2.2 mg/kg). Chilean women of low socioeco- irradiation nomic status (70% of the population) consume high amounts of bread R. F. Fedortseva, R. P. Stepanov, I. B. Bychkovskaya (mean; 200 g/day) which would provide 330 ug/day of FA. To determine the All-Russian Center of Emergency and Radiation Medicine Emercom of effectiveness of this fortification we are monitoring folate status of child Russia, Institute of Experimental Medicine RAMS; St. Petersburg, Russian bearing age women and the rates of NTD in Chile. Folate status was Federation assessed in 750 women of reproductive age from low socioeconomic level arcerm@spb.cityline.ru in Santiago, before and one year after fortification. Frequencies of NTD will After Chernobyl accident there are became accumulate the epidemiologi- be recorded from 1999-2000 (baseline) to 2002, in around 60.000 cal data on remote determined (tissue, organs and organism) disturbances births/year occurring in the nine public maternity hospitals of Santiago. in persons received low-dose irradiation. This data can not be explained Serum and red blood folates values of chilean women before fortification with classical radiation genetic positions as genetic damage appear in are similar to those of US non supplemented women before grain FAforti- small quantity, undergo reparation and can not lead to such pathology fication (NHANES II). Samples to measure folate levels after fortification in Purpose; Study of cellular mechanisms of determinated, nonstochastic the same group were obtained recently. Results are being processed. The consequences of the action of a low-dose irradiation. Material and meth- frequency of NTD in Santiago before fortification, including year 1999 up to ods;Using electron microscopy, myocardial capillary endothelium is stud- September 2000, in 103.554 newborns (alive and stillbirths, over 500 g of ied in rats X-ray irradiated at a relatively low dose of 0.5 Gy and 2.25 and birth weight) was 1,69/1000. Rates were 1,32/1000 and 49,93/1000 in alive 4.5 Gy (total irradiation) and 9, 30, 48 and 100 Gy (irradiation of the car- newborns and in stillbirths respectively. Rates of each defect were anen- diac area). The observation time was 18 months (control, 4.5 and 9 Gy), cephaly 0,56/1000; encephalocele 0,25/1000 and spins bifida 0,88/1000. 12 months (0.5 and 2.25 Gy). 8 months (30 Gy), and one month (48 and All defects were more frequent in females (61,1% vs 37,7 %; p=0.001). 100 Gy).Determined was frequecy (%) of the occurrence of endothelio- According to folic acid supply from bread, we expect that babies born cytes with signs of edematous degeneration, intracellular lysis and isolat- under the effect of the intervention at conception will start by January 2001, ed damage of mitochondria. so we will be able to show the results from the first trimester of 2001 at the Results;The total irradiation of rats at a dose 0.5Gy as well as at higher Congress. *Supported by March of Dimes, Center for Disease Control and doses, 2.25 and 4.5 Gy, produces in the population on vascular endothe- Prevention, Chilean Ministry of Health, PAHO/WHO liocytes a persistent increase of the yield of damaged cells as compared with the background. This effect was characterized by an early appear- P1015. The Prevalence of Connexin 26 Mutations Within the ance, irreversibility, and dose-independency. The damage was revealed Palestinian Deaf Population without association with mitosis.The mean level of the amount of damaged H. Shahin1,2, T. Sobe2, T. Walsh3, M. King3, K. Avraham2, M. Kanaan1 cells during the observation time with the confidence interval [P=0.05] in 1Bethlehem University; Bethlehem, Palestine; 2Tel Aviv University; Tel Aviv, the control and after the total irradiation at the doses of 0.5, 2.25 and 4.5 Israel; 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Washington; Seat- Gy amounted to 1.29 0.4, 18.5  2.8, 14.2  6.0 and 16.0  2.0, respec- tle, WAUnited States tively. The same regularities have been also established after theirradiation hshahin@bethlehem.edu of the cardiac area at doses of 9, 30, 48 and 100Gy. In some Palestinian communities, the prevalence of inherited prelingual Conclusion; In mammals and humans the destabilization of such type is deafness is among the highest in the world. As an initial step towards assumed to can cause expressed departure from physiological norms in understanding the genetic causes of hearing loss in the Palestinian popu- slowly renewling tissues since the stable increasing of frequency cells lation, 48 independently ascertained probands with bilateral non-syn- death can no compensate in its by proliferation processes. The hypothesis dromic hearing loss (NSHL) were evaluated for mutations in the connexin are suggested that these changes can play a significant role in the devel- 26 gene. Connexin 26 encodes the gap junction protein GJB2 and is the opment of low doses radiation consequences. most common cause of recessively inherited NSHLworldwide. Of the 48 Palestinian probands, 11 (23%) were homozygous or compound heterozy- P1013. Damage To The Dna Of Female Banana Plantation gous for mutations in GJB2. Multiple mutations were identified, both Workers Exposed To Pesticides. among and within extended families; -3170 G>A, 35delG, 167delT, V. Ramrez, P. Cuenca 229T>C 235delC. We show that GJB2 3170 G>Adisrupts splicing, Instituto de Investigaciones en Salud. Universidad de Costa Rica; San yielding no detectable message. From genome sequence of chromosome Jos, Costa Rica 13, we determined distances between markers flanking connexin 26 on the vramirez@cariari.ucr.ac.cr BAC contigs. Distances between markers flanking connexin 26 are con- Abstract; pesticides use in developing countries is extensive in quantity sistent with single origins in the Middle East for 35delG and for 167delT, and in time. Agreat deal of what is applied remains in the environment and with subsequent recombination between markers. Twenty-five deaf in the organisms inhabiting it. This brings contamination and health probands wildtype at GJB2 represent informative, extended families who impairment of those in contact with them. Effects can be manifested at a may harbor mutations in as-yet-unknown genes for inherited hearing loss. short term and in the long run and symptoms range from a headache to cancer development. Much research has been directed to acute and P1016. 40 Years later; The health related quality of life of chronic effects and more recently to the study of genotoxic effects of pes- women affected by Thalidomide ticides. The objective of this work was to assess the genotoxicity of those I. Nippert, B. Edler, B. Teige pesticides used in the packaging of bananas to which female workers are Westfaelische Wilhelms-Universitaet; Muenster, Germany exposed, using the single cell electrophoresis (or comet assay) as a bio- nippert@uni-muenster.de logical marker, in lymphocytes from their peripheral blood. The study pop- Introduction; Almost 40 years ago the sudden rise of births of babies with ulation was 30 exposed females from 15 different banana farms and 28 a range of severe deformities shocked the world. It was caused by a drug; unexposed females as normal controls. According to our results, there is a the tranquilizer Thalidomide. Pregnant women who took the drug in the first significant damage to single stranded DNA after five years of trimester of their pregnancy had children with a wide but distinctive range work(R2=0.1210, p>0.001). The question is whether this comes from the of malformations. Thalidomide claimed more than 10.000 victims world- actual exposures or from past exposures to other kind of pesticides. Nei- wide. Those who survived are now reaching middle-age. How have theyPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 299 fared in major areas of life and how is their health related quality of life groups endogamy, isolation and admixture with surrounding populations, today? remain open. Methods; Aquestionnaire using the WHO QOL-BREF instrument for meas- uring the health related quality of life was distributed among 166 females P1019.Prenatal Detection Of Chromosomal Abnormalities By affected by Thalidomide, living in Germany. Arandomized control group Fetal Ultrasonographic Examination Across Europe. matched by age and area of residence was asked to fill out a correspon- C. De Vigan1, M. Clementi2, E. Cariati2, N. Baena2, C. Stoll2 ding questionnaire. 1Medical Genetics; Strasbourg, France; 2Service de Gntique Mdicale, Results; Women affected by Thalidomide have a significantly lower overall Hautepierre; Strasbourg, France health related quality of life score as compared to their matched controls Claude.Stoll@chru-strasbourg.fr and have a marked lower physical health score. They are significantly less The objective of the EUROSCAN study was to evaluate the accuracy of frequently married, have fewer children, have less household income and the antenatal detection of chromosomal anomalies by routine fetal ultra- are less mobile. They suffer from chronic pain because of a steady sonographic examination in unselected populations. All congenital malfor- progress of deterioration of bones and muscles. They rely heavily on med- mations suspected prenatally and all congenital malformations confirmed ical treatment and are less satisfied with the availability of health services. at birth were identified from Congenital Malformations Registries including Because of ongoing gradual impairment they face an uncertain future in 20 registries from 12 European Countries. These registries are following regard to their mobility, their ability to remain in the workforce, and the the same methodology. During the studies period 1996-98, 664.269 births availability of health services that are apt to meet their needs. were covered including liveborn, stillborn and terminations of pregnancy. The chromosomal abnormalities were classified into 12 groups; 1783 P1017.Efficacy of a Prenatal Screening-Diagnosis Program in cases of chromosomal abnormalities were collected;the main groups were Hispanic Patients Attending a USA Urban State University Down syndrome (n=1050), trisomy 18 (n=191), Turner syndrome (n=125), Medical Center. trisomie 13 (n=86) and triploidy (n=56). The detection rate by prenatal K. Mancera1, F. Field1, L. Cohen1, E. Powell1, J. Matheson1, J. Santolaya2 ultrasonography among the 1683 cases having had at least one scan was 1University of Illinois at Chicago; Chicago, United States; 2Texas Tech 38,9%, with variation by regions and according to the chromosomal cate- Health Sciences Center at Amarillo; Amarillo, United States gories. The lowest rate was observed in Klinefelter syndrome (5,7%), the kmance1@uic.edu highest one in polyploidy (78,6%), it was 26,4% for Down syndrome; OBJECTIVE; According to the 1997 U.S. Census Bureau, Hispanics are 75,9% of the cases detected by ultrasonography were terminated. In con- the fastest growing ethnic group in the USA. Despite this fact, they contin- clusion this study shows that close to 40% of fetal chromosomal anomalies ue to be a relatively under-served population in respect to genetic screen- can be detected by routine prenatal ultrasonographic examination. How- ing and prenatal diagnosis. To assess this issue further and possibly ever this detection rate varies according to the regional policy of prenatal improve their care, we studied the efficiency of our prenatal genetic diagnosis. screening program by evaluating the number of invasive prenatal tesing (Amniocentesis/CVS procedures) performed after non-directive genetic P1020.Molecular Genetic Testing In Phenylketonuria;a Model counseling of Hispanic women referred for advanced maternal age (AMA), To Assess The Quality Control System For Monogenic Dis- abnormal maternal serum markers (MSM) or abnormal fetal ultrasound ease (AU) evaluation. MATERIALAND METHODS; Over the last 4 years 2525 V. Kucinskas1, V. Jurgelevicius1, D. Steponaviciute1, S. Giannattasio2, P. pregnant women were referred for genetic counseling. Of these, 1256 Lattanzio2, E. Marra2, R. Lugovska3, N. Pronina3, J. Zschocke4 were Hispanic (50%), 871 African-American (34%), 305 Caucasian (12%), 1Human Genetics Centre of Vilnius University; Vilnius, Lithuania; 2Centre and 93 (4%) of other ethnicities. 1866 patients (74%) were on for Studies of Mitochondria and Energy Metabolism; Bari, Italy; 3State Medicaid/uninsured. 663 of the Hispanic patients (52.7%) had a positive Medical Genetics Center Childrens Hospital; Riga, Latvia; 4University Chil- genetic screening test; 327 AMA, 273 MSM, and 63 AU. The remaining 593 drens Hospital and Department of Human Genetics, Heidelberg Universi- Hispanic patients were referred for other reasons including a family histo- ty; Heidelberg, Germany ry of genetic disorder, exposure to teratogens, recurrent pregnancy losses, Vaidutis.Kucinskas@MF.VU.LT etc. RESULTS; Overall 36% of the prenatally screened poitive Hispanic EU COPERNICUS joint research project Molecular Genetic Testing in patients elected to pursue further invasive testing to confirm the chromo- Phenylketonuria; a Model to Assess the Quality Control System for Mono- somal status of their fetuses. This acceptance rate for invasive testing genic Disease (MOLGENT) is aimed to develop an external quality assur- depended on the indication for referral; 57% for AU, 33% AMA, and 34.3% ance scheme for molecular genetic testing in PKU (EQA-PKU) for diag- MSM. CONCLUSION; From a public heatlh perspective, the relatively low nostic laboratories. Such scheme should be adequate to other EQA acceptance rate of prenatal diagnosis calls into question the efficiency of schemes already in action. On the 1st stage, a standardised strategy for the genetic screening program in Hispanic women. It is possible that most PAH gene mutation identification based on DGGE and RED analysis and of these women are not interested, or do not understand the overall objec- direct DNA sequencing was developed. Standardised protocols for (i) tives of the program. Further studies are needed to address these ques- DGGE, (ii) DNAsequencing and (iii) routine identification of common PAH tions. gene mutations were prepared (http;//www.geneticahumana.lt/MOL- GENT/). Analysis of the spectrum of PAH gene mutations in South, West P1018.Screening For C283y Gamma-sarcoglycan Mutation In and East Europe revealed the sets of 10 most prevalent mutations for the High Risk Group Of Bulgarian Gypsies EQA-PKU trials in definite populations; Italian  IVS10-11G>A, L48S, A. Todorova1, I. Tournev2, N. Ninova1, V. Georgieva3, I. Kremensky1 R158Q, R261Q, P281L, R261X, R252W, delT55, IVS12+1G>A, 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Department of Neu- IVS7+1G>A; German  R408W, IVS12+1G>A, IVS1-11G>A, Y414C, rology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 3Department of Medical Genetics; Sofia, Bulgaria R261Q, R158Q, P281L, L48S, I65T, E390G; Lithuanian  R408W, R158Q, todorova@ns.medfac.acad.bg G272X, A403V, R261Q, E280K, R261X, L311P, IVS10-11G>A, Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2C (LGMD2C) is an autosomal reces- IVS12+1G>A. The 2nd stage was the first trial of the pilot EQA-PKU sive disorder, caused by mutations in the g-sarcoglycan gene. A private scheme. Coded DNAsamples bearing four PAH gene mutations matching Gypsy mutation C283Ywas detected in that gene. Recently, a number of to clinical mock referrals and reply forms were sent to the laboratories par- LGMD2C affected families from Gypsy origin have been found in East Bul- ticipating in the pilot EQA-PKU scheme. The same samples were also sent garia and all these cases were due to the same mutation. We have to experts-reviewers for external expertise. On the basis of the analysis of screened 303 individuals in a reproductive age from high risk Xoroxane the reports received from the laboratories involved in the first EQA-PKU Gypsy group. The genetic tests revealed 8.3% C283Yheterozygote carri- trial, a scheme open for all European laboratories will be developed, as a ers. The screened sample was not ethnically homogeneous, but it was result of the 3rd stage of MOLGENTimplementation. divided in ethnonym groups on the basis of a number of socio-anthropo- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion logical criteria; social status, language characteristics, handicrafts, etc. We Genetic Testing and Screening found that the mutation C283Ywas not randomly distributed among the Gypsy subgroups. The disease seemed to be restricted to the group of P1021. Parents Satisfaction With Medical And Social Help Xoroxane Gypsies and geographically localized in East Bulgaria. Our Provided To The Child With Down Syndrome results stress upon the importance to have a precise knowledge on the T. Reimand1, O. Uibo1, R. Zordania2, V. Palmiste1, T. Talvik3 socio-anthropological structure of the group to be genetically analyzed, 1University of Tartu, Medical Faculty; Tartu, Estonia; 2Tallinns Children especially when it concerned isolated, endogamous populations (as it was Hospital; Tallinn, Estonia; 3University of Tartu, Medical Faculty; Childrens in our case). Anumber of important questions such as the origin of the eth- Clinic, Tartu University Clinics; Tartu, Estonia nic subgroups, the routs of migration, the demographic history, the sub- tiia.reimand@kliinikum.ee300 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy The aim of this work is to investigate the extent of parents satisfaction with vational, Management, Communication and Research & Development. medical and social services provided for the families with a member with Following assessment by the TAB at 6, 12 and 24 months, a postgraduate Down syndrome (DS families) and how they are coping with this situation. certificate of competence is awarded, qualifying trainees to apply for career Material and Methods; Fifty questionnaires filled by the DS families were grade posts. 14 laboratories have been accredited by the TAB for training. analysed. The age of persons with DS was 5 months-28 years (mean age To date 69 graduates have registered and 5 have left before completion. 8.5 years) Results; The clinical diagnosis of DS in most cases was made 46 have received their certificates and of those 38 remain in the profes- at maternity hospitals by paediatricians who also gave the first information sion, 6 have gone into research,1 into industry and 1 is unemployed. 18 about the DS (in 82% of cases). Only 24% of parents were satisfied with are partway through training. Experience to date indicates that this formal this information, 76% of families would like to have more information and approach to training molecular geneticists has contributed significantly to support. The cytogenetic diagnosis was made during the first month in the maintenance of a high standard of diagnostic service in Clinical Mole- 50% of cases. In 4 cases (8%) diagnosis was confirmed later than one cular Genetics Laboratories across the United Kingdom. year. Only 22% of families were completely satisfied with social benefits. The home atmosphere became worse during the years in 44% of cases. P1024.Mutation analysis in patients with osteogenesis imper- However, 70% of the families agreed to support other DS families. Con- fecta; identification of five novel mutations clusions; The DS families need more information about DS and support, E. Benusiene, D. Kasperaviciute, V. Kucinskas especially right after the diagnosis have been established and more possi- Human Genetics Centre, Vilnius University; Vilnius, Lithuania bilities for habilitation and social help. Most of the parents are ready to sup- Egle.benusiene@santa.vu.lt port other families and share their knowledge and skills. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is heritable connective tissue disorder caused in >90% cases by dominant mutations in two genes; COL1A1 P1022.Iranian Human Gene Bank (17q21.31-22.05) and COL1A2 (7q21.3-22.1). The aim of the study was to A. Hajibeigi1, K. H. Javan1, F. Pourfarzad1, N. Nikzat1, M. Neishabury1, H. improve postnatal and prenatal diagnosis of OI in Lithuania using molecu- Najmabadi1,2 lar genetic testing. Lithuanian OI database consists of 110 case records. 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; Thirteen familial and eight sporadic dominant OI cases were available for 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of molecular genetic testing. The segregation of COL1A1 and COL1A2 was Iran analysed using RFLPwithin or close to the genes. Comparison of pheno- maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk typic features with the concordant collagen locus showed that in three For over a decade prevention of the common genetic disorders was a pedigrees Sillence OI type I segregated with the COL1A1 locus, while in national programme in Iran. The result of our ten years study on carrier two pedigrees Sillence OI type I and OI type IV segregated with the identification and prenatal diagnosis of genetic diseases, has revealed the COL1A2 locus. In eight remaining pedigrees the data available were insuf- existence of a wide spectrum of mutations for certain diseases in this coun- ficient for the identification of a definite OI-linked COL1Alocus. Probands try. This is a reflection of Irans long history of foreign invasion, immigration, from 11 OI families and eight sporadic OI patients were screened for muta- cultural exchange and also the high prevalence of interfamilial marriages, tions in 26 exons of the COL1A1 gene using DNAheteroduplex analysis. creating a multiethnic society with a highly heterogenous gene pool. Dur- The results showed the presence of nucleotide sequence changes segre- ing the last three years investigation we have established a DNAbank of gating with the OI phenotype in six probands. Subsequent direct DNA all genetic diseases with Mendelian mode of inheritance studied in Iran. sequencing revealed six mutations in four exons of the COL1A1 gene; mis- Some of these samples are assigned to common or novel mutations and sense (1), nonsense (1), frameshift (3), and splice site mutation (1). Out of some others belong to patients with clinical profiles associated with a par- them, five mutations appeared to be novel; E500X, c.2165- ticular genetic disease but unidentified mutation. This bank stores patient 2166insCTCTCTAG, c.1787delT, c.1786-1787insC, IVS19+1G>A. These and his/her first degree relatives DNAtogether with a comprehensive pedi- findings confirm clinical diagnosis of OI and enable prenatal OI diagnosis gree and a clinical profile for each sample. To improve our diagnostics, we based on direct identification of a COL1A1 gene mutation in six families. found it essential to establish a link between our findings and the other research projects elsewhere in the world by presenting our experimental P1025.Legal Issues in the Practice of Clinical Genetics in the projects and this DNA bank on line. Our web site as well as providing US opportunities for us to collaborate with outside, offers a free of charge valu- L. D. Fleisher able sample resource to all the researchers in the world, who are working Sidley & Austin; Chicago, ILUnited States on various aspects of genetic disorders from prenatal diagnosis to gene lfleishe@sidley.com structure and function. This article introduces the structure and the content As scientists increase our ability to diagnose genetic conditions, precon- of this DNAbank. ditions, and susceptibilities, lawyers and ethicists increase our questions Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion and concerns regarding the societal implications of these new capabilities. Genetic Testing and Screening This presentation will address those questions and concerns as they arise in the practice of clinical genetics. For example, who decides when a new P1023.A2 year postgraduate programme for training Clinical genetics test becomes the standard of care? What does the standard of Scientists in UK Diagnostic Molecular Genetics Laboratories. care require; i.e., when must clinical cancer geneticists advise patients A. Seller1, J. Harvey2, F. Macdonald3, J. Whittaker4, L. Meredith5, A. Cur- regarding the availability of a new test; must they offer the test? Who tis6, G. Taylor7, S. Warburton3, D. Baty8, A. Dalton9 should/should not be tested? How do we protect the right not to know? 1Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories; Oxford, United Kingdom; 2Wessex What about children? What constitutes informed and voluntary consent Regional Genetics Laboratories; Salisbury, United Kingdom; 3West Mid- to genetic testing? Who do the genetic test results belong to and what must lands Regional Genetics Laboratory; Birmingham, United Kingdom; 4East be done to protect privacy and ensure security? Is there a duty to warn Anglian Medical Genetics Service; Cambridge, United Kingdom; 5Institute potential carriers of disease-predisposing genes and, if so, what if that duty of Medical Genetics; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 6Northern Genetics Service; conflicts with the duty of confidentiality? What obligations do we have to Newcastle, United Kingdom; 7Yorkshire Regional DNALaboratory; Leeds, prior patients? What if something goes wrong? United Kingdom; 8Ninewells Hospital; Dundee, United Kingdom; 9Centre for Human Genetics; Sheffield, United Kingdom P1026.AHigh-Throughput Screening Method for Wilson dis- anneke_seller@hotmail.com ease (ATP7B) gene in the highly heterogeneous Greek popu- Diagnostic molecular genetics laboratories in the UK are directed and lation. staffed mainly by Clinical Scientists with technical support provided by E. Panagiotakaki1, M. Tzetis1, N. Manolaki2, G. Loudianos1, E. Medical Technologists. Atwo year, Department of Health approved gradu- Kanavakis1 ate training programme for scientists in this speciality has been available 1Athens University, Medical Genetics; Athens, Greece; 2St Sophias Chil- since 1992 with supernumerary posts funded regionally. The aim is to pro- drens Hospital; Athens, Greece vide a highly motivated and skilled workforce, fit for purpose, to work in any mtzeti@cc.uoa.gr diagnostic clinical molecular genetics laboratory within the National Health To completely characterize the spectrum of mutations in the ATP7B gene Service. The programme also acts a foundation for statutory registration in Greek Wilson disease (WD) patients, we screened 150 Greek WD with the Health Professions Council. Training within the speciality is over- chromosomes by SSCP. 18 mutations were identified accounting for 85% seen by the professions Training Accreditation Board (TAB). The pro- of WD chromosomes. H1069Q (29.3%), R969Q (17.3%), Q289X (9.3%), grammes are modular, cover defined core topics and specialist areas with L936X (7.3%), 2530delA(5.3%), I1148T(3.3%), 2299insC (2.7%), 1708- opportunities for research and development. Trainees must demonstrate 1G>A (2.0%), 845delT (1.3%), Ter1466R (1.3%), and mutations competence in the following 7 areas; Clinical, Scientific, Technical, Obser- 1703+3insC, G1099S, 777insC, 1782delT, 2101delAT, G1061E, R778GPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 301 and 3907-2A>G for 0.7% each, while 15% of the mutations remain P1029. Validation Issues Surrounding Emerging Homoge- unknown. Subsequently we developed a universal high-throughput double neous, DNA-Based Technologies for Bioanalytical Measure- gradient denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis system (DG-DGGE) for ments in the Clinical Laboratory the analysis of 80% of WD mutations in Greece. Exons 2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 13, C. A. Foy, A. J. Woolford, H. C. Parkes 14 and 16 were PCR amplified. Heteroduplexes were generated at the end LGC; Teddington, United Kingdom of each PCR session and amplified DNAsamples were electrophoresed in caf@lgc.co.uk a linear porosity gradient 6-12% polyacrylamide gel in the presence of the Advances in DNAanalysis to develop methods which are increasingly spe- same linear gradient of denaturants, urea and formamide, as used for stan- cific, sensitive, fast, simple, automatable and cost-effective, are considered dard DGGE. The DG-DGGE conditions used were the following ; denatu- paramount. These demands are currently driving the rapid evolution of a rants 20-70% for exons 2, 4, 10, and 12 and 30-80% for exons 14, 13, and diverse range of newer technologies. One such advance is the develop- 16. Running conditions were; 75V for 15 h. In addition exons 10 and 12 ment of technologies with the ability to amplify, detect and quantitate DNA and 14 and 16 were double loaded. Following electrophoresis, gels were targets in a single closed-tube reaction as PCR proceeds. These real-time stained in ethidium bromide. Using DG-DGGE together with the highly homogeneous systems offer many advantages over traditional methods informative microsatellite markers in linkage with the ATP7B gene including speed, reduced risk of contamination and the ability to more (D13S301, D13S316, D13S314) we are able to offer genotype analysis accurately quantitate the amount of starting material present. As rapid and preclinical diagnosis to the vast majority of Greek WD families. technological advances produce systems which are capable of increased sensitivity, throughput and quantitative potential, new sets of validation P1027.DHPLC for Germline Mutation Screening in the Analy- issues need to be addressed. These include the reproducibility of the tech- sis of the VHLTumor Suppressor Gene; Usefulness and Lim- niques both intra- and inter-laboratory, sensitivity, accuracy, precision and itations the interpretation of data where arbitrary selection of cut-off points to sep- B. Klein1, G. Weirich2, H. Brauch1 arate positive and negative results are often employed. Under the DTIs 1Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institut for Clinical Pharmakology; Stuttgart, Valid Analytical Measurement (VAM) programme, LGC has been identify- Germany; 2Institut for Pathology, TU; Munich, Germany ing recent developments which may have an impact on the future of clini- bettina.klein@ikp-stuttgart.de cal DNA-based diagnostics. This presentation will highlight some of the In order to evaluate sensitivity and specificity of the recently introduced most popular homogeneous technologies currently making the transition high throughput method DHPLC (denaturing high pressure liquid chro- from the research laboratory to the clinical laboratory and discuss key matograpy) for mutation screening in the VHLtumor suppressor gene, we aspects in their validation. subjected DNAfrom 43 unrelated VHLpatients with previously sequenced VHLgermline mutations to this method. In addition, 36 genomic DNAs of P1030. Screening for fraX-A, fraX-E and fraX-F syndrome by unrelated individuals suspected of being VHL carriers but unknown one multiplex methylation-sensitive polymerase chain reac- germline status were analyzed by DHPLC and sequencing. Aims of the tion (MS-PCR) present study were to compare mutation results obtained by direct A. Weinhaeusel1, P. Waldner1, O. A. Haas2 sequencing and DHPLC, and the comparison of two different DHPLC sys- 1CCRI; Vienna, Austria; 2Ludwig Boltzmann-Institute for Cytogenetic Diag- tems. The sensitivity of DHPLC was tested with two commercial devices nosis; Vienna, Austria and protocols i.e. the Varian-HelixTM -System and the Wave Nucleic Acid weinhausl@ccri.univie.ac.at Fragment Analysis System. Both resolved all but one mutation in exon 2 Three fragile sites, FRAXA, FRAXE and FRAXF are located on the chro- and 3 of the VHLgene. In contrast, the GC rich exon 1 showed discrep- mosomal region Xq27-28 that result from repeat-expansion. Phenotypic ancies in the rate of mutation detection. Whereas the Varian-HelixTM -Sys- expression concurs with the methylation of the expansion and the promot- tem detected 10/15 (67%) mutations of the known mutations, the Wave ers of the respective genes, FMR1, FMR2 and FRAXF sequences. Both Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System detected 13/14 (93%). All three FRAXAand FRAXE are significant forms of mental retardation, whereas mutations of samples with unknown mutation status were called by both the significance of the FRAXF expansion is unclear so far. In contrast to systems raising the mutation detection rate to 72% and 94%, respectively. FRAXA, the most prevalent form of inherited mental retardation in males, Cases with different substitutions at the same nucleotide showed different whereas FRAXE and FRAXF are extremely rare. Therefore, it has been elution profiles but similar elution profiles could be obtained from different questioned whether screening for the two rare forms is warranted. Never- mutations. The Wave Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System detected theless, it is important to distinguish the one from the others. We have most VHL mutations however when 100% detection rate is needed therefore devised a multiplex MS-PCR strategy that allows the simultane- sequencing is still required and must therefore be the recommended VHL ous evaluation of the de novo promoter methylation of all three promoters. mutation procedure. Once a family specific mutation has been established, It consists of primer sets that are specific for the deaminated methylated DHPLC may be suitable for a rapid and cost-effective determination of VHL promoter regions of FRAXA, FRAXE and FRAXF as well as a primer pair carrier status in family members that is specific for the unmethylated FMR1 promoter. Our approach distin- guishes between normal and affected FRAXA, FRAXE and FRAXF males P1028.Validation and Harmonisation in Genetic Testing solely based on the respective band patterns. Female full mutation carriers A. J. Woolford, C. A. Foy, L. Birch, H. C. Parkes can be identified by a densitometric analysis of the PCR products on gels LGC; Teddington, United Kingdom stained with ethidium-bromide. So far, we have screened more than 500 ajw2@lgc.co.uk DNA samples from patients referred to for the diagnostic evaluation of The growth of genetic testing over the last decade has created a need for FRAXA, Prader-Willi and Angelman syndrome. Amongst these samples, quality control and external assessment of results. An ever increasing we identified seven patients with FRAXA, but none with FRAXE or FRAXF. repertoire of genetic loci can be examined for association with genetic abnormalities, cancer predisposition, disease status and prognosis. This P1031.Identified Mutations for Genetic Testing means that laboratories that are proficient in one area are assumed to be J. C. Beck, C. M. Beiswanger, L. H. Toji, P. K. Bender, J. C. Leonard, R. T. qualified in testing areas that may be very far removed from their area of Johnson previous experience. Coriell Institute for Medical Research; Camden, NJ United States Some important criteria for assessing a test will need to be addressed jbeck@umdnj.edu more formally. Issues of particular importance are fitness for purpose; can Currently more than 600 molecular genetic tests are offered by a variety of the test yield the desired information? What are the limits of the test, in laboratories and institutions. There is a critical need for validated standards terms of specificity, selectivity, and detection? Does sample origin, com- accessible to laboratories offering these tests. The Coriell Cell Reposito- plexity of the sample matrix or its storage have any effect on the result? ries through the NIGMS Human Genetic Cell Repository and the NIAAging Has the result been accurately interpreted? Can we assign a confidence Cell Repository have a collection of more than 600 cell lines and DNAsam- limit based on our previous data? Statistical analysis of the performance ples representing 72 diseases with characterized mutations which could be of a method and calculation of an uncertainty budget could enable more used as standards. These include diseases caused by expansion of trinu- informed genetic counselling and prevent the inappropriate application or cleotide repeats, such as dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (for which extrapolation of some genetic test results. three samples with known repeats are available); myotonic dystrophy (13); In order to deliver the potential advantages of genetic testing to society and Friedreich ataxia (10); fragile X syndrome (26); Huntington Disease (13); improve public perception of test results, it is important to demonstrate the SCA1 (2); and SCA3 (2). The collection also includes 32 different muta- quality and reliability of the test. Proficiency testing schemes and the use tions in the CFTR gene, 20 unique mutations in the BRCA1 gene, 6 muta- of reference materials or certified test samples are possible routes to har- tions in the BRCA2 gene, and 4 mutations in the APC gene. Samples from monisation of testing procedures. patients with hemochromatosis (19), muscular dystrophy (11), spinal mus-302 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy cular atrophy (3), Angelman syndrome (4), and Prader-Willi syndrome (12) classifications and codifications of genetic disorders are still heteroge- have also been molecularly characterized. In addition, specimens carrying neous and confusing. In 1991 (8th ICHG meeting, Washington), the main the factor V Leiden mutation (2), the MTHFR thermolabile variant (2), and author proposed the use of a multiaxial diagnostic system (MADS) in clin- the 20210G-Apolymorphism in the prothrombin gene (2) are also included ical genetics. For simplicity, only four major categorical axes (I-Phenotyp- in the collection. Standards are also available for apolipoprotein E and Rh ic; II-Pathogenetic; III-Etiologic, and IV-Differential Diagnoses) were D genotyping. These samples are valuable reagents for laboratories per- defined. The major advantages of such a system include; improved diag- forming molecular genetic testing and may also be useful for quality assur- nostic accuracy; greater homogeneity of the diagnostic categories, ance programs. Detailed information about these samples, including order- enhancing the comparison of diagnostic achievements among different ing instructions, is available in an electronic catalog centers, regions or countries; more specific definitions for controversial (http;//locus.umdnj.edu/ccr). terms; user friendliness, as it organizes the usual diagnostic information in Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion a systematic and logical way and does not require further skills; ease of Genetic Testing and Screening modification and improvement to keep it consistent with advances. We have also shown that the system is an excellent aid in teaching clinical P1032. Rapid detection of aneuploidies of chromosomes genetics (Lacassie, Y. An International Multiaxial Diagnostic System in 13,18,21,X and Y with multiplex-fluorescence-polymerase- Clinical Genetics. In; Dysmorphology and Genetics of Cardiovascular Dis- chain reaction in 800 amniotic fluids orders. Zerbinis, Athens, 1994). Although it was not an original goal, the P. Kozlowski, I. Kops, A. Ernsting, M. Oros MADS also can be used to improve the current International Classification Center for Prenatal Diagnosis and Genetics; Duesseldorf, Germany of Diseases (ICD-9). We recently reviewed the diagnoses on 4352 institut@praenatal.de patients, representing 88% of the patients seen in our division between In 85% of all fetal abnormalities aneuploidies of the chromosomes 13, 18, November 1986 and June 2000. We will discuss this experience regarding 21, X and Yare present. After invasive diagnostic the classical cytogenet- the classification and distribution of genetic diseases and birth defects due ic karyotyping of amniotic cell-cultures takes about 10-14 days. To get a to environmental causes, advocating the international use of this system. quicker diagnosis detection-result of these aneuploidies there are two common methods; the FISH technique and the multiplex-fluorescence- P1035. Quality control in a reference thalassemia center in PCR test. Using the multiplex-f-PCR test, results of the chromosomes Iran 13,18,21 and XYare presentable in only 18 hours, in urgent cases in 5 E. Keyhany, M. Neishabury, A. Hatami, H. Najmabadi hours after amniocentesis. Only 1ml of amnotic fluid is necessary for per- University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran forming the test. It is possible to use the test on amniotic-cells after the 11th maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk week. Three multiplex-f-PCRs include fifteen different STRs (tri-and The necessity of quality control (QC) is not obscure especially for the ref- tetranucleotid-repeats), four highly polymorphic STR-markers are used for erence laboratories that are the centers of refered doubtfull or broderline the chromosomes 13, 18, 21, three for XY.The PCR products are analysed results. In our center, which is one of the two national referral centers for on the ABI 310. From 07.99 to 11.00 we carried out 800 tests in our labo- thalassemia (a&b) and the only reference lab, where routine hematological ratory. These 800 results were confirmed by the classical cytogenetic kary- investigations are achieved in association with molecular diagnostics for otypig. We detected 11 trisomies 21, 1 trisomy 13 and 2 trisomies 18, prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection of haemoglobin disorders, QC has which were also confirmed by routine cytogenetics. In our laboratory the a great importance. QC in our laboratories is achieved by the presence of multiplex-f-PCR method is replacing the FISH technique more and more. instrument booklets, laboratory manuals containing standard methods, use In comparison to FISH the multiplex-f-PCR method is less expensive, less of high quality materials and kits, use of external and internal control mate- timeresuming and more sensitive. In addition it is more comfortable for our rial for hematology, biochemistry and genetics tests, control material for patients to get a result for the most common aneuploidies that fast. calibrating the instruments, regular analysis of instrument performances, the use of all available techniques in parallel if necessary and sequencing P1033.Cost-efficient organisation of external quality assess- as the gold standard and daily, weekly & monthly QC data analysis. These ments in molecular diagnostic laboratories have helped us to minimize the lab errors. Since the routine hematology E. Dequeker, J. J. Cassiman procedures such as complete blood count (including RBC indices), Hb Center for Human Genetics, KULeuven; Leuven, Belgium electrophoresis & HbA2 measurements are achieved for screening of tha- els.dequeker@med.kuleuven.ac.be lassemia correct results sometimes prevent unnecessary expensive, time External quality assessments (EQAs) have been organized for several consuming & specific molecular diagnostic procedures. When the hemato- genetic diseases, and demonstrated the importance of continued efforts to logical investigation proved thalassemia then specific molecular tech- improve quality in molecular diagnostic laboratories, including regular par- niques run to detect mutations, known and unknown. In our highly quality ticipation in EQA. It can thus be expected that more EQAschemes will controlled environment less than five percent lab errors has been observed (need to) be organised in the future, also because the number of diseases during the last six months. which can be molecularly diagnosed is increasing rapidly. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the costs of organising an EQA. This P1036.Down syndrome screening protocol in Czech Repub- analysis was based on the 5 years experience with European EQAs for lic cystic fibrosis (1996-2000; see also Nature Genet 2000, 25;259-260). The D. Stejskal total cost was separated in personnel costs and material costs (laboratory GENNET; Praha, Czech Republic reagents, administration, travel). Afurther separation was made between david.stejskal@gennet.cz fixed costs (independent of participants number) and variable costs (cost Antenatal Down syndrome screening protocol incorporating ultrasound per participant in addition to fixed cost). The results of the analysis show nuchal translucency (NT) into established second trimester screening is that the fixed personnel time required for the EQA organisation is high proposed. Accredited centres measuring NTare equipped with screening compared to the additional personnel time required per participant (the lat- software Obstetricians Screening Guide  OSG with following features.  ter is less than 1% of the fixed time). Similarly, the variable material cost OSG calculates NTvalue in multiple of medians (MoM).  Assesses opti- per participant is low (less than 0.5%) compared to the fixed material cost mal terms for further antenatal screening procedures.  Prints screening for the organisation of an EQA. Given the relative high fixed costs for the reports and request forms for second trimester screening.  Evaluates organisation of an EQA, we conclude that a high number of participants ultrasound biometry parameters and minor Down syndrome ultrasound (e.g., >100) is required in order to enable cost-efficient organisations of markers in the second trimester.  Monitors NTstatistical parameters. Sec- EQAs. Furthermore, one might hypothesize that the organisation of EQA ond trimester screening centres are equipped with another piece of soft- which cover several diseases simultaneously could further optimize this ware Integrator. After entering NT values and second trimester Down cost-efficiency. syndrome risk, Integrator prints an appendix to second trimester screen- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion ing report with risk adjusted by NT. Proposed screening protocol can Genetic Testing and Screening decrease false positive rate of established second trimester screening. It can be used at full combined test in the first trimester or integrated test P1034.Nosology Of Genetic Disorders. using results from both first and second trimesters in the future. Y. Lacassie, I. LaMotta, L. Florez LSU Health Sciences Center and Childrens Hospital; New Orleans, LA United States ylacas@lsuhsc.edu In this time of extraordinary advances in molecular genetics, the clinicalPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 303 P1037.Comparison of Biochemical and Molecular Testing for informative for elaboration of efficient treatment strategy for E; genetic test- Tay-Sachs Disease ing of GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms turned to be very useful in pre- T. L. Stockley, J. Callahan, J. T. R. Clarke, P. N. Ray diction of inherited predisposition to BA, while testing of three major genes, The Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada participating in osteogenesis ( VDR-3, COL1A1 & CALCR) gives a chance tracy.stockley@sickkids.on.ca to reveal individuals prone to O. Overepresantation of some detoxification Tay-Sachs disease is an inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by system alleles in the patients with chronic bronchitis, among pregnant deficiency of the enzyme hexosaminidase Aand is most prevalent in the women with repeated miscarriages as well as in cystic fibrosis patients with Ashkenazi Jewish population (carrier rate 1/30). Carrier screening for Tay- sever lung complications is shown. Exponential growth of genetic tests, Sachs is available by biochemical analysis of hexosaminidase activity in their wide and frequently non critical application opens highly risky avenue blood. However, the biochemical assay is complicated by several difficul- for their misuse and misinterpretation. Some already existing regulations in ties, such as inaccurate results for women who are pregnant or using birth gene testing policy in Europe and its position in the present Russia are control pills. As well, individuals who carry non-pathogenic pseudodefi- briefly outlined. ciency mutations are reported as Tay-Sachs carriers by use of the bio- chemical assay. Due to these difficulties, molecular analysis of mutations P1040.Analysis Of Environmental Genes Polymorphisms As in the HEXAgene is an important compliment to biochemical screening in Predictive Genetic Test For The Treatment Efficiency order to resolve these issues. We are conducting a large-scale study to Response In Endometriosis Patients compare the effectiveness of biochemical and molecular testing for Tay- T. Ivaschenko, N. Shwed, H. Kramerova, V. Baranov Sachs disease. Individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent are tested by both Institute of Obstetrics &Gynecology; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation standard biochemical testing and molecular testing for three common path- TIV@ti2629.spb.edu ogenic mutations [1278insTATC, IVS12(+1)G>C and 805G>A (G269S)] The polymorphisms of five genes (CYP1A1, mEPHX1, CYP2E1, NAT2, and two pseudodeficiency alleles [739C>T (R247W) and 745C>T GSTM1) responsible for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase I and (R249W)]. In order to feasibly test this number of individuals, we have Phase II detoxification system were studied by PCR-RFLP in the blood developed a rapid molecular diagnostic assay using allele specific amplifi- spots from 68 patients with endometriosis subjected to complex operative cation methodology. To date we have tested >1000 individuals by both the and conservative treatment. 23 patients showed clinical improvements biochemical and molecular assay. In the carrier range by biochemical after postoperative immunomodulator therapy (Group I) and 45 patients analysis (0 to 49.9% HexA), 80% of individuals have one of the five muta- were resistant to the treatment (Group II). We havent found significant dif- tions identified by the molecular assay, while only 8.5% of individuals in the ference for the polymorphism of CYP1A1, mEPHX1 genes in this two inconclusive range by biochemical analysis (50 to 55% HexA) have identi- groups. The frequency of slow allele for CYP2E1gene was significant fied mutations. Sequencing of the hexosaminidase gene in individuals who higher in Group I (14,3% versus 4,4% in Group II).The analysis of the poly- are carriers by biochemical analysis but who do not have one of the five morphism enzymes of Phase II detoxification system have shown that the common mutations will be necessary to determine if these individuals are frequency of GSTM1 gene deletion was significant higher for Group II carriers of rare hexosaminidase Amutations. In the biochemical non-carri- (76,6% versus 17,3% in Group I; p=0.001). Significant difference between er range, (>55% HexA), 1 individual was found to be a carrier of the path- two groups of patients could be mainly attributed to increased frequency of ogenic 1278insTATC mutation, and 1 individual who identified as Ashke- S1 allele (47,8% versus 28,6%; p=0.05) and decreased proportion of F nazi Jewish was found to be a carrier of the pseudodeficiency mutation allele (25% versus 38,8%; p=0.05) for NAT2 gene in Group II. Concor- R247W. The identification of individuals in the non-carrier range by bio- dance of both GSTM1 0/0 and S/S homozygotes was recorded in 46,7% chemical analysis who have pathogenic mutations suggests that molecu- of genotypes in the Group II patients and wasnt found in Group I patients. lar analysis may be a necessary adjunct to current biochemical testing pro- All these results prove clearcut preponderance of GSTM1-0 homozygotes grams. The results and implications of the study to date will be presented. and slow alleles of NAT2 gene in endometriosis patients resistant to immunomodulator therapy. Molecular analysis of GSTM1 and NAT2 gene P1038. A simple, fast, low-cost screening method for the polymorphisms might be suggested as a feasible predictive test for the detection of (GAA)n repeat expansions in Friedreichs Ataxia. choice of adequate treatment strategy in E. patients. A. Georghiou, M. Tsingis, K. Christodoulou The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus P1041. Association Of Three Detoxificaton Genes Polymor- roula@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy phism With Atopic Asthma In Adult Patients From St.peters- Friedreichs ataxia (FRDA) is the most common of the autosomal recessive burg. spinocerebellar ataxias with an estimated frequency of 1 in 50000 in the O. G. Sideleva1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, T. E. Gembitskaya2, V. S. Baranov1 European populations. More than 95% of FRDAcases are caused by large 1Otts Inst Obstet. & Gynecol.; Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation; 2Inst. homozygous expansions of a (GAA)n triplet repeat in the first intron of the of Pulmonology; St. Petersburg, Russian Federation frataxin gene. Expanded (GAA)n repeats associated with the FRDAphe- olgasid@yahoo.com notype may be detected by Southern blot analysis or PCR-based analysis. The genetic polymorphisms of glutathione-S-transferase M1 (GSTM1), Southern blot analysis is reliable but requires large amounts of DNAand is glutathione-S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) and cytochrome P4501A1 genes a time consuming procedure. Long range PCR is not reliable for the detec- responsible for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase II and Phase I tion of expansion carriers since preferential amplification of the normal detoxification system were studied by PCR-RFLPin 49 adult patients with (GAA)n repeat allele has been observed. Detection of large (GAA)n repeat atopic asthma sensitive to the house dust. The control group consisted of expansions by fluorescent triplet repeat primed PCR (TP-PCR) has recent- 66 individuals of Russian origin, living in St. Petersburg. We havent found ly been introduced. We hereby present a modified TP-PCR method for significant difference for IleVal polymorphism of CYP1A1 gene. The launching a carrier population-screening program for FRDAin the Paphos analysis of the genes, coding Phase II detoxification system enzymes, district of Cyprus. The TP-PCR product of expanded (GAA)n repeat alleles have shown that the frequency of GSTM1 gene deletion was significantly gives a characteristic trace (smearing) on an agarose gel thus enabling the higher for asthmatic patients (75,5% versus 41,0% in control; p=0.001). rapid identification of large pathogenic GAA repeats. In conclusion, we Individuals with absence of the GSTM1 gene were at approximately present a reliable, simple, fast, and inexpensive method for the detection 4,5fold higher risk of developing asthma (OR=4,45; 95%CI=2,01-9,83). of FRDA(GAA)n repeat expansions. Proportion of glutathione-S-transferase theta null genotypes (GSTT10/0) appeared to be significantly increased in the group of asthmatics (77,6%) P1039. Predictive Genetic Testing Of Some Common Multi- compared to controls (23,5%), with an OR of 11,7 (95%CI=5,13-26,88). factorial Diseases. Where We Are Now And What We Expect Concordance of both GSTM1 0/0 and GSTT10/0 homozygotes was From It. recorded in 61,2% of genotypes in the group of asthmatic patients and only V. Baranov in 9,1% of the control group .The comparable OR in the presence of both Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation null genotypes was 15,8 (95%CI=6,37-39,12). Thus, strong association of baranov@vb2475.spb.edu atopic asthma with null alleles of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes was proved in Overview of the present achievements , problems and obvious pitfalls in the present study. Molecular analysis of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes poly- quickly expanded area of predictive medicine. On the ground of genetic morphism might be useful for presymptomatic prediction of atopic asthma. nets of some common multifactorial disorders original data dealing with predictive testing of endometriosis (E), osteoporosis (O), bronchial asth- ma(BA) are presented. Genetic testing of the functionally inferior alleles of detoxification ( environmental) genes such as glutathione -S-transferases M1 (GSTM1) and N-acethytransferase-2 ( NAT2) was found to be very304 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy P1042.Evaluation of the predictive value of the diagnostic cri- potential or actual profits from exploitation of the resource, that is, profits teria for the Marfan syndrome (MFS) with respect to the out- from the sale of therapies developed from the knowledge the genomic come of fibrillin-1 mutation analysis. study provides. Compensation would appropriately take the form of a A. De Paepe, B. Loeys, I. Delvaux, S. De Bie, L. Nuytinck lump-sum payment for access to a participants DNA, royalties, or some University Hospital Ghent; Gent, Belgium combination. These alternatives would remit an appropriate portion of prof- anne.depaepe@rug.ac.be its to a research subject. Such a compensation regime would result in pay- We have performed a clinical and molecular study in 200 consecutive ment to research subjects considerably larger than those commonly made patients referred with a diagnosis or suspicion of MFS. Careful clinical now. Sample calculations which allow for the probability of success of indi- evaluation against the Gent Nosology showed that 108 patients fulfilled the vidual research studies, and an equal division of profit between the com- diagnosis of MFS,whereas 92 patients were diagnosed with a Marfan- pany and research subjects, suggest compensation for DNAaccess of at related condition. An FBN1 mutation was found in 69 patients with the clin- least $50,000 per research subject, royalties in the order of 0.005% of ical diagnosis of MFS (68 %). In several MFS families in which no mutation annual profit from sales of the product, or a combination of these options. could be identified the disease segregated with the FBN1 locus. The only Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion significant difference observed in MFS patients with and without a mutation Genetic Testing and Screening was the incidence of ectopia lentis (p < 0.04). No correlation was found between the type and location of the FBN1 mutation and the severity of the P1045.High-throughput mutation screening by capillary array phenotype. Ten mutations were found in the patients not fulfilling the diag- electrophoresis; Application to molecular diagnosis of hyper- nosis of MFS; 2 patients with predominant ectopia lentis, 1 with mitral valve trophic cardiomyopathy prolapse syndrome, 1 with isolated aortic aneurysm and 6 in a group of L. A. Larsen1, M. Christiansen1, J. Vuust1, M. Johnson2, C. Brown2, C. young children with emerging MFS, which were too young to fulfill the Wike2, H. Moolman-Smook3, P. Skytt Andersen1 diagnostic criteria. Our results show a significant difference in the number 1Statens Serum Institut; Copenhagen, Denmark; 2Applied Biosystems; of FBN1 mutations in patients fulfilling versus not fulfilling the diagnostic Foster City, CAUnited States; 3US/MRC Centre for Molecular and Cellular criteria for MFS. The findings underscore the need for careful clinical fol- Biology; Tygerberg, South Africa low-up over time, especially in young children at risk, before excluding the lal@ssi.dk diagnosis of MFS. Further molecular studies by gene sequencing and link- The human genome project has resulted in the isolation of several thou- age analysis in a selected group of MFS patients without an FBN1 muta- sand genes involved in human disease. These results raise new possibili- tion are currently ungoing in order to resolve the question about locus het- ties for precise molecular diagnosis of genetic disorders and hence for erogeneity in MFS. genetic counselling and therapeutic intervention. Consequently, there is an increasing demand for high-throughput mutation detection methods. Here, P1043.ANew Method For Identification Of Osteoporotic Risk we present a method for large-scale mutation screening based on auto- By VDR-Genotyping mated single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis by cap- G. Khne, A. A. Krehan, E. Schnakenberg, C. Tamak, S. Waschtza, L. illary array electrophoresis with multicolour fluorescence detection. The Wehmeier method was developed and tested using a commercially available 16-cap- AdnaGen AG; Hannover-Langenhagen, Germany illary array system (ABI3100). This setup allows for unattended screening lw@adnagen.com of 576 samples at three temperatures in less than 24 hours. Each geno- Genetic factors have been identified to account for up to 80% of bone min- type results in a distinct, highly reproducible conformation pattern, which eral density variance in young adults. It was reported that polymorphism in allows for automated scoring of known allelic variants using dedicated soft- the vitamin-D receptor (VDR) gene is associated with the disposition for ware. Re-analysis of known mutations in the MYH7 gene associated with the development of osteoporosis. So far, several mutations have been hypertrophic cardiomyopathy showed that screening at three different tem- identified within the VDR gene. One mutation detectable by restriction frag- peratures (18C, 25C, and 35C) was necessary for 100% sensitivity. We ment polymorphism (Bsm I) in intron 8 have been described to be associ- used the method to screen 130 South African probands with hypertrophic ated with bone mineral density. With the help of genotyping methods it is cardiomyopathy for mutations in the TNNI3 gene and found one novel possible to identify the predisposition of osteoporotic risk factors rapidly. In R186Q missense mutation and nine novel single nucleotide polymor- this investigation we report about a rapid method for the detection of vita- phisms min-D receptor mutation in intron 8 based on real-time PCR technology. We have developed a simple protocol specific for this mutation which make P1046. Experiences of cystic fibrosis carrier couples identi- it possible to differentiate between bb, Bb or BB (homozygous mutation) fied before the birth of an affected child genotypes. While the wild-type corresponds to high bone mineral density L. Henneman1, L. Kooij2, L. P. Ten Kate1 the mutated allele could be associated with low bone mineral density. This 1Vrije Universiteit Medical Centre; Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 2,; procedure enables us to identify osteoporotic risk persons at an early Groningen, The Netherlands stage. In addition, this test system is a genetic diagnostic service of our l.henneman.humgen@med.vu.nl company. This qualitative study describes the experiences of cystic fibrosis (CF) car- rier couples prospectively identified in CF families, in order to explore their P1044. How much should research subjects charge for their experiences with genetic testing and counselling and the impact on repro- DNA? ductive behaviour and family relations. Of 12 couples identified until 1997, J. C. Bear 7 couples participated in semi-structured interviews and 2 couples filled out Memorial University of Newfoundland; St Johns, NFCanada questionnaires, 2-6 years after receipt of test-results. After receiving the bearre@mun.ca results, most couples reported that they were shocked, because they did The mapping of loci conferring liability to single gene disorders and com- not expect to be both carriers. More anxiety was expressed by those who mon conditions of complex inheritance is now done primarily for commer- were pregnant (n=4) at the time of testing. Some subjects reported diffi- cial reasons. The participation of a research subject involves only provision culties in disclosing the results to family members. The reactions of family of a blood sample and health and pedigree data; physical risk and incon- members were not always supportive. After testing, all viable pregnancies venience to subjects are negligible. For these reasons, conventional mod- (16 in 8 couples) were monitored by prenatal diagnosis, and all those els of compensation for research participation are not appropriate. Partici- affected were terminated (6 in 4 couples). Some couples perceived loss of pation cannot be expected to be altruistic, given the commercial basis of reproductive expectations. For couples having children after testing, con- the research. Nor is it appropriate to limit compensation to reimbursement cerns about the correctness of results of prenatal diagnosis during infancy for the costs the subject incurs by participating (such as lost income and and how to inform the children may emerge. Couples generally reported a travel expenses), or to limit compensation to a (low) notional wage paid for positive counselling experience, although dissatisfaction was reported on the time and effort of participation. Genome research companies some- the psychological guidance during pregnancy. Most couples did not regret times provide population-level inducements to relatively small and geneti- testing. In general, couples supported the idea of screening, although var- cally isolated populations (for instance health care facilities or services), or ious concerns were expressed. The results suggest a favour for testing offer future treatment at no cost to families in which single-gene disorders outside pregnancy. The findings may be useful to explore possible dilem- occur. These compensation approaches cannot readily be generalized to mas raised by the introduction of population screening. Observations studies in large populations, or to studies of common disorders of complex reported here also might apply to other recessively inherited disorders. inheritance. An appropriate alternative compensation model treats individ- uals and families DNAas a resource in their possession, which a genome research company may wish to extract. Compensation can be based onPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 305 P1047.Cftr Mutation Scanning By Denaturing Hplc homozygous for one of the founder-related low-density lipoprotein recep- V. M. Howell, A. Proos, F. Beach, C. Jensen, G. Watts, L. Burnett tor (LDLR) gene mutations, D154N, D206E or V408M. Results. The ACE Royal North Shore Hospital; St Leonards, Australia DD genotype was detected at a significantly lower frequency in the FH het- vhowell@med.usyd.edu.au erozygotes (P<0.004) compared with younger controls. No significant dif- Testing for cystic fibrosis mutations is a cumbersome process. Over 900 ferences were observed in FH homozygotes (P<0.175) (when compared mutations have been detected, but our testing is currently restricted to the with the younger control group) and between FH patients with and without 25 most common mutations in the European population. We have evaluat- CHD. Allelic distribution differed significantly between the two control ed a reverse-phase ion-paired denaturing HPLC system for the detection groups (P<0.031), with the I-allele predominantly in the elderly. Conclu- of mutations in the CFTR gene. Following amplification, fragments are sions. Comparative analysis of molecularly-characterised FH patients and denatured and slowly re-annealed to ensure the formation of heteroduplex population-matched controls may represent a useful study approach to and homoduplex species if a mutation is present. The renatured products reveal clinically relevant allelic differences. The potential for different are injected into the HPLC in the presence of an ion-pairing reagent. This degrees of linkage disequilibrium of the ACE insertion/deletion (I/D) poly- allows the DNAto bind to the polymeric stationary phase. The negatively morphism with other potentially significant sequence changes in the gene charged DNAis eluted against an increasing gradient of acetonitrile and is and the modest degree of increased risk for CHD associated with the ACE detected by a change in the absorbance at 260nm. Under partially dena- DD genotype, argues against the likelihood of this marker being a clinical- turing conditions (created by increasing the temperature of the column), ly useful indicator of increased risk for CHD in Afrikaner FH patients. the less stable heteroduplexes elute from the column earlier than the more stable homoduplexes. When only 1 species is present in a fragment, the P1050. Effective and time saving detection of mutations in chromatogram will show only 1 peak. Aheterozygous sample will show up BRCA1 exon 11 using Restriction Endonuclease Fingerprint- to 4 peaks, representing the 2 heteroduplex and 2 homoduplex populations Single-Strand Conformation Polymorphism (REF-SSCP) with present. We evaluated this system by screening 6 CFTR exons containing automated capillary electrophoresis in an ABI 310. 17 known mutations. The mutations consisted of substitutions, 1, 2 and 3 P. Kringen1, H. Eiken2, J. Pedersen1, K. Berg1, S. Egedal3, K. Tveit4, T. bp deletions, and a 2 bp insertion. Following optimisation, all 17 mutations Ikdahl Andersen4 were detected. We found denaturing HPLC to be a rapid, economical and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevl University Hospital; Oslo, Nor- highly sensitive technique for mutation scanning and plan to extend our way; 2Medinnova, National Hospital; Oslo, Norway; 3Department of Med- CFTR testing to include mutation scanning. ical Genetics,Ullevl University Hospital; Oslo, Norway; 4Department of Oncology, Ullevl University Hospital; Oslo, Norway P1048.Mutational spectrum of LDLR gene mutations underly- pedro.kringen@ioks.uio.no ing familial hypercholesterolaemia in South African Jews Alarge proportion of women in in the industrial countries are affected by M. Callis1, F. J. Raal2, S. Jansen1, R. Thiart3, H. Nissen4, G. Pilcher5, M. breast cancer. Aproximately 5-10% of these cases may be the result of J. Kotze3 inherited cancer predispositions by mutations in the highly penetrant dom- 1University of the Free State; Bloemfontein, South Africa; 2Department of inant breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1. More than a thousand Medicine, University of Witwatersrand; Johannesburg, South Africa; 3Uni- sequence alterations including mutations and polymorphisms are scat- versity of Stellenbosch; Stellenbosch, South Africa; 4Odense University tered throughout this large gene and makes screening for mutations a Hospital; Odense, Denmark; 5University of Witwatersrand; Johannesburg, complicated task. In the present study 75 patients with hereditary South Africa breast/ovarian cancer was screened for mutations using restriction gnmgmc@med.uovs.ac.za endonuclease fingerprint-single-strand confarmation polymorphism (REF- Objective. Acohort of 21 unrelated index patients with familial hypercho- SSCP) with automated capillary electrophoresis in an ABI 310. The strate- lesterolaemia (FH) were screened for mutations in the low density lipopro- gy is based on digesting four fluorescent labelled PCR-products covering tein receptor (LDLR) gene, in order to define the spectrum of mutations BRCA1 exon 11 with suitable restrictions enzymes. Each digest was underlying the FH phenotype in the South African Jewish population. analysed subjected to nondenaturing conditions and all samples showing Methods. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification for bandshifts were sequenced to pinpoint the nature of the mutation. Atotal detection of the prevalent South African founder mutations was applied, of 13 different DNAvariants were detected by capillary REF-SSCP, two of followed by heteroduplex-single strand conformation polymorphism (HEX- which gave frameshifts and one missense mutation never previously SSCP) analysis and/or denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in reported in the BIC database. We conclude that REF-SSCPby automated mutation negative samples to identify LDLR gene defects in South African capillary electrophoresis is a rapid, efficient and reliable method to screen Jews with clinical signs of FH. Results. The FH Lithuania mutation for BRCA1-mutations. (652delGGT) reported in the majority of South African Jews with FH, was detected in 57% (12/21) of the index cases studied. Seven of the remain- P1051. National genetic register for Huntingtons disease in ing nine index patients were subjected to extensive mutation analysis of Bashkortostan Republic of Russia the LDLR gene and mutations Q64X, Q104W, D206E, IVS9+1G?A, I. A. Kutuyev1, R. V. Magzhanov1, E. K. Khusnutdinova2 N407K, V408M and IVS14+5G?Awere identified. In all samples exten- 1Bashkir Medical University; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Bio- sively examined, mutations were detected. Mutation N407K is associated chemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation with a mild FH phenotype. Conclusions. Although the high frequency of ildus@ufacom.ru 80% previously reported for mutation 652delGGTin the South African Jew- For helping in the efficient genetic counselling to affected subjects and rel- ish population may be an overestimation, predominance of this deletion- atives, and to monitor changes in the population at risk a genetic register mutation (75%) was confirmed in FH patients of Lithuanian origin, and a (GR) for Huntingtons disease (HD) was created in 1998 for the Interre- high sensitivity of extensive combined mutation screening strategies gional Medical Genetic Center. GR is based on card index principles and demonstrated. includes identifying information of subjects, anamnesis, clinical and genealogical data, results of molecular genetic testing. Patients data is P1049.Evaluation of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene refreshed on every visit to Genetic Center. GR consists of for main parts; as a modifier locus for familial hypercholesterolaemia in the patients data, reports, data export, and services. Patients data includes genetically homogeneous Afrikaner population forms on patients information, patients searching form, and family forms M. J. Kotze1, M. Callis2, S. Jansen2, C. L. Scholtz1 with genealogy tree. Reports contain 4 forms; 1) subjects selection by liv- 1University of Stellenbosch; Stellenbosch, South Africa; 2University of the ing/birthplace place, 2) molecular genetic testing results for all patients, 3) Free State; Bloemfontein, South Africa all epidemiological data for the selected regions and in a whole 4) separate gnmgmc@med.uovs.ac.za patients report. All reports can be viewed or printed. Services include let- Objective. Previous studies have demonstrated that the deletion/deletion ter printing to patients and relatives and tools for connecting with the same (DD) genotype of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene may remote databases in other regions for data updating. GR allows rapid increase the risk of myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease check on the risk status of family members, make up lists of needing visits (CHD) in patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). We determined subjects and provide assessment of trends in migrations, prevalence, birth the frequency of this polymorphism in South African Afrikaners with FH and rate, and other variables. In a whole GR can allow providing more effective population-matched controls, in an attempt to determine the appropriate- control over the HD patients and family members in the region. At pres- ness of multilocus genotyping in CHD risk assessment. Methods. The ent register includes information about 164 patients (111 alive) and 172 risk genotype distribution of the ACE polymorphism was compared in 205 FH group family members. 62 patients and 167 unaffected persons with high heterozygotes, 45 FH homozygotes and 215 controls (including 95 elderly risk were tested by molecular genetics methods. subjects) of the same population. All the FH patients were heterozygous or306 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy P1052. Incorporating biparietal diameter measurements into France risk calculations for open neural tube defects - potential anne-marie.jouanolle@chu-rennes.fr impact in publicly-funded care Hemochromatosis is a common autosomal recessive disorder of iron C. Meier1, A. M. S. Summers2, P. R. Wyatt2 metabolism in Caucasiens and its systematic population screening may be 1Ontario Maternal Serum Screening Database; Toronto, ON Canada; advocated. In Northern Europe, most cases of hemochromatosis are relat- 2North York General Hospital; Toronto, ON Canada ed to homozygosity for the C282Ymutation of the HFE gene. Before estab- cmeier@nygh.on.ca lishing a policy for the screening of hemochromatosis it is mandatory (i) to Women in Ontario are routinely offered second trimester maternal serum assess the penetrance of the C282Yhomozygosity (ii) to choose the strat- screening (MSS) during their pregnancies. MSS provides pregnancy-spe- egy of screening ; phenotypic parameters (=iron indexes) or genetic test- cific, chemistry-adjusted risks for trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18 ing (=C282Ymutation). Subjects and methods. 8663 persons attending 3 (Edward syndrome) and open neural tube defects (ONTDs).About 65,000 Health centres in Brittany were enrolled in a large survey; 3132 men (25 to patients are seen per annum. The risk assigned for ONTDs is based on the 40y) and 5531 women (35 to 50y) were tested for the C282Ymutation. background prevalence, gestational age and maternal serum alpha feto- Then fasting serum tests (serum iron, transferrin saturation and ferritin) protein (MSAFP) MoM value. This risk is also adjusted for other factors were performed in the C282Yhomozygotes. Results. In total, 54 homozy- (race, multiple gestation, insulin-dependent diabetes). Gestational age is gotes (10 men, 44 women) were identified giving a prevalence of 0.62% based on LMP or ultrasound dating. The calculated (posterior) risk for higher than that predicted (0.52%). Observed prevalence was 0.32% in ONTDs has historically been based on the combined prevalence of both men and 0.8% in women. All men had a transferrin saturation greater than anencephaly and spina bifida (in Ontario, both prevalences are approxi- 50%, 7/10 a ferritin greater than 237moles/l, and 8/10 were symptomatic mately 0.5 per 1,000). By excluding the risk of anencephaly by the use of (fatigue, arthralgias or increased ALT). Only 50% of the women had a software modifications, a more accurate risk can be presented to patients. transferrin saturation greater than 45%, 40% a ferritin greater than The purpose of this study was to model the impact of such a risk adjust- 104moles/l and 34% were symptomatic (fatigue and/or arthralgias). Con- ment, using the Ontario Maternal Serum Screening Database. Of the clusion. In men younger than 40y, biochemical penetrance of C282Y 254,833 women screened in a five-year interval from November 1st1995 homozygosity is complete and phenotypic identification of homozygous to October 31st 2000, 114,760, 57% received some kind of dating ultra- men could be based on a transferrin saturation threshold of 40%. In sound in their pregancy. 40% of these dating ultrasounds were based on women, penetrance is incomplete and not relevant to age or genital status, BPD which was recorded on their initial MSS form. Up to 75% of all preg- but transferrin saturation is unable to predict C282Yhomozygosity. nancies dated by ultrasound were late enough (10w6d) to warrant using Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion BPD. Of the 57,350 dated by BPD, 2.5% or 1,412 had a positive screen Genetic Testing and Screening result. If the risk for NTDs for these women was modified to exclude anen- cephaly, only 756, or 1.3% would have screened positive. If ultrasonogra- P1055.Mutation Screening of the PKD1 gene in 55 Families of phers had been encouraged to use BPD wherever possible and had done Hellenic Origin so, 1,279 fewer screen positives would have been seen, and the overall C. Deltas1, I. Bouba2, M. Koptides3, A. Pierides4, K. Siamopoulos5 positive rate for NTDs would have dropped from 2.5% to 1.6%, while 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2The affording pregnant women more accurate risk figuresand a similar detec- Cyprus Ins. of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 3The Cyprus Inst. tion rate for NTDs. Given the expense of and anxiety generated by false of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 4Nicosia General Hospital, positives, the adoption of BPD dating and additional markers and their Dept. of Nephrology; Nicosia, Cyprus; 5Univ. of Ioannina; Ioannina, Greece incorporation into screening algorithms is recommended, particularly in Deltasco@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy systems supported by public taxation. Mutations in the PKD1 gene on chromosome 16p13.3 cause the most common form of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). P1053.Integration of Genetic Testing Services into Practice in Patients from 55 Hellenic families from Greece and Cyprus were investi- the United States gated in our laboratory. The unique part and part of the reiterated region of I. M. Lubin, B. Chen, A. Faucett, R. S. Whalen, J. Boone, R. Martin the PKD1 gene were screened for mutations by SSCPanalysis. The part Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Atlanta, GAUnited States of the duplicated region under investigation included exons 16-22 and 23- ilubin@cdc.gov 33. These were obtained by Long Range-PCR utilizing unique PKD1 The human genome project and technological advances in the biomedical primers. Three nonsense mutations were identified in exons 40, 44 and 45 field have resulted in the discovery of a multitude of genes and the means (W3794X, R4020X, C4986X). Nonsense mutations were not found in the to identify mutations predictive and causative of disease. In the United PKD1 duplicated region, however, deletions and missense changes were States, these advances have led to concerns regarding the accuracy, identified. In three families deletions of 3bp in exons 20 and 24 were availability, use of, and access to genetic testing by the Public. To address observed, which resulted in an aminoacid deletion without influencing the these issues, the Task Force on Genetic Testing, later superceded by the reading frame (7946del3, 8047del3, and 9142 or 9143del3). A14bp dele- Secretarys Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing were established. tion was observed in exon 16 (7177del14) and a 8bp deletion was These groups, working together with professional organizations and the observed in exon 21 (8183del8). The 7946del3 and 8183del8 mutations private sector, formulated recommendations toward ensuring the safety occurred on the same chromosome. Five missense mutations were and effectiveness of genetic testing. The recommendations advocate the observed (P2471L, Q2519L, T2649I, H2921P, V3375M) in exons 18, 19, availability of appropriate education for the Public and health care 21, 23 and 31 respectively. However, we only have clear evidence that providers, assurances for appropriate informed consent, protection against H2921Pis pathogenic. The other missense mutations occurred in single genetic discrimination, additional safeguards to ensure quality in laborato- ADPKD families and were co-segragating with the disease phenotype. ry practices, and the continued involvement of the Public in the decision Also, 18 polymorphisms were observed, either in exons or introns. The making process. Accordingly, the Centers for Disease Control and Pre- majority of them did not affect the aminoacid sequence, but six of them vention, the Health Care Financing Administration, and the Food and Drug resulted in a substitution by biochemically similar aminoacids and they Administration have taken on the responsibility to evaluate and formulate were present in multiple families. Regarding the missense mutations and policies and regulations that address issues surrounding the use of genet- polymorhisms, the results should be interpreted with caution, since no ic laboratory services. Aprocess is being developed to ensure that genet- functional assay is yet available and small changes in aminoacid sequence ic tests introduced into clinical and Public health practices are analytically may or may not influence the structure of the protein, thus affecting its and clinically valid and have clinical utility. Also, recommendations, poli- function. cies, and regulations are being developed to ensure laboratories offering genetic tests are appropriately credentialed. These efforts are being under- P1056.Mutation screening and prenatal diagnosis in Turkish taken to ensure public access to quality genetic tests and allow the con- 21-hydroxylase deficiency families, and development of a tinued development of new genetic tests. novel semi-quantitative PCR / enzyme digestion based approach for detection of large scale deletions/conversions P1054. Screening Of Hemochromatosis; Results Of A Large of the gene. Survey On 8663 Persons In Brittany. T. Tukel1, M. Yuksel-Apak2, J. Q. Wei3, O. Uyguner2, F. Bas4, D. X. Song3, A. Jouanolle1, Y. Deugnier2, CES St-Brieuc3, CES Rennes4, CES St- H. Kayserili2, N. Saka5, H. Gunoz4, R. C. Wilson3, M. I. New3, B. Wollnik2 Nazaire5, J. Y. Le Gall6, V. David6 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical 1CHU Pontchaillou; Rennes, France; 2Clinique des Maladies du Foie et Faculty, Istanbul University; Istanbul, Turkey; 2Division of Medical Genet- Inserm U522; Rennes, France; 3CNAM; St-Brieuc, France; 4CNAM; ics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University; Istanbul, Turkey; 3Depart- Rennes, France; 5CNAM; St-Nazaire, France; 6UMR 6061 CNRS; Rennes, ment of Pediatrics, Weill Medical College, Cornell University; New York,Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 307 NY United States; 4Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of m.c.vanmaarle@amc.uva.nl Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University; Istanbul, Turkey; Introduction Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a hereditary metabolic 5Division of Auxology, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University; Istanbul, disease and a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. In the Nether- Turkey lands, relatives of genetically confirmed FH patients are screened by ttukel@istanbul.edu.tr genetic testing. Of these screenees, the risk perception in terms of the per- 21-hydroxylase deficiency is a recessively inherited disorder resulting from ceived probability of getting a heart attack later in life was studied. We mutations in the CYP21 gene which encodes an important enzyme in the studied both the influence of test result and lapse in time on risk percep- steroidogenesis pathway. The worldwide frequency is 1/14000 live births. tion, and the consequential influence of risk perception on cholesterol low- CYP21 gene is located along with the CYP21Ppseudogene in the HLA ering medication use and stated attitude towards gene therapy. Methods major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6. The 98 % similarity of The risk perception of 647 screenees was measured on 3 occasions (after two genes and the fact that almost all frequently reported disease causing approach, 3 days and 7 months after the test result). Presentation of the mutations reside in the pseudogene and are transferred to the active gene risk was pre-categorised and given both as numerical (1 in x) and verbal by gene conversion makes the molecular diagnosis difficult. Molecular probability. Medication use was asked 7 months and consideration of gene analysis based on allele-spesific PCR using mutation site-spesific primers therapy 18 months after screening. Results Screen positives perceived a was performed in 30 Turkish patients and their families. The patients were higher risk than screen negatives, except in verbal risk perception 7 screened for the 8 most frequently reported mutations and the frequencies months after screening. Perceived risk was highest directly after approach were determined; PRO30LEU (0 %), IVS2AS,A/C-G,-13 (25.9 %), EXON and decreased over time. Both screen positives and negatives underesti- 3  8 bp DEL(3.7 %), ILE172ASN (9.2 %), EXON 6 Cluster (ILE237ASN, mated the actual risk. Of the screen positives, 68% would consider gene VAL238GLU, MET240LYS) (3.7 %), VAL281LEU (0 %), GLN318TER (9.2 therapy. The higher the perceived risk, the more likely a person was to be %) and ARG356TRP(11.1 %). Large scale deletions and 5 end conver- on cholesterol lowering therapy or to opt for gene therapy. Conclusion The sions were idenfied with Southern blot analysis using DIG-labeled probes. screening programme raised the awareness of the screenees for their risk The frequencies were found to be 9.2 % and 18.5 %, respectively. In 9.5 of cardiovascular disease and encouraged engagement in preventive % of disease causing alleles none of these mutations were found. The behaviours, including medication use and gene therapy. sequence analysis of the gene in these patients still continues. In 4 fami- lies with known mutations, prenatal diagnosis were performed upon fami- P1059.An SSCP-based carrier test for spinal muscular atro- lies requests. Additionally, a semi-quantitative PCR / enzyme digestion phy (SMA) based approach for detection of large scale deletions/conversions of the A. Tacconelli1, S. Semprini1, F. Capon1, F. Brancati2,3, B. Dallapiccola2,3, gene was developed for routine diagnostic purposes and its accuracy was G. Novelli1 shown by comparison with the results of Southern blot analysis. 1Tor Vergata University of Rome; Rome, Italy; 2La Sapienza University of Rome; Rome, Italy; 3Css Mendel Institute; Rome, Italy P1057. European Directory of DNA Laboratories - A registry atacconelli@tiscalinet.it which endeavours to spread information among European Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder with a labs involved in the diagnosis of genetic disorders newborn prevalence of 1 in 10,000, and a carrier frequency of 1 in 40-60 E. Ngalula Kabanga1, C. Ramirez-Albott1, D. Barton2, H. Boman3, M. individuals. The SMAlocus has been mapped to chromosome 5q11.2-13. Cardoso4, B. Dallapiccola5, M. Delpech6, R. Elles7, X. Estivill8, C. The disease is caused by a deletion of the SMN gene, often encompass- Fonatsch9, E. Kavanakis10, C. Muller11, M. Nordenskjold12, A. Orpana13, D. ing other genes and microsatellite markers. The SMN gene is present in F. Schorderet14, M. Schwartz15, H. Smeets16, A. Verloes17, L. Van two highly homologous copies, SMN1 and SMN2, differing at five Maldergem1 nucleotide positions. Only homozygous SMN1 mutations cause the dis- 1Centre de Genetique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Gntique; ease. The sequence similarity between the SMN1 and SMN2 genes can Loverval, Belgium; 2National Centre for Medical Genetics; Dublin, Ireland; make molecular diagnosis and carrier identification difficult. We developed 3Haukeland Hospital; Bergen, Norway; 4Instituto de Genetica Medica Jac- a sensitive and reliable molecular test for SMN1 carrier identification, by into de Magalhaes; Porto, Portugal; 5University La Sapienza; Roma, Italy; setting up a non-radioactive SSCP-based method, which allows for the 6Universit Ren Descartes; Paris, France; 7St Marys Hospital; Manches- quantification of the amount of the SMN1 gene product with respect to a ter, United Kingdom; 8Hospital Duran i Reynals; Barcelona, Spain; 9Institut control gene. The assay was validated in 56 obligate (ascertained) carriers fur Medizinische Biologie; Wien, Austria; 10St Sophias Childrens Hospital; and 20 (ascertained) non-carriers. The sensitivity of the test is 96.4%, and Athens, Greece; 11University of Wuerzburg; Wuerzburg, Germany; its specificity, 95%. In addition, six of seven SMApatients without homozy- 12Karolinska Hospital; Stockholm, Sweden; 13University of Helsinki; Helsin- gous deletions presented with a heterozygous deletion, suggesting a con- ki, Finland; 14Centre hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois; Lausane, Switzer- comitant undetected point mutation on the non-deleted SMN1 allele. land; 15Dept of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark; Therefore, the present test is effective for detecting compound/hemizygote 16Stichting Klinische Genetica Zuid-Oost Nederland; Maastricht, The patients, for testing carriers in SMAfamilies, and for screening for SMAhet- Netherlands; 17Centre Universitaire Wallon de Gntique; Liege, Belgium erozygotes in the general population. Project founded by Italian CNR (P.F. eddnal@skypro.be Biotechnology). In 1995, the need for a comprehensive directory of genetic laboratories at a European level, as well as a listing of the services they could offer, led to P1060.Metachromatic Leukodystrohpy; Mutation screening the establishment of the European Directory of DNA Laboratories F. Joncourt1, U. Wiesmann2, S. Gallati3 (EDDNAL). An on-line version of this directory (www.eddnal.com) has 1Childrens University Hospital; Berne, Switzerland; 2Childrens University been available on the net since January 1997. The on-line directory is Hospital, Department of metabolic disease; Berne, Switzerland; 3Chil- designed to promote information exchange between European centres drens University Hospital, Human Molecular Genetics; Berne, Switzerland and to improve awareness of the availability of services for rare genetic franziska.joncourt@dkf2.unibe.ch conditions. EDDNAL currently provides information for 317 laboratories Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is an autosomal recessive disease and lists services for 580 genetic conditions. Through constant updating of caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme Arylsulfatase A (ASA). information, EDDNALendeavours to improve completeness of the registry Depending on whether the mutations in the ASA-gene cause complete or thereby facilitating professional usage. Furthermore, EDDNAL aims to only partial loss of enzyme-activity age of onset and the course of the dis- improve the quality of the services provided by professionals through the ease vary. MLD is lethal and no specific treatment can be offered to promotion of laboratory participation in a quality assessment scheme. patients. Genetic counseling and the offer of prenatal diagnosis are there- EDDNALalso intends to promote the diagnosis of very rare genetic dis- fore a need. They are complicated by the great variety of different muta- eases with a consequent improvement in both the handling of such condi- tions occuring in the ASAgene. The aim of this study is to identify disease tions and in the genetic counselling provided. The development of the causing ASA-mutations and to study their nature and distribution in our EDDNALdatabase and web-site should result in an overall decrease in the patient population. Mutation screening was started in a group of 50 MLD total cost of DNAdiagnoses of rare genetic disorders due to a European patients. Fifty healthy individuals serve as controls. Preliminary results; a concerted approach based on the prevalence of such disorders. partial screening of the ASAgene using SSCPand sequencing lead to the identification of 24 mutant alleles carrying 20 different mutations, 9 of P1058. Risk perception of participants in a family based which were novel. 85% of mutations found were nucleotide substitutions genetic screening programme on familial hypercholes- (missense/nonsense), 10% splice site mutations and 5% small deletions. terolemia This corresponds well to the distribution found among known ASA-muta- M. C. van Maarle, M. E. A. Stouthard, N. S. Klazinga, G. J. Bonsel tions. An unexpected result was that 13 of 29 patients tested so far were Academic Medical Center; Amsterdam, The Netherlands found to be heterozygous for the so-called pseudodeficiency-allele Upon308 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy completion of the mutation screening the question will be answered, P1063. The Hungarian Cystic Fibrosis Database; Statistical whether the high pd-allele frequency in our patients is due to an associa- Analysis and Genetic Data tion of this allele with a specific ASA-mutation. Our method efficiently M. Garami1, K. Nmeth1, G. Borgulya1, K. Holics2, R. jhelyi2, A. Vradi3, detects known as well as unknown mutations and thus represents a use- G. Fekete1 ful tool for carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis of MLD. 12nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University; Budapest, Hun- gary; 2Heim Pl Hospital for Sick Children; Budapest, Hungary; 3Hungari- P1061. Complete scanning of the hereditary hemochromato- an Academy of Sciences; Budapest, Hungary sis gene (HFE) using Denaturing High Performance Liquid miklos@gyer2.sote.hu Chromatography Cystic fibrosis is a human genetic disorder caused by mutations in the CF- G. Le Gac, C. Mura, O. Raguns, C. Frec transmembrane conductance regulator. Mutations in the gene encoding INSERM, EFS, CHU, UBO; Brest, France this protein disrupt electrolyte secretion, leading to hyperosmolar viscous gerald.legac@univ-brest.fr mucus. The Hungarian Cystic Fibrosis Database Project was started in Hereditary hemochromatosis (HC) is a common autosomal recessive dis- 1998. We established a unified score system for all the Hungarian CF order of iron metabolism. Genetic testing for the C282Yand H63D HFE patients, including their clinical status and their genetic background, too. gene mutations now plays an important role both in diagnosis of the dis- The Hungarian CF Registry contained 345 patients in 1998. Using these ease and detection of asymptomatic patients. However, between 4% and data allows us to perform comprehensive scientific analysis of CF patients 35% of HC probands are C282Yor H63D heterozygotes or non-carrier of distribution in Hungary, their current age, manifestation; gender ratio; pul- C282Yor H63D. The description of fifteen novel mutations now empha- monary and gastrointestinal performance status; genotype vs. phenotype sizes the importance of a complete HFE coding region scanning in these correlation; Kaplan  Meier analysis. The systematic mutation analysis for HC probands. The aim of our study was to evaluate the Denaturing High deltaF508 mutation was started in 1990 in our laboratory. In the first year Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) to set up a rapid and cost- 80 patients had been screened. Out of them 42 patients proved to be effective pre-screening assay of the complete HFE coding region. The homozygous and 11 heterozygous for this mutation. In order to determine melting characteristics of the HFE gene were predicted using the wave- mutations in the CFTR gene, 1826 Hungarian persons have been tested. makerTM software. PCR primers were designed in order to amplified DNA We isolated DNAfrom whole blood, followed PCR amplification, restriction fragments covering each translated exons with flanking intronic splice site enzyme digestion and fragment analysis. From 1992 we extended our sequences and to obtain the smallest difference as possible between melt- capacity up to the most common five European mutations (deltaF508, ing domains. Then, analysis conditions for each HFE coding fragment G542X, G551D, R553X and N1303K) and occasionally (since 1998) we were established separately according to its experimental melting curve. identify further 26 mutations, too. In 152 cases (34%) deltaF508 were pre- To achieve the highest accuracy we tested all the known HFE mutations sented in homozygous and in 116 cases (26%) in heterozygous forms. and three HFE nucleotide polymorphisms, localized in exons or melting Detection rate was 4,5% for mutation G524X; 2% for R553X and 2,2% for domains without mutation. The collection of the HFE mutations and poly- N1303K mutation. Mutation G551D was not present in our cases. In 54 morphisms was created using a site directed mutagenesis approach. All cases prenatal diagnosis was successfully done. Thirteen samples DNA mutations and polymorphisms were detected and, we thus proposed, that carried the disease mutations. Intragenic microsatellite analysis for indirect the PCR-DHPLC method can be used to search known and unknown study of CFTR gene has been performed since 1989, too. In Hungary at mutations in the HFE coding region of HC probands with at least one chro- the present all suspected CF patients get the possibilities of mutation mosome without an assigned mutation. analysis, indicated by specialists and appropriate criteria. P1062.Clinical, Biochemical, FRAXA, FRAXE and 15q11.2-q12 P1064. Ethical and Social Consequences of Genetic Screen- Parental Methylation Pattern Investigation in 110 Institutional- ing for Hemochromatosis ized Individuals with Severe Mental Retardation. D. Avard1, B. M. Knoppers1, P. C. Adams2 M. V. Mulatinho1,2, N. H. C. Aquino3, M. J. Braga4, E. J. C. Silva1, P. S. 1University of Montreal; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2University of Western Correia1, A. A. P. Santa-Rosa1, M. L. Oliveira4, M. M. G. Pimentel2, J. C. Ontario; London, ON Canada Cabral de Almeida1,3, J. C. Llerena Jr1,3 denise.avard@umontreal.ca 1Instituto Fernandes Figueira (IFF/FIOCRUZ); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Hemochromatosis, the most common known genetic disorder among Cau- 2Departamento de Biologia Celular e Gentica (IBRAG/UERJ); Rio de casians, is an autosomal recessive condition associated with excessive Janeiro, Brazil; 3Unidade de Citogentica Humana (IBCCF/UFRJ); Rio de absorption of iron which may result in liver cirrhosis, heart failure, diabetes, Janeiro, Brazil; 4Departamento de Bioqumica (IQ/UFRJ); Rio de Janeiro, impotence, and arthritis and cause early death. Considering the relative Brazil large number of people affected (about 0.5%) of the population, the poten- viannam@gbl.com.br tial severity of the disease and the relative ease of prevention and treat- This study report a genetic investigation in 110 institutionalized individuals ment of the disease, population screening for hemochromatosis has been with severe mental retardation (MR) ranging from 1 to 68 years of age advocated. However, genetic screening, possible since the discovery of (median 27,64; sex ratio 1.2F;1M) using clinical examination, convention- the HFE gene, is controversial. The relationship between genotype (pres- al cytogenetic, molecular methodologies for FRAXA, FRAXE and 15q11.2- ence of mutants of the HFE gene), iron overload and clinical hemochro- q12 methylation pattern and also screening for inborn errors of the metab- matosis is complex, and not fully understood and the possibility remains olism. We excluded 25 individuals (22,7%) with an acquired cause of MR that a large proportion of asymptomatic homozygotes may never develop and in the remaining 85 subjects, 8,2% had a chromosomal abnormality iron overload. Possible negative consequences for the individual include [four trisomy 21, including two mosaics, two mos45,X/46,XX, including a increased anxiety, and possible discrimination in obtaining insurance or 68 year old woman, and one case of del(3)(q24~25)]. One atypical case of employment. There are also implications for the family, who have a high Angelman syndrome was diagnosed, however no FRAXA and FRAXE risk of having the affected gene and may or may not want to know. In addi- amplification were found. Among the metabolic disorder,20% of all individ- tion, the social costs such as stigmatization as well as the resource costs uals had an increased rate of aminoacids in urine. No cases of homo- associated with limited health care resources will be considered. This cystinuria, phenylketonuria, or methylmalonicaciduria were detected. Clas- paper will review key ethical and social consequences for both homozy- sical genetic syndromes were present, including one neural tube defect gotes (high risk for the disease) and heterozygotes (carriers) by examining spectrum, two true microcephalic syndrome, one Norrie syndrome, one the professional debate, by comparing guidelines and policies from differ- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher syndrome, one panhypopituitarism dwarfism and ent countries and by evaluating lessons learned from screening programs one possible velo-cardio-facial syndrome. Two cases had similarly affect- for Cystic Fibrosis(CF), Sickle Cell or Tay-Sachs diseases. ed sibs and in eight cases a familial history of MR was reported. Few rarer Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion syndromes such as W syndrome and a syndrome associated to cutis gira- Genetic Testing and Screening tum were also clinically diagnosed. In 42% of cases no etiological classifi- cation was possible.Our results points to the great heterogeneity of the eti- P1065.Use of DNA-based mutation detection to evaluate the ology in MR, such as previous reports, and justify the application of other Glucose-6-phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) enzyme assay refined research methodologies in the screening of genetic causes.The in screening heterozygotes mean age of the population investigated, mostly adults, may impose some V. M. S. Lam1, J. L. C. Chan1, P. Hung2, M. D. Y. Au1 obstacles to establish a clinical diagnosis; in the other hand, it may illus- 1Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong trate the natural clinical history of rare genetic diseases associated to Kong; Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China; severe MR. (Finantial supports; FAPERJ, CNPq, CEPUERJ) 2Neonatal Screening Laboratory, Kwong Wah Hospital, Department of Health; Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of ChinaPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 309 hrmbvel@hkucc.hku.hk make decisions about research that will prove most effective for the condi- In many parts of the world including Hong Kong and South China where tion. Lay advocacy groups are optimally positioned to collect epidemiolog- G6PD deficiency is prevalent and with the wide spread use of some drugs ical and phenotypic data. By living in a virtual community, which promotes e.g., Chinese herbal medicine, G6PD deficiency is a health problem. In the sharing of stories, they have their hands on essential information that Hong Kong, new-borns in government hospitals are screened by the is usually inaccessible to clinicians or researchers who employ more tradi- enzyme assay. The at risk identified are counselled to avoid the offending tional participant and tissue solicitation methods. Anumber of models will agents, thus alleviating much of the clinical consequences. Since G6PD is be presented. In addition, as proteomics takes center stage, research will X-linked, it is often difficult to classify the genotypes, particularly the het- require collaborations in well-developed networks of researchers, partici- erozygous females, based on enzyme activity measurements alone. We pants and their respective organizations. These partnerships will be both have used two DNA-based mutation detection methods, the denaturing the catalyst and fuel for acceleration of research that is essential to gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and single stranded conformation advancing new understandings. In the past academia and industry have polymorphism (SSCP) to evaluate the validity of the enzyme activity cut- often worked on parallel tracks, apart from the lay advocacy and public off of 9.0 IU/gHb currently adopted to distinguish the heterozygotes from sectors. Increasing numbers of research collaborations give rise to effec- the normal females. From the results of 195 female samples with G6PD tive and efficient interactive models that can sustain the essential activity 1 IU above the cut-off, about 7% of G6PD deficient heterozygotes resources for genetics research. were missed. For an enzyme activity of 9.0 to10.4 IU/gHb, about 9% female heterozygotes had been identified by the DNA-based detection in P1068. Lay Advocacy Group Facilitates International these samples. The frequency of each of the common Chinese mutations Research Collaborative from samples with enzyme activity 9.0 to 12.4 IU/gHb correlates well with P. F. Terry1,2, S. F. Terry2,3, A. S. Marais2,4, I. P. Ronchetti2,5, T. Le Roux2,6, the frequency of each of these mutations found in the local population. The C. D. Boyd7, L. G. Bercovitch2,8 implications of these findings and the use of enzyme assay alone for 1Genomic Health; Palo Alto, CAUnited States; 2PXE International; Sharon, screening will be discussed. MAUnited States; 3Genetic Alliance; Washington, DC United States; 4Uni- versity of Cape Town; Cape Town, South Africa; 5University of Modena; P1066. Clinical genetics in the developing countries; The Modena, Italy; 6Lasell College; Newton, MAUnited States; 7University of Brazilian situation Hawaii; Honolulu, HI United States; 8Brown University; Providence, RI A. P. Marques-de-Faria1, A. X. Acosta2, V. E. F. Ferraz2,3, D. Brunoni4 United States 1Departamento de Gentica Mdica, Faculdade de Cincias Mdicas, Uni- pat@genomichealth.com versidade Estadual de Campinas; Campinas, Brazil; 2Departamento de Lack of data about manifestations, natural history and epidemiology of rare Gentica, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de So Paulo; Ribeiro genetic disorders inhibit research. Often difficulty identifying affected indi- Preto, Brazil; 3UNAERP; Ribeiro Preto, Brazil; 4Centro de Gentica Mdi- viduals limits the funding possibilities and makes the acquisition of patient ca, Universidade Federal de So Paulo; So Paulo, Brazil samples and data difficult. Further, the agenda of researchers and partici- faria@bestway.com.br pants can diverge in ways that ultimately delay progress. Pseudoxanthoma In the developing countries, where more than 80% of the worlds popula- elasticum (PXE) is a rare genetic disorder. PXE International, a lay advo- tion lives and the majority of children will be born, there are important cacy organization founded in 1995, initiates, supports and funds research. obstacles for the progress in clinical and medical genetics. Among medical It also provides support for affected individuals, their families and their professionals and public health officials, issues as poverty, illiteracy, high healthcare providers. Establishment of various programs in 21 countries infant mortality and other urgent matters concerning basic health care usu- world-wide is critical to providing genetic services and supporting research. ally have precedence over genetic diseases and birth defects. However, Empowering the individuals in numerous countries and cultures requires the general prevalence of these conditions seems higher than in devel- an investment of resources in these communities. As a result, the PXE oped nations and the limited resources enhance the burden on individuals, International Blood and Tissue Bank has branches in Italy and South families and populations. In addition, the requirement for genetic services Africa. The results of efforts made by PXE International are the PXE Inter- is increasing, as a consequence of the advances in medical genetics, and national Research Consortium comprised of15 laboratories world-wide, a this reinforces the need for programs in management and prevention espe- multidisciplinary approach forging collaborations amongst many special- cially at a primary health care level. Brazil has a total population estimated ists, a focused agenda which accelerates research in the service of con- around 167 millions inhabitants with a wide range of regional inequalities. sumer interests, and increased congressional awareness for real out- Total infant mortality rate, e.g., is 37.5 per 1000, but it ranges from 60.4 in comes of medical research funding. The organization is also uniquely able the less developed Northeast region to 25.8 in the more industrialised to safeguard confidentiality by acting as a firewall between researchers region of Southeast, while the poverty rate is 52.9% in the former and 16% and participants. Genetic lay advocacy using this model can benefit from in the latter. These contrasts are reflected in the implementation of genet- the added advantage of international collaboration, furthering genetic ic services, the majority located in urban centres as tertiary care universi- research for rare disorders. ty hospitals in the South and Southeast regions, with an emphasis still on dysmorphology, routine cytogenetics and counselling. There are few bio- P1069.Molecular Genetics viewed from the Health Technolo- chemical laboratories and DNA-based diagnosis is rising, particularly with gy Assessment Perspective research purposes. Acurrent overview concerning these issues will be pre- I. R. Blancquaert1, L. Bouchard2, Y. Chikhaoui1, G. Cleret de Langavant1 sented. Strategies including governmental and community participation, 1Agence d valuation des technologies et des modes dintervention en improvement of epidemiological data, development of rational and ethical sant; Montral, PQ Canada; 2Universit dOttawa; Ottawa, ON Canada genetic health programs are among the proposals for providing appropri- ingeborg.blancquaert@aetmis.gouv.qc.ca ate genetic services for the Brazilian population. Health Technology Assessment (HTA) provides legitimacy to health servic- es planning. Given the drive towards evidence-based medicine and policy, P1067. Lay Advocacy Organizations as Collaborative Part- the introduction of new technologies is closely scrutinised and expected to ners in Genetic Research produce measurable benefits. In genetics, the technology transfer from S. F. Terry1,2, P. F. Terry3,2, V. H. Whittemore1,4, J. Cody5,1, M. E. David- research to clinical services has not traditionally been supported by a for- son1 mal evaluation process (in contrast to therapeutics or medical devices). 1Genetic Alliance; Washington, DC United States; 2PXE International; The Qubec Agency for Health Services and Technology Assessment eval- Sharon, MAUnited States; 3Genomic Health; Palo Alto, CAUnited States; uated the relevance of implementing several molecular tests into clinical 4Tuberous Sclerosis Alliance; Silver Spring, MD United States; 5Chromo- services and assessed the corresponding diagnostic/screening strategies. some 18 Registry; San Antonio, TX United States The purpose of this communication is to discuss the evaluative approach sterry@geneticalliance.org used as well as the challenges and potential contribution of HTA. Our Based on decades of partnering with lay advocacy groups involved in experience shows that the usual criteria for assessing diagnostic/screen- research, the Genetic Alliance defines research as a shared enterprise ing tests do not constitute a satisfactory framework for molecular tests. collaboration between participants and researchers. The cultures of scien- Evaluating test validity is complicated by the constant evolution of tech- tific investigators and lay advocacy often differ, resulting in dynamic and niques, the frequent absence of standardisation and the need to distin- creative tensions between shared and divergent interests. Lay advocacy guish between clinical and analytical validity. The utility of groups are empowered to assume their role as equal partners in research. diagnostic/screening strategies may be difficult to measure, because of the Lay advocacy groups represent research participants interests  both psycho-social and collective nature of benefits and risks, and is often poor- those directly involved in the study and those who stand to be impacted by ly documented. Besides the scientific literature, HTAneeds to consider the study results. They are able to initiate research with a clear focus and regional and organisational context, which affects the utility, feasibility and310 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy acceptability of alternative strategies. HTAprovides legitimacy to the deci- P1072. Screening of pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor sion-making process by formulating recommendations that take into (PSTI) mutations in chronic pancreatitis by D-HPLC account the available data and their limits. Another contribution of HTAis C. Le Marechal1, O. Raguenes2, I. Quere2, M. Audrezet2, B. Mercier2, J. to define the conditions required to ensure the provision of appropriate and Chen1, C. Ferec2 co-ordinated services, which are relevant to planning and policy making. 1Etablissement Franais du Sang-Bretagne; Brest, France; 2Universite de Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion Bretagne Occidentale and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire; Brest, France Genetic Testing and Screening cedric.lemarechal@univ-brest.fr Over the past five years, gain-of-function missense mutations in the P1070. Gene Expression Profiling - a new service from the cationic trypsinogen gene have been increasingly identified as being asso- Resource Center in Berlin and Heidelberg ciated with hereditary pancreatitis or/and sporadic pancreatitis. Based C. Maercker1, D. Lutz1, G. Mall2, K. Amann3 upon a candidate approach, presumably loss-of-function mutations in the 1Resource Center (RZPD) Heidelberg; D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI) gene, particularly a p.N34S 2Dept. of Pathology; 64283 Darmstadt, Germany; 3Dept. of Pathology, Uni- missense mutation, was also identified as being strongly associated with versity of Erlangen; 91054 Erlangen, Germany chronic pancreatitis (CP) (Chen et al, J Med Genet 2000,37;67-9; Witt et c.maercker@dkfz.de al. Nat Genet 2000,25;213-6; Pfutzer et al. Gastroenterology The gene expression profiling service of the Resource Center (RZPD) is 2000,119;615-23). We extended to evaluate the PSTI gene in a large open for all groups working on functional genomics of human, mouse and cohort of unrelated French subjects with CPby Denaturing High Perfor- rat. We isolate poly A+ RNA, synthe-size P33 labeled cDNAand hybridize mance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC). The major new findings are as it with the RZPD Unigene filter sets of human (set I; about 33.800 gene and follows. Firstly, the p.N34S carrier frequency in the <20 years group is sig- ESTclones, set II; about 76.000 clones), mouse (about 25.000 clones) or nificantly higher than the >20~65 years group, suggesting an increased rat (about 26.000 clones). Phosphorimaging and evaluation of the data by environmental contribution to the disease in the later group. Secondly, the different soft-ware tools make it possible to find out with genes are over- or p.N34S is in complete linkage disequilibrum with another two variants, underexpressed, for example in a certain tissue in comparison to a control IVS1-37T>C and IVS3-66_-65insTTTT. Thus, the [IVS1-37T>C + N34S + sample. In the moment a public database is set up to make the data avail- IVS3-66_-65insTTTT] haplotype suggests a unique origin. Thirdly, in addi- able for all people working with our filters or other microarrays. In the work tion to other known variants (eg., c.-53C>Tand c.-41G>A), novel variants shown here we address the question, why renal failure in rats causes car- (eg., c.-2C>A, p.L12F and p.L14R) were also detected, albeit with a much diac dis-eases. Cardiovascular complications in patients with renal failure lower frequency compared with the p.N34S mutation. These results help are an extremely important clinical problem. The characterisitc changes of further resolve the elusive etiology of sporadic pancreatitis. cardiovascular disease in renal failure can be nicely reproduced in the experimental model of the subtotally nephrectomized rat (SNX). In order to P1073. Analysis of dystrophin mRNA in patients with DMD, identify genes which are differentially regulated during the course of the BMD and XLDC disease the gene expression profiles of hearts of sham-operated rats (con- L. Fajkusova1, M. Tvrdikova1, Z. Lukas2, J. Fajkus3 trols) and SNX with renal failure of 12 weeks duration where compared. 1Research Institute of Child Health; Brno, Czech Republic; 2Faculty Hospi- The hybridizations were repeated several times and also performed with tal Brno; Brno, Czech Republic; 3Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sci- different Unigene sets (rat, mouse, human ) under stringent condi-tions. ences of the Czech Republic; Brno, Czech Republic We were able to confirm results of previous experiments, showing an acti- lenkafajkusova@volny.cz vation of car-diac interstitial cells in SNX rats, for example by specific Complete dystrophin mRNAsequence has been analyzed in 36 Duchenne growth factors. The behavior of a number of other genes could help us to muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) explain certain cardiovascular changes in uremic rats. Due to the homolo- patients. Deletions and duplications in mRNAwere detected using reverse gy of many rat cDNAs to human and/or mouse genes, it was possible to transcription-polymerase chain reaction and point mutations were found interpret the results from the different filter sets by computer analysis. In using the protein truncation test. Individual mutations were characterized addition, we could clearly document that we are able to produce reliable by sequence analysis and their correlation with diagnosis of DMD or BMD data with our experiments. was checked. One patient with BMD phenotype was associated with non- sense mutation E1110X. In the case of the E1110X mutation an alternative P1071. Molecular basis of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphori- splicing of dystrophin mRNA(3486-3640del) was detected in this patient, bosyltransferase deficiency in Italian Lesch-Nyhan patients; which included the E1110X mutation site (nucleotide 3536) and did not identification of five new mutations. change the translation reading frame. Expression of the major dystrophin C. Lievore1, L. De Gregorio2, W. L. Nyhan2, M. Carella1 mRNAisoform (from the muscle-, brain- and Purkinje-promotors) has been 1Department of Medical Genetics, Baschirotto Institute for Rare Diseases analyzed in 15 patients with suspicion on X-linked dilated cardiomyopathy (BIRD EUROPE onlus); Costozza di Longare (VI), Italy; 2Department of (XLDC). Analysis of the expression of three dystrophin mRNAisoform was Pediatrics and Institute for Molecular Genetics, University of California San complemented by DNAanalysis of the muscle promotor, the first exon and Diego; La Jolla, CAUnited States first exon-intron boundary. The work was supported byMinistry ofHealthof laboratorio@birdfoundation.org the CzechRepublic,project no. NA/5227-3 Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is an X-linked recessive disorder involving the purine metabolism, with resultant hyperuricemia, choreoathetosis, self- P1074. Cystic Fibrosis Newborn Screening; Rare Cftr Muta- mutilation, and profound neurologic dysfunction. A deficiency of the tions In Hypertrypsinaemic Neonates enzyme hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl-transferase is responsible D. A. Coviello1, R. Padoan2, A. Bassotti2, M. Seia1, A. Ambrosioni1, C. for the disease. The human HPRTgene is located at Xq26-27 and consists Corbetta3 of nine exons spanning approximately 45 Kb. We have recruited twelve 1Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italian unrelated Lesch-Nyhan patients diagnosed with LN syndrome Italy; 2CFCentre, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy; 3Neonatal according to the clinical and laboratory findings. Studies by PCR and direct Screening Centre , Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento ; Milan, Italy sequencing on genomic DNAfrom patients revealed two missense muta- coviello@unige.it tions, two nonsense mutation, two mutations in the splicing acceptor sites, Recently neonatal hypertrypsinaemia has been associated to the presence three large deletions leading to a loss of more exons, two insertion of one of increased frequency of rare CFTR mutations and IVS8-5T polymor- base, and one compound mutation consisting in a four base deletion with phism. In the period October 1998-October 2000, neonatal screening pro- a three base insertion. Five of these twelve mutations have not been pre- gram performed in out laboratory on the population of Lombardia region, viously described; 74C>G (Pro25Arg) in exon 2, 329-332delCAAC insTCT identified 25 hypertrypsinaemic infants presenting borderline sweat test in exon 4, 506insC in exon 7, IVS6-1G>Ain the acceptor site of intron 6, (chloride value between 30 and 60mmol/L). The aim of our study was to and IVS7-1G>C in the acceptor site of intron 7. Four mutations have been assess the incidence of rare CFTR mutations or polymorphisms in infants previously described in unrelated families, and three mutations have been with neonatal hypertrypsinaemia and with a borderline sweat test in the already published. Characterization of the HPRTmutations allowed us to first months of life. Among the 25 hypertrypsinaemic infants 22 were het- detect the carrier status in eight females from seven families. In one fami- erozygous for one CFTR mutation identified within the neonatal screening ly the mutation was de novo. Identification of mutations provides a valuable program (IRT/IRT+DNAby PCR/OLAassay for up to 31 mutations). An tool for confirmation of the diagnosis, for identification of relatives who extended analysis of CFTR gene was performed on the 25 hypertrypsi- might be potential carriers, for pleimplantation testing, and for prenatal naemic infants, using DGGE technique on 11 out 27 exons, sequencing diagnosis. analysis of splice site polymorphism in intron 8 (TG)mTn and sequencing analysis of DNAs that showed an abnormal DGGE electrophoretic pattern.Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 311 The results identified a total of 17 different CFTR alleles; eight F508del, P1077. The European Molecular Genetics Quality Network four R117H, two G542X, two N1303K, two D1152H, R347P, 2183AA->G, (EMQN) 621+1G->A, 2789+5G->A, R553X, R347H, R117L, V1153E, Y1032C, S. Patton1, R. Elles1, D. Barton2, C. Mueller3, M. Losekoot4, S. Ramsden5, 711+3G->A. In addition we identified a novel mutation D110E (2 cases). S. Stenhouse6, B. Rautenstrauss7, M. Simoni8, P. Vogt9 Furthermore IVS8-(TG)mTn polymorphisms were tested, and the haplo- 1EMQN, c/o Regional DNA Laboratory, St Marys Hospital; Manchester, type TG12T5 was identified in seven infants. In total we identified 14 com- United Kingdom; 2National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Ladys Hos- pound heterozygotes (seven with two CFTR mutations, seven with one pital for Sick Children; Dublin, Ireland; 3University of Wuerzburg; mutation/TG12T5), 10 subjects with only one mutation identified, whereas Wuerzburg, Germany; 4Leiden University Medical Centre; Leiden, The in only one patient no gene alterations were found. In conclusion we sug- Netherlands; 5Regional DNALaboratory, St Marys Hospital; Manchester, gest that a high frequency of CFTR gene mutations is present among United Kingdom; 6Northern Regional Genetics Service; Newcastle-upon- hypertrypsinaemic neonates presenting a borderline sweat test in the first Tyne, United Kingdom; 7Univesitat Erlangen-Nurnberg; Erlangen, Ger- months of life. Moreover we suggests that some immunoreactive trypsin many; 8Institute for Reproductive Medicine, University of Munster; Munster, positive neonates are actually affected by a very mild form of CF, an Germany; 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg; Heidel- extended genetic analysis is recommended and furthermore clinical follow berg, Germany up in specialised Centres is needed to diagnose mild or atypical forms of spatton@smh5.cmht.nwest.nhs.uk CF. Molecular Genetics testing forms an increasingly important part of the Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion diagnostic process in all branches of medicine. Studies of the reliability of Genetic Testing and Screening such testing have indicated a significant level of inaccuracy in laboratory reports, arising from errors in sample identification, genotyping or interpre- P1075.Sequence alterations in the gene for LDLreceptor syn- tation. The European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) aims to thesis in Czech hypercholesterolemic patients raise and maintain the quality of Diagnostic Clinical Molecular Genetics V. Kuhrova, H. Francova, P. Zapletalova, E. Hrabincova, R. Slovackova, Testing. One way of doing this is to provide standard external quality T. Freiberger assessment (EQA) schemes to allow diagnostic laboratories to test and Research Institute of Child Health; Brno, Czech Republic improve their proficiency. Since its inception in 1997, EMQN has provided vera.kuhrova@volny.cz fifteen EQA schemes in six disease-specific areas. Separate posters Objective; Mutations in the gene for low density lipoprotein receptor describing each disease-specific scheme can be found alongside this (LDLR) has been associated with increased total and LDLcholesterol lev- poster. EQAschemes are designed to test the ability of laboratories to els, leading to accelerated atherosclerosis. The aim of our study was to interpret data in the light of clinical information supplied with a referral, and define sequence variations causing familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) to produce a clear and accurate report. Laboratories from all EU countries phenotype in Czech patients. Methods; 625 patients with high total and and several others have participated in EMQN EQAexercises. In 2000, the LDLcholesterol, normal serum triglyceride and with family history of pre- schemes evaluated 207 returns from laboratories, a 65% increase on mature CHD were selected for study. Screening of the mutant exons of 1999. The standards of accuracy were high but significant error rates were LDLR gene was performed using heteroduplex analysis, SSCP, DGGE, found and methods of reporting and interpreting data were varied. The DNAsequencing and PCR/RFLPanalysis. Results; Molecular searching error rate indicates a clear need for EQAto measure current standards of for mutations in coding sequence of above mentioned gene resulted in the proficiency and encourage laboratories to raise their technical perform- identification of 29 probably pathogenic sequence variations and 8 silent ance. Differences in interpretation of data and reporting standards can be mutations, many of which are new and were not described previously. Con- addressed by bringing centres together to discuss a consensus and agree clusion; Knowledge of mutations causing autosomal dominant lipoprotein guidelines for best practice in diagnostic clinical molecular genetics. disorder - FH is an aid for unambiguous diagnosis, facilitates genetic con- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 15: Poster Discussion sulting at early age together with preventing disease manifestation. This Genetic Testing and Screening study was supported by the Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, project no. NE/5554-3. P1078. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic testing of familial Breast/Ovarian Cancer P1076.Molecular genetics of Familial Mediterranean Fever in C. Mueller1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2, U. Kristoffersson3 Cyprus 1University of Wuerzburg; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Institut Curie; Parris, R. Mean1, C. Costi2, E. Rossou2, V. Hadjiroussos3, P. Petrou4, C. Deltas2 France; 3Lund University Hospital; Lund, Sweden 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2The crm@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de Cyprus Inst. of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 3Clinician in Pri- Breast and ovarian cancers (Br/Ov) are the most frequent cancers in vate Practise; Limassol, Cyprus; 4Apolloninon Private Hospital; Nicosia, women with a life-time risk of about 10 % in Western countries. About 5 % Cyprus of all cases are thought to be familial due to mutations in the BRCA1 and Deltasco@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy BRCA2 genes. Given the prevalence of Br/Ov cancers, mutation screen- Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease of ing of the BRCAgenes is now being offered to at risk women. The main high prevalence around the Mediterranean countries with four ethnic benefit of mutation detection is the predictive testing of relatives of identi- groups being particularly affected, namely Non-Ashkenazi Jews, Armeni- fied mutation carriers. In 1999 a pilot External Quality Assessment (EQA) ans, Arabs and Turks. Typically it presents as acute episodes of periodic scheme was offered by the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network fever accompanied by complaints of abdominal pain, chest pain, or joint (EMQN) for the genetic testing of the BRCA1 gene. Following the suc- pain. The actual attack usually lasts from 12 to 72 hours, with arthralgia or cessful trial, the scope of the scheme was widened in 2000 to include a arthritis often lasting longer. The most dangerous potential complication of case of a predictive test for a known family mutation and testing for the FMF is amyloidosis than can lead to end-stage renal failure. Atypical phe- BRCA2 gene. The scheme was offered to a wider audience with 24 labo- notypic presentation makes diagnosis difficult, and in many occasions ratories from 14 countries participating. Error rates were calculated from diagnosis is established by exclusion. The administration of Colchicine the total number of alleles analysed by all laboratories. On this basis, the constitutes an effective treatment. The responsible gene, MEFV, is placed overall error rate (% of incorrect alleles) was 2,9 % (1.25% in 1999). Most on chromosome 16p13.3 and it encodes a 781 aminoacid protein, Pyrin errors were the result of failure to identify a given mutation. Variation in the /Marenostrin. About 20 mutations have been identified so far, some of them interpretation and reporting was noted. Reasons for the increased error being very frequent, accounting for a high percentage of patients. Founder rate and variation in interpretation and reporting will be given in context effects have been postulated to be responsible for the high frequency of with other EMQN disease-specific EQAschemes. The results emphasise certain mutations in selected populations, rather than recurrence. Molecu- the need for additional efforts in raising standards through the provision of lar epidemiological investigation of the Greek-Cypriot population reveals EQAschemes and best practice guidelines. that about 1/25 is a carrier of one of three mutations, V726 Abeing the most frequent. Among 44 MEFV chromosomes analysed, the results are; P1079. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic V726A36.4%; F479L20.4%; M694V 18.2%; E148Q 4.5 %; M680I 2.3 %; testing of Huntington Disease Unknown 18.2%. Mutation F479Lis rather rare in other populations. These M. Losekoot1, F. Laccone2, S. Stenhouse3, V. Biancalana4, B. Bakker1, S. results suggest that contrary to previous believes FMF is not a rare condi- Patton5, R. Elles5 tion in Cyprus, and molecular testing is expected to assist further in identi- 1Leiden University Medical Centre; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Institute of fying ambiguous cases. Human Genetics, Universtaet Gottingen; Goettingen, Germany; 3Northern Regional Genetics Service; Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom; 4Insti- tute of Biological Chemistry, University Louis Pasteur; Strasbourg, France;312 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 5EMQN, C/o Regional DNALaboratory, St Marys Hospital; Manchester, scheme was offered in 2000. 34 laboratories including 3 from the USApar- United Kingdom ticipated. Results will be reported, and any required amendments to the m.losekoot@kgc.azl.nl guidelines identified by this process. Huntington Disease (HD), a progressive fatal neurodegenerative disorder, is the most common CAG repeat disease with an incidence of 1 in 10,000 P1082. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic people in Europe. HD is caused by an expansion of a highly polymorphic testing of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease CAG repeat in exon 1 of the Huntingtin gene. Genetic testing for this B. Rautenstrauss1, J. Lupski2, V. Timmerman3 expansion is routinely offered in diagnostic molecular genetics laborato- 1Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg; Erlangen, Germany; 2Baylor College of ries. In 1997, the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) Medicine, Texas Medical Centre; Houston, United States; 3Universitaire organised a pilot External Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme for genetic Instelling Antwerpen; Wilrijk  Antwerpen, Belgium testing of the HD gene with 14 participants from 13 different European berndwr@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de Union countries. The HD scheme is now the longest running EMQN Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1 (CMT1) is a clinically and genetically scheme with 39 participants (18 countries) in 2000. As the number of par- heterogeneous disorder of the peripheral nervous system. Patients show ticipants has increased, there has been a consequent rise in the error rate severely reduced nerve conduction velocities (NCV<38 m/s). CMTtype 1A (% of incorrect alleles) to 2.6% (2000) from 1.3% (1997). The error rates is the most frequent autosomal dominantly inherited form caused by a 1.5- were calculated from the number of alleles analysed by all laboratories. In Mb tandem duplication in chromosome 17p11.2-12 comprising the periph- contrast, the precision of genotyping has increased with 74% (2000) of all eral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) gene. Genetic testing for CMT1Ais rou- alleles typed within the error limits (+/- 1 repeat unit for alleles up to 40 tinely offered in diagnostic molecular genetics laboratories and performed repeats and +/- 4 repeats for alleles >40). Reporting styles varied but inter- using a wide variety of methods. The main benefit for patients is avoidance pretation was more consistent with the majority of laboratories covering of a sural nerve biopsy for diagnostic purposes. In 1999, a pilot External most of the interpretative criteria adequately. The results emphasise the Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme for CMTwas offered by the European importance of EQAschemes in measuring and raising the standards of Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN). From 14 registered labora- diagnostic genetic testing. tories a total of 11 participated. Following this successful trial, the scheme was offered to a wider audience in 2000 with 20 laboratories participating P1080. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic (23 registered). No genotyping errors were detected in either scheme. The testing of Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophy scheme will be described in full and the results for both genotyping and S. Stenhouse1, S. Ramsden2, G. Mattius3, M. Jean-Pierre4 interpretation will be discussed. Lessons drawn from the development of 1Northern regional genetics Service; Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United King- the scheme should help in harmonising laboratory standards for the genet- dom; 2Regional Genetics Service, St Marys Hospital; Manchester, United ic diagnosis of CMT. Kingdom; 3Katholieke Universiteit Leuven; Leuven, Belgium; 4Groupe Hos- pitalier Cochin; Paris, France P1083. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic s.a.r.stenhouse@ncl.ac.uk testing of Y-Chromosomal Microdeletions Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is the most common muscle wast- P. Vogt1, M. Simoni2 ing disease in children with an incidence of 1 in 4,000 males. Amilder vari- 1Institute of Human Genetics; Heidelberg, United States; 2Institute of ant of the disease, Becker Muscular Dystrophy (BMD) is less common with Reproductive Medice, University of Munster; Munster, Germany an incidence of 1 in 18,000 males. Both diseases are due to mutations in peter_vogt@med.uni-heidelberg.de the Dystrophin gene on the X-chromosome. Genetic testing for DMD and The PCR screening of microdeletions of the Ychromosome has become BMD by mutation screening of the dystrophin gene is routinely offered in an important diagnostic step in the workup of male infertility. However, diagnostic molecular genetics laboratories. The main benefit of this testing there is still uncertainty about how this diagnosis should be performed. is carrier detection in relatives of affected individuals. In 1998, a pilot Exter- There are suggestions that the large variation in deletion frequency report- nal Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme for DMD and BMD was offered by ed in the literature (varying between 1 and 55%) could be due to the vari- the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN); 15 laborato- ous selection criteria of the patients analysed, but methodological aspects ries participated. Following the successful trial, the scheme was offered to could also play a role. Like other genetic diseases, the overall quality of a wider audience and the number of participating laboratories has molecular diagnosis of Y-chromosomal microdeletions should be controlled increased to 33 (16 countries) in 2000. Error rates from the scheme were by adopting strict internal quality control measures and by participating in calculated from the total number of alleles analysed by all labs. The over- external quality assessment (EQA) schemes. Such an external quality all error rate (% incorrect alleles) for the 2000 scheme was 2.02% (4.44%, assessment project was started on the initiative of the European Academy 1998; 0.98%, 1999). The structure of the scheme has evolved in line with of Andrology (EAA). Three preliminary trials involving 29 European labora- problems identified in each round of EQA. In 1998, 3 deletion cases were tories have given a state-of-the-art picture of the overall diagnostic per- provided. In 1999, a pedigree was included and participants asked to per- formance, showing an overall rate of misdiagnosis of about 5% for both the form linkage analysis. In light of problems identified with the interpretation AZFb and AZFc regions. In collaboration with the European Molecular of linkage analysis, a linkage question was also included in the 2000 Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) the data from the preliminary trials were scheme. The scheme will be described in full and the results for both geno- used to generate the first guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromo- typing and interpretation will be discussed and lessons drawn from the somal microdeletions and were presented at a best practice workshop held development of the scheme. in the spring of 2000. An official EQA programme for Y-chromosomal microdeletions was then initiated as a joint initiative of the EAAand the P1081. An External Quality Assessment Scheme for genetic EMQN. The first EAA/EMQN trial EQAscheme started in October 2000 testing of Friedreich Ataxia and includes 57 participants from 20 countries. The results will be pre- D. Barton1, E. Sistermans2, M. Claustres3 sented. 1National Centre for Medical Genetics; Dublin, Ireland; 2University Hospi- tal Nijmegen; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 3Institut de Biologie; Montpelli- P1084.Arare homozygous rhodopsin splice site mutation ; To er, France test or not to test, is there a question? david.barton@olhsc.ie L. J. Greenberg, L. Roberts, R. Ramesar Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative dis- University of Cape Town; Cape Town, South Africa order, is the most common hereditary ataxia with an estimated prevalence JG@ANAT.UCT.AC.ZA of 1 in 50,000. The most frequent genetic abnormality seen in FRDAis the Mutations in the rhodopsin gene can cause both dominant and recessive homozygous expansion of a GAArepeat in the FRDAgene. The genetic retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a major cause of genetic blindness. Most test for FRDAis particularly useful because different forms of ataxia may changes are in the coding regions of the gene, although some splice site be difficult or impossible to distinguish by clinical examination alone. In mutations have been described. Ahomozygous IVS4+1G-Tmutation in the 1998, the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) organ- rhodopsin gene has been detected in a South African (SA) patient with RP. ised a pilot External Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme for genetic testing Alow incidence of RPamongst heterozygous carriers of this mutation has of the FRDAgene with 10 participants from 10 different European Union been reported but it is unclear whether the mutation results in a dominant countries. No sample identification or genotyping errors were recorded, but or recessive allele. To our knowledge, this mutation has never been report- a small number of errors or omissions of interpretation were identified. ed in the homozygous state. Analysis of the extended family indicate no Accordingly, a best practice workshop was organised to develop best prac- obligate heterozygous carriers of this mutation with any obvious loss of tice guidelines for FRDAtesting. These guidelines are available on the vision. These findings were made during a screening programme of SA EMQN web site (www.emqn.org). Following the successful pilot, a second patients with inherited retinal degeneration. The question is now whetherPosters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 313 to inform the family and should all the potential heterozygous carriers be mutations. Mutations in the Methyl CpG Binding protein 2 gene have been investigated. Knowledge itself without the ability to act on it, may be com- identified in roughly 75 % of classical Rett girls. We collected DNAsamples forting to some, but may simply aggravate the situation for others. An from 42 Italian classical Rett girls, and screened the MECP2 coding region awareness of the predisposition to genetic diseases may have negative for mutations by Denaturing High-Performance Liquid Chromatography consequences for asymptomatic individuals. This could also result in dis- (DHPLC), and subsequent direct sequencing. DHPLC is a recently devel- crimination if this information is available to employers and insurance oped method for mutation screening combining high sensitivity, reduced providers. Information diffuses rapidly and its consequences are felt cost per run and high throughput. In our study, 16 different de novo beyond the presenting patient. Children specifically are passively affected. MECP2 mutations, seven of which were previously unreported, were found It may be decades before the absolute value of genetic testing can be pro- in 32/42 Rett girls (76%). Seven recurrent mutations were characterized in posed with any degree of certainty. To test or not to test, even when and a total of 22 unrelated cases. Initial DHPLC screening allowed the identifi- who to test therefore remains an unresolved question. cation of 14/16 different mutations (87%); after optimal conditions were established, this figure increased to 100%, with all recurrent MECP2 muta- P1085.Multiehnic Thalassemias And Haemoglobin Hereditary tions generating a characteristic chromatographic profile. Standardization Disorders In Italy of DHPLC reagents and methods seems to be critical to the reliability and P. Primignani, M. Travi, C. Curcio, A. Biasi, D. A. Coviello, A. Cant accuracy of mutation prediction. Detailed analysis of signature shape, Rajnoldi retention time, and retention time differences between peaks will allow sig- Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, nature-based sequence identification, at least for the most common Italy MECP2 mutations and SNPs. coviello@unige.it The world distribution of beta and alpha thalassemias is well documented P1087. The mutation rates of ten human autossomal but adequate data on gene frequency defects are available only for a small microsatellites number of populations. Beta disease is common throughout the Mediter- A. M. L. Vercesi1, S. D. J. Pena1,2 ranean regions, Middle East, India, Southern Asia starting in Southern 1Depto. Bioqumica e Imunologia - Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais; China, stretching through Thailand, Cambodia, Laos and Malaysia penin- Belo Horizonte, Brazil; 2Ncleo de Gentica Mdica de Minas Gerais - sula. Alpha disease is extremely common in part of Africa, Mediterranean GENE/MG; Belo Horizonte, Brazil region, Middle East, Southern Asia and Pacific islands. Multiethnic Italian averc@mcafeemail.com reality in the last five years required new molecular approach to cover dif- There is consensus that microsatellites evolve by stepwise mutations and ferent mutation patterns and to achieve full DNAinformation in couples at that the mutation rate is positively correlated with repeat size. However, risk. In 1997 foreign people with regular permit were more than 2.000.000 there is disagreement about the influence on the mutation rate of the size but the number does not include children and clandestines (the last more and nature of the repeat motif, GC content of flanking regions, influence of than 1.000.000). Moreover, in comparison with France and Germany heterozigosity and direction biases. Molecular studies of germinative muta- where immigration is homogeneous, the phenomenon in Italy is character- tions are needed to elucidate their mechanisms Here we present mutation ized by a great heterogeneity, infact a part of immigration in Italy during the data on ten new human microsatellite loci that have been chosen because last years arrived from North Africa, Senegal, Albania, ex Yugoslavia, they have average heterozigosity > 0.6, different amplicon sizes that per- Romania, Poland, Bulgaria, Philippines and China. In North Italy actually mit multiplexing (all ten loci can be amplified in a single PCR reaction and lives more than 5% of immigrants, many of them are at risk for tha- analyzed in the same electrophoretic run using a single fluorophore). We lassemias or hereditary haemoglobinopathies such as Hb S and a great analyzed 27,086 parent/child allelic transfers selected from paternity increase of this phenomenon is expected in the near future. Screening pro- cases. We observed 26 instances of father-child mismatches in cases grams for prevention of these diseases, and prenatal diagnosis have deter- where fatherhood had been otherwise proven. Cases due to null alleles mined in a marked reduction in the birth rate of affected children. The prac- were verified and removed from the study group. The average mutation tical problems associated with genetic screening of beta thalassemia are rate was 10-3 per locus per meiosis but there was considerable hetero- now a minor problem thanks to the new molecular technologies and, on the geneity according to sex and locus. The average paternal mutation rate other hand, alpha thalassemia gene defects are partially but more easily was 1.3 X 10-3 and the average maternal mutation rate was 0.4 X 10-3. detectable by PCR protocols. In our 15 years activity we performed 1765 No mutations were observed in three loci, while ten different mutations DNA prenatal diagnoses of Thalassemias and hereditary Haemoglo- were seen in one single locus (D10S1237). All mutations were sequenced. binopathies. Since 1995 foreign people began to ask counseling for The vast majority (92%) were single step mutations. In general our results haemoglobin disorders to our Centre (estimate frequency = 6%). The geo- are concordant with previous family studies of microsatellite studies in graphic origin is the following; Africa (3,2%), Asia (0.7%), East Europe humans and increase considerably the database of well-studied human (1.3%) Middle East (0.3%) and South America (0.5%). Since the phenom- mutational events on which to test mechanistic hypotheses. enon is increasing in relation to the establishment of permanent family groups we need to adapt the screening program to the new ethnic Italian P1088. Molecular detection MTM1 gene mutations in distribution and we look forward to organize a more appropiate genetic Myotubular Myopathy Using DHPLC counselling that include; Easy and wide educational programs on the terri- M. R. DApice1, A. De Luca1,2, E. Flex1,2, B. Dallapiccola2,3, G. Novelli1 tory. Easy and multiethnic PCR protocols to achieve molecular information 1Dip of Biopathology and Diagnostic Imaging, Tor Vergata University; in couple at risk for different thalassemia syndromes. Easy and convenient Rome, Italy; 2CSS Mendel Institute; Rome, Italy; 3Dip of Sperimental Med- access to the hospital or genetic departments thank to the use of transla- icine and Pathology , La Sapienza University; Rome, Italy tors and guide lines on original language. dapice2@yahoo.it X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM; OMIM# 310400) is a severe con- P1086. Mutation analysis of the MECP2 gene in Italian Rett genital muscle disease caused by mutations in the myotubularin gene. Patients using denaturing high performance liquid chro- This gene encodes for a dual specific phosphatase belonging to a large matography. gene family highly conserved through evolution. To date, 133 mutations M. Carella1, R. Cattin1, B. Giometto2, B. Tavolato2, M. L. Giovannucci- distributed in all exons of the MTM1 gene have been identified in a large Uzielli3, C. Lievore1, A. Marin1, P. Gasparini4, P. Nicolao2,1 number of families. Since the majority of MTM1 mutations are private and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Baschirotto Institute for Rare Diseases rare, their detection is difficult and labor-extensive using traditional screen- (BIRD EUROPE onlus); Costozza di Longare (VI), Italy; 2Department of ing approaches. We set-up and formatted a denaturing high performance Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, Second Neurological Clinic, Padua liquid chromatography (DHPLC) method to detect MTM1 mutations in all University; Padua, Italy; 3Genetics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Depart- coding exons of the gene. Our protocol has revealed the pathogenic muta- ment of Pediatrics, University of Florence, Azienda Meyer; Firenze, Italy; tion in 8 XLMTM patients screened for the entire coding sequence of the 4Medical Genetics Service, IRCCS - CSS Hospital; San Giovanni Rotondo gene. DHPLC identified 7 point mutations previously described [R37X, (FG), Italy T(191-11)A, 646-647insA, T197I, R253X, G378R, G402R]. In addition, we carella@tigem.it identified two novel mutations, one in exon 8 [P199S] and one in the donor Rett Syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder splice site of exon 14 (1644+2)insG. In conclusion, we provided that characterized by several clinical abnormalities, such as progressive DHPLC analysis is a sensitive and specific method to detect mutations in encephalopathy, autistic behavior and stereotyped hand movements. Clas- MTM1 gene. sical RS features seem to occur almost exclusively in females, with an esti- mated prevalence of one in 10,000-15,000 female birth. The vast majori- ties of Rett cases (99%) are sporadic in origin, and are due to de novo314 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy P1089. Towards an efficient and sensitive molecular genetic ease, Haemophilia Aand B, Down syndrome); Laboratory for Molecular test for Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) Cytogenetic analyses (performing about 1 500 postnatal and 500 prenatal L. M. Messiaen, T. Callens, G. Mortier, N. Van Roy, F. Speleman, A. De tests annually) and a team of 6 ultrasound specialists dealing with diag- Paepe nostics of chorion villi sampling, amniocenteses, cordocenteses and pre- Center Medical Genetics, University Hospital; Gent, Belgium natal diagnostics of malformation syndromes. For a small country with lim- Ludwine.Messiaen@rug.ac.be ited resources the centralized model of genetic services offers a series of Although NF1 is one of the most common autosomal dominant disorders advantages. The same structure, communications and genetic register are with 50% of patients presenting as de novo cases, efficient and sensitive used for the different screening programs with the same analytic technolo- mutation analysis of the NF1 gene is still not available for clinical use. We gies for most of the cases. developed a combined approach starting from short-term cultured T-lym- phocytes leading to detection of NF1 mutations in 95% of typical NF1 P1092. Primary Health Care Approaches for the Control of patients, fulfilling the N.I.H. diagnostic criteria. The cascade of analyses Congenital Disorders. includes; 1) protein truncation test (PTT) followed by cDNA and gDNA A. L. Christianson1, B. Modell2, V. Boulyjenkov3, A. Alwan3 sequencing of the region of interest; 2) intragenic microsatellite analysis 1Dept of Human Genetics, University of Pretoria; PRETORIA, South Africa; followed by FISH to detect total gene deletions and/or by sequencing of the 2Dept of Primary Care and Population Sciences, RF and UC Medical complete cDNAto detect missense mutations; 3) Southern blot and cyto- School; London, United Kingdom; 3WHO; Geneva, Switzerland genetic analysis. So far 112 bona fide mutations were identified in 121 christal@medic.up.ac.za unrelated patients. For 9 patients, steps 2 and 3 of the cascade are still Global decline in infant mortality and birth rate, especially in developing ongoing. All mutations were characterized at the genomic and RNAlevel. nations, is shifting the focus of health policy from acute conditions of envi- Using the PTTonly, the mutation was identified in 100 patients and the ronmental origin towards the management of chronic diseases and dis- mutational spectrum consisted of 26 frameshift, 40 nonsense and 34 splic- ability. This change is notable in the areas of reproductive and child health. ing mutations, 25 of the latter caused by alterations outside the canonical An increasing proportion of infants born with congenital disabilities are now AG/GTsplice sites. Furthermore, 8 missense or small in frame deletions, being diagnosed, surviving and thus constituting an increasing health bur- 3 total gene deletions and 1 translocation t(14;17)(q32;q11.2) were found den. This health burden could be greatly reduced by deploying approach- by steps 2 and 3 of the cascade. Our approach may be helpful in estab- es outlined in the 1985 WHO definition of a control programme for a con- lishing the diagnosis of sporadic patients at an early age or not totally ful- genital disorder. These approaches also offer people with genetic disad- filling the N.I.H. diagnostic criteria and in providing the means to prenatal vantage choices that enable them to live and reproduce as normally as or preimplantation diagnosis, especially in sporadic patients. possible in their circumstances. However, no comprehensive model of these interventions is available. Consequent on a previous WHO Eastern P1090. Genotype-phenotype-diversity in familial cylindro- Mediterranean Regional Office (EMRO) initiative a WHO Advisory Group matosis; A mutation in the tumor suppressor gene CYLD was convened in Cairo in December 1999 to make recommendations on underlies multiple tumors of skin appendages. Public Health Approaches for the Control of Genetically Determined Dis- J. Frank orders and Birth Defects in Primary Health Care. The global epidemiology University Clinic of the RWTH Aachen; Aachen, Germany and health burden of congenital disorders was reviewed. It was recognized jorgefrank@yahoo.com that medical management of these conditions entailed costs that escalat- Familial cylindromatosis (Brooke-Spiegler-syndrome) (OMIM numbers ed exponentially as patient survival increased and this required to be coun- 123850; 313100) is a rare skin disorder, inherited in an autosomal domi- terbalanced by effective prevention programmes. These included basic pri- nant fashion and usually presenting in the second or third decade of life. mary health care reproductive health approaches, including accessible With female preponderance, dermal tumors predominantly arise in hairy family planning, adequate diets and micronutrient supplementation, pre- areas of the body with approximately 90% on the head and neck, rarely on vention and management of maternal infections and avoidance of terato- the face or trunk. Transformation to malignancy seems to be rare. Recent- gens. Implementation of such programmes can reduce the birth preva- ly, the susceptibility gene CYLD which reveals the genetic attributes of a lence of congenital disorders to a baseline level, with further reduction then tumor-suppressor gene (recessive oncogene) has been localized to chro- depending on population screening programmes to identify individuals at mosome 16q and mutations have been identified in affected families. Here, increased risk of having children with specific disorders. As no standard set we studied the molecular basis of familial cylindromatosis in a multigener- of interventions is universally applicable, the Advisory Group developed a ation family of German origin. Using PCR, microsatellite analysis, het- package of recommendations that a country could contemplate imple- eroduplex analysis, and automated sequencing, we identified a frameshift menting according to its needs and circumstances. It further proposed that mutation in the CYLD gene in several individuals. Mutation analysis further countries could form a national task force to develop a national plan utiliz- allowed exclusion of the tumor predisposition in a 6-year old boy. Interest- ing baseline epidemiological data. Adraft protocol and operating manual, ingly, in several family members with identical genotype we observed a dis- developed from a second EMRO initiative, were provided. Such a plan tinct phenotype. While some individuals revealed discrete small skin col- would require systems for education and audit, and could be implemented ored tumors localized in the nasolabial region, one family member showed following a pilot project. The need for technical support from selected expansion of multiple big tumors on the trunk and in a turban like fashion experts and relevant WHO programmes in a long-term working relation- on the head. The reasons for different clinical expression patterns of the ship was foreseen. same genetic defect in this disease remain elusive. Identification of the CYLD gene and modern genetic techniques enable us to rapidly confirm P1093. Use of short tandem repeats (STRs) for diagnosis of putative diagnoses on the genetic level, to give a prognosis for family the Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1Aduplication members at risk for developing multiple tumors, and to offer genetic coun- A. Vandenberghe1, P. Latour2, N. Levy3, R. Bernard3, A. Boyer3, L. seling for affected families. Boutrand4, F. Claustrat2, G. Chazot2, M. Boucherat2 1Faculty of Pharmacy; Lyon, France; 2Neurogntique Molculaire, Labo- P1091.National Genetic Service In Bulgaria ratoire de Biochimie, Hpital de lAntiquaille; Lyon, France; 3D pt. G n- I. Kremensky, S. Andonova, A. Ashikov, V. Chorbov, B. Georgieva, M. tique Mdicale, Hpital dEnfants de la Timone; Marseille, France; 4D pt. Ivanova, N. Ivanova, S. Jankova, A. Jordanova, R. Kaneva, E. Michaylo- Gntique Molculaire et Biochimie Clinique, Facult de Pharmacie; Lyon, va, R. Petkova, T. Petrova, A. Savov, A. Todorova, B. Zaharova France Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria vandenbe@rockefeller.univ-lyon1.fr kremensk@ns.medfac.acad.bg We tested a number of repeat sequences identified from sequenced BAC Since 2000 year in Bulgaria started a National Programme for Prevention clones covering 100% of the PMP22 duplicated region (MIT Center for and Prophylaxis of Inherited Disorders. It is organized in five regional cen- Genome Research, Cambridge MA, USA) for polymorphic behavior. We ters. In four of them only genetic counseling and postnatal cytogenetic selected sequences with (i) five or more tandem repeats and (ii) possess- diagnostic is performed. All other activities are concentrated in the genetic ing neighboring sequences suitable to identify unique primers for specific center of Sofia. Here, based on functional criteria, several laboratories are amplification. Ten such repeat sequences (4 tri-, 4 tetra- and 2 penta- involved; Laboratory for Biochemical Genetics (performing mass screening nucleotide repeats) were amplified by PCR using standard conditions. for PKU - 70 000 newborns, selective serum screening for Down syndrome Three of this short tandem repeats (STRs) were polymorphic and found and neural tube defects in first and second trimester, selective screening suitable for genotyping. The heterozygosity for normal controls is between for galactokinase deficiency- 15 000 newborns); DNAlaboratory for pre- 0.69 and 0.80. Less than 1% of healthy controls are non informative for the and postnatal diagnostic of the most common monogenic disorders (CF, b- 3 STRs. The PCR products show clean amplification without stuttering thalassaemia, DMD/BMD, SMA, CMT, PKU, LGMD2C, MCAD, Wilson dis- bands. The separation of the different alleles is accurate on non denatur-Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 315 ing polyacrylamide gels, and allows economical silver staining detection. sensitivity of the protein truncation test (PTT) and promoted by a predom- When duplicated, dosage differences between alleles are observed. The 3 inance of the mutated allele in lymphoblastoid cell lines compared to STRs cover about 0.5 Mb of the central part of the CMT1Aduplication and peripheral blood cells. Suspected low level mosaicism in lymphocyte DNA enclose the PMP22 gene. Until now, we found 9 CMT1Afamilies which could be proven by cloning of the PCR product and confirmation of a muta- showed normal CMT-REPprofiles. Very interestingly the most distal of the tion by sequencing individual clones in one case and selective amplifica- STRs revealed the duplication in all 9 families. The frequency of CMT1A tion of the mutated allele after enzymatic digestion of the wildtype allele in duplication with normal CMT-REPprofiles is 2.0% in a series of 480 dupli- the two other patients. Direct sequence analysis of peripheral blood DNA cated CMT1Apatients. Genotyping with these new STRs now definitely failed to confirm the mutations In all three cases no matter what type of replaced other polymorphic systems (RFLPs and poly(AC) repeats) in our labeling (primer or dideoxynucleotides) and what kind of automatic routine diagnosis. An automated genotyping format using 2 different fluo- sequencer (LICOR or ABI310) was used. In contrast, the underrepresent- rescent labels was successfully tested. ed mutated alleles could be directly detected by DHPLC analysis through heteroduplex formation. Titration experiments of cloned PCR products P1094.Frequency of Fragile X syndrome in South Indian Men- could proof a minimal proportion of 5% of the mutated allele. Our report tal retarded patients of un known etiology illustrate the importance of considering somatic mosaicism in sporadic G. N. Mallikarjuna Rao1, A. Jyothy1, M. Swarna2, M. Sujatha2, M. P. J. TSC cases with clinical symptoms restricted to single organs and the S.Ananda Raj2 necessity of sensitive methods for their detection. 1Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases; Hyderabad, India; 2Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases; Hyderabad, India P1097. Alpha Thalassemia Frequency in So Jos do Rio MALLIKGENE@REDIFFMAIL.COM Preto, State of So Paulo, Brazil. Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental retarda- E. C. Schiaveto, C. R. Bonini Domingos tion (MR) with frequency of 1 in 4000 males and 1 in 8000 females. The Instituto de Biocincias Letras e Cincias Exatas/ UNESP; So Jos do frequency of fragile X syndrome in mentally retarded males ranges from 0 Rio Preto, Brazil to 11 %. Our study is based on 101 patients of Mental retardation of manuschiaveto@bol.com.br unknown etiology referred from various hospitals in Andhra pradesh and The alpha thalassemia characterizes itself for the presence of a fast neighboring states. Cytogenetic analysis was done to identify fragile site at haemoglobin, with unstable characteristics, forming inclusion corpuscules Xq27.3 using folate deficient medium(TC199). Molecular diagnosis was in the erythrocytes, denominted H haemoglobin. The carrieers present done using PCR and southern blot analysis.The full mutation of the FMR1 anemia with variable grades, hypochromia, microcytosis and poikilocyto- gene i.e >200 CGG repeat expansion at the 1st exon of this gene cannot sis. The phenotype seriousness is directly related wiht the loose of alpha be amplified by PCR method. The un amplified samples were subjected to genes synthesis, being classified according his defect. The goal of the southern blot analysis using Ecor1/Eag1 double digest and probing with present study was verify the presence of alpha thalassemia in blood sam- Stb12.3 probe. 7 unrelated patients out of 101 patients of MR were of full ples conducted to the Haemoglobin Labooratory, of the Biology Departe- mutation (>200 repeat) thus the frequency of fragile x syndrome was 7%. ment in the Instituto de Biocincias Letras e Cincias Exatas/ UNESP, in this study helped identify the Fragile X patients among non specific MR So Jos do Rio Preto, state of So Paulo, Brazil, of two groups; newborns patients and also in developing strategies for definite diagnosis of this syn- and anemia carriers to explain. 712 blood samples of adult individuals and drome 813 navel cord samples were analysed, in the period f 1998-200, picked with EDTAon 5%, that were submited to a cytological and biochemical P1095. Genetic Evaluation Of Male Infertility In Venezuelan tests and a electrophoretic procedures, confirming the presence of Hb H or Patients Hb Barts. Among the total analysed, 322 adult individual samples and 139 T. Aguirre, M. M. Piras, R. Sotelo, L. Lozano, F. Rsquez, M. E. Po, A. navel cord samples presented alpha thalassemia. The answer for a pre- Kovacs, A. Sosa, I. Reyes, A. Tras, R. Piras vention program fr this genetic alteration type must be wisely elaborated, Centro Mdico Docente La Trinidad; Caracas, Venezuela considering the age group that will be studied and the edicative material. A taguirre@reacciun.ve prevention program for this alteration type has a huge importance, since The availability of Assisted Reproduction Techniques, like ICSI, allows pro- the alpha thalassemias are frequent in the population, because makes creation by males with severe infertility problems. The knowledge that possible an improvement in the carrier life quality. genetic abnormalities account for many cases of idiophatic infertility, led us to evaluate a group of Venezuelan infertile patients. In 1998, we began a P1098.Diagnoses of Childhood Onset Neuronal Ceroid Lipo- genetic evaluation program which includes Ychromosome microdeletions fuscinoses; Clinical, Pathological, Biochemical, and Molecu- by PCR, mutational analysis of the CFTR gene (cystic fibrosis) and, in lar Aspects. selected cases, karyotype. To date, we have evaluated a group of 190 con- W. Ju, D. Moroziewicz, W. T. Brown, N. Zhong secutive patients with a range of indications for ICSI, this group included New York State Institute for Basic Research; Staten Island, NY United azoospermic/oligozoospermic men. Y chromosome microdeletions were States found in 4 patients (one in AZFb and three in AZFc). Abnormal karyotypes omrddzhong@aol.com were identified in 4/65 (6%) of the patients (two 45, XYt(14;21), one 47, Three childhood onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), the infantile XXYand one 47,XYY). Mutation analysis of the CFTR gene resulted in one (INCL), classical late-infantile (LINCL), and juvenile (JNCL), are underlied patient compound heterozygote for Delta F508/R117H and five patients by gene CLN1, CLN2, and CLN3, respectively. They are among the most heterozygote for one mutation in the CFTR gene (two R117H/-, two common pediatric neurodegenerative disorders in the United States. Clin- DeltaF508/- and 621+ G to T/-). These results demonstrate that genetic ically, they all share similar symptoms. Pathologically, lysosomal storage of factors are involved in some cases of infertility in Venezuelan males, with lipofuscins can be detected with electron microscope. Emzymatically, defi- a frequency (7 %) comparable to that observed worldwide. Therefore, in ciency of palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 (PPT1) and (tripeptidyl peptidase our population, a complete genetic evaluation is highly recommended 1) TPP1 can be assayed for INCLand LINCL. Molecularly, more than 100 before the ICSI procedure. mutations have been identified, which include 39 from INCL, 39 from LINCL, and 32 from JNCL. Testing five mutations, the c. 223A-G (Y109D) P1096. Sensitivity of DHPLC for the detection of low level and c. 451 C-T(R151X) in CLN1, c. 622C-T(R280X) and IVS5-1G-C in mosaicism in tuberous sclerosis CLN2, and a deletion of 1.02-kb genomic fragment involving exon 7-8 of K. Mayer, S. Schirdewahn, H. D. Rott CLN3 may detect ~75% of clinically referred chilhood NCLs. Applying Institute of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany enzyme assay and molecular testing to NCLfamily members, we are able kmayer@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de to identify carriers and presymptomatic affected individuals. As well, pre- In tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) parental mosaicism is often observed natal diagnostic testing enables to distinguish affected, carrier, and normal in a family with more than one affected child from parents without clinical pregnancies. Combining clinical information such as the age at onset and signs of TSC. Parental germ-line mosaicism can be shown by haplotype initial signs, ultrastructural examination for characterizing lipofuscin pro- analyses whereas parental somatic mosaicism is usually detected by a file(s), enzymatic analyses for PPT1 and TPP1, and molecular testing, we reduced ratio of the mutant-to-normal allele. Direct detection of somatic are able to distinguish over 90% childhood NCLpatients and reevaluate mosaicism is even more difficult. During mutation screening in TSC we and confirm clinical diagnoses. directly discovered two monosymptomatic cases of somatic mosaicism in a total of 30 sporadic patients with a TSC1 or TSC2 mutation. Afurther case of parental somatic mosaicism was uncovered by family analysis. The two directly discovered mosaics were initially detected through the316 Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy P1099. Quality of life in children with trisomy 21 - is an ness of hereditary diseases, and there are an increasing number of fami- induced abortion inevitable lies requesting genetic services, and more physicians prescribing genetic M. Meyer, J. Kunze, J. Pelz tests. Simultaneously, there are demands in European countries to cut Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany down the costs of public health care. All this has created a situation where joerg.pelz@charite.de professional guidelines for the provision of genetic services are needed. In In clinical practice it is the obligation of a clinician to treat a patient accord- September 2000, an international workshop was organized by the ESHG- ing to evidence based principles. Aquite different situation exists in screen- PPPC in Helsinki, to formulate guidelines for the provision of genetic serv- ing, where healthy individuals are investigated to identify risks of disorders, ices in Europe. Participants were concerned about equal access and effec- which justify costs and hazards of further investigation. The situation tiveness of genetic services, quality assessment of services, professional becomes even more complex, in prenatal diagnosis, where in most cases education, multidisciplinarity and division of tasks, as well as networking. physicians take action not to treat or to avoid disease but to prevent the Participants identified a number of policy areas requiring (international) birth of a diseased child. This is the ultimate action, which should not be coordination and the establishment of coherent (international) policies. The taken by a physician, unless the disease is serious and no effective treat- purpose of this presentation is to systematically examine the existing pro- ment is available. The antenatal screening for Down syndrome, in case of fessional guidelines, legal frameworks and other documents related to the a positive test, results in the overwhelming majority of case in an induced organization of genetic services, mainly from Europe but also from other abortion, a consequence broadly accepted in both the medical and the international organizations. Since professional guidelines can improve the social community. In a case-control study we investigated different aspects quality, appropriateness, and cost-effectiveness of genetic services, and of quality of life in 51 children with trisomy 21 and in 52 control children of can serve as valuable educational tools, it is important to determine to their peer group. Parents were personally interviewed with a structured what degree they document the best practice standards, in which areas questionnaire. Quality of life in children with trisomy 21 can primarily be they may be deficient, and whether there were changes over time. This defined by good health, an intact and caring family environment, by inte- review is an essential step to lead to the efficiency in use of health care gration and autonomy. Second-rate are those areas where the disability resources and the establishment of common guidelines for all European shows strongest manifestation; somatic, intellectual and communicational countries. development. Many health problems of children with Downs syndrome are treatable with modern medical methods, integration can be facilitated by an P1102. Primary Health Care approache for prevention of appropriate, affectionate and empathic social environment. It seems to be Genetic Disorders wrong to assume that children with trisomy 21 have a low quality of life. An A. Samavat induced abortion after prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 is not justifiable, at Disease Control Dpartment; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran least if one takes/respects the viewpoint of the Down syndrome child. samavat@orang.net Iran is a vast country with a iand area about 1.6 million square kilometers P1100.The integration of human genetics in the realm of med- and a population size of more than 60 million.Iran also has different ethnic icine groups. The rate of consanguinous marriages in Iran is high and the B. Press, J. Pelz IMR(infan mortality rate)is improving and reaching below 40(22).In this sit- Institut fuer Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany uation planning the prevention programme of Genetic Disorders is one of bjoern.press@web.de the necessary duty of the Health Autorities in Iran. The primary health care Within the different specialities of medicine human genetics is one of the approaches for the prevention and management of Genetic Disorders youngest. The introduction of its concepts and its molecular methods has provids aspecial possibility to plan the prevention programme,for Iran and changed the understanding of disease and the possibilities of diagnostics. other developing countries. ThePrenatal Diagnosis is one of the This development is often seen as a paradigm shift and compared with the microstructures was set up in PHC system in Iran to prevent the tha- introduction of the cellular pathology by Virchow. It has an influence on lassemia.The other microstructures which were set up in the PHC are Lab. medical thinking and on the use of basic medical concepts. Nevertheless M.,Counselling M.,Education M.These microstructuers not only accelerat the position of human genetics in the realm of medicine and its role in the the prevention programme of thalassemia but also provide paved path for clinical setting is far from being clear and established. The present work other prevention prgramme of the Genetic Disorders such as Haemophil- analyses the understanding of doctors of tomorrow (1) of human genetics ia,down,...... function in the realm of medicine and (2) of terms like prevention, dis- ease and patient in clinical settings related to human genetics. Three P1103.Services for the management and prevention of genet- groups of students of medicine differing in the level of clinical and theoret- ic disorders, birth defects and disabilities in South Africa - ical experience (first, third and sixth year of medical education) were inter- successes and challenges viewed by a structured questionnaire focusing on the above mentioned N. Madolo topics. Human genetics is not seen as a medical discipline in the tradition- Department of Health; Pretoria, South Africa al sense by the interviewees. The role of human genetics within medicine madolN@health.gov.za is seen in diagnostics and in science. It lacks the traditional role of many Medical genetic services are integrated into maternal, child and womens medical specialities; caring and healing, both taking place in the different health services at national and provincial level in South Africa. The nation- specialities per se. The clinical application leads to dissensions in the con- al office, in collaboration with a task team nominated by each of the nine cepts of (1) prevention, which in human genetics is mainly understood as provinces, and funded by the World Health Organisation, has developed prevention of the ill instead of prevention of illness; (2) the role of patient policy guidelines for the management and prevention of genetic disorders, and physician, which in the setting of prenatal diagnosis is far from clear. birth defects and disabilities. These guidelines outline services which This may be one of the problems of human genetics to establish itself as a should be offered prior to conception, during pregnancy, at birth, in infancy medical discipline. and childhood, as well as in adolescence and adulthood. Services to be offered at the community, district, regional, provincial, and national levels P1101. Provision of genetic services ; what do the profes- are outlined as well as the training needs of personnel at each of these lev- sional guidelines tell us? els. Capacity for the implementation of these guidelines varies greatly with- B. Godard1, M. Bobrow2, J. Cassiman3, G. Evers-Kiebooms3, D. Coviello4, in the provinces and support has to be provided by the national office and P. Farndon5, H. K riinen6, U. Kristoffersson7, M. Pembrey8, S. Raeburn9, the academic centres. There are presently only four clinical geneticists, ten J. Schmidtke10, L. ten Kate11, L. Tranebjaerg12, S. Aym 13 genetic counsellors, and approximately eighty nurses with training in 1University of Montreal; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2University of Cambridge; genetics for a population of 40 million people. This clearly impacts on Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3University of Leuven; Leuven, Belgium; appropriate diagnosis and the quality of care that can be offered to indi- 4Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy; 5Birmingham Maternity viduals with genetic disorders and birth defects. Effective monitoring of Hospital; Birmingham, United Kingdom; 6Family Federation of Finland; birth defects is dependent on the accurate diagnosis and reporting, again Helsinki, Finland; 7University Hospital; Lund, Sweden; 8University College highlighting the need for advanced training in genetics. Public awareness London; London, United Kingdom; 9City Hospital NHS Trust; Nottingham, of genetic conditions is done in collaboration with non-governmental United Kingdom; 10Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; organisations, which also assist in the implementation of genetic services 11Academisch Ziekenhuis Vrije Universitt; Amsterdam, The Netherlands; at the local level. These policy guidelines are a beginning from which 12University of Tromsoe; Tromsoe, Norway; 13INSERM; Villejuif, France appropriate accessible and equitable medical genetic services can be godardb@courrier.umontreal.ca developed in a country with many pressing health priorities. Our understanding of molecular genetics has created new possibilities to diagnose and to treat genetic disorders. This has increased public aware-Posters: Genetic Services, Genetic Screening, and Public Policy 317 P1104. 1987  2000; Thirteen Years Of DMD/BMD Prevention spermatogenesis. They are located at AZFc and AZFb respectively. In Italian Families Microdeletions in theses regions cause severe oligozoospermia or S. Tedeschi1, M. Castagni1, P. De Leonardis1, F. Lalatta2, V. Briscioli2, D. azoospermia. In this study 30 STSs were selcted to screen for Yq A. Coviello1, A. Cant Rajnoldi1 microdeletions in patients with severe oligozoospermia or azoospermia . 1Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Cytogenetic, urologic , hormonal and other organic causes leading to Italy; 2Medical Genetic Unit, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy azoospermia and oligozoospermia were ruled out in these patients. Yq coviello@unige.it microdeletion was detected in 4 out of 16 patients. Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and its allelic milder form Becker Muscular Dystrophy (BMD) account for 50% of all muscular dystrophies P1107.Alpha thalassemia deletion analysis in Iran and are caused by mutations on Dystrophin gene. Deletions and duplica- M. Neishabury1, H. Najmabadi1,2, A. A. Poorfathollah3, N. Amirizadeh1, W. tions are responsible for two third of cases of affected males and the Krugluger4 remaining 30% is caused by point mutations. Disease prevention is per- 1University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; formed by carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis (PND). Risk evaluation 2Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of needs to be defined before performing PND but often women at risk are Iran; 3Iran Blood Transfusion Services; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; already pregnant when decide to ask per PND. If deletions or duplications 4Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital,; Vienna, Austria are not detected, either on index case or on at risk women, point mutation maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk analysis should be performed, but since Dystrophin gene is the largest dis- a-thalassemia is one of the most prevalent haemoglobin disorders in the covered to date in humans (79 exons), point mutation analysis is too time world. The molecular basis of a-thalassemia are deletions of variable consuming to be performed in PND. Our centre is performing familial stud- lenght involving one or both a-genes at the a-globin gene cluster. Func- ies and prenatal diagnoses of DMD/BMD on Italian population since 1987. tional point mutations leading to inactivation of the a-genes are less fre- Our registry includes more than 1000 family groups, and we performed 586 quent. So far, no comprehensive population screening for a-thalassemia prenatal diagnoses over a period of 13 years. Our experience combined to has been performed in Iran and no molecular diagnostic services are avail- technological progress allowed us to set up an easy and fast strategy for able for this disease. As a result, a considerable number of patients with accurate carrier detection and PND. Deletion and duplication detection for microcytic, hypochromic anemia and normal Hb A2 levels might be misdi- males and females by Quantitative Multiplex PCR Etidium Bromide stained agnosed as silent b-thalassemia or the molecular basis of disease remains on 32 exons and PCR-based linkage analysis using very informative STR unidentified. In this study we have screened 25 Iranian patients randomly and RFLPcan actually be performed with low costs and good accuracy in chosen from a pool of patients with microcytic, hypochromic anemia and 5 days. Of 317 PND carried out on male foetuses, 182 diagnoses of negative results in b-thalassemia genotyping for the 2 most frequent a-tha- healthy males were confirmed at birth by follow up. Our experience both at lassemia deletions (-a 3.7, -a 4.2). Analysis was performed using deletion- laboratory level and at counselling level have improved the quality of the specific PCR amplification followed by agarose gel electrophoresis of the service offered. We observed an interesting evolution of the risk modifica- resulting PCR-fragments. No -a 4.2 deletion was detected. However, 40 % tion during the years with the reduction of pregnancies with foetuses with of analyzed cases demonstrated the -a 3.7 deletion, either in the homozy- intermediate risk. gous or heterozygous state. This study suggests, that the -a 3.7 deletion is common cause of microcytic, hypochromic anemia in Iran. The results are P1105.Gastrochisis and Omphalocele in the Genetics Clinic in accordance with previous studies, reporting a remarkable high frequen- P. Hwang, B. G. Kousseff cy of -a 3.7 in the Middle East. Routine screening for this mutation will University Of South Florida; Tampa, FLUnited States improve the molecular diagnosis of anemia in Iran. bkoussef@hsc.usf.edu Since 1960s improved definition, diagnosis, and reporting of gastroschisis P1108.Application of the INNO-LiPACFTR12 and INNO-LiPA (G) and omphalocele (O) have shown that the frequency of gastroschisis CFTR17+Tn tests for neonatal screening of cystic fibrosis is on the increase. While most large studies document this increase, the using blood spot samples textbooks in English still state that O (incidence of 1;4,000) is more com- C. Van Loon, I. De Canck, P. Hendrix mon that G (incidence 1;6,000). Retrospective analysis of all 36,665 Innogenetics N.V.; Gent, Belgium probands/families evaluated at the USF genetics clinic between January 2, connyvlo@innogenetics.be 1982 and December 31, 1999 showed 121 patients with G and 98 with O. As large-scale screening of newborns for cystic fibrosis based on the The higher number of G reversed the customary G; O incidence ratio of immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)/DNAprotocol is being considered, there 1/6,000;1/4,000. Of the G patients 37/121 had karyotypes, all were normal. is a need for a DNAmethod which can simultaneously detect many muta- In the O cohort 75/98 had karyotypes and 18 were abnormal (24%); 12/18 tions and is suitable for blood spots. We evaluated the INNO-LiPACFTR12 had trisomy 18, 2/18-trisomy 21, 1/18-trisomy 13, 1/18-del (18p)/i (18q), and INNO-LiPACFTR17+Tn tests which detect 29 mutations (and the Tn 1/18-inv (2)(p11q12) mat and 1/18-inv (3)(p13q11) mat. In the G cohort alleles) and their wild type sequences in the CFTR gene to assess their 43/121 (36%) had associated anomalies compared to the O cohort with suitability for routine analysis of blood spot samples. Both tests are line 67/98 (68%). 5/121 pregnancies with G were interrupted; 2/121-miscarried probe assays (LiPAs) based on the reverse hybridization principle. Using and there were 2 stillbirths. 33 pregnancies remained with unknown to us these tests, and depending on the country, up to 94% of the mutant alleles outcome (lost to reevaluations). Among the 79 liveborn the prematurity rate can be detected. We defined an extraction method that is easy and rapid was 57%. 11/98 O pregnancies were electively interrupted; additional 6/98 to perform. This method was tested with twenty random samples. Results miscarried and 23 remained with unknown outcome. Among the 58 live- showed that a small adaptation of the multiplex amplification profile of the born patients the prematurity rate was 36%. The mortality rate in the G INNO-LiPACFTR tests (increase in the number of cycles from 30 to 35) cohort was 9% (7/79) and in the O cohort it was 15% (9/58). This study was necessary. After increasing the number of amplification cycles, all contributed to several issues in these abdominal defects; G is more com- DNAsamples were successfully amplified. The hybridization results were mon that O, has lower mortality rate, and higher rate of prematurity com- comparable to those obtained with samples extracted from whole blood. pared to O. Test results were concordant with data obtained using other mutation detection methods. These results indicate that the INNO-LiPACFTR12 and P1106. The Yq Microdeletions in Iranian patients with Idio- INNO-LiPACFTR17+Tn tests are suitable for the detection and identifica- pathic Azoospermia tion of an important number of CF mutations in the CFTR gene using blood A. Hatami1, F. Sahebjam1, K. Kahrizi2, R. A. Nadji1, F. Pourfarzad2, H. spots. Najmabadi2,1 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology and Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of P1109.Steinerts myotonic dystrophy in Romania Iran; 2University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of D. Coprean1, M. Popescu2, A. Bosca1 Iran 1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy; Cluj-Napoca, maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk Romania; 2Horia Radu Center of Neuromuscular Pathology; Valcele, Male factor is the cause of infertility in about 50 per cent of infertile cou- Romania ples. Five to twently per cent of infertile men with severe oligozoospermia dmarineanu@personal.ro or azoospermia have Yq microdeletion. Recent studies has shown the Steinerts myotonic dystrophy (SMD), the most frequent myopathy of the presence of 4 regions on the internal 6 of Ychromosome associated with adult, is a multisystemic disease. SMD is characterized by; myotonia, mus- male infertility. These are AZFa , AZFb, AZFc and AZFd which are involved cular dystrophy, cataract, hypogonadism, frontal alopecia, and ECG in the process of spermatogenesis. DAZ and RBM are two multicopy gene changes. SMD is genetically and clinically heterogeneous. SMD, an auto- families which are expressed only in testes and have an important role in somal dominant disease, is caused by mutations of the myotonin gene318 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics located in 19q13.3. The genetic defect consists in the amplification of the throughout their recruitment procedures for potential candidates. The aim CTG triplet from the region 3 of the myotonin gene. The severity of the of this primarily investigation is to examine the opinions and expectations symptoms depends on the number of CTG triplet repeats; 3-35 repeats in of personnel managers of the Migros Genossenschafts-Bund (MGB) in healthy persons, 50-100 repeats in premutation carriers, 100-2000 repeats Switzerland regarding the use of genetic testing in human resource man- in affected patients (2000 or more repeats in severely affected patients). agement. To carry out this task, questionnaires have been answered by all According to the onset age and the severity of symptoms, the following MGB personnel managers. Secondly, group discussions with these man- SMD forms are known; adult (classical, onset at 25-35 years, slow evolu- agers, representing 80.000 employees in industrial, service and associa- tion), congenital (neonatal, dramatic evolution), infantile (onset at 5-10 tion sectors, have been conducted. MGBs code of conduct supports relia- years, slow evolution), and minimal (onset after 50 years). This study was bility, confidence and ethical aspects. The author would like to thank MGB performed on the 188 SMD cases admitted to the Horia Radu Center of as the first corporation in Switzerland for its visionary permission to this Neuromuscular Pathology, Valcele, Covasna, in the period 1986-1999. The inquiry. study methods used were the familial inquiry, completion of the genetic record, reconstruction of pedigrees, and the biostatistical method. The P1112. Quality Assessment Study of Molecular Biological analysis of pedigrees confirms the autosomal dominant transmission of Markers resulting in Recommendations for Quality Guide- SMD. The SMD cases represent 11% of all muscular dystrophy cases lines, Technical Standards and New Definitions admitted in the same period. We found an increased SMD incidence in the I. M. Ambros1, J. Benard2, M. Boavida3, N. Bown4, H. Caren5, V. Com- districts Brasov, Sibiu, Timis, and Bihor. This can be explained by the baret2, B. De Bernardi6, O. Delattre2, M. C. Favrot2, N. Gross7, C. Hat- founder couple effect and the different pressure of mutagenic and selection tinger1, P. Kogner8, R. Ladenstein1, A. Luegmayr1, J. Lunec4, T. Martins- factors. son8, K. Mazzocco6, J. Michon2, S. Navarro9, R. Noguera9, A. D. J. Pear- son4, U. Ptschger1, S. Rumpler1, F. Speleman10, G. P. Tonini6, N. Van P1110. Evaluation of a molecular diagnostic assay for the Roy10, P. F. Ambros1 detection of 29 mutations and polymorphisms in the Cystic 1CCRI, St. Anna Kinderspital; Vienna, Austria; 2France; 3Portugal; 4United Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) Kingdom; 5The Netherlands; 6Italy; 7Switzerland; 8Sweden; 9Spain; gene. 10Belgium A. Myers1, R. Nersesian1, K. E. Colvin2, L. Wang2, M. Macek Jr.3, R. K. ambros@ccri.univie.ac.at Saiki1 Background; Genetic criteria become increasingly important in the treat- 1Roche Molecular Systems Inc.; Alameda, CAUnited States; 2Roche Mol- ment stratification of pediatric tumors. Amplification of the MYCN onco- ecular Biochemicals; Indianapolis, IN United States; 3University Hospital gene is one of the most powerful markers indicating an aggressive tumor Motol; Prague, Czech Republic behavior and is consequently used for therapy stratification. Aquality con- angela.myers@roche.com trol study was initiated by the ENQUAGroup to guarantee reliable and uni- Genetic testing for molecular defects in the CFTR gene has become an form quality of MYCNdata and of other genetic features, the prognostic important area in laboratory testing. However, because of the large num- impact of which is evaluated prospectively. ber of documented molecular defects in the CFTR gene, only a small num- Methods; A panel of twelve coded tumor specimens was analyzed in ber of laboratories have implemented the techniques necessary to exhaus- eleven laboratories from nine European countries. Southern blot (SB), tively analyze a patients CF locus. Nevertheless, only a relatively small PCR and FISH were used for MYCNand chromosome 1p36.3 evaluation handful of mutations recur at significant frequency and we have developed and flow FCM/ICM for tumor cell ploidy assessment. an assay to test for 25 of these CFTR mutations and polymorphisms rec- Results; Altogether, 350 investigations were performed leading to 23 diver- ommended by the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG). The gent findings (8/160 MYCN, 9/114 1p36.3 and 7/42 ploidy results). 34 assay is capable of detecting 80-90% of the defective alleles in Caucasian results were judged as not evaluable. No or incorrect determination of the Americans and has a significant detection level in other ethnic groups. This tumor cell content turned out to be one of the biggest problems leading to may be sufficiently sensitive for routine carrier screening and for the major- results based on the investigation of normal cells. After discussions and ity of diagnostic requests. The ability to test for CFTR mutations at the reviews of the tumor samples, 17 of 23 differing findings were judged as molecular level has already improved the diagnosis of symptomatic false results. The diagnostic errors were lowest for MYCN analyses deter- patients and expanded the reproductive options for family members of CF mined by SB (3.7%) and FISH (4.1%), and highest for ICM (17.3%). patients. The same technology also holds promise of identifying asympto- Conclusions; This study demonstrated the difficulties and limitations for matic carriers and at-risk couples without family history. Here we report the each technique and the problems in the evaluation and interpretation of the analysis of 400 clinical specimens that were previously genotyped by other results. Moreover, it led to technique standardization and to the develop- methods (restriction enzyme digestion, PCR mediated site directed muta- ment of a common language for the interpretation of the molecular-genet- genesis, DGGE, or DNAsequencing) using a striped array of 55 immobi- ic results which is based on uniform and unequivocal definitions. lized, sequence-specific oligonucleotides designed to detect genetic The project has been funded by the DGV, No. 98 36220 defects responsible for CF and other CFTR-associated pathologies. The assay includes 24 mutations with frequencies >= 0.1% in Caucasian pop- P1113.Non-paternity and Social Policy ulations, achieving 80-90% sensitivity and an additional mutation of African P. Millar origin providing 60-70% coverage among African-Americans. Genomic University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Canada DNAis amplified in a single 15-plex polymerase chain reaction amplifica- pmillar@cadvision.com tion system followed by detection of the 25 mutations and 4 polymorphisms The issue of non-paternity, where the presumed father is not the biological (intron 8 Tn locus, I506V, I507V, and F508C) using a low-density oligonu- father, has become more prominent in recent years because of the relia- cleotide probe array. The format of the assay permits the simultaneous bility and reduced costs of DNA-based testing and because of the screening of many samples for multiple mutations and can be readily mod- increased emphasis that governments have been placing on child support ified to combine the detection of the most frequent mutations with other and its enforcement. This paper reviews the dimensions of the issue or allelic variants common to specific ethnic groups. Expanding the panel of non-paternity, its impact on child outcomes and rights, and the implications screened mutations only marginally increases the sensitivity of the assay. for medical, legal and social policy. This molecular diagnostic assay is simple and accurate. The assay identi- fies most of the carriers and affected persons (high sensitivity) with few P1114.Computational systems for Comparative Genomics false positives (high specificity) and may be used in carrier screening and C. Suter-Crazzolara, G. Kurapkat in conjunction with conventional tests for newborn screening. LION bioscience; Heidelberg, Germany suter@lionbioscience.com P1111. Genetic Testing and Human Resource Management Current world wide genome projects confront scientists with a wealth of I. Eckerstorfer sequence information. Both the sizes and the number of biological data- University of Zrich; Zrich, Germany bases grow exponentially. Intelligent systems are needed to bridge the ingeck@hotmail.com widening chasm between data collection and interpretation. To interpret Abstract Genetic Testing and Human Resource Management Corporations data from newly sequenced pro- and eukaryotic genomes, comparative are faced with the fact that employees with unstable health conditions are genomics is rapidly gaining importance. Even distant organisms encode less resourceful due to their absence from the workplace caused by sick- proteins with high sequence similarity. Gene order in different genomes is ness. Genetic testing seems to be a method in human resource manage- also well conserved. We have employed both these observations to create ment to find out about genetically caused health problems of employees. a versatile computational genome comparison system As a result, corporations start to use genetic testing as a guiding tool (genomeSCOUT). This application can be used for projects spanningPosters: Genomics and Bioinformatics 319 from the identification of drug targets or the optimization of organisms for from mutagenesis projects and gene targeting efforts. Allele records now biotechnology, to in depth characterization and encyclopedic annotation of include information on inheritance and the molecular mutation involved, completed or partial genomes. This application is based on the well estab- and are being annotated with phenotypic data and human disease model lished data integration system SRS [Etzold, T. et al., 1996. Methods Enzy- information. All allele data are fully integrated with sequence, ortholog, mol. 266; 114-128]. In a first step, information about gene order and pro- gene expression, and strain polymorphism data. MGD is supported by NIH tein homology (e.g. homologs, orthologs and clusters of orthologous grant HG00330 groups, COGs) is efficiently collected and automatically stored in five sep- arate databases. Next, these databases are queried interactively to carry P1117.Turbogene; An access tool to genetic web resources. out the actual genome comparisons. Key benefits; 1. High speed handling J. Granados Riveron, L. Machuca Tzili of large genomic data sets. The most complex queries give results instant- Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina UNAM; Mexico City, ly. 2. User friendly graphical representations of search results, 3. Unique, Mexico SRS-based linking functions between all databases result in the accumu- tadeo61@yahoo.com lation of a wealth of biological information, 4. Reliable addition of genomes Genetics has become one of he most rapidly expanding sciences. It is very is straightforward, and 5. High flexibility allows effortless integration of difficult keeping up to date using conventional methods such as reviewing additional public or proprietary databanks and applications. printed journals, catalogs, or scientific textbooks. The use of electronic (http;//www.lionbioscience.com/) publications and databases have therefore became essential for geneti- cists. Information obtained owing to Human Genome Project and research P1115.Genomes and Gene Names efforts around the world is stored and classified in a growing number of M. W. Wright, E.A. Bruford, H.A. Wain, M.J. Lush, E. Stupka, R. Lovering, databases that are accessed through the Internet. In addition, many of the M.S. Povey. scientific journals focused in genetics have generated their own Web sites, HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee, UCL; London, United Kingdom from where it is possible to have access in variable degree to its content. nome@galton.ucl.ac.uk However, recent rapid proliferation of these and other kinds of web We have recently increased our resources to enable us to tackle the task resources for geneticist may confuse new potential users. We are present- of assigning symbols for the whole of the human genome. Despite calls to ing a new web site, called Turbogene. The purpose of our site is to provide give each gene a unique reference number, there is still a need for sym- a powerful access tool to genetic web resources. The current content of the bols for genes, especially when they are discussed in the literature. Stan- site is divided in several main categories; Journals, Databases, Software dardised gene nomenclature is an essential resource and the HUGO Gene and Societies. The Journals option displays a listing of links for over 120 Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) is committed to supplying unique gene scientific journals whose main interest is focused to genetics and molecu- symbols and names for the ever growing number of human genes. Desig- lar biology. The Databases option includes over 50 links, subdivided in nations describing structure, function or homology are preferred where the following categories; Inherited Disorders, Dysmorphology, Cytogenet- possible. We work closely with authors and researchers in each field, ics, Genomics, Mutations, Proteins, Enzymes, Mitochondrials, Laboratory online databases such as LocusLink and EnsEMBL, and other species resources and Support groups. The Software option is a catalog of pro- specific databases, in particular the Mouse Genome Informatics Nomen- grams used to pedigree analysis, primers design, sequence analysis and clature Committee. We have already assigned symbols for the finished linkage analysis. The content of the site is updated every week. The URL sequences for chromosomes 22 and 21 (Dunham et al. 1999; Hattori et al. of Turbogene is; http;//members.fortunecity.com/turbogene. 2000),providing a total of nearly 600 approved symbols, and have recent- ly been working on new data sent to us by various sequencing centres. P1118. The BioKnowledge Library  AMultispecies Knowl- Indeed, for the chromosome 21 publication we were able to ensure that edge System for Protein Annotation 88% of the genes (including pseudogenes) had approved symbols. With K. E. ONeill the ever-increasing use of electronic databases this will greatly aid future Proteome Inc.; Beverly, MAUnited States information retrieval for all interested in the human genome. The HUGO keo@proteome.com Gene Nomenclature Committee webpage can be found at URL With a growing number of genomes close to completion, Proteomes Bio- http;//www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/nomenclature/ and can be contacted via email; Knowledge Library  provides a unique resource built by comprehensive nome@galton.ucl.ac.uk curation of the research literature for model organisms, S.cerevisiae (YPD ), S.pombe (PombePD), C.elegans (WormPD ), C.albicans P1116. The Mouse Genome Database (MGD); A Comprehen- (PathoPD ), and for human, mouse, and rat proteins (HumanPSD). sive Biological Information System for the 21st Century Using the sequenced genomes as frameworks, our curators collect protein http;//www.informatics.jax.org/) knowledge currently scattered throughout the literature, and put it into a L. J. Maltais, J. A. Blake, J. E. Richardson, J. A. Kadin, C. J. Bult, J. T. concise format. The information is available in both a highly navigable for- Eppig, M. G. D. Staff mat, and a relational format which allows for convenient data mining. Appli- The Jackson Laboratory; Bar Harbor, ME United States cations for the BioKnowledge Library include genome annotation, com- ljm@informatics.jax.org parative genomics, interpretation of functional genomics, proteomic The laboratory mouse is the premier model for understanding human biol- datasets and disease and pathway studies. The Human Proteome Survey ogy and disease. Much contemporary research focuses on comparative Database (HumanPSD), a component of the BioKnowledge Library , analysis of mouse and human sequence data with emerging function of contains up-to-date information for over 10,000 known human proteins, biology implications. Thus, annotating the mouse genomic sequence and 6,000 mouse proteins, and 3,000 rat proteins. An additional component is integrating biological knowledge are of vital importance to the scientific GPCR-PD , which represents in depth annotation of the literature for the community. The Mouse Genome Database (MGD) is the community data- G-protein coupled receptors, an important class of drug target proteins, base for comprehensive information on the mouse. MGD provides a full their ligands and their associated signaling pathways. As the sequence of range of information including; genomic, structural, and phenotypic data on the human genome is completed, annotations for predicted human pro- gene definition, identification, classifications and nomenclature; genetic, teins are being added with the intention of creating the complete Annotat- cytogenetic, physical, and (species) comparative maps and data support- ed Human Proteome. The model organism volumes are freely available to ing those maps; clones/ESTs/probes/PCR characterizations and sequence academic researchers, while subscriptions are available to all others links for DNAand proteins; allelic polymorphism data; mammalian homolo- (www.proteome.com). gies for model organisms and domestic species; and descriptive pheno- typic information for genes, mutations, and mouse strains. MGD is inter- P1119.Annotation of the Human Genome; Use of the Genome connected with other online resources such as SWISS-PROT, LocusLink, as an Organizing Principal for Data Integration GenBank, , PubMed, OMIM, and databases for other species, including N. Tsinoremas GDB, RatMap, SheepBase, PiGbase, BovMap, FlyBase, etc. Two new fea- DoubleTwist Inc; Oakland, CAUnited States tures have recently been added to MGD. The first is the use of controlled nickt@doubletwist.com vocabularies for the description of the molecular function, biological Arough draft of approximately 90% of the human genomic sequences is process and cellular component of gene products as part of the Gene now available in the public domain. Interpretation and extraction of knowl- Ontology (GO) project. These terms can be used as attributes of gene edge from these sequences represent a challenge for scientific communi- products across species contributing to the development of comprehen- ty. In this presentation we will discuss our current efforts to utilize these sive comparative maps and facilitating queries across multiple databases. sequences in order to create the best view of the human genome. In addi- The second recent feature of MGD is allele description enhancements, tion, we will present a computational environment that can be used for effi- developed, in part, to support the explosion in new mutant allele discovery cient integration of diverse but relevant biological information. DoubleTwist320 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics provides a system that allows easy and comprehensive analysis against all discriminant analysis, logistic regression and support vector machines, and publicly available human genome sequence data, whether finished or filter methods will be studied. Tabu serach algorithms will be utilized to framework sequences. Gene models from the majority of the human genes select best subsets of genes according to criterion values. The proposed have been derived. SNPinformation has been integrated in the genome methods for gene identification will be applied to colon and breast gene view, as well as in each gene model. Using a sophisticated JAVA-based expression data sets. The impact of the criteria, various learning algo- viewer, scientists are able to visualize similarities to protein and protein rithms and searching techniques on the classification capacities will be domain signatures, alternative splicing information, SNPs, Mapping infor- evaluated and the biological implication of identified genes by the pro- mation, as well as a comparative view between human and mouse genes. posed methods will be explored using these two data sets In our view, the human genome serves as a scaffold to integrate different data types including expression, genotyping and pharmacogenomics infor- P1123. Data Mining a SQL Database Using Multidimensional mation. Our system is based on an open architecture paradigm, which On-Line Analytical Processing (MOLAP) Cubes allows such easy integration of all the diverse types of information on top R. W. Finnegan, D. Goldman of the genomic information. NIH; Rockville, MD United States rwf@mail.nih.gov P1120.Navigation through the space of gene interactions We developed a SQL(structured query language) database with pheno- S. Heymann type information to support analysis of our single nucleotide polymorphism Kelman GmbH; Berlin, Germany (SNP) genotyping data as part of our goal to characterize gene variants sheymann@kelman.de related to complex diseases. The SQLdatabase was designed containing Even now that the sequencing of the human genome is nearly complete, genotypes, diagnoses and responses to questions requiring the subject to scientists are still only at the threshold of understanding the functions of give a discrete rating. A multidimensional on-line analytical processing individual genes. Kelman offers a high-end solution of bioinfomatics and (MOLAP) database was constructed using the data contained in the origi- functional genome research which ensures new levels of data consistency nal SQLdatabase. The MOLAPdatabase (example here called; Finn) uses and exploitation. By means of the SPRAB technology we can predict the a cube structure in place of the two-dimensional tables seen in typical SQL genetically-determined functional relationships between proteins. Result- databases. The data in these cubes can be viewed in the form of a pivot ing from the in silico protein-protein interaction mapping we are able to table using an Internet browser or a spreadsheet application. The pivot construct a GeneNetwork, which provides an indepth understanding of table produced here represents data from the cube in the MOLAPdata- gene interplay, because it involves gene products in all their known molec- base containing dimensions for genotyping results of the serotonin recep- ular versions. So it becomes possible to embed every DNAsequence in a tor HTR2a 1438 G > ASNP, subject diagnosis (based on a SCID (Struc- network of other genes to find functional connections, which otherwise tured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders) results)) of alcohol wouldnt have attracted attention. This unique approach is now completed dependence (Dx code = 12) and their rated response to the question; How by a novel tool for visualization of data and for navigation within the net- often do you drink alone? (depicted as alone, 50 = 50 percent of the time). work of physical protein-protein interactions; the NetNavigator. Network Implementing MOLAPcubes containing the dimensions necessary to sup- and navigation tool are provided with an easy to handle user interface, so port complex trait analysis enables us to review the data prior to perform- offering the opportunity for efficient analyses of the growing amount of ing a statistical analysis. functional gene data according to different criteria. The application of Kel- mans tools is exemplified here by means of a case study in the field of P1124. RAMEDIS - Patient Database for Genetic Metabolic neuro-degenerative diseases. The computational protein-protein interac- Diseases on the Internet tion mapping approach uncovered stringent relations between genes U. Mischke1, G. Frauendienst-Egger1, D. Scheible1, T. Tpel2, R. involved in neuro-degenerative pathologies with hereditary background. Hofestdt2, F. K. Trefz1 1Klinik fr Kinder- und Jugendmedizin Reutlingen, Steinenbergstr. 31; P1121.Proteomics Analysis using Web resource 72764 Reutlingen, Germany; 2Institut fr Technische und Betriebliche G. Kadambi Informationssysteme, Otto-von-Guericke-Universitt Magdeburg, Univer- DoubleTwist.com; Oakland, CAUnited States sittsplatz 2; 39106 Magdeburg, Germany geetak@doubletwist.com grn.kkh-rt@t-online.de Proteomics seeks to provide structural and functional information for all Compiling molecular genetic and clinical data of patients with inborn errors proteins, specifically referring to individual genomes. The true value of the of metabolism in a database has become a very efficient tool for genotype- genome sequence information will be realized when a function is assigned phenotype correlation. In addition, epidemiological information can be to all encoded proteins. In our effort to provide a complete solution for drawn. This has been realized for patients with PKU bioinformatics tools we provide online agents and behind the firewall prod- (http;//www.mcgill.ca/pahdb/) and atypical forms with tetrahydrobiopterin ucts. DoubleTwist has partnered with Molecular Simulations Inc (MSI) to deficiency (http;//www.bh4.org./). We developed a database which is not provide on-line bioinformatics tools to help in assigning molecular function limited to data input of only one disease. Using the terminology of our to protein sequences. FoldSearch is the first available Agent. This Agent is knowledgebase METAGENE[1] standardized data input of any genetic built on MSIs SeqFold technology. And provides an ability to search for metabolic disease is possible. Clinical, biochemical, ethnic origin and homologous sequences when sequence identity is too low for standard molecular genetic data are included. RAMEDIS is based on an ORACLE sequence search engines. FoldSearch searches a submitted protein database management system. So far, the data input from three different sequence with a protein folds library curated from the PDB. The Fold- centers in Germany with 20 genetic metabolic diseases and 150 patients Search Agent identifies similar protein sequences bases upon protein pri- are completed. The database will be opened to the scientific community for mary and secondary structure considerations. In my talk I will discuss the data input as an electronic publishing tool. Questions of keeping a high software and the scientific details of FoldSearch and its use via the Inter- quality data input and patients confidentiality will be discussed. [1] Wis- net. senschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Birkenwaldstr.44, D-70191 Stuttgart P1122.ANew Paradigm for Biomarker Identification M. Xiong P1125. Relation Database as an useful tool in genetic study University of Texas-Houston; Houston, TX United States for the Multiple Sclerosis. mxiong@utsph.sph.uth.tmc.edu M. Belotti, G. Motta, I. Prokopenko, C. Montomoli, L. Bernardinelli The identification of specific targets for diagnostic or therapeutic use has Dep. Applied Health Sciences, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy been a principle goal for both clinicians and biomedical researches. So far, belotti@borromeo.unipv.it in biomedical research, major methods for identification of disease genes Data collection, management and control are key stages in the genetic is based on positional cloning, and linkage and linkage disequilibrium study. The relation Database (DB) was set up for the case register of analyses. In this report, a new paradigm, which incorporate feature selec- patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) resident in Nuoro province, Sardinia, tion into gene expression recognition, will be proposed for the discovery of Italy, a sampling frame for epidemiological and genetic study. Clinical, disease genes and biomarkers for diagnosis, drug efficacy and toxicity. demographical and genetic information obtained for MS patients and their The feature selection is defined as selecting a subset of features (genes) families were managed under MS-Access 7.0 software. As to high preva- out of original candidate features that performs the best under some data lence of MS and relatively low population density in Sardinia it was expect- mining systems. Since criterion for feature selection is fundamental to the ed to find many common relatives among patients family members. DB identification of biomarkers, several criteria based on separability and structure was developed with the purpose to analyse extended pedigrees. information measures will be proposed. The wrapper, which involves linear Special tools were developed to export pedigree data into programmes forPosters: Genomics and Bioinformatics 321 genetic analysis. During data insertion DB automatically searches for iden- tural Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, Chest Beatty Laboratory; Lon- tical demographic and personal data, and establishes simple links of the don, United Kingdom type mother - child or father - child between individuals. This tool allows ckwok@hkusua.hku.hk to construct many-generations pedigree for any individual of the DB. At the Hereditary deficiency in human Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase moment DB contains family data for 320 MS patients among 470 in the (G6PD) is estimated to affect about 400 million people world-wide. The case register. 69 multiplex cases of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and higher degree of highest prevalence rates are found in tropical Africa, the Middle East and relationship were found among them. Some of the relationships between sub-tropical Asia, some parts of the Mediterranean and in Papua New individuals were found automatically without knowing them a priori. We Guinea. The most common clinical manifestations of G6PD deficiency are found this relation DB to be the useful tool for data control and manage- neonatal jaundice and acute haemolytic anaemia. AIDBase ; G6PD ment in a genetic study carried out in an archaic, isolated, genetically (http;//www.bioinf.org.uk/g6pd/) is a newly created web-accessible rela- homogeneous, inbred population. It allows us to manage a very complex tional database of human Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) data set that will also include in the future genotyping data. mutations. It integrates mutations at the DNAand protein levels with clini- cal manifestations, references to the biochemical variants initially docu- P1126. Congenital Heart Diseases; Gene Expression Data- mented and structural consequences of the mutations. The database pro- base vides a form for submitting additional mutation data and can perform an S. Sperling1, D. Seelow1, S. Mebus2, P. E. Lange2, H. Lehrach1 automatic analysis of mutations likely to have a significant impact on the 1Max-Planck-Institut fr Molekulare Genetik; Berlin, Germany; 2Deutsches structure of the protein. This procedure identifies mutations which distort Herzzentrum Berlin; Berlin, Germany secondary structure, destroy hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interac- sperling@molgen.mpg.de tions or simply cause bad clashes. Residues involved in the active site and To decipher genes responsible for heart development and malfunction in the dimer interface and residues conserved among the G6PD of different human, we set up a database linking gene expression profiles of myocar- species have also been identified. The database is also linked to other dial samples from patients suffering from congenital heart diseases to the major bioinformatics, mutation, disease and health care databases e.g., anatomical state and clinical data. The samples are processed by complex OMIM, HGMD, HGBASE and PDB, relevant to understanding G6PD defi- RNA hybridisation on cDNA filter containing PCR products of 72.000 ciency and its management. The database can provide both science clones (Human Unigene Set). The filters are exposed in a phosporimager researchers and clinicians insights into the molecular aspects and clinical and automatically assessed. For phenotyping a dedicated diagnostic significance of G6PD deficiency. It also facilitates the understanding of the scheme allows us to distinguish between separate cardiac morphological structure and function relationships of the enzyme. and hemodynamical features rather than to rely exclusively on the diagno- sis. Expression profiles and diagnostic criteria are managed by a non-com- P1129.Identification of candidate genes predisposing to age- mercial database system (MySQL) with a web-based interface. The sys- related macular degeneration by systematic EST based tem permits the search for differentially expressed genes correlated to expression profiling selected cardiac anatomical features, lists all informations available for a H. B. Sthr, H. L. Schulz, N. Mah, B. H. F. Weber gene or clone and integrates our internal database. Furthermore, it will pro- Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany vide links to Internet databases for the sequence of interest. The integra- huge014@rzbox.uni-wuerzburg.de tion of different species (e.g. mouse, rat and zebrafish) is planned for the Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an increasingly common, mul- future. The obtained data should enable us to identify genes involved in tifactorial disorder causing severe vision impairment among the elderly heart development as well as genes responsible for adaptation mechanism population. With no effective therapy available at present, the identification influenced by hemodynamical changes correlated to the heart malforma- of predisposing genetic factors and the determination of their contribution tion. With these data, new targets for cardiac adaptation to common dis- to AMD is urgently needed. Towards this goal, we are pursuing a strategy eases like hypertension or heart failure should be identified. that is based on in silico ESTexpression profiling and which is aimed at the generation of a comprehensive catalogue of genes preferentially active in P1127. Protein structures as indicators of phylogeny; Analy- the human retina. Subsequently, these genes will be assessed in SNP- sis of the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase superfamily based association studies in large AMD cohorts. As a first step retina EST R. Breitling, J. Adamski sampling was performed in the UniGene database and has identified a GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health; Neuherberg, total of 1241 ESTclusters with at least 30% of the ESTs in each cluster Germany originating from retina cDNAlibraries. In a pilot study 180 clusters with breitling@gsf.de varying retina and non-retina ESTcontents were analyzed for their in vitro As part of our attempt to use phylogenetic data for the functional charac- expression by RT-PCR. This approach identified 69 clusters representing terization of novel proteins, we have developed a 3D-structure-based genes with putative retina- or retina/neural- specific transcription. Thus far, approach to establish very ancient divergences within a complex protein six retinal genes have been fully characterized and include four genes with superfamily. In implementing this approach, pairwise superpositions of X- unknown function as well as two genes belonging to well characterized ray structures are used to calculate similarity scores as input for a neigh- gene families. Another three clusters correspond to transcripts previously bour-joining tree-building algorithm. The resulting phylogeny is validated identified by the Kazusa cDNAsequencing project. At least ten of the 69 by comparison with the results of sequence-based algorithms and bio- clusters are located in non-coding regions of known human or rodent chemical data. It is also possible to use the 3D-data as a template for the genes and thus may represent partially spliced transcripts. Extrapolation of reliable determination of the phylogenetic position of novel proteins as a our preliminary results suggests that at least 130 genes within the select- first step towards functional predictions. As an examplary application we ed 1241 ESTclusters may have a specific function in the neuronal tissues have analysed the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenases (SCAD), a large including the retina. and diverse superfamily of ancient origin. Several of its members play a role in human physiology and disease, especially in the metabolism of P1130. A Primary Transcript Map for the Familial Juvenile steroid substrates (e.g. progestins, estrogens, androgens, and corticos- Hyperuricemic Nephropathy (FJHN) Critical Region on Chro- teroids). Their involvement in common human disorders such as cancer, mosome 16 osteoporosis, and Alzheimer disease makes them important candidate P11.2. drug targets. Using the 3D-structure-based approach we were able to dis- B. Stiburkova1, K. Hodanov1, L. Ondrov1, M. Ziknov1, M. Jerbkov1, cern new patterns in the phylogenetic relationships of the SCAD super- M. Nov1, C. Vlcek1, J. Paces1, J. Majewski2, J. Ott2, S. Kmoch1 family, including a basal dichotomy of the 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydro- 1Center for Integrated Genomics; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Rockefeller genases. Using those results as background, we were able to assign unex- University; New York, NYUnited States pected functions to some recently described SCAD members. bstib@lf1.cuni.cz Familial juvenile hyperuricaemic nephropathy (FJHN) is an autosomal P1128.AIDBase ; G6PD, an integrated database for Glucose- dominant renal disease, characterized by juvenile onset of hyperuricemia, 6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) Mutations gouty arthritis and progressive renal failure at an early age. Recently we C. J. Kwok1, A. C. R. Martin2, S. Au3, V. Lam1 have identified a locus for FJHN on chromosome 16p11.2 and found evi- 1Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong; Hong Kong, dence for genetic heterogeneity and reduced penetrance of the disease Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China; 2School of Animal and (Stiburkov et al, (2000) Am J Hum Genet 66;1989-1994). Our results and Microbial Sciences, Whiteknights, University of Reading; Reading, United a recent publication on localization of the FJHN gene in another family Kingdom; 3Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong; (Kamatani et al. (2000) Arthritis Rheum 43; 925-9) have narrowed the 1.7 Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China; and Section of Struc- cM candidate region, between markers D16S403 and D16S3113. BAC322 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics clones spanning approximately 2 Mb of critical region were isolated and a sive accumulation of corneal deposits that begin to appear during the first physical map is constructed using a combination of STS content analysis two decade of life. Progressively these opacities cause serious visual and BAC ends sequencing. Known genomic sequences of the clones were handicaps, often requiring phototherapeutic keratectomy or corneal trans- BLASTed against various ESTand protein databases. So far, these analy- plantation. Asingle gene BIGH3 was identified accounting for all four dis- ses revealed presence of 10 known genes and 69 putative transcripts. Cor- orders - Granular, Lattice type I, Adeline and Reis Buckler and localized on responding ESTclones were isolated and sequenced. Full length cDNAs human chromosome 5. Experiments have been done with different ethnic are currently being PCR-RACEd, sequenced and its expression profiles population to study the hot spot nature of these mutations. We have stud- are studied on a multiple tissue cDNApanel. Genes expressed in the kid- ied a total of 4 families affected with Granular corneal dystrophy (CDGG1), ney are prioritized for mutation analysis in affected pedigrees. Reis Buckler (CDRB) and Lattice type I (CDL1). SSCPanalysis was car- ried out on 47 members of a Reis Buckler family with 10 affected and 21 P1131. A Large Proportion of Coding Region Mutations in affected, 80 unaffected for a Granular corneal dystrophy family and . Medium-Chain Acyl-COA Dehydrogenase (MCAD) Lead to Sequence analysis revealed a R555Q mutation for the CDRB family, Low Levels of mRNA R555W mutation for the CDGG1 families and R124C for the CDL1 family. B. S. Andresen1, K. B. Nielsen2, N. Gregersen3 We carried out haplotype analysis on our individuals which represent Cau- 1Aarhus University; Aarhus, Denmark; 2Institute of Human Genetics and casian and on family from Sri Lanka. Our results support the hot spot the- Research Unit for Molecular Medicine (MMF); Aarhus, Denmark; ory instead of the common ancestor hypothesis to account for the muta- 3Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University; Aarhus, Den- tions. mark brage@biobase.dk P1134. Evidence for a putative cancer associated gene spe- In eukaryotic cells there exist systems that recognize and degrade mRNAs cific to Barretts Oesophageal Cancer at 17 with premature termination codons (PTC). This process is named non- sense mediated decay (NMD). We have studied the possible involvement P13.1 of the NMD system on MCAD mutations. We used analysis of cDNAfrom J. R. Dunn1, B. C. Oates2, J. Garde1, J. R. Gosney3, A. J. M. Watson2, J. >30 unrelated patients to evaluate the effect on mRNAlevels of >20 differ- K. Field1 ent (missense, silent, splice, PTC) MCAD mutations. Most patients are 1University of Liverpool; Liverpool, United Kingdom; 2Department of Medi- compound heterozygotes with the prevalent mutation 985G in one allele. cine, University of Liverpool; Liverpool, United Kingdom; 3Department of Therefore, we could monitor the amounts of mRNAfrom alleles with 20 dif- Pathology, Royal Liverpool University Hospital; Liverpool, United Kingdom ferent mutations using allele specific quantitation in a LightCycler based jrdunn@liv.ac.uk 985G assay. Patients having two PTC mutations were studied by PCR of Allelic imbalance (loss of heterozygosity) studies of 41 markers on chro- cDNAand northern blotting. All PTC mutations located upstream of the last mosome 17 in nineteen Barretts Oesophageal Cancer (BOC) specimens exon resulted in low levels of mRNA, whereas a PTC in the last exon or have identified thirteen common minimally deleted regions (MRs I-XIII). mutation of the translation initiation codon did not affect mRNAamounts. MRs II, VII and VIII are located at the sites of the Tumour Suppressor By adding translation blockers to patient cell cultures we could demon- Genes p53, NF1 and BRCA1 respectively; MRs III, IV, V (C17p), and VI, strate that NMD in MCAD is translation dependent. To our surprise, also IX, XII, XIII (C17q) are novel regions. The highest frequency of loss of het- some of the missense mutations had drastic effects on MCAD mRNA erozygosity (LOH) was observed at MRIII (91%), which is centromeric to amounts. One of the missense mutations, that did not create a pseudos- but distinct from p53. Twenty-three premalignant and BOC tissue samples plice site, resulted in complete exon skipping, and we speculate that it dis- taken throughout the length of five oesophagectomy specimens were also rupts an exonic splice enhancer. Studies employing mini-gene constructs analysed for C17 LOH. We found evidence for a clonal pathway of LOH in is in progress in our laboratory. We speculate that aberrant mRNApro- four specimens that began as one or more small deletions in histological- cessing caused by coding region mutations may be more frequent than ly early tissue, spreading to larger deletions in BOC. LOH at MRIII was previously thought. seen in the histologically earliest tissue in all five specimens. The minimal region at MRIII is 300-400 kb in size, is contained on three BAC clones, P1132. Construction of a Physical Map of the CHRNA7 two of which have been completely sequenced, while sequencing of the Gene/Duplication Region on 15q13-q14 third is underway. Analysis of this sequence data has shown that MRIII A. J. Makoff, B. P. Riley contains at least four characterised genes and a possible further eleven Institute of Psychiatry; London, United Kingdom previously undescribed genes from the ESTdata. We are currently char- a.makoff@iop.kcl.ac.uk acterising these putative cancer associated genes for BOC and investigat- Several linkage studies have implicated markers in the vicinity of the alpha- ing mutation patterns in affected tissue. 7 nicotinic cholinergic receptor subunit gene (CHRNA7) on chromosome 15q13-q14 in both schizophrenia and epilepsy. However, this region is P1135. Candidate gene analysis in the Tylosis Oesophageal complicated by the presence of a partial duplication of exons 5-10 of Cancer (TOC) region on chromosome 17q25 CHRNA7. We have made a detailed study of genomic clones in the human J. Jones1, J. Langan1, K. Evans1, A. Ellis2, J. Field1, J. Risk1 databases to construct a physical map of this complex region. This has 1Liverpool University; Liverpool, United Kingdom; 2Royal Liverpool Univer- identified clones defining three types of gene; CHRNA7, several copies of sity Hospital; Liverpool, United Kingdom a novel putative gene and a hybrid between the two. The upstream j.jones01@liv.ac.uk sequences of the novel and hybrid genes contain four previously identified The association between the autosomal dominant skin disorder, tylosis, exons plus a novel exon. The downstream sequence of the novel gene and oesophageal carcinoma has been identified in 2 large families in the contains three novel exons. The central six exons of this eight exon cas- UK and USAand a smaller German family. The disease locus was mapped sette are part of a 23 exon putative kinase gene on chromosome 3, while by haplotype analysis to chromosome 17q25. Physical mapping shows the 5- and 3-most exons are found only on chromosome 15. Afourth, less that the 0.5Mb minimal region is covered contiguously by 3 BAC clones. conserved copy of most of this cassette has also been identified on a dif- The sequence data for 2/3 of this region is available in the public domain ferent chromosome 15 segment. We have constructed a >2.8 Mb physical and analysis has been carried out using the NIX suite of programs avail- map of the region from BAC and PAC sequences deposited in databases. able from the UK Human Genome Mapping Project (HGMP). NIX analysis The map places the partial duplication in opposite orientation to CHRNA7. identified at least 10 characterised candidate genes in the TOC minimal Together, the data support an evolutionary model involving a large deletion region and at least 40 other, previously uncharacterised, gene fragments. followed by a further rearrangement, giving rise to the partial duplication of GalNAcI alpha 2-6 sialyl transferase and GalNAcII alpha 2-6 sialyl trans- CHRNA7. This physical map shows the complexity of the CHRNA7 region ferase (SThM) map to the proximal end of the TOC minimal region and and the highly duplicated and repetitive nature of its large-scale structure. may be involved in the development of cancer. The intron/exon structure of the genes was confirmed by ESTalignment using Sequencher. Both genes P1133. Identification and Characterization of mutations in were analysed for polymorphisms and mutations in the coding regions families affected with Corneal dystrophy. using family members. Two polymorphisms were identified in SThM in the N. S. Udar, S. Sheikhavandi, S. Yelchits, R. Silva-Garcia, M. Chalukya, V. 5UTR and intron 7 but these were shown not to be tylosis specific. Expres- Yellore, K. Small sion data for both genes in a variety of normal and tumour tissues will also UCLASchool of Medicine; Los Angeles, CAUnited States be presented. The criteria used to select further candidate genes for analy- Nitin@ucla.edu sis will be discussed. Agroup of four corneal dystrophies inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern are characterized by bilaterally symmetrical disorder with progres-Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics 323 P1136. Exclusion of six candidate genes in distal hereditary ly well developed, the successful identification of genes in a complex trait motor neuropathy type II linked to chromosome 12q24. is still difficult to predict. Direct application of the LD (linkage and associa- J. I. Irobi, E. Nelis, J. Meuleman, K. Venken, E. De Vriendt, P. De Jonghe, tion analysis) have proven difficult for complex traits due to combined C. Van Broeckhoven, V. Timmerman action of multiple genes influenced by environmental factors. The single- Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for marker LD methods cannot fully describe possible association(s) in an Biotechnology (VIB), Department of Neurology, University Hospital entire chromosomal region. To increase the statisticical power to detect the Antwerp (UZA), University of Antwerp (UIA); Antwerpen, Belgium presence of a disease locus (loci) the LD analysis can be extended from jirobi@uia.ua.ac.be single marker to multiple-marker haplotypes. In general, we do not have a Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (distal HMN) are clinically and genet- precise chromosomal location of the disease-susceptibility locus (loci) forc- ically heterogeneous and are divided in seven subtypes according to mode ing us to search through all possible haplotypes surrounding multiple loca- of inheritance, age at onset and clinical evolution. We performed a tions as well as spanning them. To understand and estimate structure and genome-wide search in a multigenerational Belgian pedigree with autoso- parameters within the genetic architecture of quantitative traits we have mal dominant distal HMN type II. Significant linkage was obtained between developed a method based on fuzzy logic, discovery of recurrent patters markers D12S86 and D12S340, suggesting that a gene causing distal and multilocus haplotypes, and applied to the case-control association HMN II is located on chromosome 12q24.3. In a previous mutation analy- study for family and sporadic occurrence of the prostate cancer. Results sis we were able to exclude the human phospholipase A2 gene (PLA2A) suggest that combining the application of the fuzzy logic, pattern recogni- as the responsible gene for distal HMN II. Here we report the exclusion of tion and multi-markers LD methods with large numbers of (SNP) markers six other known genes, all located within the distal HMN II region; Two should enable identification of patterns of genetics instability with potential cytoskeletal proteins; (paxillin and restin), acidic ribosomal phosphoprotein prognostic, diagnostic and disease-susceptibility loci utility. (RPLP0) and nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NM23-NDP Kinase), and two ESTs; one homologous to a human G- protein-coupled receptor P1139. Genopure - A novel magnetic bead DNA purification (HM74) gene and the other to a human voltage-gated calcium channel system for MALDI-TOF MS analysis beta subunit (CACN3). The coding region of these positional as well as U. Rapp1, M. Kostrzewa1, J. Bimmler1, I. Thomas1, T. Wenzel1, E. Nord- functional candidate genes for distal HMN II, were analysed in patients and hoff2, H. Rauth2, T. Frhlich1 healthy individuals for possible mutations. DNA sequence analysis was 1Bruker Saxonia Analytik GmbH, Bioanalytics; Leipzig, Germany; 2Max- performed but no disease causing mutations in any of the six genes could Planck-Institute of Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany be identified, excluding them as disease-causing gene for distal HMN II AKR@bdal.de MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry has a high potential for high throughput P1137.Acomplete gene catalogue of human Xp11.4 harboring DNAanalyses because of its accuracy, speed, automation capabilities, and disease loci for diabetes mellitus type I, mental retardation cost-effectiveness. Unfortunately, molecular biological reactions are per- and retinal disturbances formed in the presence of high amounts of salts and detergents which form J. Ramser1, G. Wen2, Y. Demirci3, H. Achatz1, S. Engert1, C. Pusch4, I. adducts with DNA or interfere with matrix crystallization, respectively. Martinez Garay5, A. Hardcastle6, K. Badenhoop7, M. Gorin3, M. Platzer2, A. Therefore, effective DNApurification is indispensable for successful and Meindl1 valid MALDI-TOF MS analysis. We present a novel magnetic DNApurifi- 1Ludwig Maximilians University; Munich, Germany; 2Institute for Molecular cation system which gives excellent results in subsequent mass spectro- Biotechnology; Jena, Germany; 3Department of Ophthalmology and metric measurement. Small double stranded PCR products were precipi- Human Genetics; Pittsburgh, PAUnited States; 4Universitaets-Augenklinik; tated on paramagnetic beads using an appropriate binding solution. The Tuebingen, Germany; 5Universidad de Valencia; Valenica, Spain; 6Univer- binding of DNAto the particles did not require any labeling of primers or sity of London; London, United Kingdom; 7University of Frankfurt; Frank- dNTPs. After several washing steps with buffers containing either ethanol furt, Germany or isopropanol, DNA was eluted and measured with 3-HPA matrix in a juliane@pedgen.med.uni-muenchen.de MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer. Residual PCR primers were removed Different disease entities like two syndromic forms of mental retardation, while PCR products down to about 50 bp in size were recovered with high diabetes mellitus type I and two eye diseases have been mapped to the yield. Quality of the acquired spectra was superior to that of alternative short arm of the X-chromosome including the Xp11.4 region. In order to purification protocols. Alternatively, eluted PCR-Products were used for isolate genes, involved in these conditions, we have constructed a com- subsequent reactions like primer extension or restriction enzyme digest. plete BAC/PAC-contig for the Xp11.4 region between markers DXS8025 Primer extension products or very small restriction enzyme digest products and DXS228 encompassing about 3.0 Mb. For the proximal part of this (about 20 bp) were again purified by the magnetic bead system to MALDI region, between DXS993 and DXS228, a complete transcription map was quality with high recovery using a dedicated binding buffer. The combina- established. Six distinct genes were found in this 1.5 Mb large interval, four tion of both purification procedures enabled the genotyping of SNPs by of them were screened for mutations in patients with the complete form of performing PCR, purification of the PCR product, primer extension or congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB1). Anovel gene termed NYX digest, and clean-up of the allele specific products in one reaction tube. (Nyctalopin on X chromosome) was found to be mutated in CSNB1 fami- High quality spectra could be acquired for several model systems allowing lies (Pusch et al., Nature Genetics 2000). NYX is widely and low expressed the unambiguous determination of genotypes. The bead handling can eas- and codes for a 481 amino acid protein (nyctalopin). In order to identify ily be automated on standard pipetting robots thereby enabling the pro- candidate genes for X-linked cone dystrophy (COD1), we are now cessing of thousands of samples per day. analysing the 1.5 Mb large distal part of the contig (DXS8025-DXS993). Sequence analysis resulted in the identification of three genes so far. They P1140.High-throughput Mutation Detection and Screening by escape X-inactivation and are currently screened for mutations in COD1 Constant Denaturant Capillary Array Electrophoresis families. Genes isolated from this region will also, together with genes from M. Minarik1,1, J. Bjrheim2, K. Dains1, M. Mahtani1, P. Ekstrm2 the adjacent fully characterized Xp21.1 region, be evaluated for variants in 1Molecular Dynamics; Sunnyvale, CA United States; 2The Norwegian patients suffering from diabetes mellitus type I. Finally, all genes from the Radiumhospital; Oslo, Norway Xp11.4 region and from the proximally located regions Xp11.3 and marek.minarik@am.apbiotech.com Xp11.23, can be screened for mutations in Prieto- and Renpennning syn- Project Description; drome, respectively. The discovery of low frequency DNApoint mutations and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) presents one of the major challenges in genetic P1138.Application of fuzzy logic to haplotype pattern mining analysis in the post-genome era. Among various techniques, constant- in case-control study denaturant capillary electrophoresis (CDCE, introduced in 1994 by Khrap- B. A. Skierczynski1, C. Nguyen1, M. Blumenfeld2, M. Torre1, I. Chu- ko et al.) is a viable tool for mutation detection. CDCE offers a high degree makov2, J. Link1, D. Cohen2 of sensitivity as well as ability to detect low level mutations. The CDCE 1Genset Corp.; La Jolla, CAUnited States; 2Genset SA; Paris, France instrument reported in the literature did not have any automatisation with skierb@genxy.com regard to change of polymer and loading of sample. Consequently running Most human cancers (and other complex diseases) are characterized by large number of samples was laborious and time consuming. genomic instability. The genetic events underlying its development are The present work describes a transfer of established CDCE technology to poorly understood. In a majority of cases, cancer does not occur as a sim- the multicapillary array format enabling an increase in sample throughput ple mongenic disease with clear Mendelian inheritance. Results through- that is required for large scale mutation detection and screening. In this ini- out literature support the view of multigenic etiology for complex diseases. tial work, the main emphasis was towards the optimization of the separa- While the methodology for the mapping of Mendelian disorders is relative- tion of wildtype homoduplex and mutant homoduplex and heteroduplexes324 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics by determining the optimal temperature in a step-wise fashion. The sepa- between SNPs and phenotypes requires high-throughput, high-density rating conditions for the fragment were achieved with a combination of SNPdetection systems enabling hundreds or thousands of SNPs per sam- denaturing capacity of LPAmatrix and elevated capillary temperature. ple to be genotyped in a low cost, robust fashion. Orchid BioSciences has Here we present data using high-throughput CDCE technology to identify developed the SNPcode(TM) system, combining Orchids SNP-IT(TM) point mutations in exon 1 of the k-rasgene. The samples analyzed were primer extension genotyping assay with the GenFlex(TM) Tag Array chip obtained from colorectal carcinoma patients previously described and ana- from Affymetrix. The result is a versatile genotyping system capable of lyzed by manual CDCE. The main objective of this study was to elucidate scoring from hundreds to thousands genotypes on a single chip. The inher- the feasibility of transferring the CDCE technique from a single to multi- ent generic design of the chip allows the user to adapt any SNPloci of capillary platform. In addition, the detection sensitivity was measured by interest to this platform. The SNPcode system utilizes a bifunctional SNP- identifying a number of mutants included in a wildtype population. ITprimer with the 3 sequence complementary to the SNP-containing PCR amplicon, and the 5 sequence complementary to one of the 2000 unique P1141. FP-TDI; A high-throughput, homogeneous assay for tag sequences on the GenFlex chip. The assay protocol begins with multi- SNPgenotyping coupled with effective data management. plex PCR amplification, followed by multiplexed solution-phase SNP-IT S. F. A. Grant, R. Kern, K. Kumpf, B. Mller-Myhsok, R. Tolle primer extension. The SNP-ITproducts are hybridized to the chip, sorting LION Bioscience; Heidelberg, Germany the multiplex reaction by hybridization of the specific tags on each SNP-IT struan.grant@lionbioscience.com primer to its unique complement on the chip. More than 1000 SNPs have With the increasing demand for higher throughput SNPgenotyping, many been analyzed on the system to date. We will present use of this new technologies have become available or are currently in the development genotyping system in comparison to results collected on other genotyping pipeline. However, with such large volumes of information, robust data platforms. management is crucial for subsequent statistical analysis. We have adopted the Perkin Elmer Wallac Victor2V multilabel counter for P1144. Genome Wide SNP Detection Using Subtraction a template-directed dye-terminator incorporation assay with fluorescence Remainder Quantification Analysis and DNA Sorting on polarization (FP- TDI) detection. As there are no instrument-specific appli- Microbeads. cation notes for this SNPgenotyping methodology, filters and instrument C. Dando, K. Locke, R. Fu, E. Beilharz, S. Brenner, G. Albrecht settings had to be experimentally validated. Consequently, by using a spe- Lynx; Hayward, CAUnited States cific combination of filters, we have observed consistent discrimination cdando@lynxgen.com through a 2-dye approach with a 1 second read per well. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) represent powerful markers for To aid high-throughput screening, we have maximized the homogeneity of the mapping of genes and mutations related to important traits, diseases the assay by employing a standard touchdown protocol for all PCRs. This and for the study of pharmacogenetics. We describe our Megatype tech- approach has been designed to ensure specific and maximum PCR yield nology that permits the identification of SNPs that are differentially repre- in a limited primer and ddNTPconcentration environment. In addition, fol- sented in two populations without the need for prior knowledge of the SNP lowing the optimization with 96 well plate assays, the system has been sequences. Genomic DNAfragments that exhibit a specific class of SNPs successfully scaled up to a 384 well plate assay format. are selected using our proprietary method and loaded on to microbeads From the resulting data, a SNPgenotype can be efficiently assigned to an using our Megaclone technology as described in Brenner et al, PNAS. individual through a graphical visualization tool that clusters the genotypes. 97;1665-1670 (2000). DNAprobes which reflect the allelic frequencies of This tool is part of a single platform with multiple views designed to handle the different SNPbearing fragments in each population are then prepared both SNPand microsatellite data. The data is then subjected to a set of rig- from the two different sample sources using the same proprietary method orous tests including control value checks, pedigree checking and an and tagged with two different, but complementary adapter sequences. In analysis of individual/marker history to determine if conflicting genotypes order to reduce the complexity of human probe libraries we first fractionate exist. Based on these checks plus samples that did not yield a clear geno- the probe by using a similar but less complex library to capture relevant type, a repeat plate is proposed by the system to allow minimum effort in sequences. To increase the sensitivity of subsequent analysis competitive assembly for the laboratory. Finally, the data can be exported in linkage for- hybridization of the tagged probes to the target DNAon microbeads results mat for haplotype and statistical analysis. in a 3 bp, 3-end overhang. Ligase is added to the beads such that the two Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion complementary 3 overhang sequences undergo intra-bead ligation. Mole- Methods to Detect Genomic Variation cules remaining following intra-bead ligation represent the molar excess of probe from the sample source. The allelic frequency of these sequences P1142. SNPstream(TM) 5K, a Microsphere-based System for can then be measured by the addition of a pair of fluorescently labeled de- Determination of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms by Primer coder molecules, followed by analysis and sorting by flow cytometry. Extension Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion M. A. Kunkel, R. Liberchuk, C. A. Gelfand, M. Boyce-Jacino Methods to Detect Genomic Variation Orchid BioSciences, Inc.; Princeton, NJ United States mkunkel@orchid.com P1145.High-throughput, automated methods for targeted Sin- The accelerating interest in single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) geno- gle Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) discovery typing and the sweeping pharmacogenetic implications of correlating J. V. Platko, R. J. Prill, T. Lavery, A. Rachupka, R. Onofrio, D. Richter, J. SNPs to phenotypes have resulted in the need for simple, highly accurate Ireland, M. Cargill, E. S. Lander SNP genotyping methods. Orchid BioSciences has developed Whitehead Institute, Center for Genome Research; Cambridge, MAUnited SNPstream(TM) 5K, an adaptation of Orchids SNP-IT(TM) primer exten- States sion genotyping assay to Luminexs novel microsphere-based assay plat- platko@genome.wi.mit.edu form. Asignificant benefit of the system is its ability to rapidly analyze mul- Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common form of tiplexed solution-phase SNP-IT(TM) assays. The result is highly accurate variation in the human genome and are amenable to high-throughput SNPgenotyping system that maintains the flexibility to adapt to virtually genotyping methods. Powerful approaches are being used to discover any SNPloci of interest. The advantages of this microsphere-based sys- hundreds of thousands of SNPs randomly distributed across the genome. tem will be described, along with multiplex genotyping, reproducibility, and Our group has taken a targeted approach in order to discover SNPs in accuracy results achieved with the system. specific genes and genomic regions from selected individuals. The poly- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion morphisms we discover are used as genetic markers to investigate human Methods to Detect Genomic Variation history, evolution, disease, and population structure. Designing an efficient, high-throughput system for targeted SNPdiscovery has held many chal- P1143.The SNPcode(TM) Genotyping System; AGeneric Sys- lenges. These include retrieving sequences for genes of interest, design- tem for SNPGenotyping on High Density Arrays ing primers for PCR amplification, designing and managing a laboratory M. A. Donaldson, J. A. Lathrop, C. A. Gelfand, M. T. Boyce-Jacino workflow, and analyzing and interpreting the resulting data. We screened Orchid BioSciences, Inc.; Princeton, NJ United States over 2600 genes by designing primers from mRNA sequence and mdonaldson@orcbid.com sequencing cDNAtemplates. Now that the human genome sequence is With the completion of the Human Genome Project, a substantial need to nearing completion, we initiated the use of genomic DNAas the template. obtain rapid, low cost information on genetic variations has emerged. Sin- We adapted software to separate an mRNA sequence into exons for gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are being shown in ever increasing primer design. We found that genomic DNAbased PCR has a product 92% numbers to correlate to medically relevant conditions, such as adverse of the time compared to 66% for the cDNAbased assay. The success rates drug response or predisposition to disease. Understanding the correlations for sequencing these PCR products also differ between the two methodsPosters: Genomics and Bioinformatics 325 (89% for DNA, 70% for cDNA). Once sequencing is complete, we analyze labeling, hybridization conditions, and data analysis. Examples of microar- the results using the automated program, Polyphred. We currently cover at ray performance will be shown for the analysis of gene expression. least 48Kb per person per week. Information on all aspects of our system from genomic sequence through polymorphisms is entered into databases P1149. Using Lab On A Chip Technology to Assess Sample and can be retrieved by both laboratory personnel and researcher. As of Quality for Microarrays 12/15/00, our lab discovered and validated over 4400 polymorphisms that D. Vitale, D. Ilsley, K. Hahnenberger have been applied to studies on human populations and disease. Agilent Technologies; Palo Alto, CAUnited States Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion deborah_vitale@agilent.com Methods to Detect Genomic Variation Microarray technology enables parallel measurement of thousands of expressed genes while minimizing sample consumption. One important P1146. Multiplex SNP scoring of cardiovascular candidate step in the microarray process is sample preparation. Lab-on-a-Chip tech- genes by a novel labeling strategy and microcapillary elec- nology provides a complete solution to improving sample preparation for trophoresis. DNAmicroarrays by identifying potential problems that may result in poor C. Virgos, M. Pho, A. Sassi, T. Matray, J. Wei, J. Wu, D. Dutta, S. Leon, array performance. For example, RNApreparations that are degraded or S. Muley, S. Williams, S. Singh, E. S. Mansfield, M. T. Cronin contain ribosomal RNAor genomic DNAmay result in poor probe labeling ACLARABiosciences Inc; Mountain View, CAUnited States and can easily be identified using the RNA6000 kit. Fluorescently labeled cvirgos@aclara.com probe preparations that may result in poor array performance can also be An increasing number of SNP scoring methods to support association determined. The Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer rapidly analyzes RNAprepara- studies and specific genotyping panels used for phenotype prediction are tions for integrity, yield, and genomic DNAcontamination. Information with being developed. These methods will have to meet stringent requirements regard to amount, size, and the degree of purification of fluorescently of high-throughput, accuracy, flexibility and reduced cost. By combining a labeled cDNAand cRNAprobes can also be obtained and strongly corre- proprietary new probe labeling strategy (eTag[TM] reporters) with existing, lates to array performance. robust genotyping biochemistry such as TaqMan[R], ACLARABiosciences is developing a flexible, multiplex assay format for multiplex SNPscoring. P1150.Statistical Inference in Array Genomics In the eTag label strategy, each probe of a multiplexed set is labeled with R. Nadon1, P. Shi1, E. Woody2, H. Hubschle1, N. Rghei1, P. Ramm1 a fluorogenic eTag, which has a unique and characterized electrophoretic 1Imaging Research Inc.; St. Catharines, ON Canada; 2University of Water- mobility. Following the reaction, the cleaved eTags are separated by elec- loo; Waterloo, ON Canada trophoresis and genotyping information is obtained by interpretation of the robert.nadon@imaging.brocku.ca obtained electropherograms. Specific genotyping panels can be construct- Gene expression arrays present unique challenges for statistical inference. ed by selection from a library of characterized eTags. Additional eTags sets The typically small number of replicated expression values in array studies can be used as internal control markers. We are currently optimizing the make the use of standard parametric statistical tests problematic. Such SNPassay using the eTag approach for analysis on both commercial cap- tests have low sensitivity and return potentially inaccurate probability val- illary electrophoresis instrumentation (ABI 310 and ABI 3100) and our own ues. We present novel alternative statistical inference procedures which plastic, multichannel LabCard[TM] devices. Multiplex SNPanalysis of syn- circumvent these difficulties. The procedures stem from the concept that thetic target and genomic DNAfor the cardiovascular targets LPA, ApoA4, each gene represents an individual experiment. Accordingly, arrays pres- ApoB, ApoE and CETPwill be discussed. ent large numbers of small sample experiments tested under the same conditions. Given this, it should be possible to pool the random error esti- P1147.Direct IBD Mapping; Gene Mapping Using Microarrays mates across all genes. We have developed two variants of the pooled D. Smirnov, S. Narasimhan, T. Weber, A. Bruzel, V. Cheung error method, which we refer to as common error and fitted, to estimate Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia; Philadelphia, PAUnited States random error associated with each transcript. Our pooled error methods dsmirnov@mail.sas.upenn.edu estimate random error from the entire array and can function with as few Genomic mismatch scanning (GMS) is a hybridization-based gene map- as two replicates. Because our random error estimates are based on large ping method, which allows selective recovery of genomic DNAfragments samples, they provide more accurate and precise estimates than other that are identical-by-descent (IBD) between two individuals. During GMS methods. With these accurate error estimates in hand, classical statistical procedure, restriction-digested genomic DNAfrom two subjects are dena- techniques can be applied to array analyses, providing statistical tests that tured, mixed and allowed to reanneal to form heterohybrids. Homohybrids are sensitive to small differences in expression. The methods will be illus- and mismatch-containing heterohybrids are then selectively removed by trated with experimental data. treatment with methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes, exonuclease, and Escherichia coli mismatch repair proteins. The isolated DNAfragments P1151.Making DNAmicroarrays  optimisation and compari- can be then mapped to their genomic regions by genotyping with son of various DNAimmobilisation strategies microsatellite markers, however genomic microarrays can be used to map L. Ondrov1,2, M. Nova1, M. Jerabkova1,2, M. Hrebicek1,2,3, S. Kmoch1,2,3 IBD DNAmuch more efficiently. The combination of GMS and IBD mapping 1Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders; 1st Faculty of Medicine; using genomic microarrays is known as direct IBD mapping. To allow Prague, Czech Republic; 2Center for Integrated Genomics; Prague, Czech mapping any disease genes, one needs a set of well-characterized Republic; 3GeneAge Technologies; Prague, Czech Republic genomic clones. Currently, in our laboratory, a mapping project, which will londr@lf1.cuni.cz produce a set of well-characterized BAC clones covering entire human Efficient and uniform immobilisation of target DNAmolecules onto a glass genome at ~ 1 Mb resolution, enters its final phase. Mapped BAC clones surface is one of the critical steps in making DNAmicroarrays and is cen- will be placed in map order onto a DNA microarrays. This allows easy tral to the quality of the resulting data. We have adopted and compared determination of the genomic address of DNAfragments isolated through immobilisation of amino-modified DNA onto a poly-L-lysine and 3-glyci- the GMS procedure. Here we will discuss potential applications and exper- doxypropyltrimethoxysilane-modified glass surfaces, disulphide-modified imental specifics of direct IBD mapping. DNAonto a 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane-modified glass surface and a disulphide-modified DNA covalently cross-linked to 3-mercaptopropy- P1148. Use of Custom, in situ Synthesized, Oligonucleotide ltrimethoxysilane onto unmodified glass surface. Individual chemistries Arrays in Gene Expression Analysis were tested with Cy5 and Cy3 labelled PCR products or Cy5 labelled A. B. Lucas, S. Y. Fujimoto, P. DAndrade, Z. A. Keval, A. Franke, L. N. Liu, oligonucleotides. Target DNA was spotted by GeneSurfer arrayer D. Q. Bi (GeneAge Technologies) and individual reaction steps were followed by Protogene Laboratories, Inc.; Menlo Park, CAUnited States IVLlaser scanner (Genomic Solution). Our experience showed that pub- alucas@protogene lished immobilisation protocols were usable only after careful optimisation. Microarray expression analysis has become one of the most widely used Poly-L-lysine chemistry is useful for binding of amino-modified and even of functional genomics tools. We have developed the use of surface tension non-modified DNA. However, blocking procedure limits its application only patterns on glass slides to allow the in situsynthesis of arrays of oligonu- for hybridisation experiment. Disulphide chemistry is applicable for both cleotides directly on the glass surface using ink jet technology to dispense hybridisation and primer extension experiments. Procedure is fast, effec- reagents. This versatile method offers the ability to customize the arrays at tive and cheap what makes it preferable for high-throughput array produc- the time of synthesis, and allows precise feature placement and morphol- tion. ogy. This control, and the ability to create arrays of Tm-matched oligonu- cleotides, gives excellent performance and quantification in hybridization reactions. Our group has optimized aspects of target preparation and326 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics P1152. Improved background correction for spotted DNA P1155.Association studies in pharmacogenomics-how valid microarrays are they? C. Kooperberg L. J. Sheffield1,2, S. Forrest1, P. Ioannou1, N. Cranswick1,3 Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Seattle, WAUnited States 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute; Parkville, Australia; 2University of clk@fhcrc.org Melbourne; Parkville, Australia; 3Royal Childrens Hospital; Melbourne, Most microarray scanning software for glass spotted arrays provides esti- Australia mates for the intensity for the foreground and background of two chan- sheffld@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au nels for every spot. The common approach in further analyzing such data An exciting promise of pharmacogenomics research is to develop gene is to first subtract the background from the foreground for each channel, tests that will predict which individuals are at increased risk of side effects and to use the ratio of these two results as the estimate of the expression and which individuals will benefit most from each specific drug. Association level. The resulting ratios are, after possible averaging over replicates, the studies are often used. Atarget group is selected (eg those with abnormal usual inputs for further data analysis, such as clustering. If with this back- drug clearance and/ or side effects) and they are compared with a control ground correction procedure the foreground intensity was smaller than the group with no side effects or normal clearance. We discuss the issues background intensity for a channel that spot (on that array) yields no relating to selecting these groups and what sample size is required. It is usable data. In this paper it is argued that this preprocessing leads to esti- important to know the population distribution of the polymorphisms being mates of the expression that have a much larger variance than needed studied and if possible select the control group from this population so the when the expression levels are low. design becomes a nested case-control study. This allows true estimates of the risks for target group for each allele type. The presentation will discuss P1153.Serial Analysis of Gene Expression using the Applied various methods for adjusting for population admixture such as matching Biosystems Capillary Electrophoresis Platforms case and control or alternatively using family based studies such as the K. M. Gunning TDTtest. Once a suspected polymorphism is identified there needs to be Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CAUnited States collaborative studies to verify the findings. An alternative is to examine if GunninKM@appliedbiosystems.com the polymorphism found to be important actually affects gene function. We In todays genomic age, the draft completion of the human genome has have developed an in vitro method, of inserting a particular single base allowed researchers access to a wealth of information with respect to gene change into a gene and studying the change in function using an attached identity and gene expression profiles. Scientists have developed novel reporter molecule ways in which to elucidate this information and SAGE is deemed one of the more comprehensive methods available for rapid, detailed analysis of P1156.Measuring the affects of aneuploidy; gene expression large numbers of cellular transcripts. To further enhance the rapidity at differences between Down syndrome and normal human fetal which one can determine this global gene expression profile, one needs brain more efficient and precise methods for analyzing these transcripts and for R. Lyle1, P. Chanson1, C. Gehrig1, H. S. Scott2, S. E. Antonarakis1 assessing their abundance. Automated capillary electrophoresis provides 1University of Geneva Medical School; Geneva, Switzerland; 2The Walter a platform whereby the sequence of these many transcripts can be deter- and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Victoria, Australia mined with speed and precision. The ABI PRISM 3700 and the ABI PRISM Robert.Lyle@medecine.unige.ch 3100, the most recent addition to the CE family of platforms, provide the Down syndrome (DS) or Trisomy 21 is the most common genetic cause of SAGE researcher with a means by which they can determine quickly and mental retardation, occuring in approximately 1/700 live births. In addition, reliably, the transcript information necessary to build these gene expres- there are other neurological phenotypes associated with DS, including sion profiles. These platforms partnered with the uniformity of signal brachycephaly, microcephaly and early onset Alzheimers like desease. strength and length of read of BigDye terminators, are the efficient solu- The presence of an extra copy of certain but not all of the approximately tion for large scale transcript analysis using the SAGE method. We will 250 genes on HC21 is likely to contribute to the DS phenotype. However, demonstrate the ease of use and flexibility of these platforms as a pre- the effect of each of these gene products to the specific phenotypes could ferred method for the sequence analysis of ditags in the SAGE process. be either direct of indirect through processes that affect the expression of other genes or gene products. This hypothesis leads to the need for the P1154.Hazardous Waste-Associated Acquired Genetic Disor- exploration of global gene expression studies in cells and tissues from indi- ders viduals with DS and from model organisms (see also Chrast et al. this G. McKinstry meeting). Our aim is to use techniques available for measuring global gene Gene Amplification; Dunwoody, GAUnited States expression (SAGE, macroarrays and microarrays) to analyse the differ- gmckinst@bellsouth.net ences in gene expression in aneuploid versus normal mammalian brain Gene Amplification is an environmental consulting agency located in a cells to identify genes and pathways with altered expression levels in DS northern suburb of Atlanta. The company is 14 years old. Recently, the phenotypes. Here we describe results using large nylon macroarrays that company has focused on genomics and bioinformatics. Of great interest contain over 30 000 human genes to analyse gene expression differences has been acquired genetic disorders due to exposure of humans living between DS versus normal human fetal brain at 20 weeks of gestation. We around uncontrolled hazardous waste sites. There has been much atten- have identified a number of genes which show consistent changes within tion given to the exposure problem in the United states [( Agency for Toxic different DS and normal samples and are confirming these changes by Substances and Disease Registries (ATSDR), Environmental Protection Northern blot and RNase protection. Comparison of data from human and Agency (EPA), National Research Council (NRC)] and to serious environ- mouse models of DS, as well as data from different techniques (SAGE), mental cleanup efforts (Superfund Sites). Popular Superfund sites have will enable us to identify the most important genes and pathways involved included Love Canal, New York, Woburn, Massachusetts, Hinckley, in the DS neurological phenotype. California, and Toms River, New Jersey. Other cancer-related hotspots have been recently highlighted (USATODAY, October 5, 2000). There is P1157. Performance Evaluation Of A Novel Application For serious concern for those individuals exposed to toxic wastes and their Comparative Dna Sequencing Analysis And Mutation Detec- genetic-related health problems. Increased occurrences of childhood tion. leukemias, brain cancers, liver cancers, breast and ovarian cancers, gas- C. Kosman trointestinal cancers, miscarrages, birth defects and low-birth-weight Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CAUnited States babies all have been found associated with uncontrolled hazardous waste kosmanca@appliedbiosystems.com sites. Gene Therapy, Genetic Testing and Prenatal Diagnosis are new We have developed a new practical application for comparative DNA medical procedures that can be applied to deal with hazardous waste sequencing analysis. The focus of this new application is the discovery or associated acquired genetic disorders (HWAAGD). A database identification of sequence variants in a data set of sequence derived from (HWAAGD) is being compiled and HWAAGD models formulated showing a single locus in various individuals. This tool allows for the rapid and accu- how these new genetic procedures can be used to deal with cases report- rate analysis, and alignment of multiple sequence comparisons containing ed for completed exposure pathway sites. Weekly environmental updates mixed-base positions against a reference sequence. This application uses are also provided at www.geneamplificationintl.com highlighting these procedures and algorithms better suited to the unique nature of compara- and other environmental -related issues. These updates can be easily tive sequencing data. Specifically, the prior knowledge of a reference downloaded to most computer printers. sequence available in many comparative sequencing projects is used to streamline and automate portions of the analysis. In addition, new algo- rithms were developed that leverage the high degree of sequence similar- ity found in comparative sequencing applications to aid in the analysis. ThePosters: Genomics and Bioinformatics 327 software performs sequence analysis and aligns the analyzed sequence to homology to the human Unigene set could be detected, and which fulfilled a reference sequence. It also aligns imported sequences that contain vari- the arguments mentioned above. These candidates are presently under ants. It will then analyze the compared sequences, provide protein trans- investigation. lation and report the analysis in a convenient format. Here, we present the Results are stored in The Integrated X chromosome Database (IXDB, results from the performance evaluation of this new software tool on sev- http;//ixdb.molgen.mpg.de/). In addition to our own mapping and in-silico eral types of comparative sequencing data sets. For these analyses, this data IXDB integrates data from other public databases as well as data from new application produced results concordant with those previously the EC Transcript Map Consortium. Nine chromosome spanning and obtained using standard DNA analysis tools while providing substantial eleven contig maps can be viewed. performance advantages over these tools. In all cases the analyses were completed in significantly less time and required less manual manipulation P1160.AComprehensive BAC Resource of the data. The innovative approaches employed in this tool result in less S. Zhao user intervention needed to achieve improved mutation detection. The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR); Rockville, MD United States szhao@tigr.org P1158. Automatic method to construct complete genome Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) clones carry large insert (80-300 high-resolution physical maps integrating data from different kb) and are used by large genome centers and small laboratories. Human sources Genome Project and other research projects have generated extensive J. Sainz, S. Gudjonsson, G. Sigurdsson, K. Agnarsson, O. Atladottir, U. maps, sequences, annotation and function information for many BACs. Benitez, S. Einarsson, H. Magnusson, K. Mylonas, G. Thorisson, D. The data are extremely valuable. However, currently, different pieces of Oskarsson, K. Stefansson, J. Gulcher information are scattered over different places and an integration of the Decode Genetics; Reykjavik, Iceland existing data for each BAC is lacking. Researchers have to spend signifi- sainz@decode.is cant amount of time searching for information of the BACs that they are We constructed a high resolution physical map of the human genome interested in, and often are unable to obtain a complete picture that some- including markers and genes using a method that integrates data from dif- times results in duplication of efforts. Although a few sites start to offer a ferent sources. We store the data in relational databases (Oracle and more complete set of data for human BACs, these resources are aimed to Access) and use queries that process and analyze the data to construct facilitate the collaboration among genome centers to finish the human physical maps integrating all available information. We integrated data genome and therefore are not easy to use by the general research com- generated in our group with data from the public domain. We used the fin- munity. In order to utilize the massive data efficiently and to realize the ulti- gerprinting contig database from Washington University and the Sanger mate goals of the genome projects, a centralized place that gathers, inte- Center, and the Human Genome Project Working Draft sequence from the grates and makes the data easily accessible is greatly needed. Towards University of California at Santa Cruz. We generated hybridization data this end, we build a comprehensive BAC resource for species including with 8.040 microsatellite markers versus BACs from the RPCI-11 library. human, mouse, rat, and zebrafish. The current database contains over Electronic PCR versus the human genome draft sequence was performed 630,000 human BACs and 265,000 mouse BACs that are mapped, with with approximately 1,000.000 markers designed from BAC end 23,000 human clones and 1,000 mouse clones having sequences and sequences, known STSs, gene Reference Sequences, UniGene clusters annotation. The database is freely accessible via the web and supports and sequences contained in one Affymetrix expression chip. Positional dis- sequence or clone searches and anonymous FTP. The relevant sites and crepancies from different sources were analyzed and a final location was resources are described at provided to the markers. The integrated physical map includes physical http;//www.tigr.org/tdb/BacResource/BAC_resource_intro.html. locations for 9.446 microsatellite markers, 9.127 gene Reference Sequences, 9.147 Affymetryx expression chip sequences and 17.380 P1161. A 1 Mb Resolution BAC Map Spanning the Human markers from UniGene ESTclusters. The high degree of automation of the Genome process allow us to rapidly update and construct a human genome physi- S. L. Narasimhan, T. Weber, M. Arcaro, M. Morley, A. Bruzel, V. G. Che- cal map with new information on a monthly basis. ung University of Pennsylvania, Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia; Philadel- P1159. Towards a complete transcript map of the human X phia, PAUnited States chromosome sandya2@mail.med.upenn.edu R. Sudbrak1, S. Hennig1, G. Teltow1, K. Rak1, P. Sterk2, H. Lehrach1 We are generating a repository of mapped bacterial artificial chromosome 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2EMBL- (BAC) clones that covers the human genome at a resolution of ~ 1 Mb. EBI; Hinxton, United Kingdom These clones are designed as reagents for microarray-based gene map- sudbrak@molgen.mpg.de ping and Direct Identical-by-descent Mapping. They can also be used to The X chromosome is one of the best characterized human chromosomes. identify and characterize chromosomal abnormalities. The BAC clones Most genes on the X chromosome display a haploid status in males and from the Roswell Park Cancer Institute human male BAC library (RP- II) as a consequence, recessive mutations in X-linked disease genes result in have been mapped to radiation-hybrid (RH) markers by filter hybridization hemizygous affected males and heterozygous (usually asymptomatic) car- and PCR. The clones are characterized by HindIII fingerprinting, end rier females. The easily recognizable inheritance pattern of X-linked dis- sequencing, and fluorescent in situ hybridization . These characterized eases allows instant assignment of the causative genes to the X chromo- clones allow us to integrate the RH map with cytogenetic map and the some. For these reasons, genetic analysis and mapping of genes on the X human genome sequence. Currently, we have over 3,000 mapped BAC chromosome have been greatly facilitated. It is estimated that the X chro- clones, and characterization is near completion. Adatabase, GenMapDB, mosome contains 1.500-4,000 genes, but only 446 UniGene cluster http;//genomics.med.upenn.edu/genmapdb, has been developed to pro- (December 2000 version) have been assigned to the chromosome so far. vide information on these mapped clones as well as to consolidate multi- By the analysis of the working draft sequence of the human X chromosome ple resources related to this project. In this presentation, we will discuss we will assemble a close to complete X chromosome gene collection. So the content of this clone collection and illustrate its use in genome analy- far, we identified 1500 X-linked UniGene cluster. The majority of clusters sis. are aligned to the sequence of the goldenpath (http;//genome.ucsc.edu/). Aset of two IMAGE clones per cluster were identified and re-arrayed. This P1162.Annotation of Human Chromosome 7 array will greatly accelerate physical mapping and candidate gene S. W. Scherer1, J. Cheung1, K. Nakabayashi1, J. Vincent1, E. Petek1, J. approaches aiming in identifying disease-causing mutations. In order to Herbrick1, J. Grover1, B. Kerem2, M. Li1, G. Boocock1, J. Rommens1, L. identify transcripts not covered by UniGene clusters we used gene predic- Osborne1, A. Boright1, L. Tsui1 tion methods for generation of hypothetical cDNAand peptide sequences. 1Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada; 2Hebrew University; These in-silico gene targets are evaluated in a second step by doing Jerusalem, Israel sequence comparisons against all available mammalian Unigene sets, steve@genet.sickkids.on.ca Protein databases and model organisms, including non-public ESTdata- The aim of our project is to establish a fully annotated physical, DNA bases generated at MPIMG. Potential novel gene targets are classified sequence, and gene map of human chromosome 7. As part of this anno- then by low or no detectable homology to any of the human databases. Out tation we are also collecting and characterizing all clinical, functional, and of these only the predictions with several exons and a minimum cDNA biological information relevant to chromosome 7. Through analysis of DNA length of more than 500 bp were initially considered for further analysis. sequence data in the public and Celera databases we could detect corre- The analysis of the genomic sequence of the human X chromosome result- sponding genomic fragments for over 98% (6,500 of 6,579) of the STSs ed in a set of 700 novel gene candidates, where no significant sequence known to map to chromosome 7. Initially, 70 large (>500 kb) DNA328 Posters: Genomics and Bioinformatics sequence contigs could be established with the average length being 1.6 P1165. Recombination, interference and sequence; compari- Mb and the largest being 11.5 Mb. To complete the map of chromosome 7 son of chromosomes 21 and 22. we have determined the end-sequence of 200 cosmid or BAC clones and A. Collins, W. Tapper, X. Ke generated over 700 kb of genomic DNAsequence resulting in coverage or University of Southampton; Southampton, United Kingdom closure of 16 gaps. Our analysis indicate most of the euchromatic region arc@soton.ac.uk is now covered but that the pericentromeric region is still under-represent- The euchromatic sequences of chromosomes 21 and 22 are almost com- ed requiring additional mapping and sequencing work. Moreover, a 100- plete and have similar lengths (33.7 - 34.6 Mb). This similarity largely con- 200 kb duplication at 7p11.1 was identified to be present in 30 copies else- trols for the influence of sequence length making comparison of patterns of where in the genome and another 200 kb segment was found in 3-4 copies recombination and chiasma interference interesting. There are marked dif- at 7q11.23, further complicating assemblies. With the current DNA ferences between the two chromosomes in both of these aspects. Overall sequence map we have, so far, identified over 718 full-length genes and chromosome 21 shows less recombination, particularly in males, than 1382 additional transcriptional units (total of 2100) on chromosome 7. Also, chromosome 22 (56 versus 71 cM). The level of chiasma interference is 100 rearrangement breakpoints, 700 FISH mapped clones, 3 fragile sites, rather close to the genome average of p=0.35 (in the Rao et al., mapping and 3 imprinted regions could be accurately placed on the DNAsequence- function) for both sexes for chromosome 22 and for female chromosome based map for future disease gene research. 21. However, the paternal chromosome 21 level is p=0.05. This indicates very strong chiasma interference. We suggest that these differences P1163. Analysis of Gene Transcripts of Chromosome 21 by depend on the very different sequence composition of the two chromo- HPSF Oligonucleotide Microarrays somes, particularly in the distribution of GT/CA repeats and/or tetranu- H. Donner1, B. Drescher2, J. Weber2, S. Wegener1, H. Paul1, R. Kirchner1, cleotides. We observe that recombination in males is significantly associ- W. Mann1 ated with these repeat tracts. For chromosome 21 the longer repeat tracts 1Department of DNA microarrays, MWG-Biotech AG; Ebersberg, Ger- are localised to the sub-telomeric region only but they are more wide- many; 2Department of Bioinformatics, MWG-Biotech AG; Ebersberg, Ger- spread on 22. This suggests there may be fewer opportunities for double many recombination events to occur, within a critical distance, for chromosome wmann@mwgdna.com 21, consistent with higher levels of interference. The sex-difference may be Chromosome 21 is the smallest human autosome and an additional copy related to the greater condensation of chromosomes in paternal meiosis, causes Down syndrome, the most frequent genetic disorder of mental which restricts recombination to areas with the longer repeat tracts. degradation in humans. The complete DNA sequence was published recently, leading to 127 known as well as 98 predicted genes. Based on P1166. Mapping of DNAloop organization of a region within the complete chromosomal DNA sequence we have computationally chromosome 16q22.1 containing the LCAT gene cluster. designed specific oligonucleotides for all known, predicted as well more S. A. Shaposhnikov1,2, E. Frengen2, V. V. Zverev1, H. Prydz2 than 275 possible gene transcripts, which had been annotated using the 1Research Institute for Viral Preparations; Moscow, Russian Federation; Annotation EngineTM module of our BioGISTTM software package. For 2Biotechnology Centre of Oslo; Oslo, Norway every gene transcript three different oligonucleotides were robotically spot- sergeys@biotek.uio.no ted (Affymetrix 417 arrayer) onto glass slides. Those microarrays were The present work is focused on the exploration of domain organization of hybridized with fluorescent labeled cDNAderived from lymphoblastoid cell a specific region within human chromosome 16q22.1 containing a tight lines of two patients suffering from Down syndrome as well as healthy con- cluster of genes, the LCATgene cluster. We suggest that the organization trols. Gene transcripts were regarded to be present if two of three oligonu- of the gene cluster has biological significance. We have recently generat- cleotides showed significant values above background. Also variations in ed a high-resolution integrated map covering 2.8 Mb surrounding the LCAT the mRMAamount between patients and controls were monitored and data gene cluster (Frengen, E., Rocca-Serra, P., Shaposhnikov, S. et al., obtained from these experiments will be presented. Because of the recent- Genomics 70(3), in press, 2000). This map includes a candidate region for ly published DNAsequence, cDNAclones of many known, predicted as containing a putative tumor supressor gene. The approach used in the well as possible genes are not available. HPSF oligonucleotide microar- present work is based on the ability of cellular topoisomerase II to cleave rays therefore provides a valuable tool for first phase expression analysis DNAin the presence of several anticancer agents. The cleavage sites are of genes not known to be expressed so far. associated with regions of DNAattachment to the nuclear skeleton, and indicate DNAloop anchorage sites. Thus, verifying the topoisomerase II P1164.Pyrosequencing Technology For Signature Tag Deter- cleavage sites within the region allow mapping of the domain organization. mination. Human cells have been exposed to topoisomerase II inhibitor, the DNA K. Hjelm, P. Blomgren, F. Lysholm, G. Magnusson, R. Kroon, A. Tallsj from the cells was cleaved with restriction enzymes, separated by pulsed Pyrosequencing AB; Uppsala, Sweden field gel electrophoresis, blotted, and hybridized with probes from the katarina.hjelm@pyrosequencing.com LCATgene cluster region. The domain maps allow relation of the structur- Pyrosequencing is a non-electrophoretic DNAsequencing method based al architecture of the region to the functional organization of the DNA. on the detection of pyrophosphate released as a result of nucleotide incor- poration by DNApolymerase. An enzyme cascade converts the pyrophos- P1167.Latest Advances in SNPGenotyping by Dynamic Allele phate to light which is detected by the camera in a PSQ96 System Specific Hybridization (DASH) (Pyrosequencing AB). The system includes a PSQ96 instrument with W. M. Howell, M. Jobs, L. Feuk, T. Emahazion, J. A. Prince, A. J. Brookes dedicated software and reagent kits for the application. Each reagent kit Center for Genomics Research, Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, contains the enzyme and substrate mixtures and the four nucleotide solu- Sweden tions, ready for use. Sequence stretches of some 20 bases can be used to Anthony.Brookes@cgr.ki.se identify specific genes or genomes. Such stretches are known as Signa- DASH is a method for high-throughput genotyping of SNPs, insertion/dele- ture Tags. Pyrosequencing technology has now been adapted to enable tions (indels), and other sequence variations (Genome Res, 2001, 11;152- the reading of these signature tag sequences. The components of a new 162; Nature Biotech, 1999, 17;87-88). Allele discrimination is based upon reagent kit allow parallel processing of up to 96 samples within approxi- real time detection of hybridisation stability differences in duplex DNAs mately one hour. Samples are easily prepared from PCR products. As the involving fully matched or allelic-mismatched structures. The published four nucleotides are added sequentially to the reaction mixture, the procedure involves PCR amplification of a target sequence (with one sequence of an unknown sample is easily determined from the developing primer biotinylated), streptavidin affinity capture of one product strand, pyrogram in which peaks are generated as nucleotides are incorporat- hybridisation of an unlabelled oligonucleotide probe (matching one allele) ed. Adedicated algorithm for automatic base calling and quality assess- at low temperature in the presence of a double-strand specific fluorescent ment from Pyrosequencing data has been developed. The results are dye, and steady heating through a temperature range while monitoring flu- stored in a local database, fully traceable and easily editable, if desired. On orescence. Changes in the amount of duplexed probe-target material are average, over 20 bases were correctly sequenced on a number of tem- thereby tracked as a melting-curve profile, indicating whether the probe- plates, differing in origin, GC content and length. The suitability of Pyrose- target duplexes were perfectly matched, subtly mismatched, or a het- quencing technology for Signature Tag sequencing was clearly demon- erozygous mixture of the two. Avalidation study was performed, involving strated. application of DASH to 89 randomly selected proven SNPs. Non-optimized assay designs (worst-case scenario) resulted in 79 functional assays (89%). Secondary structures in target sequences were found to be criti- cally harmful to DASH performance. Identifying and altering key PCR primer bases involved in secondary structure formation can overcome thisPosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 329 problem. This led to an improved design success rate of essentially 100% P1170.Glycogen Storage Disease type Ia; molecular study in (6/6 initially non-functioning DASH assays were restored via this optimized Brazilian patients design strategy). Asoftware tool for automated DASH assay design that E. L. Sartorato1, F. C. Reis1, H. C. Caldas1, I. V. D. Schwartz2, R. incorporates the new design system has now been developed. Subse- Giugliani2, M. G. Burin2, D. Y. J. Norato1 quent DASH studies demonstrated that the method provides genotyping 1Universidade Estadual de Campinas; Campinas - So Paulo, Brazil; 2Uni- accuracy >99.9%, and a reproducibility of 100%. With the above DASH versidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul; Porto Alegre - Rio Grande do system an individual worker can easily genotype several thousand sam- Sul, Brazil ples/week. sartor@unicamp.br To move towards genotyping hundreds of thousands of samples, we are Mutations in the glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) gene are responsible exploring many new DASH modifications. Reaction principles are now in for glycogen storage disease type Ia (GSDIa). It is characterized by growth place for scaling up via i) micro-volume (<2?L) PCR in 1536-well plates, ii) retardation, hepatomegaly, hypoglicemia, hyperlipidemia and lactic acido- employing liquid-handling-free spun-arrays for DASH execution on flat sur- sis. In this study we are reporting G6PC gene mutations in eight of the faces, and iii) incorporating multiplexed potential by using FRET-based sig- twenty-five Brazilian patients with clinical symptoms of GSDIa . Five previ- nal production. Final imaging of DASH melting-curves will employ a CCD ously described mutations (R83C, Q347X, V338F, D38V and G68R) were camera. We anticipate that a fully validated system along these lines will detected. The two most common mutations identified were R83C and be produced this year. Q347X, accounting for 8 out of 14 (57,14%) mutant alleles. It was also ana- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion lyzed the 1176 polymorphism and two intronic mutations (IVS3-58T>Aand Methods to Detect Genomic Variation IVS4+10G>A). We used the minigenes strategy in order to verify the effect of this intronic mutations in the splice mechanism. This study underscores P1168. Gene Dosage using Real Time PCR ; Application for that molecular genetic analysis is a reliable and convenient alternative to Deletion Carrier Diagnosis in Galactosaemia. the enzyme assay in a fresh liver biopsy specimen to diagnose GSDIa. C. Costa1, M. Brivet1, M. Abramowicz2, E. Vamos2, A. Legrand1, J. Costa3 1Hpital Bictre AP-HP; Kremlin Bictre, France; 2Universite Libre Brux- P1171.Anovel splicing mutation (IVS43C>G) in the G6Pase elles Hpital Erasme; Bruxelles, Belgium; 3Hpital Amricain de Paris; gene of five Portuguese GSD Ia patients Neuilly, France H. Rocha1, L. Diogo2, E. Martins3, A. Cabral4, C. Sousa1, I. Maire5, L. Vilar- catherine.costa@bct.ap-hop-paris.fr inho1 In two related galactosaemic patients from an Ashkenazi jewish family, no 1Instituto de Gentica Mdica Jacinto de Magalhes; Porto, Portugal; PCR amplification of the 11 exons of the uridyltransferase gene (galt) was 2Hospital Peditrico de Coimbra; Coimbra, Portugal; 3Hospital Maria Pa; possible. Ahomozygote Galt gene deletion was then suspected. Success- Porto, Portugal; 4Unidade de Doenas Metablicas, Servio de Pediatria ful co-amplification by duplex PCR of another gene eliminated the hypoth- de Hospital Santa Maria; Lisboa, Portugal; 5Service de Biochimie Pdia- esis of PCR inhibitors. Sequencing of the 11 exons in the parents did not trique, Hpital Debrousse; Lyon, France reveal any heterozygote mutation or polymorphism and suggested a het- hugo.rocha@igm.min-saude.pt erozygote deletion in both parents. To confirm the possible deletion, real Glycogen Storage Disease Type Ia (von Gierke disease, GSD Ia, MIM# time quantitative PCR on a LightCycler system was used. The Galt gene 232200) is an autossomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by a defi- and as reference internal control the superoxyde dismutase (SOD) gene cient activity of the catalytic unit of the microssomal glucose-6-phos- were co-amplified in the same tube by duplex PCR in DNAfrom patients, phatase (G6Pase) system. Since the characterisation of the G6Pase cat- parents and controls;they were compared to a range of serial DNAdilu- alytic unit gene, a steadily growing number of mutations, responsible for tions for quantitation. The two genes were submitted to the same PCR fluc- GSD Ia, have been reported. The identification of mutations allows a non- tuations since they were amplified in the same reaction. The copy number invasive DNA-based method for the diagnosis of patients suspected of of Galt gene was about twofold lower in each parents DNA (ratio having GSD Ia, but has also important implications with respect to carrier Galt/SOD=0.43 and 0.47 for mother and father respectively) than in con- detection and prenatal diagnosis. Here we describe a new mutation in trol DNA(ratio=1.2+/-0.2) thus confirming the heterozygous status for the intron four of the G6Pase gene, that cause a change in the acceptor site deletion. The quantitative real time PCR by duplex PCR in a single tube on for splicing. This mutation, IVS4-3C>G, was found in five Portuguese genomic DNArepresents an interesting alternative to time-consuming and patients with a previous enzymatic diagnosis of GSD Ia (three homozy- labor-intensive Southern blotting or pulsed field gel electrophoresis, for the gous and two heterozygous), and was absent from the 228 control alleles diagnosis of deletions, especially in heterozygous patients. Complete tested. Due to the unavailability of liver biopsy from any of these patients, GALTgene deletion is rare and was only described previously in two other it was not possible to confirm the presence of the aberrant mRNA. In spite unrelated Ashkenazi jewish families. of this limitation, there are some reasons that strongly suggest that this mutation cause an aberrant splicing of the G6Pase gene, leading to an P1169. A Novel Mutation In The PHKG2 Gene In A Case Of impaired activity of the G6Pase; (i) the nature of the substitution (only 1% Phosphorylase Kinase Deficient Liver Glycogenosis Associ- of the acceptor splicing sites have a guanine at that position); (ii) the fre- ated With Cirrhosis quency of this mutation among Portuguese patients (17% of the alleles); C. Bruno1, F. Menni2, K. E. Niezen-Koning3, C. Minetti1, R. Parini2 (iii) the absence of any other mutation in the G6Pase gene of the homozy- 1Dept. of Pediatrics, Istituto Giannina Gaslini; Genova, Italy; 2Dept. of Pedi- gous patients and (iiii) the absence from the control alleles. atrics, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milano, Italy; 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Beatrix Childrens Hospital; Groningen, The Netherlands P1172.Cytochrome oxidase deficiency presenting with micro- cb2246@yahoo.com cephaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum We describe a novel homozygous PHKG2 mutation in a boy with liver Phk A. M. Innes1,2, D. Applegarth3, M. Collison2, S. S. Seshia2, L. E. deficiency who developed cirrhosis early in infancy. A9-year-old boy, the Seargeant2, M. Del Bigio2, B. Robinson4, C. R. Greenberg2 second child of healthy consanguineous Pakistani parents, presented at 1University of Calgary; Calgary, AB Canada; 2University of Manitoba; Win- 16 months with hepatomegaly and jaundice. Blood tests showed liver cell nipeg, MB Canada; 3University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Cana- necrosis, cholestasis, severe hypocalcaemia, and microcytic hypocromic da; 4University of Toronto; Toronto, ON Canada anaemia. Ultrasonography showed an enlarged and homogeneously Micheil.Innes@CRHA-Health.Ab.Ca hyperecogenic liver. A liver biopsy revealed severe fibrosis; hepatic Aterm baby weighing 3.2 kg (50%) and measuring 50 cm (50%) was born debranching and phosphorylase enzyme activities were normal while to an apparently non-consanguineous couple from a remote aboriginal phosphorylase kinase activity was undetectable The clinical follow-up of Cree community in Manitoba. Her head circumference measured 31.5 cm the child showed persistent alteration of function liver tests with a normal (<5%). She developed a severe lactic acidosis (5-10uM) with an elevated glucose control and a correct diet treatment. Asecond liver biopsy per- lactate/pyruvate ratio. Positive investigations included severe micro- formed at the age of 8 years showed liver cirrhosis. Direct sequencing of cephaly with agenesis of the corpus callosum on MRI, an abnormal mus- the PHKG2 gene revealed a single homozygous T-to-C mutation at cle biopsy with prominent mitochondria and on histochemical analysis nucleotide position 1122 in exon 10, replacing an encoded leucine with many fibres lacked or had diminished cytochrome oxidase (COX) activity. proline at codon 357 (L357P). This mutation segregates with the biochem- COX activity was also low (20% of control) in isolated muscle mitochon- ical phenotype, and it was not found by us in 50 normal controls. These dria, with very mildly decreased complex I activity, normal complex II and data enlarge the spectrum of mutations associated with PhKG2 gene and citrate synthase activities. COX activity, PDH activity, Succinate further confirms that PhK deficient liver glycogenosis associated with cir- Cytochrome c Reductase and the lactate/pyruvate ratio in cultured skin rhosys is caused by PHKG2 mutations. fibroblasts were normal. Mitochondrial DNAdeletion studies were normal and the NARPmutation was absent. The lactic acidosis resolved in 2-3330 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease weeks but the patient developed severe apnea , intractable seizures, and P1175. MEHMO (Mental retardation, Epileptic seizures, showed no neurodevelopmental progress. She died at age 15 months with Hypogonadism and -genitalism, Microcephaly, Obesity); A a head circumference of 36 cm. The COX complex (complex IV of the mito- new X-linked mitochondrial depletion syndrome. chondrial respiratory chain) is responsible for the final event of electron D. Lev1, E. Leshinsky-Silver1, A. Singer2, R. Navieux3, N. Bibi4, V. Barash5, transport. This is a 13 subunit enzyme, the largest 3 subunits are encoded M. Sadeh1, T. Lerman-Sagie1 by the mitochondrial genome, and the 10 other subunits are encoded by 1Wolfson Medical Center; Holon, Israel; 2Kaplan Medical Center; the nuclear genome. Arecent review (Robinson, 2000) summarizes the 5 Rechovot, Israel; 3The Mitochondrial and metabolic disease Center, well-delineated phenotypes associated with COX deficiency. These UCSD; San Diego, CAUnited States; 4Barzilai Medical Center; Ashkelon, include a tubulopathy/ataxia phenotype (COX 10), Leigh disease (SURF1 Israel; 5Hadassa Medical Center; Jerusalem, Israel and other genes), a fatal infantile phenotype with severe acidosis and brain dorlev@post.tau.ac.il sparing , a cardiomyopathy phenotype (SCO2) and a phenotype with mild MEHMO is a new X-linked disorder characterized by mental retardation, pyschomotor retardation and eventual fulminant acidosis unique to regions epileptic seizures, hypogonadism and genitalism, microcephaly, obesity of Quebec (2p16). To our knowledge, our patients presentation with evi- and hypotonia. It was recently assigned to the locus Xp21.1-p22.13 that is dence of prenatal brain effects manifesting as severe microcephaly and flanked by CYBB and DXS365. We describe a child with MEHMO and lac- agenesis of the corpus callosum is unique. Given the uneven COX stain- tic acidosis .Amuscle biopsy revealed markedly reduced activities of com- ing in different muscle fibres suggesting heteroplasmy, an underlying plexes 1,3 and 4 of the electron transport chain Histological staining mtDNAabnormality affecting COX activity and oxidative phosphorylation showed mitochondrial proliferation and lipid storage. Elecron microscopy appears most likely. revealed abnormal huge mitochondria with concentric cristae and electron dense bodies. Southern blot analysis of the childs DNAextracted from P1173. A novel SURF-1 mutation in Leigh syndrome caused muscle biopsy using both mitochondrial and nuclear probes revealed a by cytochrome c oxidase deficiency normal mtDNAsize but a profound depletion (30%) of the mtDNA. M. DiRocco1, M. Bado2, L. Arata3, P. Broda2, U. Caruso2, V. Capra3, P. Tor- These findings suggest a deficiency in one or a fewfactors involved in the tori-Donati4, C. Minetti2, C. Bruno2 processing or control of mitochondial DNAsynthesis. This is the first report 1II Div. of Pediatrics, Istituto Giannina Gaslini; Genova, Italy; 2Neuromus- of identification of MEHMO as a mitochondrial disease and the first X- cular Diseases Unit, Univ. of Genova, Istituto G. Gaslini; Genova, Italy; linked mitochondrial depletion syndrome. MEHMO should be added to the 3Div. of Neurosurgery, Istituto G. Gaslini; Genova, Italy; 4Div. of Neuroradi- growing list of neurologic disorders presented with mitochondrial DNA ology, Istituto G. Gaslini; Genova, Italy depletion. The applications of these findings to prenatal diagnosis and to majadirocco@ospedale-gaslini.ge.it the understanding of the processes leading to mtDNAsynthesis are dis- We have identified a novel mutation in the SURF-1 gene in a child with clin- cussed. ical and neuroradiological evidence of Leigh syndrome and cytohrome c oxidase deficiency (COX). A15-month-old girl, first child of non related Ital- P1176.Construction of transgenic mice carrying human mito- ian parents, presented at 1 year of age with failure to thrive, neurodevel- chondria opmental regression and frequent episodes of vomiting. Physical exami- V. Sokolova, N. Arbuzova nation showed facial dysmorphism, hirsutism, and muscle hypotonia. Institute for Experimental Medicine; St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation Venous blood lactate was elevated (32mg/dl, normal < 22). GS-MS of uri- molgen@molgen.iem.ras.spb.ru nary organic acids showed a massive excrection of lactate and related A human mitochondrial suspension isolated from HepG2 culture was metabolites. Plasma and urinary amino acids were normal. Brain MRI microinjected into fertilized eggs of CBAC57BLmice. In the first experi- showed bilateral increase signal of thalami on T2-weighted scans. Histo- mental series the microinjected zygotes were cultured in vitro to the blas- chemistry of skeletal muscle showed virtually absent cytochrome c oxidase tocyst stage. All embryos survived and developed normally. Previously, (COX) activity and no ragged-red fibers. Biochemical analysis of a muscle species-specific primers were designed for the human mtDNA and the homogenate confirmed an isolated reduction of COX. Genomic DNAwas endogenous mt-DNAin the embryos. An Alu1 cleavage site was found in isolated by peripheral limphocytes and SURF-1 gene was amplified by the human mtDNAsequence which is absent from the murine mtDNA. This PCR protocols. Sequencing analysis of the SURF-1 gene revealed a novel allowed us to discriminate the amplified human mtDNAfrom that of the heterozygous single base-pair deletion at nucleotide position 566 mouse. Apresence of human mtDNAwas shown by PCR with species- (566delG) in exon 6, which predicts a truncated surf1 protein. Amutation specific primers at every stage of development of the preimplantation in intron sequence or in other regulatory sequence of SURF-1 is predicted embryos. Then 2- and 4-cell embryos derived from microinjection zygotes to account for the missing second mutation. were separated to blastomeres. More than once human mtDNA was revealed only in one blastomere after the first cleavage of a zygote. In P1174.Tissue-specific distribution of mtDNAmutations in 26 some cases one blastomere of the 4-cell embryo carried no human mate- MERRF and MELAS patients rial and another showed the presence of somewhat lower amount of M. Tesarova, M. Capkova, V. Kaplanova, H. Hansikova, J. Zeman human mtDNA. In all cases when microinjected zygotes reached the blas- Department of Paediatrics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University; tocyst stage human mtDNAwas detected. In the second experiments the Prague, Czech Republic microinjected zygotes were transplanted into the uteri of recipient mice. marketa.tesarova@seznam.cz DNA of foreign mitochondria was found by PCR with species-specific Clinical symptoms in patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are primers in the embryos at 8th - 13th days of embryogenesis. The per cent very heterogeneous. Oxidative phosphorylation system, as the only excep- of transgenic embryos was 13%. The several 13th-days embryos were tion in mammalian cell, is encoded by both the nuclear DNA(nDNA) and divided to different tissues and organs which further were analyzed sepa- the mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA). The presence of homogeneous popula- rately for presence of human mtDNA. Heteroplasmic mice produced by this tion of mtDNAmolecules in tissue is called homoplasmy, the presence of technique will be useful in study of mitochondrial dynamics and may has- wild-type and mutated mtDNAmolecules is known as heteroplasmy. Clini- ten the creation of animal models of human mt-DNA-based diseases. cal manifestation of mtDNA mutations occurs when the percentage of mutated mtDNA copies reaches a threshold value, when the cell is no P1177. Molecular characterization of phosphofructokinase more able to tolerate the mutation and decrease in activity of several com- deficiency (Taruis Disease) in a Chinese male plexes of respiratory chain cause insufficient energy provision. In this study P. S. Lai1, H. H. Khng1, P. Kuperan2, S. Miwa3, H. Kanno4, W. C. Yee5 we analysed tissue-specific distribution of mtDNAmutation A3243G and 1National University of Singapore; Singapore, Singapore; 2Tan Tock Seng mtDNAmutation A8344G in blood, muscles, hair roots and skin fibroblasts Hospital; Singapore, Singapore; 3Okinaka Memorial Institute for Medical from 26 patients in 10 families with MELAS and MERRF syndrome. In Research; Tokyo, Japan; 4Okinaka Memorial Institute of Medical Research patients with syndrome MERRF and MELAS, the level of heteroplasmy Institute; Tokyo, Japan; 5National Neuroscience Institute; Singapore, Sin- varied between 6% and 95%. The range of heteroplasmy of mtDNAmuta- gapore tions in various tissues in one patient was quite broad (from 48% to 95%). paelaips@nus.edu.sg The highest heteroplasmy was found in muscles, followed on with hair Hereditary phosphofructokinase deficiency or Taruis disease is an autoso- roots. Low levels of mutated mtDNAmolecules were found in blood and mal recessive disorder caused by a deficiency of phosphofructokinase fibroblasts. In most of investigated families the portion of mutated mtDNA (PFK) enzyme which catalyzes the ATP-dependent conversion of fructose molecules increase in descendant generations, the increase wasnt the 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-biphosphate. Three isoenzymes of PFK have same in all studied tissues. Supported by GACR 302/99/0648. been identified, namely muscle (M), liver (L) and platelet (P). The PFK-M gene responsible for this disorder spans 30 kb and consists of 24 exons encoding three types of tissue-specific mRNA variants. We report thePosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 331 molecular characterization of a 20 year-old Chinese male with PFK-M defi- P1180. Patients with Gaucher disease and Parkinsonian ciency. The proband, an offspring from a consanguineous marriage, pre- symptoms do not share a common genotype. sented with exercise intolerance and compensated hemolysis. The genet- E. Sidransky, N. Tayebi, M. Callahan, J. Park, B. K. Stubblefield ic defect was identified through RT-PCR and sequencing analysis of National Institute of Mental Health; Bethesda, MD United States mRNAtranscripts. Asingle nucleotide substitution involving a C to Ttran- sidranse@irp.nimh.nih.gov sition was identified in exon 6 of the PFK-M gene. The proband was There have been several reports of adult patients with Gaucher disease, homozygous for this mutation while the parents were observed to be het- the inherited deficiency of lysosomal glucocerebrosidase (GC), who have erozygous carriers. This mutation generated a stop codon predicted to developed parkinsonian symptoms. We have observed that these patients result in premature termination of translation of the PFK enzyme. This is generally have relatively mild visceral manifestations of Gaucher disease, the first PFK-M mutation known to us to be reported in an ethnic Chinese but develop an early onset, treatment-refractory form of Parkinsons. We patient. performed genotypic analyses of 9 adult patients with type 1 Gaucher dis- ease and parkinsonian manifestations. The patients were from 8 different P1178. Prosaposin Deficiency Due To 1 Bp Deletion In Sap B nations and included Ashkenazi and non-Jewish individuals. Direct Domaine; The Evidence For Functional Sap ADeficiency Due sequencing of the 11 exonic regions of the GC gene demonstrated that no To Nonsence-mediated Decay. two patients shared the same genotype. The common N370S mutation, M. Jer bkov1,2, M. Hrebcek1,2, H. Hulkov1, J. Ledvinov1, H. which was heretofore not associated with neuronopathic Gaucher disease, Poupetov1, B. Asfaw1, L. Bern1, M. Elleder1 was encountered in 7 of the patients studied. One patient carried mutation 1Institute for Inherited Metabolic Disorders; 1st Faculty of Medicine; L444Pon the paternal allele and D409H on the maternal allele, but South- Praque, Czech Republic; 2Center for Integrated Genomics; Prague, Czech ern blot analyses showed that the maternal allele had an additional 15 kb Republic fragment resulting from a recombination between metaxin and its pseudo- mcerv@lf1.cuni.cz gene. Metaxin, a convergently transcribed gene located adjacent to the GC We describe a case of a fatal infantile storage disease with pseudogene, encodes for a 317 aa protein which is part of a preprotein hepatosplenomegaly and severe neurological disease caused by a defi- import complex in the outer membrane of the mammalian mitochondrion. ciency of prosaposin, precursor protein giving rise to saposins A,B,C, and Sequencing of the gene for metaxin along with the genes for parkin and D. Saposins are essential for in vivo activation of lysosomal hydrolases alpha-synuclein is in progress for all of the 9 patients. Because Parkinsons taking part in the sphingolipid degradation cascade. The patient was disease is a relatively common disorder, thought to result from multiple eti- homozygous for 1bp deletion in saposin B domain (c803delG), leading to ologies, there also may be different genes contributing to this phenotype a frameshift and premature stop codon. In obligatory heterozygotes the among our patients. Further analyses of the glucocerebrosidase locus in mutant mRNAwas detectable only in nuclear RNAfraction of skin fibrob- these patients are also being performed to explore the possible associa- last, while in cytosolic RNAfraction it was undetectable presumably due to tion of the parkinsonian symptoms and alterations in genes contiguous to nonsense-mediated mRNAdecay. Degradation of majority of the mutant glucocerebrosidase. mRNAmay lead to functional deficit of saposin A, in spite of normal sap A domain coding sequence. The absence of immunodetectable saposins P1181. A study of the glucocerebrosidase gene mutations; (saposins A-D) in patients tissues was accomompanied by a broad spec- Vaccinia expression system trum of stored sphingolipids encompassing ceramide mono-,di-, tri-, tetra- K. Hodanova1,2, M. Hrebicek1, Z. Melkova3 hexosides and sulphatide ceramides. In heterozygous parents direct 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles sequencing of RT-PCR products revealed only wild-type cDNAsequence, University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2Centre for Integrated Genomics; suggesting that mutant mRNA was significantly less abundant. Mutant Prague, Czech Republic; 3Institute of Pathological Physiology, 1st Faculty cDNAwas detected by ARMS only in RNAisolated from nuclear fraction of of Medicine, Charles University; Prague, Czech Republic parents fibroblasts, it was not detectable in cytoplasmic fraction. This con- khod@lf1.cuni.cz firms that mutant mRNAis in cytoplasm essentially absent or at least sig- Gaucher disease is the most frequent sphingolipidosis. It is caused by nificantly less abundant. These findings together with the lack of lysosomal b-glucocerebosidase (GCD) deficiency or rarely by the deficien- immunoreactive saposins A-D in the patients tissues allow to postulate cy of sphingolipid activator protein, saposin C. More than 120 mutations that the c803delG in addition to deficit of saposins B, C and D leads to were described in the human b-glucocerebrosidase gene in Gaucher functional deficit of saposin Adue to nonsense-mediated decay. patients. (1) The majority of GCD deficient Gaucher patients are com- pound heterozygotes. In non-Jewish populations rare or private mutations P1179.Towards the understanding of the lysosomal transport form about 25-30 % of mutant alleles. (2) Therefore, functional expression disorders; proteomic maps of lysosomal membrane proteins. of mutant GCD is necessary to distinguish neutral mutations from deleteri- A. V. Pshezhetsky, V. Seyrantepe, J. Ausseil, K. Landry, Y. Chang ous mutations. We have used hybrid vaccinia expression system to study Sainte-Justine Hospital; Montreal, Canada wild-type and mutant GCD. We have expressed novel and rare mutations alex@justine.umontreal.ca found in Czech Gaucher patients. (3) The individual mutations were intro- Lysosomal membrane transport proteins mediate the traffic of protons, duced by site-directed mutagenesis into expression vector pTM1-glu1, cysteine or activated acetyl residues into the lysosome and the catabolic which contains human GCD cDNAunder control of T7 promoter. (4, 5) We products such as amino acids, monosaccharides and vitamins out of the have constructed five recombinant vaccinia viruses carrying wild-type and lysosome. Lack or malfunction of lysosomal transporter proteins causes mutant human GCDs. The tissue culture cell line was co-infected with several severe genetic diseases of children including nephropathic cysti- VTF7-3 vaccinia virus, which expresses T7 RNA polymerase, and with nosis CTNS), Niemann-Pick disease type C, sialic acid storage disease each of the recombinant viruses. High levels of GCD expression were (SIASD), cobalamin (cbl) F disease, mucolipidosis IV (MLIV) and Sanfilip- achieved. Plasmids carrying mutant 15 different GCD cDNAs were po III type C (MPS IIIC). The goal of our proteomic-based research pro- employed also for transient expression of GCD. In spite of the rather high gram is to identify the underlying cause of genetic diseases, as reflected background of tissue culture cell lines it was possible to distinguish poly- by the protein patterns of affected cells and tissues. We have isolated lyso- morphisms and deleterious mutations in both cases. This work was sup- somal membranes from mouse and human liver, obtained their proteomic ported by grant GAUK 131/97. 1 Beutler,E. and Gelbart, T. (1998) Blood maps using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis with immobilized pH gra- cells, Molecules, and Diseases 24, 2-8 2 Horowitz M, Zimran A(1994) Hum dients and identified the major proteins by combining peptide mass finger- Mutat 3; 1-11, 1994 3 Hodanova K, Hrebicek M, Cervenkova M, Mrazova printing, and amino acid sequencing. The obtained results have provided L, Veprekova L, Zeman J. (1999) Blood Cells Molecules and Diseases 25; the basis to build a complete proteomic database of the lysosomal mem- 287-289 4 Pasmanik-Chor, M. et al. (1996) Biochem J 317, 81-8 5 Pas- brane. Then we have analyzed lysosomal membrane proteins from cul- manik-Chor, M. et al. (1997) Hum Mol Genet 6, 887-95 tured skin fibroblasts of normal controls and patients suffering from cbl F and MPS IIIC and identified the protein spots that reproducibly differ P1182.Simultaneous Detection of Six Common Gaucher Dis- between patients and control cells. Candidate disease-causing genes will ease Mutations by a Novel Reverse-Hybridization Assay be cloned, and studied by mutation analysis and/or by expression and G. Kriegshuser, A. Moritz, F. Kury, C. Oberkanins functional characterization. This approach may be in the future extended to ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH; Vienna, Austria discovery of other disease-related membrane proteins in peroxisomes, kriegshauser@viennalab.co.at microsomes, mitochondria and the plasma membranes. Gaucher disease is the most common glycolipid storage disorder known. The disease is characterized by glucocerebrosidase deficiency caused by mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene. Enzyme deficiency results in accumulation of glucocerebroside within the reticuloendothelial332 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease system which may lead to hepatosplenomegaly, bone marrow suppres- P1185. Type I Gm1 Gangliosidosis In South Brazil; Insights sion, and bone lesions. The disease is panethnic and has been divided into From The Haplotype Analysis In Families With The Two Com- three clinical phenotypes (Types I-III) with Type I being most common. In mon Mutations. the Ashkenazi Jewish population Type I disease frequency is estimated to R. Giugliani1,2, C. Baiotto1,2, C. Dornelles3, R. Sano1, J. Coelho1, U. 1 in 500 with a carrier rate to approximate 1 in 10. Enzyme replacement Matte1,2 therapy is available for Type I Gaucher disease, resulting in clinical 1Medical Genetics Service - HCPA- UFRGS; Porto Alegre, Brazil; 2Post improvement and increased quality of live. Since the sequence of the GBA Graduation Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology - UFRGS; Porto gene was first published in 1985, more than 100 mutations have been Alegre, Brazil; 3FEPPS; Porto Alegre, Brazil described. We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay for the rapid rgiugliani@hcpa.ufrgs.br and simultaneous detection of six mutations predominantly found in the Type I GM1 Gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by the Jewish population; 84GG, IVS2(+1), 1226G, 1297T, 1448C and 1604A. deficiency of beta-galactosidase. The accumulation of GM1 ganglioside The test is based on a single, multiplex DNAamplification reaction and causes neurological regression and death within the first two years of life. ready-to-use test strips presenting a parallel array of oligonucleotide Its incidence (1;200,000 world-wide) is highly increased in South Brazil probes for each wild-type and mutated allele. The entire procedure from (1;17,000 live births), where only two mutations (R59H and 1627insG) are blood sampling to the identification of GBAmutations needs less than 6 responsible for almost 60% of the alleles. We studied a group of 390 nor- hours and may be automated on existing equipment (e.g. TECAN profi- mal individuals in order to determine the frequency of carriers in the gen- Blot). (kriegshauser@viennalab.co.at) eral population. In addition, to identify a possible common origin to these mutations, 26 patients and the controls were analysed for the presence of P1183. Genotype-phenotype Correlations In Romanian two polymorphisms (R521C and S532G). All patients were diagnosed by Gaucher Patients enzyme assay on plasma or leukocytes. Parents were also analysed to C. Drugan1, L. Procopciuc1, C. Caillaud2, P. Grigorescu-Sido1, T. Drugan1, establish linkage phase. Mutation analysis in 24 new patients confirmed G. Jebeleanu1 the frequencies of R59H (21%) and 1627insG (37%) assigned in 20 cases 1University of Medicine Cluj; Cluj, Romania; 2Universite Paris V; Paris, previously analysed. Mutation frequency in the controls was 0,13% and France 0,38%, respectively. Therefore carrier proportion is 1;65, similar to that cdrugan@umfcluj.ro found in PKU. The frequency of the polymorphisms R521C and S532G Biochemical diagnosis of Gaucher disease in Romanian population was 0% and 18% in the patients and 3% and 7% in the controls. Haplotype became available since 1997. In this study we measured the enzymatic analysis indicated a possible common origin for R59H, found to be linked activities of acid beta-glucosidase in peripheral blood leukocytes and of to the G allele for S532G in two thirds of the patients. The other mutation, serum chitotriosidase in 68 suspects selected according to clinical and 1627insG, was found associated to the wild type haplotype in more than histopathological criteria. 22 type 1 Gaucher disease patients were con- 90% of the cases. The wild type haplotype was also the most common firmed. Analysis of the frequent mutations in the acid beta-glucosidase haplotype, found in 86% of the alleles in the control group. R59H was first gene; N370S, L444P, R463C, 84GG and of the recombinant alleles recN- described in an Italian patient, and probably spread in Brazil with the Ital- ci I and recTLwas performed by PCR-RFLP and by sequencing of the ian migratory waves. On the other hand, the link of 1627insG to wild hap- amplified fragments bearing the L444Psubstitution, respectively. Clinical lotype in most cases suggests a more recent origin, and possibly recurrent, severity was evaluated according to the Zimran severity score index. The for this event. The collection of ethnic information and the analysis of 2 fur- results obtained indicate a high prevalence of the N370S allele (52.3%), ther markers close to the gene, in progress, should bring valuable infor- followed by the L444P(22.7%), recNci I (6.8%) alleles and unknown muta- mation to clarify this issue (CNPq, FAPERGS, PRONEX/MCT). tions (18.2%). Genotype-phenotype correlations were similar to those reported for other Caucasian populations, with the N370S allele excluding P1186. A New Non-invasive Surrogate Marker For Assess- the development of neurological symptoms and the L444Pallele indicating ment Of Large Arteries Involvement In Patients Affected With a more severe course of the disease. This study indicates a high preva- Fabry Disease lence of type 1 Gaucher disease in Romanian population (22 confirmed P. Boutouyrie, S. Laurent, D. P. Germain patients in only 4 years of biochemical diagnosis) and points out to the Hpital Europen Georges Pompidou; Paris, France necessity of introduction of the enzyme replacement therapy in Romania. dominique.germain@hop.egp.ap-hop-paris.fr Background ; Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inborn error of glycosph- P1184. Human GM1-Gangliosidosis; Identification of Three ingolipid metabolism due to deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme Mutations in the Maltese Population. alpha-galactosidase A. The enzymatic defect results in the deposition of A. E. Felice, A. Alashtar, J. Vella, C. Al-Shinawi, S. Bezzina Wettinger, R. uncleaved glycosphingolipids in tissular lysosomes and plasma. Whereas Blundell, C. Scerri, G. Grech FD is primarily considered as a progressive small vessel disease, little is Lab of Molecular Genetics, University of Malta; Msida, Malta known about peripheral large arteries involvement. Recent studies have afel@biotech.um.edu.mt demonstrated that genetic engineering has removed many obstacles to the The lysosomal storage disorder GM1-gangliosisdosis is a genetic meta- clinical use of enzyme replacement, and that the infusions of purified bolic and neurological disorder caused by a complete or partial deficiency alpha-galactosidase Aare safe and biochemically active, emphasizing the of the enzyme acid b-galactosidase. Infantile GM1-gangliosisdosis is rela- need for clinical and surrogate markers to monitor efficacy of enzyme tively common in the Maltese population , with a heterozygous frequency replacement therapy. Methods ; We investigated common carotid and radi- of 3.0%. The mutations responsible were studied in five unrelated Maltese al artery diameter, intima-media thickness (IMT) and distensibility in 21 families. Fragments containing all the exons and flanking regions, of the - hemizygous FD patients and 21 age-matched male controls, using high- galactosidase gene where amplified using the polymerase chain reaction definition echotracking systems and aplanation tonometry. Results ; (PCR) and were either sequenced directly or scanned by single stranded Patients with FD had a significant two-fold increase in radial artery IMTand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis prior to sequencing. Adou- distensibility, independently of body surface area, age, and mean BP. With ble point mutation, CG?AT, within the IVS 7 of the -galactosidase gene, aging, the increase in radial artery IMTwas 2.3-fold higher in FD patients at position 9 and 10 bp downstream of the 3 end of exon7 was identified than in controls. Carotid IMTwas mildly but significantly increased in FD in all the families studied and denoted as Spl7. Another mutation denoted patients (+18 %), whereas distensibility was unchanged. Conclusion ; This as IVS14 nt 2G, an A?G transition located at the invariant AG dinucleotide is the first evidence of a major increase in arterial wall thickness, measur- of the 3 splice acceptor site of intron 14 has also been characterized in able at the site of a medium-sized artery in a cohort of patients with FD. three of the families. The IVS14 nt 2G mutation was identified in patients The assessment of this newly recognized phenotype of FD, through non who were also shown to be carriers of the Spl7 mutation. The R482H muta- invasive procedures, may prove useful for future monitoring of enzyme tion, has been identified in two of the families. Asingle nucleotide poly- replacement therapy. morphism, IVS7 +10G>T(the G?Ttransversion in mutation Spl7), which has an allelic frequency of 1 in 16 in the Maltese population, has also been P1187. Fabry Disease; Nine New Mutations in alpha-Galac- characterised. In conclusion, these data indicate that the Spl 7 and tosidase AGene and Molecular Carrier Detection IVS14nt-2G mutations are probably linked, and show considerable molec- R. Dobrovolny, L. Dvorakova, M. Hrebicek, J. Ledvinova ular heterogeneity in the - galactosidase gene of Maltese patients with Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases; Prague, Czech Republic GM1 gangliosidosis. rdobr@lf1.cuni.cz Fabry disease, an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (E.C. 3.2.1.22). Affected individuals accumulate neutral glycosphingolipidsPosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 333 with terminal alpha-linked galactosyl moieties particularly in the lysosomes ined alleles in adult and 13% - in juvenile MLD-patients. Prevalence of of blood vessels, heart, and kidney. Clinically affected are hemizygote I179S in the whole group of MLD-patients was 11%. I179S accounted for males but heterozygote females may have an attenuated form of the dis- 17% of examined alleles in adult as well as juvenile MLD-patients. P426L order. This could be, besides other factors, due to X-inactivation pattern of and I179S were not found in late infantile MLD-patients, what confirms pre- female carriers. vious observation that these two mutations cause MLD of late-onset types. We diagnosed biochemically 35 hemizygotes and 51 heterozygotes from Interestingly, I179S always occured in a heterozygous state. nineteen Czech and Slovak families with Fabry disease. Mutations were found by direct sequencing of purified RT-PCR products from affected P1190. Delineation of genes and mutations involved in the males or carrier females from 13 unrelated families. Nine new mutations various clinical forms of ceroid lipofuscinoses in France. were identified, each in a single family; Q280K, L294X, D155H, A153V, C. Caillaud, J. P. Puech, J. Manicom, L. Poenaru G43D, IVS 1+2, IVS 5+3, Ex2, and c. 734del59. In the remaining four fam- Laboratoire de Gntique, INSERM U129; Paris, France ilies, four previously reported mutations were found; R301X, R342Q, caillaud@cochin.inserm.fr Q340X, and N215S. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are inherited neurodegenerative disorders ARMS or PCR-RFLPmethods were designed for specific detection of each characterized by the accumulation of autofluorescent lipopigments in vari- of the mutations. To unravel the impact of X-inactivation status on clinical ous tissues. Four NCLforms are distinguished according to clinical and manifestation of Fabry disease in heterozygote females we optimised morphological features ; infantile (INCL), late infantile (LINCL), juvenile method for determination of X-inactivation pattern in tissues. (JNCL) and adult (ANCL). Eight loci have been described as responsible These studies permit precise heterozygote detection, prenatal diagnosis for these different forms, among which two encode soluble enzymes ; and further define the heterogeneity of mutations in alpha-galactosidase A palmitoyl-protein thioesterase (CLN1), tripeptidyl-peptidase I (CLN2). In gene causing Fabry disease. It also helps to delineate phenotype-geno- LINCL, the most common clinical form in France, the CLN2 locus was fre- type correlation. Determination of X-inactivation pattern can be used in fur- quently involved, as demonstrated by the presence of a tripeptidyl-pepti- ther studies of Fabry disease clinical manifestations in heterozygotes. dase I (TPP-I) deficiency in a majority of patients. Complete sequencing of Supported by grant projectsIGAMZ ?R NE 5770-3-99 and VS 96127 the CLN2 exons showed the predominance of two previously reported mutations (3556 G->C and Arg208Stop), accounting each for 30 % of the P1188. Identification of a novel alpha-galactosidase A muta- alleles. Various novel mutations such as deletions, splice or nonsense tion in a Japanese case of Fabry disease with systemic mutations were characterized on the other alleles. Some LINCLpatients inflammatory findings had no TPP-I deficiency and are likely candidate for the CLN6 or CLN7 M. Iga loci. One patient with a juvenile form exhibited a TPP-I deficiency and car- Miyazaki Medical College; Miyazaki, Japan ried the 3556 G->C mutation in association with a novel point mutation. A myiga@fc.miyazaki-med.ac.jp palmitoyl-protein thioesterase (PPT) deficiency was found in most of the Anovel single point mutation, G43D in exon 1 of alpha-galactosidase A INCL patients tested. The first CLN1 mutations characterized in these (alpha-Gal) was identified in a Japanese of Fabry disease. The patient patients were previously reported mutations, except one novel point muta- complained high fever and arthralgia. Inflammatory findings were seen on tion. The study of the CLN3, CLN6, CLN7 and CLN8 loci is in progress laboratory analysis in addition to typical presentation of Fabry disease. The among the uncharacterized patients. Delineation of the various loci administration of prednisolone was effective to improve them. The alpha- involved in NCLwill allow a reliable genetic counselling and prenatal diag- Gal cDNAfrom the patient and his parents was synthesized and amplified nosis to couples at-risk for these diseases. by RT-PCR. DNAsequence analysis of 10 clones derived from each fam- ily member was performed. Asingle amino acid substitution G43D was P1191.Molecular Genetics of Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis found in 10 clones of the patient, 4 clones of his mother. No substitution in Portugal was found in his father. The wild type alpha-Gal cDNAand the alpha-Gal C. A. F. Teixeira1, A. Guimares2, M. J. Ferreira2, L. Lopes3, E. Pinto3, S. cDNAcarrying G43D mutation derived from the patient were used for tran- Rocha3, C. Caseiro3, M. C. S. Miranda3, M. G. R. Ribeiro3 sient expression in COS-7 cells. Northern blot assay showed that there 1Genetic Neurobiology Department, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celu- was no difference between the wild type alpha-Gal and the mutant alpha- lar; Porto, Portugal; 2Department of Pathology and Molecular Immunology, Gal G43D in the level of mRNA of alpha-Gal. However, the calculated ICBAS; Neuropathology Department, HGSA; Porto, Portugal; 3Genetic alpha-Gal activity for G43D was 1% of that for the wild type alpha-Gal. Neurobiology Department, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular; Enzi- These findings indicate that G43D is a specific mutation which causes defi- mology Department, Instituto de Gentica Mdica Jacinto Magalhes; ciency of alpha-Gal activity without reduction of mRNAand results in Fabry Porto, Portugal disease. Because this is a novel mutation, G43D might be relevant to the gribeiro@ibmc.up.pt atypical phenotype of this patient. The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are recessively inherited neu- rodegenerative disorders characterised by the intralysosomal accumula- P1189.Results of a screening for most common mutations in tion of autofluorescent lipopigments. Four variants are classically distin- metachromatic leukodystrophy patients with different types guished according to clinical and ultrastructural features; infantile (INCL), of the disorder. late-infantile (LINCL), juvenile (JNCL) and adult (ANCL). Currently there A. Lugowska1, A. Tylki-Szymanska2, B. Loeschl3, B. Czartoryska1, J. are at least 8 genetically different variants and an accurate differentiation Berger4, B. Molzer3 requires a multidisciplinary approach. Eighteen unrelated Portuguese 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology; Warsaw, Poland; 2Child Health patients presenting a clinical course and histopathological alterations of Centre; Warsaw, Poland; 3Institute of Neurology, University of Vienna; NCLhave been studied. Based on clinical and morphological data 4 main Vienna, Austria; 4Brain Research Institute, University of Vienna; Vienna, groups were established; INCL/GROD (n=1), LINCL/CVP (n=3), Austria JNCL/FPP(n=7) and vLINCL/CVP+FPP(n=7). The enzymatic determina- lugowska@ipin.edu.pl tion of PPTand TPPI enzymatic activities in patient cell extracts, using syn- Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD; Mc Kusick 250100) - a genetically thetic fluorogenic substrates, showed that INCLwas caused by a deficient based metabolic disorder leads to demyelination of central and peripheral PPTactivity whereas the LINCLwas due to a defective TPPI activity, thus nervous system. It is caused by deficient activity of arylsulphatase A establishing the diagnosis of CLN1 and CLN2, respectively. Mutation (ARSA; EC 3.1.6.1) which initiates the degradation of sulfatide - an essen- analysis by screening the 1.02kb deletion within CLN3 gene showed that tial component of the myelin. Three types of MLD are distinguished; late JNCLpatients were all homozygous for the same gene defect. The vLIN- infantile, juvenile, and adult. Mutations 459+1G>Aand P426Lwere most CLpatients presented a normal TPPI activity. The data suggest that 2 clin- frequently found in MLD-patients from Western Europe. Each of these ical forms of NCL, the JNCLand the vLINCL, associated respectively to mutations accounted for 25% of all investigated MLD alleles. Mutation CLN3 gene and to an yet cloned gene, might be prevalent in Portugal. The I179S was previously described to be the most common one among Pol- work was supported in part by the Portuguese Health Ministery. ish late juvenile MLD-patients. Ascreening for these three mutations was performed in 33 unrelated MLD-patients from Poland; 12 individuals with P1192.Unusual clinical presentation in two cases of multiple late infantile, 15 - with juvenile, and 6 - with adult types of MLD. Genomic sulfatase deficiency DNAwas isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes and PCR-RFLPmeth- S. Cuevas1, R. Rivera1, E. Blanco1, S. Kofman1, C. Medina2, M. Valdes3, ods were used. Prevalence of 459+1G>Ain the whole collective of MLD- W. B. Rizzo4 patients was 21%. 459+1G>Aaccounted for 42% of investigated alleles in 1Hospital General de Mexico; Mexico D.F., Mexico; 2Centro Medico de late infantile, 10% in juvenile, and 8% in adult MLD-patients. Prevalence of Occidente; Mexico DF, Mexico; 3Instituto Nacional de Ortopedia; Mexico P426Lin all MLD-patients was 18%. P426Laccounted for 67% of exam- DF, Mexico; 4Medical College of Virginia; Virginia, United States334 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease sergioa@servidor.unam.mx P1195. Creation of registration systems of patients with Multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) is an inborn error of metabolism that hereditary Gaucher disease in Russia combines clinical features of late infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy G. V. Smirnova, I. N. Lunga, S. V. Stukalov, T. M. Bukina and mucopolysaccharidosis. The characteristic biochemical abnormality is Medical Genetic Scientific Center RAMN; Moscow, Russian Federation a reduction in the activities of several sulfatases with consequent tissue maria@co.ru accumulation of sulfatides, sulfated glycosaminoglycans, sphingolipids In Russia registration system of patients with Gaucher disease (GD) and steroid sulfates. In this study, we present two unusual cases of MSD belonging to class of hereditary storage diseases has been worked up. with variable enzymatic deficiency of arylsulfatases A, B and C. Both With the help of complex of genetic-epidemiological and clinical genealog- patients lacked hepatosplenomegaly, had broad thumbs and index fingers, ical methods informational arrays about families with patients suffering and exhibited an unusually slow progression of clinical symptoms. Olivo- from GD have been collected. Upon this foundation the computer database pontocerebellar atrophy was present and one patient had a large retro- about Gaucher patients has been created including information on 30 var- cerebellum cyst. Mucopolysaccharides were not detectable in the urine ious sections; general information, methods of diagnostics, clinical status from either subject. Leukocyte arylsulfatase A activity in RJ was 0.46 of proband, state of health of relatives, treatment of proband. Computer nmoles/mg protein/h and in RW was 0.0 nmoles/mg protein/h (normal 0.7- base contains information on 122 cases of GD with various clinical types. 5.0 nmoles/mg protein/h). Leukocyte arylsulfatase B activity in RJ was 24 General analysis of computer database on GD showed such serious prob- nmoles/mg protein/h and in RW 22 nmoles/mg protein/h (normal 115-226 lems as revealing contingents of Gaucher patients and exact diagnostics. nmoles/mg protein/h). Leukocyte arylsulfatase C was in RJ 0.30 Weve executed registration of Gaucher patients and constant renewal of pmoles/mg protein/h and in RW 0.28 pmoles/mg protein/h (normal 0.84 data upon patients addressing to doctor and active revealing patients in pmoles/mg protein/h). In conclusion, we presented two cases of MDS with medical institutions. The complication of GD diagnostics is related with mild clinical presentations not previously reported and variable enzymatic exclusive clinical polymorphism of this pathology and availability of hardly deficiency of arylsulfatases A, B and C. distinguishable geno- and phenocopies. Due to this and also to new prospect for Gaucher patients it was greatly important to receive biochem- P1193. Mutational analysis of 24 Niemann-Pick type Aand B ical verification of diagnosis. Diagnosis was confirmed in 66 patients by patients - 20 novel mutations method of enzyme diagnostics (detection of glucocerebrosidase activity) J. Sikora1, H. Pereira1, M. Elleder1, R. Wevers2 and in 43 patients analysis of genome DNA was made and mutations 1Institute for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, 1st Medical Faculty of Charles N370S ? L444Pwere revealed. The created computer database of Gauch- University; Prague, Czech Republic; 2University Hospital Nijmegen, Labo- er patients is used for; revelation of groups of patients for making addi- ratory of Neurology 319; Nijmegen, The Netherlands tional researches for verification of diagnosis made at clinical level; collec- jakub.sikora@lf1.cuni.cz tion of population-statistical material for further development of medical- We have analyzed acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) gene mutations in 24 genetic researches of GD. patients with Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) type Aand B by direct sequenc- ing of gDNA. Eighteen patients originated from former Czechoslovakia, six P1196.Evolution of Gaucher Disease during ERT and its Inter- were from Netherlands. Niemann-Pick disease type Aand B is an autoso- ruption mal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of lysosomal ASM (E.C. M. Ivanova, B. Radeva 3.1.4.12) and the resultant lysosomal sphingomyelin accumulation. There Clinical Genetics, High Medical University-Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria are 21 ASM gene mutations published up to date. Among the patients from pediatr@internet-bg.net former Czechoslovakia (type A- 7 cases, atypical type Avariant - 6 cases, The enzyme replacement with Ceredase and Cerezyme is high effective type B - 5 cases,) eighteen mutations were described, fifteen of them for Gauchers patients type 1. The establishing of this treatment is con- novel. The novel mutations (type Aassociated - fsP189, S248R, D278A, nected with a lot of ?conomical difficulties. The complications after stop- Q292K, W533R; type B associated - G166R, P184L, R228H, A241V, ping the ERTare unknown and the literature data are limited. The aim of R289H, Q292K, R376H, R474W a fsP595) were all in heterozygous state. our work was to evaluate the consequence of ERT interruption.Tree Three novel mutations were identified (Q292K, D251E and L341P) among patients with Gaucher type 1 were investigated. Their diagnosis was con- atypical type Apatients. Mutation Q292K is prevalent among NPD patients firmed with enzyme assays and DNAanalysis. The ERTwas proceed in from former Czechoslovakia (described on 38% of mutated chromo- 1994/1995,1997/1998 and 2000 years. During the ERT there were somes). Six cases (type A- 3 patients, type B - 3 patients) from Nether- improvement of clinical, hematological and biochemical parameters. The 2 lands represent one quarter of Dutch NPD patients. Number of mutations years interruptions because finantinal cause took to appear of epistaxis, in this group was six, five of them novel (type A associated - H319Y, post operative bleeding, bone pains, often infections. The splenohep- F463S, P475L, Y537H, type B associated - P371S). All of the identified atomegaly increased faster. There were registrated spleen infarctions. The mutations were either small deletions or of missense type. We confirmed growth development delay significantly. The hematological parameter all the novel mutations by PCR\RFLP. worsed. The acid phosphatase and chitotriosidase elevated singnificant- ly.The results of retreatment during 2000 shown that the children need P1194. Clinical And Laboratorial Study Of 21 Cases Of more high doses Cerezyme to rich the primary effect. Our analysis shown Mucopolysaccharidoses that the interruption of ERTcost more expensive as the regularly continued P. S. Gerritsen Plaggert1, L. M. J. Albano1, S. M. M. Sugayama1, L. treatment with Ceredase and Cerezyme and has negative psychosocial Toma2, J. Coelho3, R. Giugliani3, C. A. Kim1 effects.In conclusion we not recommende interruption of ERTfor Gauch- 1Genetics, Instituto da Criana; So Paulo, Brazil; 2Molecular Biology, ers patients because is dangerous and lifethreatening. UNIFESP; So Paulo, Brazil; 3Medical Genetics, Hospital de Clnicas; Porto Alegre, Brazil P1197. Investigating roles for two human proteins with very plaggert@aol.com long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase activity in the biochemical The mucopolysaccharidoses(MPS)are a heterogeneous group of inborn abnormality of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy errors of lysosomal glycosaminoglycan metabolism. The importance of this S. J. Steinberg, A. K. Heinzer, K. D. Smith, P. A. Watkins group of disorders among the inborn errors of metabolism lead us to report Kennedy Krieger Institute and Johns Hopkins University School of Medi- 21 cases. We performed clinical, radiological and biochemical evaluations cine; Baltimore, MD United States of the suspected patients, wich allowed us to establish a definitive diagno- steinbergs@kennedykrieger.org sis in 21 cases. The diagnosis was made in average at the age of 51 Mutations in the ALD gene are the molecular basis of X-linked mo(ranging from 7 mo to 19 y). The patients were classified as follows; adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). Greater than 60% of these mutations result Hurler-MPS I(2 cases); Hunter-MPS II(2 cases); Sanfilippo-MPS III(3 in an absence of ALD protein (hALDP) in the peroxisomal membrane of cases); Morquio-MPS IV(4 cases); Maroteaux-Lamy-MPS VI(9 cases); and cultured fibroblasts. Peroxisomes isolated from human ALD fibroblasts Sly-MPS VII(1 case). The high relative frequency of Maroteaux-Lamy dis- demonstrate a reduced capacity to activate very long chain fatty acids ease contrasts with most reports in the literature and could express a pop- (VLCFAs) to their coenzyme A derivatives and, thus, presumably have ulational variability. Not all patients showed increased GAG levels in urine, diminished very long-chain acyl-CoAsynthetase (VLCS) activity. However, therefore, normal urinary GAG pattern does not rule out the possibility of a hALDPis not a VLCS and its function remains elusive. We have cloned two MPS. Diagnosis is not easy and confirmation is based with specific enzi- human genes that have VLCS activity; hVLCS and bubblegum (hBG). In matic investigation. addition to their capacity to activate VLCFAs, both hVLCS and hBG are active towards a broad range of substrates, including long chain, mono- and polyunsaturated and branched-chain fatty acids. hVLCS is expressed primarily in liver and kidney, although its transcript is detectable in brain; inPosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 335 contrast, hBG is expressed principally in brain. Northern blots have P1200.Molecular Analysis of Carnitine Acylcarnitine Translo- revealed decreased bubblegum gene expression in ALD fibroblasts. Asim- case Deficiency in Twelve Patients ; Application for Prenatal ilar result was obtained using reverse transcription-PCR. Endogenous Diagnosis. hVLCS is localized to both the peroxisome and endoplasmic reticulum, M. Brivet1, J. Costa2, A. Slama1, A. Boutron1, A. Legrand1, C. Costa1 whereas hBG has a plasma membrane and cytosolic localization. Tran- 1Hpital Bictre AP-HP; Le Kremlin Bictre, France; 2Hpital Americain de sient overexpression of hBG or hVLCS in ALDP-deficient fibroblasts does Paris; Neuilly, France not correct the defect in peroxisomal -oxidation that results from the faulty catherine.costa@bct.ap-hop-paris.fr activation step. However, co-overexpression of hVLCS and hALDP in CACT deficiency is a rare severe autosomal recessive disorder of long ALDP-deficient cells has a synergistic effect and restores -oxidation chain fatty acid oxidation and has a bad prognosis. Amultiplex PCR fol- beyond that obtained with hALDP alone. Further studies to elucidate a lowed by cycle-sequencing was developed to detect mutations in the putative interplay between hALDPand hVLCS and/or hBG are in progress. CACTgene. The entire coding regions, intron/exon splice junctions were amplified in a single tube by multiplex PCR using 9 pairs of primers and the P1198.Gestational Loss Is AComplex Trait In The Long-chain PCR products were submitted to cycle sequencing. Genomic DNAanaly- Acyl-CoADehydrogenase Deficient Mouse Model sis was performed in 12 unrelated patients and was confirmed in parents P. A. Wood, P. S. Berger, D. A. Hamm, C. A. Pinkert in 9 families. On the 24 alleles, 11 molecular abnormalities were identified, University of Alabama at Birmingham; Birmingham, ALUnited States two of them at a higher frequency. Among these two, a homozygote splic- paw@uab.edu ing mutation (261-10T->G) already described in 2 eurasian patients, was We previously found a significant reduction from the expected number of found in 3 unrelated asiatic patients. Two point mutations at the same mice born that were either heterozygous (45% of expected) or homozy- codon (R178X, R178Q) were found in 3 other unrelated north-african fam- gous (60% of expected) for the null allele for long-chain acyl-CoAdehy- ilies. Prenatal diagnosis carried out by our group were previously per- drogenase (LCAD). We hypothesized that this may be due to either an formed by enzymatic methods on cultured cells (trophoblasts or amnio- energy deficiency in the embryo or a toxic effect on the embryo in the het- cytes). However results were obtained after several weeks of cell growth. erozygous or homozygous mother. Since development from morula to Mutation identification has allowed a prenatal diagnosis in 4 families. In 2 blastocyst is a major energy consuming process, we hypothesized that families mutation analysis was started only after amniotic fluid sampling LCAD deficient embryos would exhibit reduced developmental compe- and prenatal diagnosis conducted on cultured amniocytes. In the two other tence as demonstrated by a failure to proceed from compaction through families genomic studies were performed on crude chorionic villi and result blastocoel formation. To investigate the development of early embryos of was obtained in 3 days. Two carriers, an affected foetus and an unaffect- all three genotypes (LCAD+/+, +/-, -/-), we cultured early embryos from day ed foetus were identified. Long chain fatty acid oxidation assays and CACT 1 post-copulation to day 8. We found a significant decrease in LCAD-/- activity measurements, performed on cultured trophoblasts and/or amnio- embryos starting at days 3-4 (morula to blastocyst stages) resulting in a cytes confirmed the results one month later. 8.7% survival rate as compared to 56% survival rate in LCAD+/+, and 32% survival rate in LCAD+/- embryos (p=0.012, ANOVA). We also have P1202. The modification of the tridimensional conformation observed that we have been unable to develop congenic LCAD+/- mouse of HMGCoALyase caused by novel mutations explains the 3- lines on the C57BL/6 background due to the severe rate of loss of offspring OH-3-metilglutaric aciduria in two patients in G2 when backcrossing mice with the B6,129 starting genetic back- R. Aledo1, N. Casals1, C. Mir1, P. Gomez2, R. Roca3, D. Serra2, G. Asins2, ground, whereas the backcrosses done using 129/SvEv mice yielded the J. Pi4, J. Lloberas5, J. Crespo6, J. Abdenur6, G. Besley7, A. Valencia8, F. expected ratio of offspring with the mutant allele (~50%). We speculate that Hedgardt2 there is a profound modifier gene(s) in the B6 background that promotes 1Unit of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat Internacional de for gestational loss that is independent of the energy deficiency that Catalunya; Sant Cugat, Spain; 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecu- appears to be correlated with a simple gene dosage effect in the cultured lar Biology, School of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona; Barcelona, embryos. These studies are particularly important to help understand the Spain; 3Protein Design Group (CNB-CSCIC), Cantoblanco; Madrid, Spain; fact that no human LCAD deficient patient has been documented. 4Unit of Human Physiology, College of Huesca, University of Zaragoza; Zaragoza, Spain; 5Department of Physiology (Immunology, Macrophage P1199.Clinical manifestation of muscular carnitine palmitoyl- Biology), School of Biology, University of Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; transferase II deficiency in infancy - detection by a new and 6Fundacin para el Estudio de las Enfermedades Neurometablicas; non-invasive strategy using tandem mass spectrometry Buenos Aires, Argentina; 7Willink Biochemical Genetic Unit; Manchester, K. E. Gempel1, S. Hofmann1, B. F. Pontz2, K. Gerbitz1, M. F. Bauer1 United Kingdom; 8Protein Design Group (CNB-CSIC), Cantoblanco; 1Institute for Clinical Chemistry, KH Munich-Schwabing; Munich, Germany; Madrid, Spain 2Department of Paediatrics of the Technical University Munich; Munich, raledo@csc.unica.edu Germany 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaric aciduria (HA) is an autosomal recessive inborn Klaus.Gempel@lrz.uni-muenchen.de error of metabolism produced by mutation in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl- Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT-II), an enzyme associated with the CoAlyase (HL) gene. HLis a mitochondrial enzyme, which catalyses the inner mitochondrial membrane, plays a crucial role in the transport of long- last step of both ketogenesis and leucine catabolism. Two novel point chain fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix for b-oxidation. CPT-II defi- mutations in HLgene were found in patients from Argentina and United ciency is an autosomal recessive disorder which presents itself as two phe- Kingdom with biochemically diagnosed 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric notypes; a severe infantile form and a milder muscular form which typical- aciduria. Mutations Ser201Tyr and Asp204Asn, one in each patient, were ly manifests around puberty. Patients with the adult form suffer from mus- detected by sequencing the PCR amplified exons. The Ser201Tyr mutation cular pain, rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria triggered by extensive exer- interferes with the proper assembly of the substrate as demostrated in a cise. Currently, the diagnosis is based on the determination of CPT tridimensional model of HMGCoA lyase, and the Asp204Asn mutation enzyme activity in muscle biopsies or fibroblasts. Here we report a non- breaks the interaction Asp204-His233 responsible for the nucleophilic invasive diagnostic strategy based on the tandem mass spectrometric attack to the substrate. The mutational changes in tridimensional models (TMS) determination of acylcarnitines, which allows the detection of CPT- of HMGCoAlyase and their implications in the patients phenotypes are II deficiency in serum samples. In CPT-II deficiency, long chain acylcar- discussed. nitines accumulate in the serum thereby generating a highly characteristic TMS spectrum. These spectra are characterized by distinct elevations of P1203.Inborn Error of Metabolic Diseases in Malaysia palmitoyl-, oleoyl-, stearoyl-carnitine. They are consistently obtained in all Y. Choy1, Z. Mohd. Yunus2, D. Pertiwi2, Z. Ismail2 CPT-II patients, are absent in patients with unspecific muscle symptoms 1Pediatric Institute, Kuala Lumpur Hospital; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; 2Insti- and controls, and differ markedly from that of other inborn errors of lipid tute of Medical Research; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia metabolism. We propose that TMS of serum acylcarnitines allows us to choyo2tm.net.my easily screen suspect cases, thereby facilitating a rapid diagnosis and low- The exact incidence of many inborn error of metabolic diseases (IEMD) are ering the risk of serious complications. In some cases, TMS together with unknown in many parts of the world especially the developing countries molecular genetic testing even renders it possible to establish the diagno- due to lack of diagnostic facilities and lack of awareness among the physi- sis without undertaking a muscle biopsy. This view is supported by the cians in these countries. In fact, certain IEMD may be more common in recent identification of a child presenting the typical symptoms of the adult these countries due to higher incidence of consanguinity. In Malaysia, lab- form of CPT-II deficiency. oratory diagnosis of IEMD was not available till recently. Under the Health Ministry New Policy we were able to set up a number of specialized diag- nostic tests. Using High Performance Liquid chromatography for amino336 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease acid analysis and Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry for organic syndrome. These are definite disturbances of aminoacid metabolism asso- analysis we were able to confirm some of the amino acidopathies and ciated with mental retardation. The molecular defects with metabolic blocks organic acidurias. Out of the 470 samples received from all over the coun- and accumulations of some metabolites in the body fluids explain the clin- try from June 1999 till June 2000, 28 cases of IEMD have been confirmed ical features. We also include a case of sarcosinemia, a case of histidin- using these tests. Out of these 28 cases, 7 cases of maple syrup urine dis- uria, rare and controversial genetic disorders concerning neurologic abnor- ease (MSUD), 4 cases of tyrosinemia type I, 8 cases of urea cycle defects malities determination. (UCD), 3 cases of methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), 3 cases of 3-hydroxy- isobutyric acidemia, 1 case each of phenylketonuria, non-ketotic hyper- P1206.Alkaptonuria in Slovakia; Thirty two years of research glycinemia (NKH) and propionic acidemia (PA) were diagnosed. Three out on phenotype and genotype of the eight cases of UCD were citrulinemia. Consanguinity of the parents S. Srsen1, C. R. Mueller2, A. Fregin2, K. Srsnova1 was found in 8 of these cases (30%). History of neonatal death in siblings 1Jessenius Faculty of Medicine; Martin, Slovakia; 2Department of Human occurred in 6 cases (21%) and there was history of similar illness in the Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany other living siblings in 3 cases (13%). These cases were definitely the tip crm@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de of an iceberg and phenylketonuria was probably under-represented as The research programme on alkaptonuria (AKU; OMIM # 203500) in Slo- most of the tests were done for sick children admitted to hospitals. But his vakia was started in 1968 by the Institute of Clinical Genetics at Martin and, data provides us a good argument for carrying out newborn screening for in its first stage, was focussed on clinical, biochemical, genetic and epi- IEMD in the country as part of our effort to prevent and reduce genetic demiological questions. Based on a screening programme of now 610.000 causes of mental and physical handicap. inhabitants (including 509.000 newborns) the world-wide highest incidence of AKU (1 in 19.000) was recorded and a total of 208 patients (including P1204.Values of Urine Amino Acid in Pre-term Infants; Com- 110 children) were registered. Through the co-operation of the families, parison of Urine Amino Acid Levels Before and After Pre-term extensive genealogical studies (sometimes over 2 centuries) were made Formula or Human Milk Fed possible. Most AKU ancestors could be traced to their original geographic C. Chuang, S. Lin locations, predominantly in remote mountain regions. A high degree of MacKay Memorial Hospital; Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China inbreeding was noted in these areas. These epidemilogical data formed cck@ms1.mmh.org.tw the basis for molecular studies which began in 1991 in collaboration with The change of amino acid (AA) concentrations in body fluids is critical for the Wuerzburg group. The AKU locus was mapped to human chromosome the diagnosis of aminoacidopathy and malnutrition. Because of the lower 3q2 by orthology to the mouse locus aku, the homogentisate 1,2 dioxyge- physiological maturity of organs in pre-term infants, AA metabolism is nase genes (HGD) were cloned from mouse and man and nine different affected that results in inconsistency of AAconcentrations in the body flu- mutations were identified in AKU patients; These include 4 missense, 2 ids, especially in urine. In order to accurately interpret urine AAresults, splice-site, 2 insertion and one novel 1 bp deletion mutation. The most fre- well-documented urine AAcontrol values for pre-term infants are absolute- quent mutations in Slovakia are G161R and c.1278insC (P370fs) which ly required. In our study, we report the control range of urine AAconcen- were found on 16 (= 40 %) and 7 (= 17.5 %), respectively, of the 40 AKU trations in pre-term infants before and after formula or human milk fed, in chromosomes from the 20 index cases. To date, the genotypes of 28 the mean time, we also evaluate the difference of individual AAconcentra- patients and 68 relatives from 20 families have been established and tion among these 5 groups by proceeding statistical analysis. Urine amino served as the basis for genetic counselling. The highest incidence and acid levels (in nmol/mg cretinine) were measured by ion-exchange chro- allelic heterogeneity was observed in the Kysuce district (125.500 inhabi- matography method. Urine samples were collected from 34 pre-term (28 - tants) with 5 different mutations on 11 AKU chromosomes. An analysis of 35 Wks) infants before the first milk feeding, 1 and 4 weeks after milk fed, the association between HGD intragenic markers and mutations and of the in which 12 infants fed with human milk and the rest 22 fed with pre-term geographical origins of the AKU chromosomes suggests that several formula milk with regular amounts. When comparing the urine AAvalues founders have contributed to the HGD gene pool. While there is no before and after milk fed by pair-t test, a significant mean difference was straightforward explanation for this clustering of independent mutations, found between the first milk feeding group and the 1st week after milk fed subsequent genetic isolation is likely to be responsible for the high preva- group (p < 0.05), however, an insignificant mean difference was obtained lence of AKU in Slovakia. between the first milk feeding group and the 4th week after milk fed group. For individual AA, all the infants either fed with formula or human milk P1207. Biotin deficiency effects on HCS and carboxylases showed significant decrease in concentrations of cystine (approximately genetic expression 51.4 to 57.4% ) and tryptophan (approximately 21.5 to 27.3% ). Essential A. Velazquez, R. Rodriguez-Melendez, S. Cano-Colin, S. Mendez-Cruz amino acids, such as valine, leucine, isoleucine, and phenylalanine, National Autonomous University of Mexico; Mexico, D.F., Mexico; showed significant decrease in concentrations in the formula fed groups, velare@servidor.unam.mx but not in the human milk fed groups. Conclusively, urine AAlevels in pre- Biotin deficiency is a nutritional phenocopy of Multiple Carboxylase Defi- term infants is 2 - 4 folds higher than that of full-term infants, and this con- ciency. Regulation of genetic expression of carboxylases and holocar- firmed the lower physiological maturity of digestive function and AAmetab- boxylase synthetase (HCS) is poorly understood, and may have important olism in pre-term infants. In addition, human milk is much better than pre- consequences for their genetic defects. We investigated the regulation of term formula milk in AAs supply for growth and development. Finally, the HCS mRNA and of pyruvate (PC), propionyl CoA (PCC) and 3-methyl new-established urine AAcontrol values is valuable for clinical application, crotonyl CoA(MCC) carboxylases mRNAs and their protein mass, in liver, especially for the diagnosis of AAmetabolic disorders. kidney, muscle and brain. HCS mRNAlevels were significantly reduced. The decrease in HCS mRNAwas reversed when biotin was injected into P1205. Aminoacidopathies with Mental Retardation Diag- deficient animals, the recovery being a delayed effect, apparent over 24 nosed in the Laboratory of Human Genetics of Cluj County hours after vitamin administration. These changes seem to be the first Hospital, Integrated in the Department of Cell and Molecular known instance in mammals, of an effect of a water-soluble vitamin on Biology of University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatie- mRNAfunctionally related to it. On the other hand, the expected carboxy- ganu from Cluj-Napoca, Romania. lases activity decrement was associated with a reduction in the amount of R. C. Vulturar1, I. Benga2, G. Benga3 their enzyme proteins, but not in their mRNAlevels. Only in the brain, PC 1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology ,University of Medicine and and PCC amounts did not change significantly. In conclusion, this work Pharmacy; Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 2Neuro-Psychiatry Clinic of Cluj Coun- provides evidence for biotin being a modulator of the genetic expression of ty Hospital, Department of Paediatric Neurology, University of Medicine the enzymes involved in its function as a cofactor. As such, it may be a use- and Pharmacy; Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 3Department of Cell and Molecular ful model for probing a similar role for other water-soluble vitamins. (Spon- Biology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Laborato- sored by grants from Programa de Apoyo a Proyectos de Investigacin e ry of Human Genetics of Cluj County Hospital; Cluj-Napoca, Romania Innovacin Tecnolgica UNAM, and Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tec- Vulturar.Romana@umfcluj.ro nologa) Plasma and/or urinary aminoacid analyses were performed by a two- dimensional thin layer chromatography procedure (Wadman & al. 1981) in P1208. Molecular and functional studies in patients with the children suspected for having perturbances of aminoacid metabolism. A cblE type of homocystinuria. number of over 1700 samples from patients reffered by the Neuro-Psychi- P. Zavadakova1, V. Kozich1, T. Suormala2, B. Fowler2 atry Clinic and other Paediatric services from Cluj-Napoca were analysed 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic disorders; Praha, Czech Republic; 2Univ. between 1980-2000. Out of these, 54 cases were diagnosed as hyper- Child. Hosp.; Basel, Switzerland phenylalaninemias/phenylketonurias, one case of oculocerebrorenal Lowe zavadakp@hotmail.comPosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 337 Methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) is presumably required for reduc- whom a mutation in the OTC gene was not found on clinical testing. The tive activation of methionine synthase which remethylates homocysteine. 15N U/G ratio in this patient showed a severe reduction of in vivourea cycle MTRR deficiency is a putative cause of the cblE type of homocystinuria, a activity that correlated with deficient OTC activity in her liver, level of orot- rare autosomal recessive disorder. This disease manifests in childhood ic aciduria, and severe clinical phenotype. Stable isotope studies may pro- with megaloblastic anaemia, neurological disease and psychomotor retar- vide a sensitive tool in combination with other measures to aid in the diag- dation. MTRR gene mutations are reported in 9 patients with cblE type of nosis of at risk OTCD females. The decision to resort to orthotopic liver homocystinuria but normal and mutant gene products have not yet been transplantation (OLT) in OTCD females is controversial requiring consider- characterised. ation of phenotypic severity, access to tertiary care centers, and social fac- Our ongoing studies are directed at the molecular characterisation of an tors. In this patient, the use of this diagnostic approach in conjunction with additional 7 patients with clinical, biochemical and enzymological evidence a consideration of her clinical history and medical-social situation led to a of functional methionine synthase deficiency and cblE confirmed by com- decision for OLT. plementation studies. In one case we identified homozygosity for a 140 bp insertion (903ins140) P1211. Ornithine Transcarbamylase(otc)deficiency; Mutation caused by a T->C transition within intron 6 of the MTRR gene, presumably Spectrum, Haplotypic Background And Diagnosis leading to exon splicing enhancer activation. First trimester prenatal diag- L. C. C. Azevedo1, L. Vilarinho2, A. Amorim3 nosis was possible in this family by analysis of this mutation. Another 1IPATIMUP; Porto, Portugal; 2IGMJM; Porto, Portugal; 3Faculdade de patient was heterozygous for a deletion of exon 2 at the mRNAlevel, the Cincias da UP/ IPATIMUP; Porto, Portugal only nucleotide change in exon 2 and flanking intronic regions was an luisa.azevedo@ipatimup.pt intronic mutation, IVS-201G->A. The mechanism by which this intronic Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC; EC 2.1.3.3) deficiency is the most com- mutation leads to exon 2 skipping is unknown. Transient transfection of two mon inborn error of the urea cycle and shows an X-linked inheritance with cblE fibroblast cell lines with a eukaryotic expression vector containing wild frequent new mutations. Inherited deficiency of OTC in hemizygous affect- type MTRR cDNA, revealed 2.2 and 3 fold increases of methionine syn- ed males usually results in severe ammonia intoxication, lethargy, vomiting thesis, compared with untransfected cells. Restoration of methionine syn- and early death. Mild forms of OTC deficiency may be present later, even thase activity following transfection with wild type MTRR supports, with a during adulthood. Symptoms and signs may include coma, mental retar- functional assay, the idea that cblE is due to defects in the MTRR gene. dation, protein avoidance, headache, bizarre behaviour, or episodic hyper- ammonemia. The broad aim of this study is to provide biochemical and P1209.Protein aggregation - a common cause of cystathion- molecular characterisation of OTC deficiencies, and diagnosis of OTC ine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency. asymptomatic carrier status in Portuguese affected families. Biochemical M. Janosik1, J. Oliveriusova2, J. P. Kraus2, V. Kozich1 diagnosis is established by the finding of; increased plasma ammonia and 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University; Prague, glutamine; decreased plasma citrulline and increased urine orotate excre- Czech Republic; 2University of Colorado, Health Sciences Center; Denver, tion. Tests of proteins and allopurinol loading are used in an attempt to CO United States detect carrier females when biochemical determinations are inconclusive. mjano@lf1.cuni.cz By PCR amplification followed by SSCPand HCSGE, we have detected Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) - the key enzyme in the transsulfura- two recurrent mutations (R141Q and G195R) and a novel mutation in the tion pathway of homocysteine - is a homotetramer of 63-kDa subunits. donor splice site of intron 2 (IVS2 +1 g?t). R141Q and G195R mutations Each subunit binds five ligands; serine and homocysteine as substrates, were found in two unrelated females, and IVS2 +1 was found in a male cofactor pyridoxal-5-phosphate, allosteric activator S-adenosylmethionine with 10% of OTC activity determined by hepatic biopsy. Haplotypic infor- and heme with unknown function. Deficiency of CBS is the most common mation obtained with two flanking markers of OTC gene (DXS997 and cause of homocystinuria. The majority of mutations are missense muta- DXS1068) and four intragenic markers (Ex4 46; IVS3-8nt; IVS4-7nt; Ex8 tions with unknown impact on protein function. We determined the degree 270) was performed in affected families in order to provide information of assembly of CBS subunits in cultured skin fibroblasts of 13 patients with about lineage haplotypes. CBS deficiency. The native western blot analysis showed only high molec- ular weight aggregates, and absence of the tetramer. Five selected P1212. Evidence for Neuron Apoptosis Induced by Hyper- mutants - A114V, A155T, E176K, I278Tand del ex12 - were expressed in phenylalanine E. coli. All mutants formed aggregates lacking heme while only the A114V X. Gu1, X. Yang2, R. Chen2 mutant yielded traces of active CBS heme-containing tetramer. An ongoing 1Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research; Shanghai, China; 2Xin Hua study will determine the effect of chemical chaperones on the folding of Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University; Shanghai, China mutant CBS using both an E.coli and an eukaryotic expression systems. xhkj@public.sta.net.cn Our results show that the decreased affinity and/or inability to bind heme Objective This study is to investigate the neurotoxicity of hyperphenylala- prevent correct folding and subsequent tetramer formation of mutant CBS. nine and to explore the possible mechanisms. Methods The primary cul- This can make the mutants less stable, prone to misfolding and aggrega- tured cortical and hippocampal neurons of embryonic rat were cultured in tion. We postulate that, similarly to other genetic defects, mutant CBS mis- Neurobasal, exposed to hyperphenylalanine (Phe) and assayed the sur- folding and aggregation may be the primary defect in a significant propor- vival rate. The morphological changes were observed by special staining. tion of homocystinuric patients. bcl-2, fas and c-fos were tested by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Results The survival rate of cortical neurons was significantly decreased P1210. Use of an integrated approach to diagnose and man- compared to normal controls in present Phe at 300 mol/L, 600 mol/L, age a symptomatic ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency 1200 mol/L and shown a dose dependent. Positive apoptotic neurons female increased with the concentration of Phe by TUNELstaining and observed F. Scaglia1, Q. Zheng1, W. OBrien1, J. Henry2, J. Rosenberger2, P. under electronic microscope. The positive neurons of fas and c-fos Reeds2, B. Lee1 increased than normal control by immunohistochemistry with the exception 1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medi- of bcl-2. The mRNAexpression of c-fos increased accordingly while that of cine; Houston, TX United States; 2Childrens Nutrition Research Center bcl-2 decreased. Conclusion Apoptotic neurons were induced by hyper- and Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX phenylalanine. The abnormal expression of some genes may hasten the United States neuronal apoptosis, such as the upregulation of fas and c-fos genes and fscaglia@bcm.tmc.edu the downregulation of bcl-2. Females with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) have a het- erogeneous clinical expression. Diagnosing at risk OTCD females is P1213.X-linked ichthyosis; utilization of FISH and PCR in the important for determining reproductive risks and preventing potentially cat- analysis of the frequent occurrence of deletions of the STS astrophic hyperammonemia. Diagnosis of partial OTCD during asympto- gene in Mexico matic periods is difficult. The allopurinol challenge used in the diagnosis of A. Jimenez1, M. Valdes2, L. M. Gonzalez1, R. Rivera1, S. Kofman1, S. OTCD females may give rise to both false negatives and positives, and Cuevas1 DNA diagnosis is unable to detect mutations in all cases, especially in 1Hospital General de Mexico; Mexico DF, Mexico; 2Instituto Nacional de OTCD females or unusual presentations in males. We have previously Ortopedia; Mexico DF, Mexico used the ratio of isotopic enrichments of 15N urea/15N glutamine (15N-U/G) sergioa@servidor.unam.mx as a sensitive index of in vivourea cycle activity. We have now applied this X-linked ichthyosis (XLI) is due to the steroid sulfatase (STS) deficiency. method in an integrated approach to aid in the diagnosis and prospective STS assay, PCR and FISH analyses are useful to establish diagnosis and management of a symptomatic female with suspected partial OTCD in to discard XLI-carriers. The present study analyzes the frequency and size338 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease of molecular deletions of the steroid sulfatase (STS) encoding gene in a INSERM, France] sample of 90 Mexican subjects with biochemical diagnosis of X-linked ichthyosis (XLI). XLI patients were analyzed through STS assay, PCR P1216.Investigation of inborn errors of purine and pyrimidine amplification of the 5-3 ends and flanking markers of the STS gene and metabolism FISH analysis. No amplification of the 3 and 5-ends of the STS gene by R. Giguere, D. Cyr, C. Auray-Blais, B. Lemieux PCR was detected in the DNAof 86 patients, 2 samples presented a nor- Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke; Sherbrooke, PQ Canada mal amplification, 1 amplified the 3 end and 1 amplified the 5 end of the rgiguere@courrier.usherb.ca gene. FISH analysis was positive for XLI in 87 patients, the 3 patients that In the last decade, there have been many exciting developments in the showed a normal hibridization pattern were a point mutation and 2 intra- field of inborn errors of purine and pyrimidine metabolism. These disorders genic deletions. 32 patients presented the rupture sites at flanking markers should be suspected in any case of unexplained anaemia, failure to thrive, DXS996 and DXS278, 24 patients had the breakpoints at flanking markers susceptibility to recurrent infection or neurological deficits with no current DXS996 and DXS1134 and the rest (24 subjects) showed heterogeneous diagnosis, including autism, cerebral palsy, developmental delay, deaf- rupture sites. This report shows a very high frequency and heterogeneous ness, epilepsy, self-mutilation, muscle weakness, inability to walk or talk, pattern of deletions in the human STS encoding gene in a representative gout and sometimes renal disease. The diagnosis of the majority of the sample of the Mexican population, and it defines the characteristics of known inherited defects of purine and pyrimidine metabolism can be FISH analysis and PCR to diagnose XLI patients achieved by the analysis of urinary excretion profiles by reversed phase high-performance liquid chromatography and multi-wavelengh UV detec- P1214. Intragenic deletion of 3 bp of the STS gene causing tion. Once perfected, this technique has important clinical applications for XLI ichthyosis. high-risk screening and follow up. We have established control values for M. Valdes1, A. Jimenez2, R. Rivera2, S. Kofman2, S. Cuevas2 sixteen different metabolites, thus permitting the possibility of diagnosing 1Instituto Nacional de Ortopedia; Mexico DF, Mexico; 2Hospital General de thirteen different diseases. Since the beginning of our analyses (October Mexico; Mexico DF, Mexico 1998), we have found seven positive cases; one molybdenum cofactor sergioa@servidor.unam.mx deficiency, one dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency and five ade- Steroid sulfatase (STS) deficiency is an inherited error of metabolism caus- nine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency. The analysis of purines and ing X-linked ichthyosis (XLI). Onset is at birth or early after birth and it is pyrimidines is a useful tool when investigating prenatal and neonatal dis- clinically characterized by dark, regular and adherent scales of skin. eases. Approximately 85-90% of XLI patients have large deletions of the STS gene and flanking sequences. Only seven patients have been reported P1217.Clinical heterogeneity and molecular basis of MyoAd- with partial deletions of the STS gene. These include; a deletion within enilate Deaminase Deficiency (MADD). Aguennouz M., intron 7 extending over exons 8-10 of the STS gene; a partial deletion that Rodolico C., Ciranni A., Migliorato A., Musumeci O., Vita G, included exon 10; an intragenic deletion spanning exons 2-5; a partial dele- and Toscano A. tion within intron 1 and between flanking sequences DXS1131 and M. Aguennouz, C. Rodolico, A. Ciranni, A. Migliorato, O. Musumeci, G. DXS1133. It has also been reported two unrelated cases with partial dele- Vita, A. Toscano tions at the 5 end of the STS gene. In this study we describe an intragenic Clinica Neurologica 2; Messina, Italy deletion of the STS gene in an XLI patient and his mother. The subject and aguenoz@www.unime.it his mother were classified through STS assay in leukocytes using 7-[3H]- Background; MyoAdenilate Deaminase Deficiency (MADD) is responsible dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate as a substrate. Exons 1-10 of the STS of a bening metabolic myopathy characterized by muscle fatiguability, gene were analyzed by PCR and DNAsequence analysis. STS activity cramps, myalgias, and more rarely, exertional myoglobinuria (primary was undetectable in the XLI patient (0.0 pmol/mg protein/h) and very low form). The most known molecular defect of MADD is the nonsense muta- in his mother (0.32 pmol/mg protein/h vs 0.84 pmol/mg protein/h of normal tion C34Ttransition at codon 12(Gln to Stop) in exon 2 in AMPD1 gene, control). DNAsequence analysis showed a 3 bp deletion (AAGdel1252) predicting a severely truncated MAD peptide. MADD may also present in within exon 7 of the STS gene in both the patient and his mother. At this association with other neuromuscular disorders in the so called coinci- moment, we have analyzed more than 100 XLI patients and found two par- dental form. Furthermore, it is known that MAD isoform M is abundantly tial deletions of the STS gene. This is the first 3 bp deletion of the STS expressed in type 2b muscle fibers. We have recently observed a number gene causing XLI. of patients with myalgias, reduced percentage of type 2b fibers and low or absent MAD activity and no associated neuromuscular diseases. These P1215.Homozygous form of porphyria variegata in childhood features suggest a third form af MADD that can be defined as secondary E. Malonova1, J. Zeman1, H. Puy2, V. Da Silva2, R. Rosipal1, J. Deybach2, form. Objective; To characterize the clinical, morphological, biochemical P. Martasek1 and molecular aspects of the three forms of MADD. Materials & Methods; 1Department of Paediatrics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University; We investigated 31 unrelated patients with MADD; 5 with the primary form, Prague, Czech Republic; 2Centre Francais des Porphyries; Colombes, 18 with the coincidental form and 8 with the secondary form. Results; -13 France patients are homozygous for the C34Tmutation (5 primary and 8 coinci- emalonova@hotmail.com dental form), presenting with a residual MAD activity <1% of control range. Porphyrias are metabolic disorders caused by decreased activity of - 10 patients with coincidental form are heterozygous for the nonsense enzymes in hem biosynthesis. Their clinical manifestation in early child- mutation and 5 of them had a very low biochemical activity <8%. - 8 hood is rare and include congenital erythropoietic porphyria, erythropoiet- patients with selective muscle type 2b fibers atrophy and a reduced MAD ic protoporphyria and homozygous forms of acute hepatic porphyrias. We activity (4-30%) did not carry the MADD mutation. Conclusion; 1) patients present the results of biochemical and molecular analyses in 3 children with the primary form had the homozygous mutation and residual MAD with homozygous form of porphyria variegata (PV). The clinical symptoms activity <1%; 2) patients with the coincidental form may present with very in two children were already described (1). The third patient is a boy with low activity and homozygous or heterozygous trait for C34T mutation; short stature, short fingers and slight mental retardation who developed 3)patients with the secondary form may have variable residual MAD activ- severe photosensitivity in the age of two years. The plasma fluorescence ity (4 to 30%) but do not carry the most known MADD mutation. emission maximum of 626 nm was pathognomonic for VP, and the increased protoporphyrin (PP-IX) levels in erythrocytes were in agreement P1218.G6PD Deficiency and Genetics in Turkey with our previous description of increased PP-IX levels in homozygous H. Bagci cases with porphyria variegata (2). Genetic analysis was performed by Pamukkale University; DENIZLI, Turkey denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of protoporphyrinogen hbagci@pamukkale.edu.tr oxidase gene and by subsequent sequencing of atypical DGGE pattern. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase(G6PD) deficiency was firstly identi- Two different mutations in the boy were found; 1072G>A resulting in fied from the results of research on primaquine, which is used in malaria Gly358Arg in exon 10 and IVS10+4T>G in intron 10. The Gly358Arg muta- therapy, and its effects on hemolysis during 1950s in US. During the time- tion is identical with the mutation we found in our 2 other patients with course of G6PD research, it is clearly observed that biochemical charac- homozygous variegate porphyria (3). Expression of this mutation in E. coli teristics, molecular identification of the G6PD protein, variant analysis and showed 9.5% residual activity as compared to wt protoporphyrinogen oxi- the structure-function relationships has been intensively studied. The dase. 1. Kordac V., Deybach J.-C., Martsek P., et al., Lancet, I, 851, 1984. regional distribution of the G6PD deficiency is closely related with geo- 2. Kordac V., Martsek P., Zeman Z., Rubin A. Photodermatol. 2, 257, graphic regions which are endemic for malaria. 1984. 3. Roberts A.G., Puy H., Dailey T., et al., Hum. Mol. Genet. 7, 1921, First enzyme dificiency was reported on 1940 in Turkey. According to the 1998. [Supported by grant GAUK 5/2000/C from Charles University, and by WHO criteria, there are about 20 biochemically identified variants inPosters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease 339 Turkey. The variants named as Gd-Aksu, Gd-Serik, Gd-Korkuteli in Antalya P1221. Triplet Duplication in ?1(I) collagen chain of proband region(western Mediterranean), on the other hand Gd-Mersin, Gd-Balcal, with lethal osteogenesis imperfecta shifts register of alpha Gd-Samanda?, Gd-Adana ve Gd-Antakya variants were identified in chains in helix and alters incorporation of mutant trimers into ukurova(eastern Mediterranean) region. The overall distribution of G6PD fibrils and ECM. deficieny is about 5 % in Turkey. In ukurova region G6PD deficiency was J. C. Marini1, W. A. Cabral1, M. Mertts2, S. Leikin2 reported by different research groups as 8.5 %(Ozsoylu etal, 1975), 5.8 % 1NIH/NICHD/HDB; Bethesda, MD United States; 2NIH/NICHD/LPSB; (Akoglu et al, 1981), 7.6 % (Klnc et al, 1982), 8.3 % (Yuregir et al, 1984), Bethesda, MD United States 8.2 % (Aksoy et al, 1981), on the other hand in Antalya region, 9.2 % oidoc@helix.nih.gov (Aksoy et al, 1990), in Eagean Region 2-9 % (Sipahioglu et al, 1979), in We investigated the effect of shifting the register of the collagen helix by a Eastern Turkey-Erzurum 1 % (Aksu et al, 1972). single Gly-X-Ytriplet on collagen assembly, stability and incorporation into The main molecular defect causing the G6PD deficieny in Turkey is the fibrils and matrix. These studies utilized a collagen mutation occurring in Mediterranean mutation identified as 563T. On the other hand, Med2 hap- lethal type II OI. The proband has a triplet duplication in COL1A1 exon 44 lotype and 1311Tmutation are observed together frequently. cDNAand gDNAsubclones. The normal allele encodes 2 identical Gly-Ala- (*)G6PD Working Group; Bagci H., Aksoy K., Tuli A., Acikbas I., Atalay E., Hyp triplets at aa 868-874, while the mutant allele encodes three. The reg- Aksu A., Gumuslu S., Solak M., Turan Y., Demircan K. ister shift delays helix formation, causing overmodification of all CNBr pep- tides. Pericellular processing of secreted procollagen demonstrated more P1219.Menkes disease in a girl with normal karyotype rapid appearance of pC- and mature collagen than control. In matrix L. Burglen1, C. Ioos2, N. Horn3 deposited by proband cultured fibroblasts, overmodified chains were abun- 1Hpital Trousseau; Paris, France; 2Hpital Raymond Poincar; Garches, dant in the immaturely cross-linked fraction but constituted a minor fraction France; 3John F.Kennedy Institute; Glostrup, Denmark of maturely cross-linked collagen. Trimers purified from cell culture exhib- lydie.burglen@trs.ap-hop-paris.fr ited markedly different behavior depending on whether they had two (+/+), We report on a girl affected with Menkes disease. She is the first child of one (+/-) or no (-/-) mutant ?1 chains. Differential scanning calorimetry young healthy parents. Two maternal uncles died in early infancy from revealed that +/+ molecules denature in sequential steps, 6o, 5oand 4oC Menkes disease. Her mother was shown to be carrier by DNAanalysis with below the Tm of wild type protein; +/- molecules denature in a single step, polymorphic markers. The girl was born prematurely at 35 weeks. First 2oC below wild type. The three species appeared to be secreted in a 1;2;1 months were marked by chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive. Psychomo- ratio consistent with random chain association. In vitro fibrillogenesis of tor development was delayed, with head control at 7 months. At 18 this mixture produced fibers containing no +/+ molecules and smaller +/- to months, examination showed major hypotonia. She was unable to sit. -/- ratio than the starting mixture. The rate and extent of fiber formation Smiling, following with eyes and social contact were good. She had a were comparable to wild type only at 4X higher protein concentration. The prominent occiput, sparse scalp hair with pili torti and cutis laxa. Menkes profound effects of shifting the collagen triplet register correlate with the disease was suspected on familial history. Serum copper and ceruloplas- severe clinical outcome. min were slightly reduced. Menkes disease was confirmed by increased copper accumulation in cultured fibroblasts. Karyotype was normal. MRI P1222. Chitotriosidase activity in patients with beta-tha- showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Abdominal ultrasound was nor- lassemia mal, as were skeletal radiographs. Females affected with Menkes disease G. M. Altarescu, B. Rudensky, A. Goldfarb, A. Abrahamov, D. Elstein, A. are extremely rare. Expression of the disease is explained in some cases Zimran by 45X syndrome or balanced translocations with breakpoints at the MNK Shaare Zedek Medical Center; Jerusalem, Israel locus. Non-random inactivation is supposed to be responsible for clinical altaresg@ninds.nih.gov expression females with normal karyotype. X inactivation study in lympho- Objective; To measure plasma chitotriosidase levels in patients with b-tha- cytes is in progress. lassemia and to ascertain correlation with severity and/or other parame- ters. Introduction; Chitotriosidase, produced by macrophages, is a marker P1220. Alpha-1-antitrypsin mutation spectrum; assessment of severity and response to therapy in Gaucher disease. Since there is of haplotype diversity of rare variants and identification of a expansion of the reticuloendothelial system, chitotriosidase may be equal- novel Ser47Arg mutation. ly useful in b-thalassemia. Material and Methods; 39 adults (16-53 years; S. Seixas1, G. Cordeiro-Ferreira2, O. Garcia3, J. Rocha1 30 with b-thalassemia major, 9 with intermedia), and 14 children (0.7-15 1Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto years; 12 with b-thalassemia major, 2 with intermedia) were tested for chi- (IPATIMUP); Porto, Portugal; 2Servio de Pediadria, Hospital Fernando totriosidase and correlated with ferritin, hemoglobin, liver function tests, Fonseca; Lisboa, Portugal; 3Area de Laboratorio, Ertzaintza, Seccion de and genotype. Results; Plasma chitotriosidase levels were normal (<20 Biologia; Bilbao, Spain mU/ml) in all children. Only 16 adults had elevated levels and 12 of these, sseixas@ipatimup.pt >80 mU/ml. There was no correlation with genotype, age, type, hemoglo- We have assessed the levels of haplotype diversity associated with rare bin, transfusions/year, or chelating treatment. The patient with the highest non-S and non-Z alpha-1-antitrypsin (PI) variants by analysing a SNPsit- chitotriosidase (1440 mU/ml) had the highest ferritin (5175 mg/l), required uated in intron Ic of the PI gene and three microsatellites located within or the most transfusions/year (40), and had abnormal liver tests. Ferritin and close to corticosteroid binding globulin (CBG), alpha-1-antitrypsin and pro- poor therapy compliance correlated with chitotriosidase levels. Discussion; tein C inhibitor (PCI) at chromosome 14q32.1; PCI-190kb-PI-60kb-CBG. Normal levels in the pediatric cohort and increased levels in only some Using protein isoelectric focusing followed by DNAsequence analysis a adults may reflect status of iron overload in macrophages and may suggest total of 35 unrelated variants belonging to 14 distinct allelic classes were a role for monitoring chitotriosidase. Our results are in contradistinction to identified in samples from Portugal, the Basque Country and So Tom e Barone et als in an Italian cohort. Conclusions; These results may impli- Prncipe; I (Arg39Cys, n=7); a newly identified normal Ser47Arg mutation cate a role for plasma chitotriosidase levels in monitoring clinical parame- (Slisbon, n=2); Mmalton (Phe52del, n=2); T (Arg101His or Glu264Val; ters and response to therapy in patients with b-thalassemia. n=3); M4 (Arg101His or Asp376Glu; n=8); V (Gly148Arg; n=1); Plowell (Asp256Val; n=1); R281del (Arg281del; n=1); Pdonauwoerth (Asp341Asn; P1223. Diagnosis of Congenital Metabolic Disorders by Gas n=2); Zaugsburg (Glu342Lys; n=1); Q0mattawa (Leu353insT n=1); So Chromatography / Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) in India - Tom (Pro362His; n=1); Mheerlen (Pro369Leu n=3); Mwurzburg High-risk screening approach. (Pro369Ser; n=2). Haplotype and sequencing information suggest that U. P. Dave1, J. Fernando1, I. Matsumoto2, C. Zhang2 some variants could have arisen either from recurrent mutation or intra- 1Centre for Research in Mental Retardation (CREMERE); Mumbai, India; genic recombination; the mutations defining the Mheerlen, and Q0mattawa 2Matsumoto Institute of Life Science (MILS); Ishikawa, Japan variants were found in allelic backgrounds that are different from those cremere@bom5.vsnl.net.in originally reported; the I allele displays levels of haplotype heterogeneity Arapid progress in human genetics, by the end of this millennium, is main- compatible with at least one additional independent origin; M4 haplotypes ly due to advances in laboratory technology available at the fingertips of suggest independent origins through recurrence of the His101Arg mutation the clinicians for accurate, specific and reliable genetic diagnosis. Howev- and through recombination between M2 and M1Val213; the Tallele is the er, genetics takes a back seat in the Indian scenario due to other national probable result from recombination between S and M2 (or M4). These data health priorities. The concept of Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) being confirm and extend previous observations that a limited repertoire of muta- rare (46%), was based on the older conventional methods of TLC and tions is responsible for a significant fraction of PI sequence variation. GC. In view of this a powerful tool like GC / MS was used in the simulta- neous detection of 101 congenital metabolic abnormalities of amino acids, organic acids, sugars, sugar acids, sugar alcohols, nucleic acids and340 Posters: Biochemical Basis of Genetic Disease nucleic acid bases. the serum of the clinically unffected father and subsequently extended our The present paper reports chemical diagnosis of 355 highrisk children molecular genetic analysis to hair bulbs. In DNAfrom hair bulbs, but not with definite diagnosis of IEM in 58 cases (16.4%) using Mass Spectrom- from lymphocytes of the father we could then identify the same mutation etry. In criticallyill neonates, the metabolic abnormalities was 28.26% (13 that was present in his clinically affected daughter (one other daughter had out of 46 neonates). This emphasises the crucial role of GC/MS in pre- died due to the disease and could not be studied).We conclude that detec- venting mortality and morbidity. The highrisk genetic factors were con- tion of cholesterol precursors by GC-MS analysis is a very appropiate sanguinity, family history of mental retardation, still births and deaths. For method to confirm the clinical diagnosis of the CHH syndrome and can be transportation of airdried urine filter paper, the referral system was helpful to detect somatic mosaicism. established with the attending doctors in small towns and rural areas hav- ing limited laboratory infrastructure. The 22 disorders are considered as P1226. The Haemochromatosis StripAssay; a reverse- target diseases as some therapy and management is possible. hybridization assay for the molecular analysis of HFE and Afew interesting cases will be presented where successful management, TFR2 gene mutations therapy and genetic counselling was done. Recognition of congenital A. Moritz, F. Kury, C. Oberkanins metabolic disorders at the primary health care levels by creating aware- ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH; A-1110 Vienna, Austria ness among medical professionals and developing resources like techni- moritz@viennalab.co.at cal expertise and sophisticated equipments are the key factors in genetic Hereditary haemochromatosis (HH) is a very common autosomal reces- healthcare. The Indian population with religious, racial and ethnic diversity sive disorder of iron metabolism with a genetic incidence of about 1 in 200 indicates a great scope of GC / MS diagnostic technology in establishing individuals of Northern European descent. HH is characterized by pro- the epidemiology of congenital metabolic disorders which is currently lack- gressive accumulation of iron in various organs (liver, heart, pancreas), ing. ultimately leading to liver cirrhosis, diabetes, arthritis, cardiomyopathies and premature death. With early diagnosis and treatment by therapeutic P1224. Diagnosis, Handling And Evolution Of The Maple phlebotomy survival of patients is normal. A number of point mutations Syrup Urine Disease. presentation Of ACase. within a novel MHC class I-like gene (HFE) have been identified and relat- G. Cossio ed to HH. While homozygozity for C282Yis observed in the majority of HH Hospital del Nio de Panama; Panama, Panama patients, the diagnostic value of other HFE mutations is still under investi- gcossio@sinfo.net gation. More recently, mutations in the gene encoding transferrin receptor- The Maple Syrup Urine Disease is an inborn error of metabolism produced 2 (TFR2) have been found in individuals with non-HFE haemochromatosis. by genetics mutation. In Panama, they have been identified few cases, all We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay (Haemochromatosis of them children from the indigenous group know as Tule. In these cases StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous detection of known mutations the fatality has been high in the absence of a precocious diagnostic that in the HFE and TFR2 genes. The test is based on a single, multiplex DNA would let a better handling. We had the opportunity of handling a case with amplification reaction and ready-to-use test strips containing oligonu- exanguine-transfusion and especial milk formula getting very good results cleotide probes for each wild-type and mutated allele immobilized as par- clinical as well as those from laboratory. Clinical Case. It treats of a child of allel lines. The entire procedure from blood sampling to the identification of 59 days who begins his symptomatology since 6to day of life, with a clini- mutations requires less than 6 hours and may be automated on existing cal chart of irritability, strong and sharp crying, poor feeding, vomiting and equipment (e.g. TECAN profiBlot). (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) hyporexia, he has treated in an ambulatory way. On the eleven day of the life he enters to the institution for being with greater irritability, without suc- P1227.Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes; rapid molecu- tion and with opisthotonos. After the handling in the Hospital and with sta- lar diagnosis with methylation-specific PCR for imprinting ble clinical evolution the newborn goes out with a diagnosis of Syndrome analysis of the rigid boy and a treatment with Mogadon at the 59 days. Hi is evalu- A. Gomez, L. Sbaiz, A. Sedita, S. Bosso, E. Cocco, L. Leone, G. Restag- ated at genetic department, where is suspected the MSUD for clinical and no urines smell, it is realized 2-4 DNPH test which give positive. With the fact Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Childrens Hospital Regina Margherita; and the clinic syrup urine smell the patient is hospitalized with Maple Syrup Torino, Italy Urine Disease diagnosis to be treated with peritoneal dialysis and special grestagno@hotmail.com diet. The blood and urine aminoacid chromatography gives positive for Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angelman syndromes (AS) are caused by the loss leucine, valine and isoleucine giving no doubt in the diagnosis. The clinical of function of imprinted genes in proximal 15q. The PWS and AS imprint- characteristics that this patient shows are typical of the classic MSUD. We ing mutations include the DMR (Regions of allele-specific Differential believe important to report this case because the signs and symptoms Methylation) at the CpG islands of the SNRPN locus which may lead to (including the characteristic odor of the urine) of a children who as been incorrect resetting of the imprint in the germ line. We are using M-PCR asymptomatic the first 4 days of life must orient us toward a metabolic dis- (Methylation-specific PCR) which can rapidly assess the methylation sta- ease, first in the group of the intermediates organic acidemias, which may tus of CpG sites within a CpG island, without using methylation-sensitive be corroborated with laboratory test hat is available in our media and which restriction enzymes. This assay entails initial modification of DNAby sodi- can be made very fast. um bisulfite, converting only unmethylated cytosines to uracils and subse- quent amplification with primers specifically designed for the methylated or P1225. Molecular genetic and gas chromatography - mass unmethylated version of the CpG island of SNRPN. Aretrospective study spectrometry studies in the Conradi-Huenermann-Happle conducted on 42 DNAsamples previously analyzed by Southern blotting syndrome; biochemical evidence for somatic and germ line showed 100% concordance on 15 PWS, 4 AS and 23 normal samples. A mosaicism diagnostic test is now routinely performed on DNAs from various sources C. Has1, U. Seedorf1, F. Kannenberg1, L. Bruckner-Tudermann1, J. (blood, Guthrie cards, CVS). In the last year we analyzed 65 subjects with Kunze2, E. Folkers3, H. Traupe1 suspected PWS/AS; nine showed the methylation pattern of PWS, two the 1University of Muenster; Mnster, Germany; 2University of Berlin; Berlin, methylation pattern of AS and fifthy-four were normal. M-PCR is a reliable Germany; 3Regional Hospital; Zaandam, The Netherlands method in the differential diagnosis of neonatal hypotonias and of the var- traupeh@uni-muenster.de ious forms of obesity/hypotonia/mental retardation. The advantage of M- Recently , causative mutations in the gene for emopamil binding protein PCR, when compared with previous PCR-based techniques or Southern (EBP) have been identified in the Conradi-Huenermann-Happle syndrome blot are the rapidity, sensitivity, the use of cheap reagents and the possi- (MIM # 302960). EBPalso acts as a sterol isomerase and has an impor- bility of detecting the major classes of molecular defects causing PWS/AS tant function in the final steps of cholesterol biosynthesis. To better under- (deletions, uniparental disomy and imprinting mutations) without the need stand the functional genetics of the Conradi-Huenermann-Happle (CHH) of parental DNA. syndrome we performed molecular genetic and sterol biochemical studies in 5 CHH syndrome families comprising 13 individuals. For appreciation of P1228. High Throughput SNP Analysis on the ABI PRISM the functional consequences we studied serum samples using gas chro- 7900HT Sequence Detection System matography- mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis. Mutations in the EBP J. F. Stevens, J. Ma, C. Lee, W. Bi, K. J. Livak gene were found in all 5 families.Accumulation of cholesterol precursors Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CAUnited States such as 8- dehydro- cholesterol demonstrated that the mutations identified stevenjn@appliedbiosystems.com were functionally relevant.In one family the CHH syndrome concerned two The ABI PRISM 7900 HTSequence Detection System features a real- affected daughters, although both parents were free of the disease. Sur- time PCR instrument with 384-well-plate compatibility and robotic loading. prisingly, we found a strong accumulation of cholesterol precursors also in The 7900 HTAutomation Accessory loads up to eighty-four 384-well platesPosters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 341 into the instrument without user intervention. Hand-held and integrated bar sequences surrounding the SNPs confirmed the correct positioning of the code readers simplify sample tracking, while continuous wavelength detec- primers on their respective gene sequences. Thus, pyrosequencing tion enables the use of multiple fluorophores in a single reaction. Sample enables reliable and robust analysis of several SNPs in a single pyrose- tubes remain closed throughout the PCR and detection process to control quencing reaction. contamination. The probe-based, fluorogentic 5 nuclease assay provides Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion homogeneous detection of any SNPusing universal reaction conditions. Methods to Detect Genomic Variation By using fluorogenic probes with a Minor Groove Binder (MGB) attached to the 3 end, robust discrimination is achieved even for SNPs in AT-rich P1231.Can the polymorphism rate of genes be correlated to DNA. These TaqMan MGB probes also utilize a non-fluorescent the localization within the genome? quencher, which enables the detection of four reporter dyes, making it pos- K. Schiebel, S. Beck, B. Orlicz-Welcz sible to multiplex TaqMan SNP analysis. These features coupled with Institute for Biochemistry; Erlangen, Germany developments to reduce reaction volume and automate probe manufactur- katrin.schiebel@biochem.uni-erlangen.de ing enable large scale and cost effective SNPanalysis. Used as an end- Inter-individual genomic variability is mainly due to single nucleotide poly- point reader, the ABI PRISM 7900 HTSequence Detection System can morphisms (SNP) and variable numbers of tandem repeats (VNTR). Both make up to 300,000 genotype determinations per 24-hr day. kinds of variability are elevated in the genomic region of the protein phos- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion phatase regulatory subunit gene PPP2R3Lcompared to the average poly- Methods to Detect Genomic Variation morphism rate in the whole genome. The human PPP2R3Lgene is locat- ed in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) on human sex chromosomes P1229.Determination of a Genome Wide SNPAllele Frequen- Xp and Yp, 150 kbp from the telomer. The elevated variability of the cy Map in Three Defined Populations and CEPH Pedigrees for PPP2R3Lgene region is most likely caused by the exceptional features of SNPs Identified by The SNPConsortium PAR1. The increased recombination rate within the PAR1 and a GC con- M. S. Phillips, W. M. Ankener, M. G. Pohl, M. T. Boyce-Jacino tent of 60 % both are supposed to increase the SNPrate whereas slippage Orchid BioSciences, Inc.; Princeton, NJ United States and illegitimate recombination alter the number of tandem repeats. Corre- mphillips@orchid.com lations between genomic environment and polymorphism rate were inves- Now that the sequencing of the human genome is nearing completion, the tigated by comparing the variability of the PPP2R3L region with the initiation of the next phase or the annotation phase of the human genome genomic region of the closely related autosomal PPP2R3 gene. project is starting to unfold. This next phase will focus on determining the number and types of genes present, identifying how these genes control P1232.Determining the approximate relatedness of individu- and regulate biological processes and characterizing the variations that als for Linkage Disequilibrium mapping are observed between individuals. Akey component of this analysis is the M. Bahlo, J. P. Rubio, H. Butzkueven, T. P. Speed, S. J. Foote identification, localization and population frequency determination of single The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Parkville, Australia nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In collaboration with The SNPConsor- bahlo@wehi.edu.au tium (TSC), Orchid BioSciences is determining SNPallelic frequencies in Kruglyak (1999) and others have cautioned against the use of LD (Linkage samples from three different defined populations, and selected CEPH pedi- Disequilibrium) mapping in the general human population because of the grees. Using Orchids high throughput single-base primer extension tech- prohibitive number of markers required to map genes. However, the den- nology, SNP-IT, approximately forty individuals from each of the Cau- sity of markers required for LD mapping is much reduced in a population casian, African American and Asian populations are being analyzed to esti- that is sufficiently young. Suppose we have a population of age approxi- mate the frequencies of more than 60,000 SNPs distributed equally across mately 6-8 generations. This type of population allows the use of the genome. The 60,000 TSC SNPs are also being analyzed on 10 CEPH microsatellite markers instead of SNPs for LD mapping, which are known pedigrees for the determination of both allelic frequency and phase of the to be more informative. However, in order to use such a young population SNP. The pedigrees are also useful as a tool for error checking of the SNP it is imperative to have a representative sample of individuals. Otherwise assays and the determination of haplotypes. Results from the analysis of individuals in the sample are more distantly related and LD is unlikely to be the CEPH pedigrees will provide the initial components for a linkage dise- detected. Here we outline two strategies to identify people who are dis- qualibrium (LD) map of the genome. New software tools are being devel- tantly related by 6-8 generations. One is a simple method based on the oped and utilized to streamline this process. The results of these studies average IBD sharing of individuals and the other is a multipoint approach will form the basis for the first defined human SNPmap and generate the looking at the average length of segment shared by individuals. We try the resources necessary to conduct genome-wide association studies. methods on some simulated data as well as on some real data from Tas- Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion mania, Australias island state. Methods to Detect Genomic Variation P1233.Agene fine mapping measure based on Hardy-Wein- P1230. Multiplex genotyping of SNPs using Pyrosequenc- berg disequilibrium among affected individuals ing R. Jiang1, J. Dong1, F. Sun2 A. Schiller, J. Dunker, A. Alderborn 1Michigan Technological University; Houghton, MI United States; 2Univer- Pyrosequencing AB; Uppsala, Sweden sity of Southern California; Los Angeles, CAUnited States annalotta.schiller@pyrosequencing.com rjiang@mtu.edu Pyrosequencing, or real-time sequencing, is a fast and accurate method Feder et al. (1996) used $p_{\rm excess}$ and $F$, which is based on for SNP analysis. Pyrosequencing AB (Sweden) manufactures the Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium, to study hereditary hemochromatosis PSQ96 System, in which 96 different SNPs are analyzed in parallel in (HH), and located the hereditary hemochromatosis gene to a genomic approximately 10 min. A dedicated SNP scoring software automatically region $<$1-2 cM. $$F=\frac{H_0-H_e}{1-H_e}$$ where $H_0$ is the delivers genotype and a quality assessment for each sample. In this study, observed frequency of homozygosity and $H_0$ is the expected homozy- the applicability of pyrosequencing for multiplex genotyping was investi- gosity assuming Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium among cases. We prove that gated. SNPs from the Renin-Angiotensinogen-Aldosterone System $F_M$ needs to be improved, and it is possible that the value of $F_M$ at (RAAS) were analyzed using pooled simplex PCR products followed by one marker locus is larger than that at another marker locus, and the latter multiplex genotyping. To further enhance cost efficiency in SNPanalysis, is closer to the disease susceptibility locus. The reason of the inadequate multiplex PCR followed by multiplex genotyping by pyrosequencing was performance of $F_M$ is that $F_M$ depends on the allele frequency of tested using the Factor V Leiden and Prothrombin G20210A polymor- $M$. If the allele frequencies at different markers are different, which is phisms. The flexibility offered by pyrosequencing with respect to position- usually the case, the maximum of $F_M$ will not occur at the disease sus- ing of the sequencing primer relative to the SNPwas exploited in experi- ceptibility locus. We propose a new measure of fine-scale mapping $J$, mental design of multiplex genotyping. Both strategies (pooled simplex which is a modified version of $\hat F_M$. Our new measure does not PCR/multiplex pyrosequencing and multiplex PCR/multiplex pyrosequenc- depend on marker allele frequencies, and its maximum occurs at the dis- ing) resulted in highly reproducible and accurate SNPscores, which were ease locus. We do not need to assume a single ancestral haplotype. in complete accordance with those obtained when genotyping each frag- Assuming multiple ancestral haplotypes, we prove that $p_{\rm excess}$ ment independently. Design of sequencing primers in combination with a is not a good measure of fine-scale mapping because it depends on mark- reaction specific dispensation order enabled separate typing of the SNP er allele frequencies. In theory, our new measure is better than both $F_M$ positions whilst keeping the genotyping quality identical to that of simplex and $p_{\rm excess}$. In simulations, our new measure outperforms $F$ genotyping. In addition, this approach allowed some unequal amplification and $p_{\rm excess}$ for all disease models. efficiency to occur without negatively effecting the genotyping results. The342 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism P1234. Accurate Estimation of Both Haplotype Frequencies the power greatly. As for illustration, we apply the proposed test to a simu- and Phase of Each Subject Using Multilocus Genotypic Data lated data set provided by the 12th Genetic Analysis Workshop organizers. from Unrelated Individuals Using EM Algorithm-based Pro- It shows that the proposed test statistic yields strong evidence for the gram region where the underlying disease loci reside whereas the equal weight Y. Kitamura1, M. Saito1, A. Saito1, H. Akama1, H. Morisaki2, T. Morisaki2, test statistic provides only modest evidence for the same region and yet N. Kamatani1 indicates a strong signal to the location which is far away from the true 1Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Womens Medical University; Tokyo, locations. Japan; 2National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute; Osaka, Japan kitamura@ior.twmu.ac.jp P1237. Genotyping SNPs with exension of fluorescently Haplotype analysis is becoming increasingly important for mapping dis- labelled primers ease genes. Usually, exact haplotypes are considered to be obtained only G. Kirov from pedigree data. Recently, however, methods for estimating the fre- University of Wales College of Medicine; Cardiff, United Kingdom quencies of the haplotypes from the genotypic data of unrelated individu- kirov@cardiff.ac.uk als have been developed based on expectation-maximization (EM) algo- The genetic dissection of disorders of complex inheritance requires large- rithm. The previous study has suggested that the estimation of the sample scale genotyping of SNPs. Anumber of methods have been developed for frequencies of the haplotypes was accurate when the simulation data were efficient and fast genotyping. Some of these methods, e.g. using polarisa- analyzed. We examined whether the EM-based haplotype frequency esti- tion and mass spectrometry, require expensive equipment and are not mation and the estimation of phases of unrelated subjects are accurate suited for small to medium-sized laboratories. Primer extension with fluo- using the real data on smoothelin gene. Using the DHPLC and SSCP rescently labelled ddNTPs can be performed on the more widely available methods on PCR-amplified DNA, we were able to determine the haplo- automated sequencers. Here we report a variation of this method which we types for 2 separate regions spanning 341-380 bp sequences in the find more reliable and cheaper. We use extension primers labelled with 3 smoothelin gene for 96 unrelated subjects (32 Japanese, 32 European different dyes (FAM, HEX and TET). We designed our own size standards American and 32 African American). After physically determining the hap- ranging from 13 to 43 bp, labelled with TAMRA. The 3 end of the primer lotypes, we concealed the phases and applied the genotypic data to our extends not immediately up to the SNP, but one bp earlier. This reduces EM-algorithm-based program. Our program estimates both haplotype fre- the interference of the first extension peak with the peak produced by the quencies and the probability distribution on the phases of the subjects, and primer which has not incorporated any d/ddNTP. We use 3 dNTPs and 1 can handle both biallelic and multiallelic loci. When the data from the 3 ddNTPfor each reaction, so that the primer extends between 1 and 5 bp groups were applied separately, the program almost perfectly estimated beyond the SNP, until it reaches the next ddNTP site. This produces 3 the sample haplotype frequencies as well as the phases in the subjects. peaks which allow unambiguous calling of genotypes. The presence of a Mis-estimation rate was almost negligible. Although the present method peak produced by the non-extended primer in each reaction allows to dis- should be tested for the cases where haplotypes span much wider regions tinguish failed reactions and provides an internal size control. Out of 8 of the chromosome, our data suggest that the results of the EM-based reactions, we produced reliable traces in 7 with our first attempt, and had haplotype frequency and phase estimation from the data of unrelated indi- to change the ddNTPin the last reaction to the alternative ddNTP. Using viduals may be quite reliable for the data from various ethnic groups. different sizes of primers, ranging from 15 to 31 bp, we were able to multi- plex all 8 SNPfor analysis on the same gel. The cost of an individual geno- P1235.Simulation of Genotypes using Inheritance Vector typing is $0.42, excluding the cost of primers. We also perfomed pooled A. Saito, M. Saito, Y. Kitamura, H. Akama, N. Kamatani DNAgenotyping of these 8 SNPs on pools of 110 parent-offspring trios. Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Womens Medical University; Tokyo, One reaction did not produce reliable traces because of interference with Japan the peak of the non-extended primer. One SNPhad an allele with a very asaito@ior.twmu.ac.jp low frequency of 2% and could not be measured reliably. The remaining 6 In a linkage study of a disease, it is important to know if the number of pedi- SNPs showed highly reproducible patterns with a maximum variation grees that investigators have collected or plan to collect will be sufficient to between experiments of just 2.8%. Analysis of pooled and individual geno- detect linkage. Computer simulation of the genotypes in pedigrees is an typings showed a maximum error of 1.4% for the true versus the predicted effective method that can provide approximate answers to such questions. difference between two sets of pools. We conclude that the method is suf- However, with the previous simulation programs based on the basic algo- ficiently accurate to be used as an initial screen in order to reduce the num- rithm used in the LINKAGE package, it was difficult to simulate genotypes ber of SNPs that justify individual genotyping. at more than a handful of loci. To investigate complex diseases, multipoint Also presented orally in Concurrent Session 5: Poster Discussion analysis with many markers will be crucial and it is necessary to simulate Methods to Detect Genomic Variation genotypes at large numbers of loci. In this study, we have developed a new computer program to simulate genotypes quickly at many loci with gener- P1238.Amultiplex solution for SNPinterrogation using fifth- al Monte Carlo method and inheritance vector. Inheritance vector is a bina- dye labeled short size standard and single-tube primer exten- ry vector that describes the outcome of the patermal and maternal meios- sion reaction es giving rise to the nonfounders in the pedigree at every locus in the S. S. Kuo, D. Wei, G. Ayanoglu, M. Johnson, C. Chang, P. Hanachi, A. B. genome, which can indicate the precise inheritance pattern of the pedi- Tomaney, P. Dong gree. Using inheritance vector, our program can simulate genotypes at Applied Biosystems; Foster City, CAUnited States many trait or marker loci quickly in a standalone linux environment and that kuoss@appliedbiosystems.com supports efficient multipoint analysis of pedigree data. Avariety of methods may be used to characterize and to screen single nucleotide polymorphisms. Analysis platforms include microarray scan- P1236.Incorporating ages at onset in a generalized score sta- ning, real-time PCR analysis (TaqMan), and MALDI-TOF. In addition, elec- tistic for linkage analysis trophoresis-based techniques include OLAanalysis, dideoxy sequencing, L. Hsu and single-nucleotide primer extension. SNaPshot is a single-tube SNE Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Seattle, WAUnited States reaction designed for elucidation of individual loci within known sequence lih@fhcrc.org contexts for the purpose of SNPscreening and validation. We describe the Data with varying age at disease onset arise frequently in studies of map- development of a short size standard for analyzing small fragments on flu- ping disease genes for complex traits. In our earlier paper (Li and Hsu, orescent detection systems. This standard contains 9 fragments ranging 2000, Annals of Human Genetics, in press), we show that naively combin- from 15 to 120 nucleotides, and is labeled with a fifth dye. During evalua- ing affected subjects with different ages at onset may result in a much tion on various capillary electrophoresis platforms, we are able to achieve reduced power in detecting linkage. Based on this observation, in this excellent precision and curve-fitting cross-platform. The fifth dye is spec- paper we propose a weighted generalized score test statistic, where the trally well resolved from other dyes. This size standard is designed in par- proposed weighting depends on a specified age-dependent penetrance ticular to enable automated data analysis in methods for SNPdetection, function and on the observed age at onset in affected family members. The such as single-nucleotide extension assays. In our poster, we will demon- large sample theory shows that the proposed weighted test has a correct strate its utility in SNE assays. With the combination of different fragment type I error rate even if the penetrance function is misspecified. It is shown lengths and four-color chemistry, the potential for multiplexing SNP loci analytically that under the Cox proportional hazards model for the major exists for large-scale genotyping with minimal optimization. gene effects, the weighted test statistic gains more power than the one giv- ing equal weights to all affected subjects, and that under- or over-mis- specification of mode of inheritance and relative risk do not appear to affectPosters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 343 P1239.Non-Mendelian single-nucleotide polymorphisms with P1242. Evaluating the power for detecting complex traits frequent conversion to homozygosity using all of the nonparametric statistics implemented in W. J. Broom1, M. J. Parton1, P. M. Andersen2, A. Al-Chalabi1, N. Leigh1, J. SimWalk2 and GENEHUNTER2. F. Powell1, C. E. Shaw3 Y. Y. Shugart1, A. Collins2 1Institute of Psychiatry; London, United Kingdom; 2Umea University; 1Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD United States; 2University of Umea, Sweden; 3Institute of Psychiatry and Guys, Kings & St Thomass Southampton; Southampton, United Kingdom School of Medicine; London, United Kingdom yyao@cidr.jhmi.edu spgtwjb@iop.kcl.ac.uk Several allele sharing based statistics have been developed as alterna- As part of a SNP haplotype we sequenced a 7.5Kb region around the tives to parametric lod scores when the mode of inheritance of a genetic SOD-1 locus. We detected 11 novel SNPs and a 50 bp deletion. The two trait is unknown. It is important to evaluate the power of alternative statis- commonest SNPs were genotyped in 1100 individuals and we found that tics to detect linkage given a complex genetic background. Goldin and their allele frequencies were at great variance from Hardy-Weinberg equa- Weeks (1993) simulated data for five two-locus models and three hetero- tion (chi-squared values of 45 and 85). Six primer pairs were used to gen- geneity models. The two-locus models include two dominant loci (DD), two erate PCR products ranging from 150 to 1,200 bp and genotyping by recessive loci (RR), a dominant and a recessive locus (DR and RD). and restriction digest and direct sequencing gave identical results excluding an a model with additive penetrance (AD). Heterogeneity models describe artefactual explanation. Transmission of the SNPs within CEPH pedigrees heterogeneity levels of 50 % (H50) and 25% (H25). Each replicate com- demonstrated Mendelian and non-Mendelian SNP inheritance patterns prises 20 three generation pedigrees. The power to detect linkage using within the same PCR product. Conversion was bidirectional from T>C and two nonparametric (NP) statistics implemented in GENEHUNTER2 and C>T and dependant on the presence of at least one parental T allele. five NPstatistics in SimWalk2 were compared using these simulated data Transmission frequencies observed in this study for non-Mendelian SNPs sets. Our results demonstrate that Spairs performs well over all models are consistent with a population genetics model leading to a stable poly- although Spairs and Sall are comparable except for the RR model where morphism. These events are not explicable by our current ideas of muta- Sall has lower power. Surprisingly, the E statistic in SimWalk2 appears to genesis, such as methylation and deamination of cytosine residues, and be less powerful than Sall under all models, particularly the RR model. suggest that SNP conversion occurs as a novel genomic editing event Within SimWalk2 statistics Aand C perform best for RR and statistics B,D affecting both parental chromatids. Sites of SNPinstability may significant- and E are similarly powerful with DD and two heterogeneity models. The ly impact on research that assumes genomic stability and heritability of power to detect linkage for the AD data set is generally low although Sall human SNPs. performs the best amongst all of the statistics examined. We conclude that the choice of NPstatistic greatly affects the power to detect linkage. P1240. Multiple, time-spaced injections onto the MegaBACE for high throughput SNPgenotyping. P1243. Genetic Polymorphism of the ACE and TNF-alpha in A. Shuster1, M. Minarik1, D. Shen1, K. Pirkola1, K. Jones2, R. Belcinski1, Childhood Asthma A. Mamone2, M. Mahtani1, K. Dains1 M. Alikasifoglu, G. Adalioglu, Y. Saraclar, A. Tuncer, E. Tuncbilek 1Amersham Pharmacia Biotech; Sunnyvale, CA United States; 2Amer- Hacettepe University; Ankara, Turkey sham Pharmacia Biotech; Piscataway, CAUnited States mehmet@gen.hun.edu.tr audrey.shuster@am.apbiotech.com An insertion-deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme We have further developed and improved a method for high throughput (ACE) gene has been shown to be associated with levels of ACE. Because SNPgenotyping on the MegaBACE 1000. The system takes advantage ACE is heavily expressed in the lungs and plays a key role in the metabo- of the instruments flexibility to load multiple 96-well sample plates over a lism of angiotensin II and bradykinin, which are potentially involved in the short period using a proprietary method of repeated, time-spaced injec- pathogenesis of asthma. Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is a tions. Samples are prepared in a single-tube SNuPE (Single Nucleotide potent modulator of immune and inflammatory responses, and has been Primer Extension) reaction that contains four different fluorescently-labeled implicated in a variety of autoimmune diseases, including asthma. dideoxynucleotides (terminators). After single base extension and cleanup, Interindividual variation in TNF alpha levels may be genetically determined SNPproducts are loaded onto the MegaBACE by automated electrokinet- and polymorphisms (G-A- 238 and - 308) within the TNF-alpha genes and ic injection. Multiple, pulsed injections of up to 10-30 different SNPmarker nearby HLAClass II region have been associated with differences is TNF plates are then loaded into the same polymer matrix, spaced at two minute alpha production. In the present study, we examined whether asthma is electrophoresis intervals. 1000 - 3000 SNP genotypes can be obtained linked with these ACE and TNF-alpha genes polymorphism. Patients with with a time range of approximately 2-5 hours; further color and size multi- asthma (n=120, 74 males and 46 females; age 11.22  3.69) and 52 plexing will greatly increase throughput. Acharacteristic injection marker is healthy controls were determined for their genotype by the polymerase added to each sample prior to injection, acting both as internal control and chain reaction (PCR) method. Fourty-six asthmatics demonstrated the DD also demarcating each injection from the next. Aseparate software pack- type (38.3%), 52 the DI type (43.4%), and 22 the II type (18.3%). The ACE age, SNPProfiler automatically processes the signal data and outputs the gene polymorphism (D/I) did not show on association (odds= 0.65, % 95 maximum likelihood SNPgenotypes. The flexibility of the system is demon- CI, 0,67 2,33, X2= 1,99, p>0,005). The allelic frequency of the TNF-alpha strated by the ability of switching between three applications high G-A- 238 among the asthma patients was not significantly different from throughput sequencing, SNPtyping or STR genotyping in minutes. among the control subjects. However, TNF-alpha G-A-308 allele was pres- ent at significantly higher frequency in cases than control (odds= 2,42, % P1241.Assessing Interference Levels in Mouse 95 CI, 1-7-3, 42, p<0,005). No significant differences were evident in serum N. J. Armstrong, T. P. Speed IgE levels, allergic and non-allergic asthma patients among the three geno- University of California, Berkeley; Berkeley, CAUnited States types. The ACE (D/I) polymorphism is not associated with asthma in this nicola@stat.berkeley.edu population. We conclude that the TNF-alpha G-A308 polymorphism may Positive crossover interference has been documented in many organisms form of the genetic predisposition to asthma. including both human and mouse (Zhao et al. 1995). The amount of inter- ference appears to vary throughout the genome. QTLanalysis and genet- P1244.Associations of multi-locus genotypes in the cytokine ic map estimation are usually carried out under the assumption of no gene cluster on chromosome 5q31-35 in asthmatic patients in crossover interference. However, taking crossover interference into Iceland. account creates more accurate genetic maps especially in the presence of H. Hakonarson1, U. S. Bjornsdottir2, A. Manolescu1, T. Gislason2, D. Gis- missing or erroneous data. The genome averaged level of interference has lason2, J. Gulcher1, K. Stefansson3 previously been estimated for mice. We fit a chi-square model for interfer- 1deCODE genetics Inc.; Reykjavik, Iceland; 2Vifilstadir University Hospital; ence to each individual chromosome for various sets of mouse data. The Reykjavik, Iceland; 3deCODE genetics Inc.; r, Iceland chi-square model has been found to fit data from experimental organisms hakonh@decode.is well (Lin and Speed 1996). We estimate m, the level of interference for Asthma is a complex genetic disorder largely attributed to the interactions each chromosome. We also investigate if there is a significant difference in of the environment and multiple genes each potentially having relatively the level of interference between the sexes. small effects. Several genes that map to chromosome 5q31-35 have been associated with asthma. While these genes are highly polymorphic no SNP is found to play a major role in asthma. This study addressed the hypoth- esis that specific series of SNPs within several genes at this locus may be associated with asthma. Thirteen SNPs were examined in 9 genes at the 5q31-35 locus in 94 asthmatic patients and 91 controls, by sequencing.344 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism The patients phenotype was characterized by skin tests, PFTs and metha- and parents when possible. All the individuals were phenotyped for BMD choline challenge tests. The genotypes are denoted as MM, Mm, and mm, at 7 sites. We now report a linkage study of AluI polymorphism T1377C in wherein M and m represent the major and minor allele frequencies, the calcitonin receptor gene (CTR) with bone mineral density measured at respectively. The analyses were based on the Hardy-Weinberg law and 2 sites (femoral neck and Ward triangle) or with body mass index (BMI). chi-square tests. No dominant series of genotypes was detected that Families were studied with non parametric linkage and transmission dise- extended to all nine genes. However, we observed significant correlation quilibrium test methods. C allele frequency was 30%. Genotypes were in between the combinations of the MM and mm genotypes in 4 locations Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Sib-pair analysis showed linkage with within the IL-13 gene (p<0.0001), but no differences were detected femoral neck density (p=0.036), and BMI (p=0.038). Linkage was not between patients and controls. Linkage disequilibrium was also observed observed at Ward triangle site even if the result was close to the signifi- between the SNPs in the IL-13 and IL-4 genes, and to a lesser degree cance threshold (p=0.06). TDTwas performed by setting as affected the between the IL-4 and IL-3 genes. Taken together, these observations subjectes with a Z-score < -1. No preferential allele transmission to affect- demonstrate that specific genotypes in the IL-3, IL-4 and IL-13 genes are ed individuals was observed. Due to the low information content of the in marked linkage disequilibrium; however, their relevance to asthma polymorphism (PIC=0.33), individuals will be further genotyped with DNA remains uncertain. We are currently searching for possible associations of markers mapping close to CTR gene in order to increase the number of multi-locus genotypes with asthma in a larger cohort. informative families. In conclusion, the calcitonin receptor gene or a close- ly located gene might be associated to bone mineral density in the Italian P1245.Informativity and results of LOH analysis for five APC population. gene polymorphic markers T. Cacev, S. Kapitanovic, K. Pavelic P1248. Genetic Analysis of Two Pedigrees with Charcot- Rudjer Bockovic Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine; Zagreb, Croatia Marie-Tooth Neuropathy Type 1C tcacev@rudjer.irb.hr A. S. Golden1, V. A. Street1, J. D. Goldy2, B. L. Tempel1, T. D. Bird3, P. F. We examined 46 cases of human sporadic colon cancer and correspon- Chance2 ding normal tissue samples to evaluate the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 1Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and V.M. Bloedel Hearing the APC gene loci. DNAs were used for PCR, RFLP, VNTR and LOH Research Center, University of Washington; Seattle, WA United States; analysis. To analyze LOH at the APC gene loci we used five polymorfic 2Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Development, University of Washing- markers; three RFLPintragenic markers (exon 11 RsaI, exon 15 MspI, and ton School of Medicine; Seattle, WAUnited States; 3Neurology, University exon 15 AspHI) and two VNTR flanking markers (D5S409 and D5S433). of Washington School of Medicine and Veterans Administration Medical The informativity for all three intragenic RFLPmarkers was 50.0 % (23 of Center; Seattle, WAUnited States 46 assayed), and 21.7 % of tumors (5 of 23 informative) demonstrated agolden@u.washington.edu LOH. The informativity for VNTR flanking markers D5S409 and D5S433 Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy is the most common inherited was 60.9 % (28 of 46 asseyed) and 87.0 % (40 of 46 asseyed) respec- peripheral nervous system disorder affecting approximately 1 in 2000 indi- tively. Eight of 28 informative tumors (28.6 %) demonstrated LOH for mark- viduals and characterized by degenerative changes in motor and sensory er D5S409, and 14 of 40 informative tumors (35.0%) demonstrated LOH nerves. The hallmark of CMTType I (CMT1) is reduced nerve conduction for marker D5S433. The informativity for all five APC loci was 100 % and velocities (NCVs) (<40 meters/sec) and nerve biopsies that demonstrate 14 of 46 tumors ( 30.4 %) demonstrated LOH. Our study showed that it hypertrophic demyelination. The present study includes two large five-gen- was necessary to use VNTR flanking markers D5S409 and D5S433 to eration CMT1C pedigrees (K1550 and K1551). Affected members have increase the number of informative cases (from 50 % with intragenic mark- clinical findings and reduced NCVs consistent with CMT1. Male-to-male ers) to 100 %. The highest informativity was observed for VNTR marker transmission is present, confirming autosomal dominant inheritance. Pre- D5S433, 87 %. vious linkage analysis with markers from the CMT1Aregion on chromo- some 17p11-12 and CMT1B region on chromosome 1p21 excluded link- P1246.Wet/Dry Cerumen Phenotype Maps to Chromosome 16 age. Furthermore, the DNAduplication commonly associated with CMT1A P11.2-16q12.1 is not present. Sequence analysis for five genes known to play critical roles H. Tomita1, K. Yamada1, G. Mohsen1, N. Niikawa1, N. Kato2 in the development of demyelinating neuropathies, the peripheral myelin 1Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine; protein-22 (PMP-22), the myelin protein zero (MPZ), the early growth Nagasaki, Japan; 2Department of Neuropsychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, response 1 and 2 genes (EGR1 and 2), also known as Krox-24 and Krox- University of Tokyo; Tokyo, Japan 22, and PERPdisclosed no abnormalities, confirming further genetic het- niikawa@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp erogeneity in CMT1 and indicating that the mutant gene in these CMT1C Human cerumen (earwax) is a single-gene trait, consisting of two pheno- pedigrees represents a novel unmapped form of CMT1. To assign a chro- typically distinct forms, wet and dry types (MIM 117800). The wet type is mosomal address, we are performing a 10 cM genome scan on both pedi- characterzied by light-/dark-brown, sticky and wet cerumen, while the dry grees. No linkage has been detected on chromosomes 5, 6, 14, and 19-22 cerumen is gray/tan, brittle and dry. The wet type (W) is dominant to the for pedigree K1550, nor on chromosomes 19-22 for pedigree K1551. other dry type(w). Since the phenotype of homozygotes (WW) for the wet type is indistinguishable from that of heterozygotes, the wet phenotype is P1249. Molecular genetic studies in autosomal recessive completely dominant. Frequencies of the wet and dry types vary in races. axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease The former type predominates in most Europeans and Africans, whereas D. M. Georgiou1, H. Jedrzejowska2, B. Ryniewicz3, I. Hausmanowa- the latter is markedly prevalent in Mongoloids and native Americans, and Petrusewicz2, E. Zamba1, T. Kyriakides1, L. T. Middleton4, K. intermediately in polulations in eastern Europe, Middle East and South Christodoulou1 Africa. Thus, it is most likely that the prototype in the human is the wet type. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2Neu- To localize this trait locus, we performed a linkage analysis on eight Japan- romuscular Unit, Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences; ese families segregating with dimorphism. Two-point linkage analysis pro- Warsaw, Poland; 3Department of Neurology, Medical Academy; Warsaw, vided a maximum LOD score of 11.19 (theta = 0.00; penetrance p = 1.0) Poland; 4Clinical Discovery Genetics, Glaxo Wellcome R&D; London, Unit- at D16S3044. Haplotype analysis defined the locus within ~5.9 cM in the ed Kingdom 16p11.2-16q12.1 region between D16S3093 and D16S3117. The localiza- roula@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy tion will contribute to further isolation of the putative cerumen gene. Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease forms a group of heterogeneous dis- orders of the peripheral nervous system the main feature of which is distal P1247.Linkage and association studies of Calcitonin Recep- weakness and wasting in the limbs, associated to other neurological man- tor gene with bone mineral density in Italian families ifestations, mainly affecting sensation, reflexes and muscle tone. CMTis G. Malerba1, A. Sangalli1, S. Mirandola1, V. Braga2, S. Adami2, P. F. Pig- the most common peripheral nerve disorder with an estimated frequency natti1, M. Mottes1 of 1 in 2,500. It may be inherited in an autosomal dominant, an autosomal 1Biology and Genetics, DMIBG; Verona, Italy; 2Department of Rheumatol- recessive or an X-linked mode. There are two physiopathological types of ogy; Verona, Italy CMT; the demyelinating type, characterised by decreased motor nerve bobo@medgen.unvir.it conduction velocities (MNCV) and primarily affecting the myelin and, the Osteoporosis is a disease associated to low bone mineral density (BMD) axonal type, characterised by normal or slightly reduced MNCVs and pri- that has been described to be mostly under genetic control. Several can- marily affects the axon. The two types may be distinguished based on neu- didate genes have been reported to be linked or associated to osteoporo- rophysiological and neuropathological criteria. One autosomal recessive sis or related phenotypes. We collected 120 families (547 individuals, 180 axonal CMT locus has thus far been mapped, on chromosome 1q21.2- sibships) through an osteoporotic subject. All families had at least 2 sibs, q21.3, but the corresponding gene has yet to be identified. We selected aPosters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 345 group of seven autosomal recessive axonal CMTfamilies that were previ- acterized by shortened axial length of the globe. This condition is usually ously characterised at the clinical, neurophysiological and neuropathologi- associated with coloboma. Non-syndromic microphthalmia is clinically and cal levels for further molecular genetic studies. Forty-seven individuals, fif- genetically heterogeneous and may be inherited in an autosomal reces- teen of them affected, were included in the study. These individuals were sive, dominant or X-linked manner. Anumber of chromosomal abnormali- genotyped at marker loci spanning the known CMT loci. Families were ties have previously been reported with sporadic cases of congenital analysed for linkage at these known CMTloci and slightly positive results microphthalmia. So far only two genetic loci have been identified for famil- were further evaluated by haplotype analysis. Three of the seven families ial cases. A locus was reported for a Pakistani family on 14q32. We (one Cypriot and two Polish families) linked to demyelinating autosomal mapped another locus to 14q24.3 in a large Turkish family and reported recessive CMTloci. mutation in the CHX10 gene (Nat. Genet. 25; 397-401; 2000). Our linkage analysis of another 10 Turkish and Israeli families failed to show any link- P1250.AGenetic Study of a Large CMT Type 2 Family from age with DNAmarkers linked to MITF (3p14-p12), EYA2 (20q13), CYP1B1 Turkey; Exclusion of all Known CMT2 Loci (2p21) and other candidate regions (2q21-q22; 2q31 and 2q33) previous- N. Bissar-Tadmouri1, Y. Parman2, F. Deymeer2, P. Serdaroglu2, V. Tim- ly associated with this condition. Herewith, we report clinical and molecu- mermann3, P. De Jonghe3, C. Van Broeckhoven3, E. Battaloglu1 lar study of a new large three-generation Turkish family with 44 members. 1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology & Genetics; Istan- Eight subjects presented with unilateral/ bilateral non-syndromic microph- bul, Turkey; 2Istanbul University Medical School, Department of Neurology; thalmia or anophthalmia with coloboma of iris and/or coroid. Two addition- Istanbul, Turkey; 3University of Antwerp, Department of Molecular Genet- al members presented with coloboma without any microphthalmia. Myopia ics; Antwerpen, Belgium and astigmatism are other associated anomalies in this family. DNAsam- tdmouri@boun.edu.tr ples prepared from 26 members were used for linkage exclusion of 6 can- Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) is a heterogeneous group of dis- didate genes including CHX10 (14q24.3), PAX6 (11p13), OTX2 and SIX1 orders of the peripheral nervous system with a broad spectrum of clinical (14q21-q22), RX (18q21-q22), VSX1 (20p11.2), as well as the published severity and different pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant CMTis locus on 14q32. Agenome-wide search of this family has recently been classified into two forms based on neuropathological criteria. CMT1 is completed. Saturation mapping for an observed region of homozygosity is characterized by de- and remyelination, while CMT2 exhibits axonal currently in progress. degeneration. Genetic studies have shown that CMT2 is genetically het- erogeneous. Several CMT2 loci have been identified on chromosome P1253. Homozygosity mapping and analysis of a candidate 1p35-p36 (CMT2A), chromosome 3q13-q22 (CMT2B), and chromosome gene in a family with an autosomal recessive high myopia and 7p14 (CMT2D). Afourth CMT2 type (CMT2C) was not linked to any locus. vitreoretinal dystrophy Recently, the Neurofilament Light (NF-L) gene was found responsible for a M. Weigell-Weber1, G. Sarra2, E. P. Messmer2, M. Hergersberg3 new CMT2 type (CMT2E) localized on chromosome 8p21. Point mutations 1Institute of Medical Genetics; 8057 Zrich, Switzerland; 2University Eye in the Myelin Protein Zero (MPZ) gene were found in some CMT2 families Hospital; Zrich, Switzerland; 3Institute of Medical Genetics; Zrich, as well. In this study, we report a genetic study on a large CMT2 family Switzerland from Turkey. Linkage analysis was performed by using a number of mark- weigell@medgen.unizh.ch ers mapping to the CMT2A, CMT2B, and CMT2D loci, to the MPZ locus on We describe a Swiss family, in which four of eight sibs show severe retinal chromosome 1q22-23, and within the NF-Lgene. Lod scores have exclud- changes, early-onset myopia maligna, excessive posterior staphyloma and ed the association of the disease in this family with any of the CMT2 loci, presenile cataract. There was no evidence for myopia or another ophthal- suggesting the presence of an additional CMT2 locus to be identified. mological disease in the parents of the eight siblings or in one of the over thirty children. The posterior staphyloma clearly differentiates this vitreo- P1251. Genetic refinement of the locus for autosomal domi- retinal degeneration from other previous described ones. The mode of nant colobomatous microphthalmia to a 10-cM interval on inheritance in this family with only one affected generation and both affect- chromosome 15q12-q15 ed males and females is likely to be autosomal recessive. The hitherto L. Morle1, L. Michon1, M. Bozon1, L. Duret2, J. Zech3, N. Alloisio1, J. unknown phenotype of the disease (implicating very rare occurence) and Godet1, H. Plauchu4, P. Edery4 the origin of the parents from adjacent villages are compatible with a hid- 1Centre de Gntique Molculaire et Cellulaire, UMR CNRS 5534; 69622 den consanguinity in this family. Therefore, homozygosity mapping Villeurbanne Cedex, France; 2Biomtrie et Biologie Evolutive, UMR CNRS seemed to be a promising approach to localize the causative gene in this 5538; 69622 Villeurbanne, France; 3Service dOphtalmologie, Hpital family. In the case of a recessive disease in a consanguineous pedigree, Edouard Herriot; 69347 Lyon Cedex, France; 4Service de Gntique, Hpi- the region surrounding the disease locus is assumed to be identical by tal Htel-Dieu; 69288 Lyon Cedex, France descent in affected persons. In contrast, in unaffected members this region l-morle@univ-lyon1.fr should not be identical by descent. More than 500 microsatellite markers Congenital microphthalmia is a common disorder of embryonic eye devel- distributed over the entire genome were investigated and have lead to the opment characterized by shortened total axial length. Isolated microph- identification of a 12cM homozygous region. Acandidate gene, encoding a thalmia is genetically heterogeneous and may be inherited in an autosomal protein of the extracellular matrix, was analysed by DHPLC analysis. Until dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked manner. To our knowledge, now only polymorphisms and no mutations in this gene have been identi- only the CHX10 gene has been clearly involved in human microphthalmia. fied in several members of this family. Here, we studied a five-generation family of Sephardic Jewish origin that included 38 members, of whom 7 have either unilateral or bilateral P1254.Association of IDDM and Single Nucleotide Polymor- microphthalmia of variable severity inherited as an autosomal dominant phisms (SNPs) in the AIRE gene trait with incomplete penetrance. After exclusion of several candidate loci, T. Nikopensius1, P. Peterson2, J. Ilonen3, M. Knip4, K. Krohn2, E. Lh- we performed a genome-scan study and recently demonstrated linkage to mussaar1, A. Kurg1, A. Metspalu1 chromosome 15q12-q15. Positive LOD scores were obtained with a maxi- 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu; Tartu, Estonia; mum at the D15S1007 locus (maximum LOD score 3.77, at recombination 2Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere; Tampere, Finland; fraction 0.00). Haplotype analyses supported the location of the disease- 3University of Turku; Turku, Finland; 4University of Helsinki; Helsinki, Fin- causing gene in a 13.8-cM interval between loci D15S1002 and land D15S1040. Further linkage analyses allowed us to refine the candidate tiitn@ebc.ee interval to a 10-cM region. Candidate genes, namely Gremlin and Con- Type-1 diabetes (IDDM) is an autoimmune disorder resulting from destruc- nexin36 (Cx36), are currently under study. tion of the pancreatic islet cells, with the major susceptibility gene in HLA region on chromosome 6p21. IDDM is accompanying with Addisons dis- P1252. Molecular Analysis Of A Large Turkish Family With ease in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndromes (APS), appearing as Autosomal Recessive Congenital Microphthalmia And a common clinical phenotype in APS2 and a rare phenotype in APS1, Coloboma which is only described autoimmune endocrine disease with Mendelian F. Percin1, V. Seyrantepe2, A. Yigit3, S. Karslioglu3, M. Sarfarazi1 inheritance. The gene responsible for APS1 - AIRE (autoimmune regulator) 1Molecular Ophthalmic Genetics Laboratory, University of Connecticut - has been identified on chromosome 21q22.3 by positional cloning and Health Center; Farmington, CT United States; 2University of Montreal, characterised as a transcriptional activator. IDDM and APS1 are enriched Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center; Montreal, PQ Canada; 3Sisli in Finnish population. We have designed a DNAchip with AIRE sequence Etfal Research and Training Hospital; Istanbul, Turkey polymorphisms and mutations searching for allelic variants associated with Ferda@Neuron.uchc.edu IDDM and estimated the allele frequencies and heterozygosities for 11 Congenital microphthalmia is a developmental ocular malformation char- SNP-s, nine out of them from AIRE coding region, in 120 patients with346 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism IDDM and 135 controls from Finnish population. We used APEX technolo- lids, a nose and chin that felt rubbery, and eyebrows that slant sharply gy for identification of different types of sequence alterations. APEX is a upward. Subsequent reports in the literature have described affected resequencing method based on two-dimensional array of oligonucleotides, patients in Germany, Japan and Oman. We have identified several families immobilised via 5 end on a glass surface. The PCR-amplified and enzy- with children affected with Setleis Syndrome in Puerto Rico as well as from matically digested DNA template is annealed to immobilised primers, another family in Oman. DNAanalysis of candidate gene regions, using which promote sites for template-dependent DNApolymerase extension various loci implicated in other ectodermal dysplasias (1q32-44, 2q11-13, reactions, using four fluorescently labeled dideoxynucleotides. The Geno- 3q27,11q23-q24 and 13q12), and a region in chromosome 1 recently pro- rama imaging system and genotyping software is used for data analysis. posed to be a possible locus for the Setleis Syndrome gene (1p36) was We have found five SNPs to be polymorphic with heterozygosity index carried out by genotyping with STR markers (Marshfield). We observed between 0.2 - 0.5. Three polymorphic SNPs could be considered as mark- markedly increased allele frequencies and allele sharing or homozygosity ers of preference for association/LD studies in IDDM patients. The most for marker GATA48B01 at locus D1S1660, when compared to normal common APS1 mutations, R257X and 13-bp deletion in exon 8, showed no Puerto Rican controls. This marker lies close to the plakophilin 1 gene, evidence for linkage to IDDM in the population studied. which has been associated with ectodermal dysplasia/skin fragility syn- drome. Identification of the Setleis Syndrome gene may permit under- P1255.ASingle nucleotide polymorphism in the Delta1 gene standing the pathogenesis and permit prenatal diagnosis of this rare dis- mapped to IDDM8 is associated with Type I Diabetes Mellitus order in the Puerto Rican population. Support provided by NCRR RCMI O. S. Kokanovic1, G. E. Davies2, T. Oda3, S. Kazi2, X. Wang2, S. Guo2, C. G12RR-03051 and S06GM08224 C. Settara3, S. Ghosh1 1The Max McGee National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes/Medical P1257. Serotonin gene polymorphisms in chronic daily College of Wisconsin; Milwuakee, WI United States; 2The Max McGee headache National Research Center for Juvenile Diabetes/Medical College of Wis- D. Civitelli1, S. Carrideo1, G. Nicoletti1, F. Bono2, A. Labate2, D. Pirritano2, consin; Milwaukee, WI United States; 3National Human Genome Research A. Lucisano2, E. V. De Marco1 Institute/National Institute of Health; Bethesda, MD United States 1CNR-Istituto Medicina Sperimentale e Biotecnologie; Mangone (CS), kokanovo@mcw.edu Italy; 2Universit Magna Graecia; Catanzaro, Italy Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) is an autoimmune disease that results in civite@imseb.cs.cnr.it the destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas. Single Chronic daily headache (CDH) is defined as headaches occurring more nucleotide polymorphism (SNP-based candidate gene analysis in regions than 15 days per month and lasting more than four hours per day. It is a with evidence of linkage to T1DM is proving to be instrumental in discov- common cause of pain, affecting up to 5% of the population. Although it is ering variants of genes involved in the pathogenesis and/or regulation of often regarded as being caused predominantly by external factors, many this disease. Delta 1 is a human transmembrane notch ligand that has patients report complaints of CDH in their family members. The neuro- recently been fully characterized and mapped to the IDDM8 region transmitter serotonin (5-HT) play a major role in the regulation of pain in between microsatellite markers D6S446 and D6S281 (Oda et al., unpub- the central nervous system and therefore may be involved in pathophysi- lished data) showing significant LD transmission in T1DM patients ology of CDH. In this study we performed a genetic association analysis to (T=58.2-68.1%, P<0.05; Owerbach, 2000). The Delta 1-Notch pathway verify whether the 5-HT genes contribute to the risk of CDH. Polymor- may play a role in induction of peripheral tolerance. We identified 3 new phisms in the genes coding for 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT6 receptors and 5- SNPs within the Delta1 gene and carried out initial association analysis for HT transporter (h-SERT) were investigated in a sample of 105 patients 2 SNPs using 384 affected T1DM cases from HBDI repository and 192 with CDH and 92 healthy control subjects all coming from the same geo- matched controls. We found significant association for one intronic SNPin graphical area. No significant differences in allele or genotype frequencies the T1DM population located 47bp away from the GTdonor splice site of were found in the patients compared to the controls for any of the investi- exon 4 (P<0.023). We will confirm this association with a TDTanalysis of gated polymorphisms. These data indicate that serotonin genes studied do over 200 singleton families from Australia. An SNPlocated in the 3UTR not contribute to the genetic predisposition to CHD. region showed no frequency differences in cases vs. controls. The third SNPlocated in the promoter has not been examined for association yet, P1258.Confirmation of linkage of juvenile hemochromatosis but we have determined in silico that this polymorphism is present in a on chromosome 1 in families from Saguenay Lac-Saint-Jean putative binding site for the transcription factor AP-2, thus potentially affect- (Quebec, Canada). ing the transcriptional regulation of Delta1. S. R. Rivard1, C. Mura2, L. Bechner3, H. Simard4, R. Simard4, D. Grimard4, C. Morin4, J. Latreille1, G. Le Gac2, O. Raguenes2, C. Frec2, M. De Characterization of study populations and association results Braekeleer5 Intronic SNP #5 3'UTR SNP #29 1Hpital Charles LeMoyne; Greenfield Park, PQ Canada; 2EFS & Univer- Age atFrequency Frequency Frequency Frequency sit de Bretagne Occidentale; Brest, France; 3INSERM; Paris, France; Subjects Onset of G allele of A allele of T allele of G allele 4Complexe Hospitalier de la Sagamie; Chicoutimi, PQ Canada; 5Universit Case de Bretagne Occidentale; Brest, France Control marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr (HBDI Juvenile hemochromatosis, also called hemochromatosis type 2, is a rare Repository) and severe form of hemochromatosis affecting sexes equally. Patients T1DM 384 <15 0.3833 0.6167 0.716 0.284 usually develop hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in their 20s and heart NGT 192 >30 0.4751 0.5249 0.724 0.276 failure and/or cardiac arrhythmias in their 30s. The locus of this autosomal No recessive disorder was identified on the long arm of chromosome 1, in a 4 P value P<0.023 significant cM interval between markers D1S442 and D1S2347 (Roetto et al. 1999). difference Thirteen patients with criteria fulfilling those of juvenile hemochromatosis are followed on a regular basis for phlebotomies at the Complexe Hospi- P1256.APossible Locus for Setleis Syndrome, an Ectodermal talier de la Sagamie in Chicoutimi (Quebec, Canada). Ten patients (76.9%) Dysplasia Common in San Sebastin, Puerto Rico had hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and 9 (69.2%) had cardiac arrhyth- C. L. Cadilla1, L. Al-Gazali2, N. Izquierdo3, L. Nogueras1, A. Santiago- mia and/or congestive heart failure. The remaining two patients were diag- Cornier4 nosed at a very young age (9 and 10 years old). A sole patient was 1UPR School of Medicine, Dept. of Biochemistry; San Juan, PR United homozygous for the H63D mutation in the HFE gene associated with States; 2United Arab Emirates University, Dept. of Paediatrics; Al Ain, Unit- hemochromatosis type 1. The other patients were heterozygous for the ed Arab Emirates; 3UPR School of Medicine, Dept. of Ophthalmology; San C282Yor S65C mutations or did not carry a known mutation in the HFE Juan, PR United States; 4Ponce School of Medicine, Dept. of Biochem- gene. Furthermore, no novel mutation was found in the HFE gene (Rivard istry; Ponce, PR United States et al. 2000). All the patients are from Saguenay Lac-Saint-Jean, a region c_cadilla@rcmaca.upr.clu.edu with a founder-like effect in which several autosomal recessive disorders Setleis Syndrome is a form of ectodermal dysplasia (Facial Dermal Dys- have attained a high frequency. We obtained blood for DNAextraction from plasia, MIM 227260) first described in 1963 in Puerto Rican patients that 11 families to perform linkage analysis with markers (D1S442, D1S2344, moved to New York from the town of San Sebastin. This syndrome is D1S498, and D1S2347) located on the long arm of chromosome 1. The characterized by bilateral temporal marks similar to forceps marks, an maximum LOD score obtained was 4.12 with a recombination rate of 0.03. aged leonine appearance, puckered skin about the eyes, absent eyelash- Although six different haplotypes were identified, the same haplotype (1-3- es on both lids or multiple rows on the upper lids and none on the lower 3-5) was found on 16 of the 26 hemochromotosis chromosomes (61.5%).Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 347 Three other haplotypes were found more than once; they are 1-3-1-5 and from the remaining late-onset families (n=156). Six regions generated 1-2-3-5 present on three chromosomes each and 1-3-1-3 present on two interesting lod scores. The strongest results overall (MLOD or LOD* > 2) chromosomes. Our results confirm that the locus for juvenile hemochro- were obtained for markers on chromosomes 5q, 8p, 9q, and 17p-17q. matosis in Saguenay Lac-Saint-Jean is located on chromosome 1q; they Additional regions of interest (MLOD or LOD* > 1.5) were 14q and Xq. also suggest a founder effect in this population. Results in the late-onset subset were similar to those obtained overall. In contrast, analysis of the 18 early-onset families detected significant evi- P1259. Association study between 5-HTT gene polymor- dence for linkage to chromosome 6q (MLOD and LOD* > 5), in the vicinity phisms and Parkinsons disease of the parkin gene. We conclude that several loci provide interesting link- E. V. De Marco, D. Civitelli, F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, I. C. Cir Candiano, A. age results in our family sample. Strong linkage of early-onset PD families A. Pasqua, P. Spadafora, C. Tomaino, G. Nicoletti, D. Messina, G. Annesi to the region on 6q containing parkin supports its involvement in familial CNR-Istituto Medicina Sperimentale e Biotecnologie; Mangone (CS), Italy PD. Regions of interest on 5q, 8q, 9q, and 17 have been prioritized for fol- demarco@imseb.cs.cnr.it low-up and evaluation of positional and functional candidate genes in The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) of the brain mediates sodium depend- these regions is underway. ent presynaptic reuptake of serotonin and has great importance for modu- lating serotonine function. The SLC6A4 locus encoding this protein maps P1261. NACP/alpha-synuclein polymorphism in Parkinsons to chromosome 17q11.1-17q12. It spans 31 kb and consists of 14 exons. disease Afunctional polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) located in the proximal 5 regula- P. Spadafora, A. A. Pasqua, F. Annesi, P. Serra, G. Nicoletti, E. V. De tory region is a repetitive sequence with different allelic transcriptional effi- Marco, D. Civitelli, C. Tomaino, I. C. Cir Candiano, S. Carrideo, G. Annesi ciencies (transcriptional activity of the long variant is more than twice that CNR-Istituto Medicina Sperimentale e Biotecnologie; Mangone (CS), Italy of the short). Asecond polymorphism found in intron 2 (Stin2 system) and spadafo@imseb.cs.cnr.it consisting of a VNTR of 17 bp segment, might have an indipendent role in NACP/alpha-Synuclein gene is located on human chromosome 4q21-23. influencing the stability of transcription complexes. We performed an asso- Missense mutations are responsible for rare forms of autosomal dominant ciation study to elucidate the role of the serotonin transporter gene as a Parkinson (PD). The protein encoded by this gene has also been demon- susceptibility factor for Parkinsons disease (PD). Acomparison of poly- strated in Lewy bodies of sporadic PD, suggesting that it may play a cru- morphic regions of the serotonine transporter gene was carried out in 315 cial role in a final common pathway. The exact mechanism by which patients with PD. Diagnosis of PD was carried out according to the UK NACP/alpha-Synuclein protein plays a role in neuronal degeneration is Brain Bank criteria among outpatients attending the Institute of Neurology unclear. Variability in the NACP/alpha-Synuclein gene could lead to the at the University of Catanzaro. The control group included 185 healthy sub- aberration in the proteolytic pathway with following protein aggregation. jects from the same geographic area (Calabria  Southern Italy). No dif- We investigated a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat in the promoter region ference was found between allele or genotype frequency in the patients of the NACP/alpha-Synuclein gene in 197 PD patients from Southern Italy compared to the controls as regard the examined polymorphisms. This and 182 healthy control subjects matched for age, sex and geographical findings indicate that the investigated polymorphisms of the serotonine origin. Four different alleles ranging from 265 bp to 271 bp were identified. transporter gene are unlikely to play a role in genetic predisposition to Allele frequencies were computed by counting genes from the observed Parkinsons disease. genotypes. We did not find statistically significant differences in the NACP/alpha-Synuclein genotypes between the patients with PD and the P1260.Complete Genomic Screen in Familial Parkinson Dis- control group (chi square; 3.272; df; 5; p; 0.658). In contrast to our findings, ease Kruger et al.99 showed a significantly higher frequency of the 267 bp allele W. K. Scott1, J. M. Stajich1, B. L. Scott1, M. A. Nance2, R. L. Watts3, J. P. (1 allele) in PD patients than in controls. Our results thus provide further Hubble4, J. L. Haines5, W. C. Koller6, R. Pahwa7, M. B. Stern8, B. C. Hiner9, evidence that the variation within the NACP/alpha-Synuclein gene does J. Jankovic10, F. H. Allen11, C. G. Goetz12, G. W. Small13, N. G. Laing14, L. not play an important role in the etiology of PD. T. Middleton15, A. D. Roses16, J. M. Vance1, M. A. Pericak-Vance1 1Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC United States; 2Struthers P1262.Systematic Search For Susceptibility Genes In Bipolar Parkinsons Center; Golden Valley, MN United States; 3Emory University; Affective Disorder Atlanta, GAUnited States; 4Ohio State University; Columbus, OH United J. Schumacher1, S. Cichon1, D. J. Mller1, M. Hrter1, M. Albus2, M. Bor- States; 5Vanderbilt University; Nashville, TN United States; 6University of rmann-Hassenbach2, E. Franzek3, J. Fritze3, R. Kreiner4, B. Weigelt4, J. Miami; Miami, FLUnited States; 7University of Kansas; Kansas City, KS Minges5, B. Lerer6, C. Windemuth-Kieselbach7, T. Wienker7, M. P. Baur7, United States; 8University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; D. Lichtermann8, W. Maier8, M. Rietschel8, P. Propping1, M. M. Nthen1 9Marshfield Clinic; Marshfield, WI United States; 10Baylor College of Med- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; icine; Houston, TX United States; 11Carolina Neurological Clinic; Charlotte, 2Department of Psychiatry, Mental State Hospital, Haar; Mnchen, Ger- NC United States; 12Rush-Presbyterian-St. Lukes Hospital; Chicago, IL many; 3Department of Psychiatry, University of Wrzburg; Wrzburg, Ger- United States; 13University of California, Los Angeles; Los Angeles, CA many; 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Dresden; Dresden, Ger- United States; 14University of Western Australia; Perth, Australia; 15Glax- many; 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Mainz; Mainz, Germany; oWellcome; Greenford, United Kingdom; 16GlaxoWellcome; Research Tri- 6Department of Psychiatry, Hadassah University of Jerusalem; Jerusalem, angle Park, NC United States Israel; 7Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Uni- bscott@chg.mc.duke.edu versity of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 8Department of Psychiatry, University of The objective of this study is to identify genetic loci linked to Parkinson dis- Bonn; Bonn, Germany ease (PD) in multiplex (more than one family member diagnosed with PD johannes_schumacher@yahoo.de and available for study) families. Data from family, twin, and epidemiolog- Bipolar affective disorder is a severe psychiatric disorder with a high preva- ic studies suggest that the etiology of PD is complex and comprised of lence and substantial morbidity and mortality. Strong support for the role of genetic and environmental factors. Genes responsible for early-onset, genetic factors in the aetiology comes from twin, family, and adoption stud- autosomal dominant PD (alpha-synuclein) and juvenile-onset, autosomal ies. We have been conducting a genome-wide search for susceptibility recessive parkinsonism (parkin) have been recently identified. However, genes in a set of 75 families with bipolar affective disorder from Germany, additional genes, particularly for the more common, late-onset familial form Italy, and Israel, comprising 136 affected-sib-pairs and including a total of of PD, remain to be discovered. We studied 174 Caucasian multiplex (2 or 444 individuals. Clinical assessment of subjects included a SADS-Linter- more sampled PD patients) families [containing 870 sampled members view by trained interviewers and review of all available clinical records and (378 affected), 185 sampled affected sibling pairs and 70 other sampled family history information. DSMIII-R was used as the main diagnostic sys- affected relative pairs] ascertained as part of a multi-center genetic linkage tem. Inclusion criteria for the systematically ascertained BPfamilies were study. Mean age at onset was 59.912.6 years. Diagnosis of PD was one proband with BPI, a secondary affected sib with either BPI, BPII, based on the presence of two of the following signs; tremor at rest, bradyki- SA/BP, or UPR, and availability of both parents. If either parent was nesia, and rigidity, as well as the absence of atypical features and other unavailable, unaffected sibs of the proband were collected. Genotyping causes of parkinsonism. Aclinical adjudication board reviewed all cases for was undertaken using fluorescent semiautomated technology using a map consistency across sites. Marker genotypes were obtained on 344 of 394 microsatellite markers at an average spacing of ca. 9.1 cM. Linkage microsatellite markers (average spacing 10 cM). Families were studied for analyses were performed using LINKAGE, GAS, and GENEHUNTER. We linkage using a multi-analytical approach consisting of two-point paramet- found significant evidence for a susceptibility locus in chromosomal region ric (MLOD) and multipoint non-parametric (LOD*) methods. To identify 8q24.Suggestive evidence for linkage was obtained at 1p33-p36, 2q21- potential genetic heterogeneity by age at onset, 18 families having at least q33, 3p14, 3q26-27, 4p16, 8p21, 10q25-26, 11p11-12, 13q11, 18p11.2, one family member with onset prior to age 40 were considered separately and 18q23. 348 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism P1263. Interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-1alpha and IL-Receptor microsatellites DNAmarkers at the ETM1 and ETM2 loci, and eventually Antagonist Gene Polymorphism in Patients with Multiple excluded linkage to both regions suggesting further genetic heterogeneity Sclerosis. of FET. Furthermore, the Parkinsons loci mapping to chromosomes 4 and V. Andreoli, I. Manna, G. La Porta, A. La Russa, P. A. Serra, G. Nicoletti, 6 were also excluded. Ongoing gene mapping studies will hopefully shed M. Caracciolo, R. Cittadella ligh on the genetic variability of ET. Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology-National Research Council; Cosenza, Italy P1266. The Epithelial membrane protein 3 and Neurotrophin andreoli@imseb.cs.cnr.it 4/5 genes are not mutated in autosomal recessive Charcot- Genetic susceptibility to Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is determined by many Marie-Tooth with axonal degeneration linked to chromosome partially identified genes, each having a modest effect but together forming 19q13.3 a major determinant of disease. The cytokine network, with its prominent A. Leal1, B. Morera2, G. Del Valle3, D. Heuss4, C. Kayser4, B. Neundrfer4, role in immune and inflammatory responses, can be considered a poten- R. Barrantes5, A. Reis6, B. Rautenstrauss7 tial factor of considerable importance. Interleukin (IL)-1alpha and 1beta are 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg; Erlan- two proinflammatory cytokines involved in the formation of MS lesions. The gen, Germany; Gene Mapping Centre, Max-Delbrueck-Centre; Berlin, Ger- IL1-receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) is a protein structurally related to IL- many; and Institute of Health Research, University of Costa Rica; San 1beta, that effectively inhibits the proinflammatory effects of IL-1. To ana- Jos, Costa Rica; 2Unitat de Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat Pompeu Fabra; lyze the contribution of IL-alpha, IL-1beta and IL-1RAgenes in the genet- Barcelona, Spain; 3Department of Neurology, San Juan de Dios Hospital; ics predisposition to MS, we have examined four polymorphic genetic San Jos, Costa Rica; 4Department of Neurology, University of Erlangen- markers in 85 Italian patients with clinically definite MS and 130 healthy Nuremberg; Erlangen, Germany; 5Institute of Health Research, University controls. No significant differences in genotypic and allelic frequencies of Costa Rica; San Jos, Costa Rica; 6Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- were found between MS patients and healthy controls. Our results suggest versity of Erlangen-Nuremberg; Erlangen, Germany; and Gene Mapping that these polymorphisms do not contribute to the genetic susceptibility to Centre, Max-Delbrueck-Centre; Berlin, Germany; 7Institute of Human MS . Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg; Erlangen, Germany aleal@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de P1264. Fine mapping of the multiple sclerosis susceptibility Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), a group of hereditary motor-sensory loci on chromosomes 5p14-p12 and 17q22-q24 neuropathies (HMSN), is a clinically and genetically heterogenous disorder H. M. F. Riise Stensland, J. Saarela, M. Schoenberg Fejzo, D. Chen, M. of the peripheral nervous system. Clinically, CMTis divided into a demyeli- Parkkonen, A. Jokiaho, A. Palotie, L. Peltonen nating type 1 (CMT1), characterized by reduced nerve conduction veloci- UCLASchool of Medicine; Los Angeles, CAUnited States ties (NCV<38m/s) and an axonal type 2 with almost normal NCV (CMT2). hriise@mednet.ucla.edu We have studied a Costa Rican family with 18 affected members with Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological disorder characterized by inflam- autosomal recessive CMT2. Clinically, the age at onset of chronic sym- matory demyelination of the CNS. Multiple studies have suggested a metric sensory-motor polyneuropathy was 28 to 42 years (mean 33,8), and genetic component to MS, and genome wide scans have revealed sever- the electrophysiologic data clearly reflect an axonal degenerative process. al putative susceptibility loci. In the genetically isolated Finnish population, After exclusion of linkage to known CMTloci a genomewide search was four main candidate regions have been identified; The HLA-locus on chro- performed. Evidence for linkage to markers on chromosome 19q13.3 was mosome 6, the MBP-locus on chromosome 18 and two relatively wide found with a maximum two-point LOD score of 9.08 for marker D19S867 regions on chromosomes 5p14-p12 and 17q22-q24, which are syntenic to (recombination fraction of 0.0). Homozygosity mapping defines a region of the murine Eae loci 2 and 7, respectively. By using radiation hybrid map- 5.5 cM between markers D19S902 and D19S907 with a shared haplotype. ping, FISH, and web-based approaches, we have further characterized the We propose a new locus for CMT2, namely ARCMT2B. Candidate genes critical regions on chromosomes 5 and 17. We have analyzed a denser set in this region were identified and analyzed, using denaturing high-perform- of markers between D5S432 and D5S2061 (20 cM) on chromosome 5, and ance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) and sequencing with patients, carri- between D17S956 and D17S2182 (25 cM) on chromosome 17 in the ers and healthy controls. The epithelial membrane protein 3 (EMP3) gene Finnish multiplex families. Supportive evidence for linkage was obtained enconding a PMP22 homologous protein and located on 19q13.3 was for both regions. Markers D5S1992 and D17S1825 gave the highest pair- ruled out as being responsible for this form of CMT. Also in this region is wise LODs (4.08 and 3.42, respectively), and both Genehunter and located the gene that encodes the neurotrophin-4/5 (NT-4/5), a regulator of Simwalk2 multipoint analysis programs further restricted these putative MS the development and maintenance of the nervous system, that possibly loci. The subset of families originating from Southern-Bothnia, an internal play a physiological role in the mature peripheral nervous system. Howev- isolate on the Western coast of Finland with a higher prevalence of MS, er, no mutation in this gene was found in carriers and affected with provided most information for the chromosome 17 locus. Forty singleton ARCMT2B in the Costa Rican family. families originating from the Southern-Bothnia region, as well as addition- al 119 trios from other parts of Finland, have been genotyped for the best P1267.Clinical and genetic study of a large Autosomal Domi- markers, but no significant association with MS could be detected. We are nant Spastic Paraplegia family from Southern Italy now analyzing 126 intragenic SNPs in positional candidate genes. By M. Muglia1, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, A. M. F. Patitucci1, R. Mazzei1, combining the information from the microsatellite markers and the SNPs F. L. Conforti1, M. Caracciolo1, B. Ardito2, G. Nicoletti1 we will monitor for allelic association and shared haplotypes in the Finnish 1Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, National Research MS alleles. Council; Mangone (CS), Italy; 2Miulli Hospital; Acquaviva delle Fonti (BA), Italy P1265.Exlusion of the ETM1 and ETM2 loci in a large Moroc- muglia@imseb.cs.cnr.it can family with autosomal dominant essential tremor Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HPS) is a heterogeneous group of inherit- L. Baala1, A. Sbiti2, R. Nejjari2, A. Munnich3, S. Lyonnet3, A. Sefiani2 ed disorders of the motor system characterized by progressive lower- 1Department of Genetics INSERM U-393 Necker Hospital; Paris, France extremity spasticity and weakness. Clinically HPS is classified as pure and Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology; Rabat, Morocco; form if neurologic impairment solely affects the legs and complicated 2Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology INH; Rabat, Morocco; form if additional symptoms such as mental retardation, ataxia, epilepsy, 3Department of Genetics INSERM U-393 Necker Hospital; Paris, France optic atrophy and peripheral neuropathy are present. The pure form of baala@necker.fr HSP is most commonly inherited as autosomal dominant trait, although Essential tremor (ET) is a chronic neurological condition which may be families with an autosomal recessive or with an X-linked mode of inheri- regarded as the most common movement disorder in human. The main tance have also been described. Genetic loci for HSPare designed spas- feature of ET is postural tremor of the arms, but the head, legs, trunk, tic gait (SPG) loci. To date seven SPG loci responsible for pure HSPhave voice, jaw, and facial muscles may be involved as well. ETcan be either been described; SPG4 (2p22), SPG13 (2q24-q34), SPG8 (8q23-24), sporadic or familial (familial essential tremor, FETor ETM). In addition, the SPG3 (14q11-q21), SPG10 (12q13), SPG6 (15q11.1) and SPG12 (19q13). prevalence of Parkinsons disease and dystonia may be increased in fam- Only one gene at the SPG4 locus, designed spastin has been identified. ilies with ET. Autosomal dominant inheritance can be demonstrated in most In this study, we report a large pedigree with a pure form of HSP from families and two ET loci have been mapped on chromosomes 3q13 Southern Italy. Atotal of 35 subjects were studied. Eleven members were (ETM1, MIM 190300) and 2p25-p22 (ETM2, MIM 602134) respectively. found to be affected. The clinical picture was uniform in the affected mem- Here we report on a large Moroccan family with isolated autosomal domi- bers and characterized by spastic gait as prominent sign in all symptomatic nant ET. Interestingly, patients presented with a very early onset. They are patients with a variable degree of severity. The hypertonia of the lower mainly affected with fine rapid ET of both hands and arms. We tested limbs was associated with moderate spasticity at rest and normal or slight-Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 349 ly impaired muscle power. Using nine microsatellite markers located on ling dataset, we previously reported results of a collaborative genome wide chromosome 14, linkage to chromosome 14 was detected. The molecular scan where polymorphic markers located at 1p36 and 6p21 were associ- data confirm, as previously reported, the mapping of the SPG3 locus in a ated with Alzheimers disease (AD) (Collins et al, 2000; Go et al, 1998; region flanked by D14S75 and D14S1031. Collins et al, 1998). Several inflammatory genes, such as interleukin 1 (IL1)-a and IL1-b (Grimaldi et al, 2000, Nicoll et al, 2000) located at 2q14- P1268.Genetic Linkage Analysis In Two Autosomal Dominant 21, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), located at 6p21, have been found to Spastic Paraplegia Families. be associated with AD. We recently reported a haplotype containing alle- A. Moerman1, S. Schraen2, T. Stojkovic2, A. Coeslier1, O. Boute1, S. les of the -238 and -308 promoter polymorphisms of TNF and the Manouvrier1, B. Sablonnire2 microsatellite TNFa, located ~16.5 kb upstream of TNF, was associated 1Hopital Jeanne de Flandre; Lille, France; 2Hpital Roger Salengro; Lille, with AD in subset of the above families (Collins et al, 2000). From a sub- France set of 320 families with an age of onset over seventy years (total NIMH sib- a-moerman@chru-lille.fr ling dataset = 481), we found suggestion of linkage at two regions on chro- Familial spastic paraplegia (FSP) is a genetically heterogeneous group of mosome 1, including the same 1p terminal region. The GENEHUNTER neurodegenerative disorders of the central motor system, characterised by program gave a peak NPL score of 1.66 (p-value=0.023) and SIBPAL progressive weakness and spasticity of lower limbs. On the basis of addi- analysis resulted in a peak IBD score at 0.52 (p=0.033) for the p terminal tional neurologic or non-neurologic features, they may be divided into pure region. Because of the association of TNF to AD and the suggestion of the and complicated forms. Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X- 1p36 region linked to AD, we looked at the tumor necrosis factor receptor linked recessive inheritance patterns have been described for each type. 2 (TNFR2) gene, one of two main receptors for TNF, located at 1p36.2. We No definitive correlation between gene mutations and clinical phenotype used family-based association testing to look at the T->G polymorphism at has been described for autosomal dominant FSP, and genetic hetero- position 196 in exon 6 of TNFR2 that leads to a M->R substitution. How- geneity remain important. To date, seven distinct loci have been identified ever, we did not find any significant association between TNFR2 and AD in for the autosomal dominant FSP, including SPG4 (chromosome 2p), SPG3 150 families with at least two affected and one unaffected siblings (SIBAS- (chromosome 14q), and SPG8 (chromosome 8q). We describe two early- SOC, p=0.71, S-TDT, p=0.28, SDT, p=0.63) (Collins, 2000). The other TNF onset autosomal dominant SPG families. In both families, clinical findings receptor, TNFR1, is located at 12 p13.2, a region where other genome are similar with preponderant lower extremity spasticity and less important wide scans have indicated as suggestively linked to AD (Kehoe et al, 1999; muscular weakness. However, subtle sensitive clinical differencies direct- Rogaeva et al, 1998). We have genotyped an A->G silent change in codon ed us to SPG3 in family 1 and SPG4 in family 2. Linkage analysis were per- 12 of TNFR1 in the same set of late-onset AD families and will present formed in both families using microsatellite polymorphism on SPG3 and these results. SPG4 loci. In family 1, linkage was established with SPG3 locus in accor- dance with clinical findings. However, in family 2, no linkage was found P1271. Benign familial temporal lobe epilepsy - suggestive with either SPG3 or SPG4. Our results confirms genetic heterogeneity of linkage on chromosome 3. autosomal dominant FSP, and classification difficulties according to chro- S. Bourgoin1, M. Z. Labuda1, B. Aboul-Khalil2, E. Andermann3, M. Pan- mosome location or age at onset symptoms. dolfo1 1CHUM Notre Dame Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Vanderbilt Universi- P1269. Dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase 1, estrogen receptor ty Medical Center; Nashville, TN United States; 3Montreal Neurological alpha and interleukin 1 alpha polymorphisms in Finnish late Institute; Montreal, PQ Canada onset Alzheimers disease sarahbourg@hotmail.com M. Pirskanen1, M. Hiltunen1, S. Iivonen1, A. Mannermaa2, S. Helisalmi1, We studied seven families of different ethnic origin with dominantly inherit- M. Lehtovirta1, A. M. Koivisto1, M. Laakso3, H. Soininen1 ed temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) or febrile convulsion. The TLE families 1Department of Neuroscience and Neurology, University and University were previously tested for known partial epilepsy loci on chromosomes Hospital of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 2Chromosome and DNALaboratory, 20q, 15q, 10q, 8q, 19q 22q. All families were subjected to the genome- University Hospital of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 3Department of Medicine, wide scan using Weber set 9A, which contains about 160 markers spaced University and University Hospital of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland at an average genetic distance of 25 cM throughout the entire autosomal Mia.Pirskanen@uku.fi genome. We have identified a marker on chromosome 3 co-segregating Alzheimers disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia occurring with the TLE phenotype in an American family of European descent. There in the later decades of life. The only risk gene that has been indisputably are seven affected individuals in this family, plus one of uncertain status, shown to associate with AD is the e4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) all presenting infrequent simple or complex partial seizures, some with gene. In addition to APOE, other polymorphic genes are likely to operate vegetative aura or dj vu symptoms. Three had also generalized tonic as risk factors in late onset AD (LOAD). We have studied the role of the clonic seizures. The maximum lod score of Z = 2.2 at theta = 0.0 was polymorphism in three different genes that have been implicated in LOAD. obtained for the marker D3S2500, assuming 80% penetrance and a 1% The studied polymorphism were the insertion/deletion polymorphism of phenocopy rate. All affected family members segregate the same haplo- dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase 1 (ACE) gene, the PvuII and XbaI polymor- type. The exons of two candidate genes in the region, KCNMB1 and phisms of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene and the C-to-Ttransition KCNMB3, were sequenced but no mutation was found. polymorphism at -889 of the interleukin 1 alpha (IL1A) gene. ACE, ESR1 and IL1Apolymorphisms were genotyped from 86 LOAD patients and 200 P1272.Towards the Localization of Genes involved in Devel- control subjects. 46 of the LOAD patients and all of the 200 control sub- opmental Dyslexia; The Dutch Study. jects were from a population-based study investigating cardiovascular risk F. A. Hol1, A. J. G. Heister1, C. Kuijpers2, H. G. Brunner1, G. W. Padberg3 factors and glucose metabolism in elderly people. The baseline study was 1University Medical Center, Dept. Human Genetics; Nijmegen, The Nether- conducted in Kuopio in 1986-1988 and it included 1300 subjects aged 65- lands; 2Interfaculty Research Unit for Language and Speech; Nijmegen, 74 years who were randomly selected from the inhabitants of the town of The Netherlands; 3University Medical Center Dept. Neurology; Nijmegen, Kuopio. The additional 40 LOAD patients genotyped were from the same The Netherlands geographic area. No association was found between the AD and control f.hol@antrg.azn.nl ACE (p = 0.81), ESR1 PvuII (p = 0.85), ESR1 XbaI (p = 0.78) or IL1A(p = Recently, the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) 0.80) genotype. Our data suggest that there is no association between the started a multidisciplinary research programme on the causes, effects and studied ACE, ESR1 and IL1Agene polymorphisms and LOAD. treatment of (specific) reading impairment. This programme basically con- sists of three parallel research projects. The first project is a prospective P1270. Investigation of association of polymorphisms in study of the early precursors of dyslexia. The second project concerns an TNFR1 and TNFR2 in Alzheimers disease patients intervention study, whereas the third component of the programme deals R. T. Perry1, J. S. Collins2, L. E. Harrell1, D. Blacker3, R. E. Tanzi3, M. G. with the search for genetic factors that are involved in dyslexia. Several McInnis4, S. S. Bassett4, R. C. P. Go1 methods can be employed to localize genes influencing complex disorders 1University of Alabama at Birmingham; Birmingham, AL United States; like dyslexia. Major gene(s) with a strong effect on the phenotype will result 2Greenwood Genetic Center; Greenwood, SC United States; 3Massachu- in dominant inheritance of the trait in extended pedigrees and can be setts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School; Boston, MAUnited detected by classical parametric linkage analysis. Use of non-parametric States; 4Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions; Baltimore, MD affected-sibpair analysis allows detection of genes with smaller effect. The United States objective of the genetic study is to apply both strategies to identify predis- rperry@uab.edu posing genes for dyslexia in the Dutch population. Four extended pedi- Using non-parametric analyses in 266 sib-pair families from the NIMH sib- grees consistent with autosomal dominant transmission, with at least 9350 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism dyslectics each, have been recruited. In addition, approximately 200 Homozygosity for the C677T mutation of the methylene tetrahydrofolate affected sibpairs from 165 nuclear families were sampled. The phenotype reductase (MTHFR) gene, a key enzyme in the folates and homocysteine of each subject was assessed by use of a series of psychometric tests metabolism, is associated with an increased risk for NTD, even in Italian including single-word and non-word reading, non-word repetition, rapid population, which has a relatively low prevalence of NTD. However, this naming and spelling. Genome-wide linkage analysis in the first extended genetic risk factor could not acount for all folic acid-preventable NTD. pedigree with 14 dyslexic subjects, has been completed and results will be Another mutation in the same gene, the A1298C mutation, results in presented. decreased MTHFR activity, which is more pronunced in the homozygous than heterozygous state. In this study, we studied the A1298C mutation in P1273. Natal Dispersal In Rhesus Macaques Is Related To the Italian population to evaluate its role as risk factor. We used 200 chil- Serotonin Transporter Gene Promoter Variation dren with sporadic myelomeningocoele, 99 mothers and 64 fathers and A. Trefilov1, M. Krawczak2, J. Schmidtke3 190 unrelated normal volunteers as control group. The frequency of the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School; Hannover, Ger- mutated C allele was 0.29 in controls versus 0.40 in patients, 0.51 in the many; 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College of Medi- mothers and 0.41 in the fathers. Thus, we observed increased frequency cine; Cardiff, United Kingdom; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover of the mutated allele in the NTD patients and their parents when compared Medical School; Hannover, Germany with controls. The determined odd ratios showed an increased risk of 2.25 Trefilov.Andrea@MH-Hannover.de (95% CI;1.14-4.47) for the prevalence of the C/C genotype in the affected Natal dispersal in rhesus macaques is related to serotonin transporter children versus controls. These data indicate that homozygosity for the gene promoter variation Andrea Trefilov, Michael Krawczak, Jrg A1298C mutation in the MTHFR gene is an important risk factor for Italian Schmidtke ABSTRACT To ascertain whether the serotonin system is NTD patients. genetically linked and/or associated to/with the age at male natal dispersal (an easily accesible measure of risk-taking/harm avoidance behaviour) in P1276. Possible Involvement of the Xp21.1-3 Region in the the Old World primate Macaca mulatta, 96 free-ranging rhesus macaques Etiology of 46,XX Sex Reversal in a Kindred with two XX from Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico were genotyped for five repetitive loci in Males three essential among mammalians highly conserved genes of the sero- S. Kofman-Alfaro1, N. Monroy1, M. Lopez2, J. Berumen3, J. Zenteno1 tonin metabolism by the method of amplification fragment length polymor- 1Department of Genetics, Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medic- phism. The analysed repeat markers, that have already been associated ina, UNAM; Mexico City, Mexico; 2Sistemas Biolgicos, UAM-X; Mexico with mood disorders in men, include the VNTRs in the promoter regions of City, Mexico; 3Esc. Militar de Graduados en Sanidad; Mexico City, Mexico the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4, 5-HTT) gene and monoamine oxidase skofman@servidor.unam.mx A(MAOA) gene. Our results revealed that homozygotes for the short allel- 46,XX maleness is an uncommon form of human sex reversal character- ic variant of the 5-HTTLPR have left their natal groups significantly earlier ized by testicular development in subjects lacking a Ychromosome. 46,XX (age 57.12.6 months) than carriers of the long allele (ll; age 71.52.1 males can be classified as Ypositive or Ynegative, depending on the pres- months, ls; age 63.51.5 months). Since migration implies reproductive ence or absence of Y-sequences. Approximately 90% of XX males carry costs and benefits that change with age at first group transferal, migration the SRYgene, responsible for the testicular development. The remaining at an intermediate age might have conferred a heterozygote advantage cases are SRY negative and testicular differentiation is probably due to serving to maintain the VNTR polymorphism in the SLC6A4-promoter via mutations in autosomal or X-linked sex determining genes. Most 46,XX overdominant selection. males occur sporadically but there are a few kindreds in which two or more affected individuals have been described, all being SRYnegative. To deter- P1274. Polymorphism of the serotonin transporter gene mine whether XX sex reversal was X-linked, we performed linkage analy- (SLC6A4) and the monoamine oxidase A gene (MAO A) in sis using a total of 29 dinucleotide X-chromosome markers in a previously males with alcohol withdrawal delirium. reported family including two SRY-negative XX male brothers. Our results E. Gorbunova, A. Galeyeva, E. Khusnutdinova show that the affected males and a 46,XX normal sister inherited the same Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation maternal X chromosome, however at Xp21.1-3 the two brothers had in ekkh@anrb.ru common 6 marker alleles in homozygous state, which differ from those Ainsertion-deletion polymorphism in promoter region of the SLC6A4 and observed in their sister. This data show that in this family XX sex reversal EcoRV restriction polymorphism of the MAO A were studied for allelic co-segregates with a 4.25 cM region at Xp, a chromosomal segment that association with alcohol withdrawal delirium in 96 Russian and 67 Tatar includes the Dosage-Sensitive Sex reversal (DSS) locus. We propose that alcoholic males as well as in their ethnically matched nonalcoholic male DSS may be involved in the etiology of XX sex reversal, either through controls (60 Russians and 52 Tatars) within aboriginal groups of the Volga- molecular defects in DAX-1 or in a yet unidentified sex-determining gene Ural region of Russia. The alcoholics were subtyped according to age of located in this region. onset of alcoholic dependence. For the SLC6A4 no significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies between Russian and Tatar controls P1277. Refinement of the locus for Oto-palato-digital syn- and between alcoholics in whole and controls of the same ethnic group drome type I (OPD-I) were observed. However, a significantly higher frequency of the S/S geno- T. Kosho1, K. Muroya2, M. Tanimura3, T. Uemura4, M. Matsuo5, type (0.43) and relatively lower frequency of the L/S genotype (0.29) were H. Ohashi6, N. Matsuo2, T. Ogata2 found in Russian early-onset alcoholics compared with Russian controls, 1Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Dental College Ichikawa General Hos- Russian later-onset alcoholics and Tatar early-onset alcoholics. The S/S pital, Ichikawa; Japan; 2Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School genotype frequency in Russian later-onset alcoholics (0.05) was signifi- of Medicine, Keio; Japan; 3Department of Child Ecology, National Chil- cantly lower compared with healthy Russian control and Tatar later-onset drens Medical Research Center; Japan; 4Department of Surgery, Divi- alcoholic. For the EcoRV polymorphism of the MAO Athere were no sig- sion of Plastic Surgery, Saga medical school; Japan; 5Division of Medical nificant differences in allele frequencies between Russian and Tatar con- Genetics, Kanagawa Childrens Medical Center; Japan; 6Division of Med- trols and between alcoholics and controls of the same ethnic group. The ical Genetics, Saitama Childrens Medical Center; Japan allele 456 frequency was significantly higher among Russian and Tatar ktomoki@cocoa.ocn.ne.jp early-onset alcoholics compared with nonalcoholic men. Thus, our results Oto-palato-digital syndrome type I (OPD-I) (MIM31130) is a rare disorder indicate that the S/S genotype is associated with susceptibility to early- characterized by broad distal digits with short nails, a peculiar face with a onset alcoholism in Russian groups, and allele 456 MAO Ais correlated supraorbital ridge, and conductive deafness. X-linked transmission with with early-onset of the alcohol abuse among both investigated aboriginal intermediate expression in female and complete expression in males has groups of the Volga-Ural region of Russia. been demonstrated. The previous study provided evidence for the linkage of OPD-I to the tightly linked markers DXS15, DXS52 and DXS305 at P1275.Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) A1298C Xq28, and refined the critical gene for OPD-I to the approximately 10 Mb polymorphism as a NTD risk factor for the Italian population area distal to DXS539. Here, we report a linkage study with polymorphic V. Capra, P. De Marco, A. Moroni, L. Arata, E. Merello, M. Calevo microsatellite markers in a four-generation family consisting of two males G. GASLINI; Genova, Italy with complete expression and three females with intermediate expression. capraval@tin.it Genotype analysis for 16 loci flanking at Xq26-28 revealed that the L1CAM Periconceptional folic acid intake prevents about 70% of all Neural Tube locus was co-segregated with the OPD-I phenotype in all the male and Defects (NTDs). It has been demonstrated that alterations in folate and female patients although the proximal BGN locus or the distal DXS1108 homocysteine metabolism may play a role, since NTD patients as well as locus were not. Two-point linkage analysis revealed a maximum LOD mothers have moderately increased levels of plasma homocysteine. score of 1.20 at theta=0 between OPD-I and L1CAM. The critical gene forPosters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 351 OPD-I was suggested to be refined to the approximately 3 Mb area and frequency of HindIII(+/-) genotype was lower (odds ratio; 0.17, p<0.05) between BGN and DXS1108. in russians patients with repeated MI then in no-CVD russians males. P1278.Linkage Analysis In ALarge Italian Family Affected By P1281. Fine mapping of region 1p32 that contains the third X-mental Retardation major locus for autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia A. Ciccodicola1, C. Lanzara1, I. Conte1, A. Zullo1, I. Annunziata1, A. Tori- M. Abi-Fadel, L. Villeger, S. Rochaud, A. Robin, J. Rabes, M. Devillers, C. no1, S. Cocchia1, D. Circolo1, V. Ventruto1, G. Casari2, M. DUrso1, M. G. Junien, C. Boileau, M. Varret Miano1 INSERM UR-383, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades; Paris, France 1International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR; Naples, Italy; abifadel@necker.fr 2Stem Cells Research Institute; Milan, Italy Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH), one of the most fre- ciccodic@iigb.na.cnr.it quent hereditary disorders, is characterized by an isolated elevation of LDL Non-specific X-mental retardation (NXMR) is a very common and geneti- particles that leads to premature mortality from cardiovascular complica- cally heterogeneous disorder and affect approximately 1/600 males. Over tions. It is generally assumed that mutations in LDLR and APOB genes the past two years, the repertoire of loci involved in NXMR has expanded account for ADH, however we have shown that ADH is genetically more rapidly. Linkage studies carried out on several X-linked mental retardation heterogeneous. We identified 23 ADH families in which we excluded link- (XMR) families with informative meiosis and affected males distributed on age to LDLR and APOB thus demonstrating the implication of a new locus two or three generations, mapped at least 60 XMR loci. Each of these we named FH3. Genetic linkage was obtained in 6 pedigrees localizing accounts for only 0.5-1% of XMR cases. Through positional cloning effort FH3 in a 8 cM interval at 1p32-p34.1. This linkage result has been con- six genes have been cloned. They are RSK2 (Xp22.2), IL1RAPL(Xp22), firmed by S. Hunt et al. in a Utah pedigree. Taken together, the haplotype TM4SF2 (Xp11.4), OPHN1 (Xq12), PAK3 (Xq21.3) and GDI1 (Xq28). Here data define a 1 cM interval for FH3. By radiation hybrid mapping, 6 candi- we report linkage analysis strategy applied to a large Italian pedigree date genes (FABP3, SCP2, APOER2, PAFAH2, AMPK and EPS15) were affected by NXMR to identify the causative disease gene. Using 14 STRs located outside this interval demonstrating no identity with FH3. Through covering the entire X chromosome, we have analysed on automatic an e-mapping approach, we built a BAC contig that spans  5 Mb and con- sequencer the genotype of 23 individuals distributed on two generations of tains 1 non ovelapping area. The analysis of sequences draft reveals more which 7 affected males have mild or severe mental retardation. Paramet- than 30 genes (cloned and predicted). We are currently screening all these ric linkage data carried out by MLINK program indicate a maximum lod genes for liver expression and sequencing some of them in the FH3 fam- score of 3.14 at theta = 0.00 for the polymorphic marker GATA72E05 locat- ilies. Finally, heterogeneity tests estimated that 19% of 23 non-LDLR/non- ed inside the pericentromeric region of 23 cM between Xp21.1 and q22.1. APOB ADH families were linked to FH3, indicating the implication of a This linked portion of Xper has a similar position of other 23 XMR families fourth locus called FH4 that we are currently mapping. already described in Xp11-q21. The XMR pericentromeric clustering sug- gests allelism and the presence at least of 2 XMR genes in this region. P1282.Linkage of Familial Combined Hyperlipidemia to chro- Multipoint linkage studies are in progress to restrict the XMR candidate mosomes 1 and 13. region. P. Hanifi Moghaddam1, J. de Graaf2, L. A. Sandkuijl1, M. J. Veerkamp2, A. Tholens1, A. F. H. Stalenhoef2, R. R. Frants1 P1279. Association of CD14 polymorhism and monocyte 1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical receptor density. Center; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Department of Medicine, Division of K. Kalidas, K. El-Sharnouby, S. A. Roberts, D. Irving, J. Sheldon, J. General Internal Medicine, University Medical Center Nijmegen; Nijmegen, Poloniecki, S. Jeffery, J. C. Kaski The Netherlands St. Georges Medical School; London, United Kingdom payman@lumc.nl kkalidas@sghms.ac.uk Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL), the most common genetic form Atherosclerosis is characterised by the formation of focal lesions which of dyslipidemia in man, affects 1-3% of the population and is found in up to protrude into the arterial lumen, obstructing blood flow and producing sta- 20% of premature myocardial infarction survivors. FCHL is defined by ble and unstable angina, and acute MI. Monocyte CD14 receptor is acti- hypercholesterolemia and/or hypertriglyceridemia and the presence of vated by bacterial lipopolysaccharide to produce endothelial cell activation, coronary heart disease (CHD) in a first-degree relative < 60 years. Fur- cytokine secretion and pathophysiological effects associated with the initi- thermore, FCHLis characterized by several traits that are associated with ation and development of atherosclerosis. It has been suggested that the an increased risk of CHD including small dense LDL, insulin resistance and T allele of a common polymorphism in the CD14 gene promoter is asso- increased apolipoprotein B. ciated with an increased risk of MI, and that this effect may be due to an Segregation analysis suggests a complex inheritance pattern with major increased density of CD14 receptors on monocytes in TT homozygous dominant genes influencing the major FCHLtraits. Although several gene- individuals. We have examined the CD14 genotype and circulating mono- mapping studies have surfaced candidate regions, no causative genes cyte receptor density in 60 individuals with differing states of cardiac dis- have been identified so far. Comparison of various linkage studies shows ease, to determine whether such a correlation exists. that several candidate loci are common in different populations, although often with mixed findings in replication studies, due to clinical, genetic and P1280.Analysis of associations of HindIII restriction fragment ethnic heterogeneity. length polymorphism of lipoprotein lipase gene with myocar- We have collected and characterized 40 multigenerational families with dial infarction in Bashcortostan population FCHL including 687 individuals with high clinical and diagnostic homo- O. E. Mustafina, E. Shagisultanova, T. Narsybullin, I. Tuktarova, A. Bik- geneity. Recently, a genome wide linkage analysis with 405 microsatellite meeva, E. Khusnutdinova markers was performed with the support of the NIH in the 13 (n = 280) Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation most informative families. Several candidate regions have been identified, ekkh@anrb.ru two of which stand out as extremely promising with a joint lod score of 3.8 Lipoprotein lipase (LPL, triacylglyceroprotein acylhydrolase, EC 3.1.1.34) in a simultaneous search analysis. These two regions are located on chro- plays a crucial role in plasma lipoprotein processing by catalyzing the mosomes 1 and 13, respectively. Two other loci on chromosomes 4 and 20 hydrolysis of core triglycerides of chylomicrons and very low density showed promising lod scores between 1 and 2, individually. In order to lipoproteins. So LPLgene is a logical candidate gene of cardiovascular dis- enhance and pinpoint linkage evidence and eliminate false positive find- eases (CVD). The aim of our study was to investigate whether common ings, fine mapping of candidate regions is being performed in the complete HindIII restriction fragment length polymorphism at intron 8 of LPLgene is set of the 40 original families and three additional multigenerational FCHL associated with myocardial infarction (MI) in Russians and Tatars from families (n>850). As the results of the first stage genome screen already Bashcortostan. Polymorphism of LPLgene was studied in unrelated males indicated locus heterogeneity for FCHL, it is extremely important to deter- without symptoms of CVD (53 Russians and 80 Tatars) and coronary heart mine the exact contribution of each of the loci involved. For this purpose, disease patients MI survives under 55 years (98 Russians and 68 Tatars) quantitative trait analyses will be carried out for each of the traits that by the polymerase chain reaction. The frequencies of the genotypes HindI- underlay FCHL. Noteworthy, we have recently completed a 5 years clinical II(-/-), HindIII(+/-), HindIII(+/+) in Russians (3.77%, 49.06% and 47,17%) and biochemical follow-up in the 40 FCHLfamilies, giving important infor- did not differ from that in Tatars (7.50%, 51.24%, and 41.25% accordingly); mation on phenotype variation. HindIII(-) allele frequency was 28.30% in Russians and 33.13% in Tatars. Insight in the genetic background of FCHLwill form the basis for improved The HindIII(+/+) genotype was more common among MI survives then clinical care, including earlier and more effective preventive therapy. control subjects in Tatars (odds ratio; 1.56, p<0.05). It was also found that frequency of HindIII(+/+) genotype was higher ((odds ratio; 6.85, p<0.05)352 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism P1283.Genotyping Of Factor V Leiden And Protrombin 20210 tified 7 novel polymorphisms; -152 A/G, -438 A/G, -530 C/T, -1053 T/C, - Mutations In Hemodialysis Patients With Multiple Arteriove- 1102 T/G,-1690 G/A, and -1925 T/C. The -152 A/G, -530 C/Tand -1925 nous Fistula Thrombosis T/C transitions were found to be in strong linkage disequilibrium, as well as B. F. Ata1, N. zbek2, N. zdemir3, S. Sezer3, K. B. Kazbey1, D. Divanli- -438 A/G, -1102 T/G, -1053 T/C and -1690 G/A. Plasma TAFI levels (%) in oglu1, A. Kara1, M. Haberal4 subjects with the -438GG/-1102GG/-1053CC/-1690AA genotype (n=70) 1Baskent University School of Medicine Department of Molecular Biology; were 9416.5; heterozygotes -438GA/-1053TC/-1102TG/-1690AG (n=51) Ankara, Turkey; 2Baskent University School of Medicine Department of had TAFI levels of 84.615.5, and in -438AA/-1053TT/-1102TT/-1690GG Pediatrics; Ankara, Turkey; 3Baskent University School of Medicine homozygous (n=6) levels were 72.2  8.8 (P=0.0003). TAFI concentrations Department of Nephrology; Ankara, Turkey; 4Baskent University School of in -152AA/-530CC/-1925TThomozygous (n=122) were 89.417.1, some- Medicine Department of General Surgery; Ankara, Turkey what higher but not significantly different from levels observed -152AG/- batac@superonline.com 530CT/-1925TC heterozygous (849.9; n=5). We also examined TAFI Vascular complications are one of the most comman problems which con- polymorphisms as risk factors for deep venous thrombosis (DVT) by deter- tribute to the morbidity of end-stage renal failure.After understanding the mining their prevalence in 388 consecutive patients with DVTand in 388 role of point mutations in the etiology of thrombosis, the high prevalance of matched controls. The -438GA/-1053TC/-1102TG/-1690AG and -438AA/- Factor V Leiden (FVL) and Protrombin 20210 (Pt-20210) mutations began 1053TT/-1102TT/-1690GG polymorphisms were detected in 166 patients to gain more importance.Previously the incidence of Turkish heterozygous and in 187 controls, yielding an odds ratio (OR) for DVTof 0.8 (95%CI; 0.6- carrier status for FVL and Pt 20210 were described as7% and 2.3% 1). Although the OR for DVTlinked to -152AG/-530CT/-1925TC had been respectively.This study was designed for the determination of FVLand Pt of 1 (95%CI; 0.5-2.2) in the whole group, in subjects aged <35ys the OR 20210 carrier status in hemodialysis patients with history of arteriovenous was 0.1 (95%CI; 0.01-0.9), indicating a significant protective effect for DVT. fistula (AVF) thrombotic complications. 46 adult hemodialysis patients In conclusion, we identified variations in the TAFI gene and demonstrated (mean age 45.66+12.31years, mean HD duration 87.37+ 54.07months) that they influence plasma TAFI levels. The data also suggest that TAFI who had AVF thrombosis at least three episodes were subjected .Single polymorphisms may influence the risk for DVT. nucleotid polymorphism was searched in FVL(Arg506Gln) and Protrom- bin(G-A) genes by real time PCR and the fluorometric DNAmelting point P1286.Exlusion of the ETM1 and ETM2 loci in a large Moroc- analysis. At the end of these molecular analysis mutation of FVLwas found can family with autosomal dominant essential tremor in 7 ( 15.2%)patients and Pt 20210 in 4 ((8.7%) patients. These results may L. Baala1, A. Sbiti2, R. Nejjari2, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, A. Sefiani2 indicate that the incidence of the both mutations were two fold increased in 1Necker Hospital; Paris, France; 2INH; Rabat, Morocco hemodialysis patients when compared with normal population. As a con- baala@necker.fr clusion , in patients with frequent AVF thrombosis, in addition to medical Essential tremor (ET) is a chronic neurological condition which may be and surgical reasons genetic factors should be investigated. Further regarded as the most common movement disorder in human. The main thrombogenic complications can be prevented by early identification of this feature of ET is postural tremor of the arms, but the head, legs, trunk, high risk group. voice, jaw, and facial muscles may be involved as well. ETcan be either sporadic or familial (familial essential tremor, FETor ETM). In addition, the P1284. A recessive, most likely X-linked case of familial prevalence of Parkinsons disease and dystonia may be increased in fam- thrombocytosis in an Arab family ilies with ET. Autosomal dominant inheritance can be demonstrated in most W. Kuehnau1, M. Stuhrmann1, L. Bashawri2, B. Al-Awamy2, E. A. El- families and two ET loci have been mapped on chromosomes 3q13 Harith1 (ETM1, MIM 190300) and 2p25-p22 (ETM2, MIM 602134) respectively. 1Medizinische Hochschule Hannover; Hannover, Germany; 2King Faisal Here we report on a large Moroccan family with isolated autosomal domi- University; Al-Khobar, Saudi Arabia nant ET. Interestingly, patients presented with a very early onset. They are stuhrmann.manfred@mh-hannover.de mainly affected with fine rapid ET of both hands and arms. We tested Familial thrombocytosis (FT) has previously been described as an autoso- microsatellites DNAmarkers at the ETM1 and ETM2 loci, and eventually mal -dominant disorder presenting with clinical symptoms similar to those excluded linkage to both regions suggesting further genetic heterogeneity of sporadic essential thrombocythaemia (ET). To date, three different of FET. Furthermore, the Parkinsons loci mapping to chromosomes 4 and mutations have been identified in the human thrombopoietin (THPO) gene 6 were also excluded. Ongoing gene mapping studies will hopefully shed of FTpatients. We studied a Bedouin Arab family affected with an appar- ligh on the genetic variability of ET. ently recessive type of FT. In this family, all four brothers had markedly and/or moderately elevated platelet counts, while the two sisters and their P1287.Exclusion of NPR1 as a candidate gene for autosomal parents had normal platelet counts. Plasma thrombopoietin levels were dominant medullary cystic kidney disease type 1 normal in all family members.The four brothers, aged 4-8 years, currently M. Koptides1, R. Mean1, C. Stavrou2, A. Pierides3, K. Demetriou3, T. have no thrombotic or haemorrhagic complications. Mutation analysis at Nakayama4, F. Hildebrandt5, A. Fuchshuber5, C. Deltas6 the THPO gene in the affected brothers failed to detect the major known 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2Dept. mutation (intron 3 G->C) that had previously been described as causing of Nephrology, Paphos General Hospital; Paphos, Cyprus; 3Dept. of FT. In addition, segregation analysis using a CA-repeat microsatellite Nephrology, Nicosia General Hospital; Nicosia, Cyprus; 42nd Dept. of Inter- marker tightly linked to THPO revealed completely discordant THPO alle- nal Medicine, Nihon Univ. School of Medicine; Tokyo, Japan; 5University les among the affected brothers, thereby excluding THPO as the disease Childrens Hospital; Freiburg, Germany; 6The Cyprus inst. of Neurology locus in this family. We assume the existence of a new locus for FT, where- and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus by the disorder is transmitted as a recessive, most likely X-linked trait. Deltasco@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy Autosomal Dominant Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease (ADMCKD) is an P1285. Identification of polymorphisms in the 5-UTR region adult onset heterogeneous genetic nephropathy characterized by salt of the TAFI gene; Relationship with plasma TAFI levels and wasting and end stage renal failure. The gene responsible for ADMCKD1 risk of venous thrombosis was mapped on chromosome 1q21 and it is flanked proximally by marker M. G. Fagundes1, M. A. Zago2, J. Meijers3, P. H. REitsma4, D. Loureno5, D1S498 and distally by D1S2125, encompassing a region of ~8cM. With- V. Morelli5, F. H. Maffei6, C. E. Piccinato2, W. A. Silva-Jr2, R. F. Franco2 in this region there is a large number of transcribed genes including NPR1 1Center for Research on Cell-based Therapy, School of Medicine of that encodes the atrial natriuretic peptide receptor 1. This receptor plays a Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao; Ribeirao Preto-SP, Brazil; 2Center for crucial role in regulation of blood pressure by facilitating salt excretion. Research on Cell-based Therapy, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, Based on its presumed function we hypothesized this gene as a reason- University of Sao Paulo; Ribeirao Preto-SP, Brazil; 3Department of Hema- able candidate for the MCKD1 locus. DNAmutation screening was per- tology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, the Nether- formed on the entire NPR1 gene coding sequence, including the lands.; Amsterdam, Netherlands Antilles; 4Department for Experimental exon/intron splice junctions. The samples investigated belonged to Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, the patients of five large ADMCKD1 Cypriot families. The screening revealed Netherlands.; Amsterdam, Netherlands Antilles; 5Federal University of Sao two novel polymorphisms, one intragenic at aminoacid position 939, which Paulo; Ribeirao Preto-SP, Brazil; 6State University of Sao Paulo; Ribeirao was occupied by either arginine or glutamine, and a second one located in Preto-SP, Brazil the 3 UTR, 29 nucleotides downstream the NPR1 stop codon. The latter gifag@ig.com.br was a single nucleotide C insertion/deletion in a stretch a three or four Cs. Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is a potent fibrinolysis No relationship was present between any allele of the two polymorphisms inhibitor. TAFI gene variations were not reported heretofore. We analyzed and the disease, as both alleles were observed in both affected and a 2083-bp region at 5 of the TAFI gene in 127 healthy subjects and iden- healthy subjects. In addition, no association was observed between thePosters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 353 disease and another rare 8-bp deletion polymorphism at the 5 UTR of ica; Alghero, Italy NPR1 and the disease. Based on these findings it is unlikely that NPR1 is pasqua@imseb.cs.cnr.it the same as the MCKD1 gene although it is presently unknown whether it Febrile seizures (FS) are the most common form of childhood seizures. FS plays a disease modifying role. have both environmental and genetic factors involved in their pathogene- sis. These convulsions probably have a variety of causes, but a genetic P1288. Familial Ectrodactyly;An Autosomal Dominant Pedi- component has long been recognised. The genetics of familial FSs is gree with Novel Skeletal Features and Exclusion of the p63 somewhat ambiguous. Polygenic, autosomal dominant and autosomal Locus recessive models have received support. Recently four putative FSs loci, T. Roscioli1, P. J. Taylor2, J. A. Donald3, J. Masel4, I. A. Glass5, M. F. Buck- FEB1 (chromosome 8q13-q21), FEB2 (chromosome 19p), FEB3 (chromo- ley6 some 2q23-24) and FEB4 (chromosome 5q14-15), have been mapped. In 1Sydney Childrens Hospital; Sydney, Australia; 2Molecular and Cytoge- this study we conducted a linkage analysis to the four known FSs loci in netics Unit, South Eatern Area Laboratory Services; Sydney, Australia; eight small families originating in Southern Italy that appeared to segregate 3Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University; Sydney, Aus- FS as an autosomal dominant trait. Members of these families were geno- tralia; 4Royal Brisbane Hospital Radiology Department; Brisbane, Aus- typed using microsatellite markers linked to the previously identified febrile tralia; 5Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington State; Seat- convulsion loci, FEB1, FEB2 , FEB3 and FEB4. The febrile seizures phe- tle, WAUnited States; 6Molecular and Cytogenetics Unit, South Eastern notype was analyzed as an autosomal dominant trait with an incomplete, Area Laboratory Services; Sydney, Australia but high, disease penetrance of 90% and with an estimated disease gene rosciolit@hotmail.com frequence of 0.001. Two-point linkage analysis was performed using the We describe a family with AD variable ectrodactyly, encompassing the FASTLINK version MLINK of the LINKAGE 5.1 software package. Positive classical lobster claw deformity, through to partial absence of the thumb but not significant lod scores were obtained in seven families probably and radial ray, distal agenesis of the index finger and epiphysial coning. because of the small numbers of subjects examined. For one family two- One individual has an unusual supernumerary ossicle with an articular sur- point lod scores were negative and multipoint lod scores were below the face opposed to the distal phalanx of the thumb. Two individuals had skele- threshold value of -2, excluding linkage with four known FC loci. These tal manifestations consistent with EEC; one with unilateral dysplasia of the results indicate that there are at least five loci responsible for febrile con- nails of fingers 2-4 and another with cleft palate. Due to the presence of vulsions these features, a linkage study for the EEC Split Hand Split Foot (SHFM) 4 locus (p63)was undertaken. Two point Lod scores were calculated for P1291. Genetic analysis of an Italian family with dominant three microsatellite markers that lie within 0.55cM of p63 and flank the focal distonia; evidence for further genetic heterogeneity gene. Linkage was excluded by Lod scores of <-2 within 8cM of D3S3549; F. Brancati1, V. Caputo2, G. De Fazio3, A. Berardelli4, L. Vacca4, A. Pizzu- 3cM of D3S3530; and 1cM of D3S1294 (Zmax is 4.9). Of the three other ti5, G. Novelli6, B. Dallapiccola5 known SHFM loci, SHFM2 is X-linked; SHFM1 (7q21.3-q22.1) is usually 1Universit di Roma La Sapienza, CSS Mendel Institute; Roma, Italy; sporadic comprising additional features of deafness, cleft palate and 2CSS, Mendel Institute; Roma, Italy; 3Universit di Bari; Bari, Italy; 4Uni- microcephaly, which were not present in this family. SHFM3 (10q24) con- versit di Roma La Sapienza; Roma, Italy; 5Universit di Roma La tains a candidate F-box/WD40 gene Dactylin, which is currently being Sapienza, CSS Mendel Institute; Roma, Italy; 6Universit di Roma Tor examined by other researchers. The HOXD cluster on the long arm of Vergata; Roma, Italy chromosome 2 has also been associated with ectrodactyly but our family frankbrank@libero.it does not have the imperforate anus or penoscrotal hypoplasia associated Idiopatic dystonias are neurological disorders characterized by involuntary with deletion of the whole cluster. Currently, further linkage analyses are twisting movements of affected parts of the body. Most dystonia cases are underway to determine whether linkage to 10q24 exists for our SHFM fam- sporadic. However, familial dystonias, mostly with autosomal dominant ily or whether this represents a novel locus. transmission pattern, reduced penetrance and variable expression, not uncommonly come to the clinician attention. Seven genes for dystonias P1289. Polymorphisms in Positional Candidate Genes for have been mapped so far and two of them have been identified (the Torsi- Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Mapped to 1q23-q42 nAand the GTP-cyclohydrolase gene) carrying mutations in particular fam- A. S. A. Alansari1, A. Gl2, W. Ollier1, J. Ordi3, L. Teh4, A. Hajeer1 ilies. Two loci, DYT6 and DYT7 in chromosome 8p and 18p respectively, 1The University of Manchester; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2University have been linked to single families with primary purely focal dystonias. The of Istanbul; Istanbul, Turkey; 3Hospital General Vall dHebron; Barcelona, linkage has never been confirmed by other groups. Here we present a Spain; 4Blackburn Royal Infirmary; Blackburn, United Kingdom three generation family (15 members) from South of Italy with 8 patients aliya@fs1.ser.man.ac.uk affected by focal dystonia with age of onset between 20 and 50 years. We Background; Family studies in different ethnic populations have shown that have analysed for linkage both the DYT6 and DYT7 regions by genotiping chromosome 1q23-q42 interval is linked with SLE. Several potential can- all the family members. Samples were loaded on a ABI PRISM 310 and didates are mapped to this region, including the gamma chain (FcRg), analysed with the Genotyper 2.0 software. Furthermore, the DYT1 gene on FcgRs, IL-10, CRP, SAP, PARP and TGFb2. Objectives; To investigate 9q31 was screened for the GAGdel mutation. In this family, the study positional candidate genes polymorphisms and to study the possible asso- excluded linkage of the dystonia gene both for the DYT6 and DYT7 loci, ciation between identified polymorphisms and SLE in patients from three and absence of the recurrent DYT1 mutation. The findings comfirm the different populations. Methods; We have investigated the FcRg, FcgRIIb high genetic heterogeneity of famlial idiopatic dystonias, in particular the and TGFb2 genes for polymorphisms using PCR-SSCPand sequencing. focal and multifocal forms. (This work was supported by MURST) Identified polymorphisms were typed using PCR-RFLPmethod. Cases and controls were available from three ethnic groups, Turkish (95), Spanish P1292. Investigation of linkage at chromosome 2q in (120 ) and UK (100 ). All the patients fulfilled the 1982 ACR revised crite- osteoarthritis of the hand ria for SLE. Results; Five SNPs have been identified in the FcRg gene, 2 J. M. Stankovich1,2, H. M. Cooley1, M. M. Sale1,2, M. Bahlo3,2, T. P. SNPs in the promoter, one in intron four and 2 in the 3UTR. Four out of Speed3,2, J. Dickinson1, G. Jones1,2 the 5 SNPs were relatively common and therefore investigated in the 3 1Menzies Centre for Population Health Research; Hobart, Australia; populations. Allele and genotype frequencies of all four SNPs investigated 2Cooperative Research Centre for Discovery of Genes for Common were not statistically different in cases and controls. In addition, polymor- Human Diseases; Melbourne, Australia; 3The Walter and Eliza Hall Insti- phisms has identified in the 5UTR of TGFb 2 and in the 5UTR and intron tute of Medical Research; Melbourne, Australia 3 of FcgRIIb. Discussion; The FcRg, FcgRIIb and TGFb2 genes are poly- Jim.Stankovich@utas.edu.au morphic. The identified FcRg polymorphisms do not contribute to SLE sus- Twin studies have suggested a strong genetic component to osteoarthritis ceptibility. However, these polymorphisms may be useful in studying other (OA), especially that of the hand. We have collected extensive phenotypic diseases. The polymorphisms identified in the FcgRIIb and TGFb2 genes and genetic data on 470 subjects from 68 families containing at least two will be investigated in the three different ethnic case-control groups. living affected individuals in Tasmania, Australia. Phenotypic assessment of hand OAutilised the Altman atlas for joint narrowing and osteophytes. P1290.Linkage Study in families with febrile seizures This score was quantitative (range 058 out of a possible 60) and of high A. A. Pasqua1, A. Gambardella2, P. Forabosco3, C. Tomaino1, F. Annesi1, reproducibility (intra-class correlation 0.940.98). Subjects have been P. Spadafora1, I. C. Cir Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, A. Labate2, D. Pirritano2, genotyped at 19 markers on chromosome 2q. We attempted to reproduce G. Annesi1 the findings of Leppvuori et al. (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65; 1060) by using 1CNR-Istituto Medicina Sperimentale e Biotecnologie; Mangone (CS), an identical design and a non-parametric linkage (NPL) analysis on 2q of Italy; 2Universit Magna Graecia; Catanzaro, Italy; 3CNR-Istituto di Genet- 69 individuals in 22 families with severe distal interphalangeal joint OA.354 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism The maximum NPLscore was 1.05 (at the same marker (IL1R1) identified through whole genome scan and genetic linkage analysis. Once the gene by Leppvuori et al.). These results do not provide confirmation of linkage is mapped, a correlation between the genotypes and phenotypes will be at this site in our population. Subsequent fine mapping, QTLanalysis or closely examined. genome wide screens may be required for demonstration of linkage in this population. P1296.Rarity of molecular alterations in the promoter region of the androgen receptor gene P1293.CFTR gene polymorphisms in Latvia D. F. Cabral, M. L. Ribeiro, A. dos Santos, C. Hackel L. Krumina1, V. Kroshkina1, I. Tamane1, M. Lazdins2, V. Baumanis3, A. Universidade Estadual de Campinas - UNICAMP; Campinas - SP, Brazil Krumina1 dcabral@obelix.unicamp.br 1Medical Academy of Latvia; Riga, Latvia; 2University of Latvia, faculty of The androgen receptor protein is essential for androgen action, by binding Biology; Riga, Latvia; 3University of Latvia, Biomedical Research Centre; either testosterone (T) or its 5a-reduced metabolite, 5a-dihydrotestos- Riga, Latvia terone. Thus, the androgen receptor gene (AR) plays an essential role in liene777@hotmail.com the development of male sexual characteristics. The AR gene has a rela- The aim of our study was to analyse CFTR gene polymorphisms useful in tively long 5 untranslated region (5UTR). Since this region may play a role indirect DNAdiagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis in Latvia. 31 patient with CF, 30 in translation control, protein expression could be modulated by polymor- healthy family members and 146 healthy Latvians were subjected to DNA phisms in the normal male population. In addition, a previous report of two testing. DNA analysis was performed by PCR, restriction analysis and germline point mutations in the 5UTR of the AR gene in men with prostate agarose or polyacrilamide gel electrophoresis. All DNAsamples have been cancer1 suggest that these alterations may contribute to this disease. We analysed for six CFTR gene polymorphisms. 3 extragenic diallelic poly- therefore evaluate the variability of this region in healthy individuals and in morphic sites - KM-19/PstI, XV-2C/TaqI, J3.11/PstI and 3 intragenic poly- prostate cancer patients from a Brazilian population. The screening for morphic sites - [GATT]n in intron 6A, TUB18 in intron 18 and CArepeats in polymorphisms in the 5 UTR was performed by CSGE. Genomic DNAs intron 1 were studied. Diallelic polymorphic sites are in Hardy - Weinberg from 100 male blood donors and from 100 patients with prostate cancer equilibrium. The highest heterozygote frequency was detected for markers were amplified by PCR, with 4 pairs of primers designed to cover a 1,400 XV-2C/TaqI - 49,9% and KM-19/PstI - 42,8%. Absolute linkage disequilib- bp region. Since the AR gene is X-linked, each product was mixed with a rium was found between the mutation F508 and polymorphic loci IVS 6a previously sequenced normal fragment, in order to generate heterodu- (GATTrepeat) and XV-2C/TaqI; highly significant with loci TUB18 and KM- plexes in the presence of point mutations. Only one mutation was detect- 19/PstI. Result of haplotype analysis showed different distribution of hap- ed by this technique, in one individual from the blood donors sample, con- lotypes between normal, F508 and non-F508 CF chromosomes. The sisting of one base pair deletion (-T at position -1110) identified by most common haplotypes associated with the F508 mutation differ in the sequencing. The deletion observed is situated far from the critical region, marker J3.11, located downstream (distance 1cM) from the CFTR gene. therefore its possible effects might be minimised. These results point out These findings are consistent with the data published for most European the highly conserved character of this region. 1Crocitto et al., J Urol populations and will be useful in indirect DNAdiagnosis for CF in Latvia 158;1599-1601,1997. supported by FAPESP. and for tracing the origin of the F508 mutation in the Baltic Sea region. P1297. Endothelial Nictric Oxide Synthase Minisatellite Poly- P1294. CF-like lung disease associated with the IVS8-5T morphism; analysis of associations with myocardial infarc- allele in combination with the polymorphisms TG11 and tion and essential hypertension in Russians from Bashkor- M470V of the CFTR gene tostan B. Thamm-Mcke1, D. Wand1, T. Lietz2 E. I. Shagisultanova, O. E. Mustafina, T. R. Narsyb?ullin, I. A. Tuktarova, 1Gemeinschaftspraxis Dr. Reising-Ackermann & Koll.; Leipzig, Germany; A. M. Bikmeeva, E. K. Khusnutdinova 2Universittskinderklinik; Leipzig, Germany Institution of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation labrgenetik@aol.com ekkh@anrb.ru Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive genet- Nitric oxide inhibits platelet aggregation, proliferation of vascular smooth ic disorders in the Caucasian population and is caused by mutations in the muscle cells, and leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells. An impaired syn- cystic fiobrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene. The 5T allele in thesis of nitric oxide by the vascular endothelium has been implicated in intron 8 causes abnormal splicing of the CFTR gene by skipping of exon 9 the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease. Thus, genetic polymorphism leading to non-functional protein. In combination with an other CF mutation of endothelial constitutive nitric oxide synthase (ecNOS) may be involved the 5Tallele might be associated with congenital bilateral absence of the in the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease (CAD). The possible asso- vas deferens (CBAVD) or chronic pancreatitis. However, the 5Tvariant has ciations between variable number of tandem repeats polymorphism incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity, suggesting that some (VNTR, 27-bp repeat) at intron 4 of ecNOS gene, essential hypertension other regulatory factors may modulate the splicing of exon 9. Furthermore, (EH), myocardial infarction (MI) were investigated in Russians from the 5T allele alone has not been reported to cause lung disease. We Bashkortostan. Polymorphism of ecNOS gene was studied in unrelated describe a three years old male patient with CF-like lung disease. Sweat normotensive males without symptoms of CAD (102 subjects), CAD chloride conductance has been rising over the last three months (37,7 - patients MI survives under 55 years (107 subjects), EH patients (107 sub- 53,7 - 66,6 - 67,0 mmol/l) with increasing frequency of respiratory infec- jects). The VNTR region of ecNOS gene was amplified by the polymerase tions, but still no pneumonia. The digestive function appears normal. Com- chain reaction; two alleles, containing four (allele A) and five repeats (allele plete sequencing of the CFTR gene revealed the TG11/ 5Tallele in com- B), were identified. Distinctions between controls and hypertensive bination with the M470V polymorphism. No other mutation was present. patients with left ventricular hypertrophy were found; in patients the geno- These data suggest that the 5Tpolythymidine tract on specific haplotype types eNOS4A/A, eNOS4A/B and eNOS4B/B were discovered in 4.17%, backgrounds (number of TG repeats, presence of M470V) may cause mild 52,08%, 43,75% of case, alleles Aand B in 30.21% and 69.79% of case, CF-like lung disease with moderate values of sweat chloride conductance. respectively. In controls genotypes and alleles distributions were as fol- lows; eNOS4A/A 1.96%, eNOS4A/B  29.41%, eNOS4B/B  68.62% and P1295.Genetic and Clinical Studies of Otosclerosis A 16.17%, B  83.33%. But genotypes and alleles frequencies did not dif- X. C. Li, D. Mills, P. Johnson, D. Brackmann, R. A. Friedman fer significantly between MI patients and controls. Thus, eNOS minisatellit House Ear Institute; Los Angeles, CAUnited States polymorphism might be a genetic risk factor for the development of left cli@hei.org ventricular hypertrophy among russian hypertensive patients. Clinical otosclerosis has a prevalence of 0.2 to 1% among white adults, making it the single most common cause of hearing impairment in this pop- P1298. Evaluation of markers on human chromosome 10, ulation. It is a disease of the otic capsule that is characterized by resorp- including the homologue of the rodent Rf-1 gene, for linkage tion and redeporsition of bony tissue. The majority of epidermiological to End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) in African-Americans. studies indicate that the inheritance of otosclerosis is autosomal dominant B. I. Freedman1, H. Yu1, M. Sale2, B. H. Roh1, D. W. Bowden1, S. S. Rich1 with reduced penetrance. To date, only one otosclerosis locus, OTSC1, 1Wake Forest University School of Medicine; Winston-Salem, NC United has been mapped on chromosome 15q. We studied a large multi-genera- States; 2University of Tasmania; Hobart, Australia tional family in which otosclerosis has been inherited in an autosomal dom- bfreedma@wfubmc.edu inant pattern. Six of the affected persons have surgically confirmed oto- African-Americans demonstrate familial clustering of hypertensive ESRD sclerosis. Exclusion study on this family by typing genetic markers that (H-ESRD). Animal models of H-ESRD also suggest that genetic factors linked to OTSC1 indicates that a novel otosclerosis gene segregates in this make strong contributions to renal failure. In the Fawn-Hooded rat model, family. We are now in the process of locating the disease-causing gene the majority of the risk for glomerulosclerosis appears to be on rat chro-Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism 355 mosome 1 (the Rf1 and Rf2 genes). These renal failure genes appear to Table 1. Results from the studies of polymorphism in ACPPlocus in Bul- promote the development of nephrosclerosis. The corresponding syntenic garian population regions of the human genome for Rf1 and Rf2 have been isolated to Frequency in the 10q24-26 and 9q21, respectively. Allele Frequency inFrequency in literature (Doak et al. DNA was collected from 452 African-American sib pairs concordant for (bp) BEN patients Controls 1991) ESRD, 249 of these ESRD sib pairs are concordant for non-diabetic eti- C6 (136)0.136 0.162 0.153 ologies of ESRD (H-ESRD and chronic glomerulonephritis) and 203 ESRD C5 (140)0.018 0 0.0267 sib pairs are concordant for diabetic ESRD. We evaluated the Rf1 region C4 (144)0.345 0.309 0.18 on chromosome 10 as a candidate gene for ESRD in black sibling pairs C3 (148)0.427 0.441 0.52 concordant for ESRD. We tested for genetic linkage between 21 polymor- C2 (152)0.056 0.088 0.1067 phic markers spanning chromosome 10 and ESRD using the GeneHunter C1 (156)0.009 0 0.0133 (version 2) software. New When these 21 markers were genotyped in the 249 non-diabetic ESRD sib (112- 0.009 0 nonpublished pairs, suggestive evidence for linkage was observed between adjacent 116) markers D10S249 and D10S1435 on chromosome 10p (lod score ~ 1.7). Additionally, genes near the Rf1 region demonstrated weak evidence for linkage to all cause ESRD (lod score ~ 1.2). These results suggest that P1301. A new human mtDNA polymorphism ; ND6 14562 genes underlying human H-ESRD susceptibility may be found on chromo- (C->T). some 10p in man and also in the region homologous to the rodent Rf1 I. Manna1, V. Andreoli1, A. La Russa1, G. La Porta1, A. Labate2, R. L. Oliv- gene. eri2, D. Pirritano2, R. Cittadella1 1Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology-National Research P1299. Comparative study of CYP2D6 polymorphism in Council; Cosenza, Italy; 2Institute of Neurology,University Magna Graecia; healthy Bulgarian population and patients with Balkan Catanzaro, Italy endemic nephropathy (BEN) manna@imseb.cs.cnr.it B. Zaharieva1, S. Atanassova1, A. Dimitrova1, T. Dimitrov2, D. Toncheva1 The observation of a multiple sclerosis (MS)-like illness in patients, who 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Sofia; Sofia, Bulgar- carry the most common Lebers hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) mito- ia; 2Department of Nephrology, Medical University - Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria chondrial DNA(mtDNA) mutation may indicate a contributory role for mito- draga@sofiaonline.com chondrial genes in genetic susceptibility to MS. During a screening study The cytochromes P450 play an important role in the metabolic activation of of Calabrian patients with MS-like illness for the pathogenic LHON muta- many precarcinogens. Different polymorphic variants are associated with tions at positions 11778, 3460 and 14484 of human mithocondrial DNA, we cancer susceptibility. Development of urinary tract tumors (UTT) is a clini- observed a new genetic polymorphism caused by a variation of the base cal problem for 38-40 % of the patients with BEN. The aim of the study is pair (bp) at position 14562, which is located in the gene for mitochondrial to compare CYP2D6 polymorphism in BEN patients and healthy persons. ND6. The variant is a C?Ttransition which creates one new restriction site 125 samples are genotyped (55 from BEN patients and 70 samples from ; Mbo I, leading to Valine substitution for Isoleucine.The restriction frag- healthy persons) for three CYP2D6 mutant alleles, responsible for the PM ments were detected by electrophoresis on 3% agarose gel and visualised phenotype. CYP2D6*A, CYP2D6*B and CYP2D6*D alleles were identified by ethidium bromide staining. This polymorphism was observed in a using allele-specific PCR (Heim and Meyer, 1991). The frequency of patient , 36-year-old male, clinically diagnosed MS. The molecular analy- homozygotes BEN patients for mutant alleles is 5.45% versus 10% in sis of other asymptomatic members of probands family confirmed the healthy group. Significant differences between the frequencies of het- same nucleotide variation. The primary LHON mutations at nucleotides erozygotes in BEN group (12.73%) and healthy persons (31.43%)(p<0.01) 11778, 3460 and 14484 were not present in this patient. We performed a were revealed. The frequency of homozygotes of wild type allele was sig- mutational analysis in fifty normal subjects from the same geographic nificantly higher in BEN patients (81.82%) compared to the controls background , but this polymorphism was not present. Thus, this novel (58.57%)(p<0.01). We suggest that wild type allele might be associated nucleotide transition is a neutral polymorphism. with genetic predisposition to development of urinary tract tumors in BEN patients. P1302.Acharacteristic of polymorphism in a tetranucleotide short tandem repeat locus D9S768 in Siberian population P1300. Frequency of polymorphic (TAAA)n tandem repeat in I. Goncharova, T. Nikitina ACPPlocus in Bulgarian population Institute of Medical Genetics RAMS; Tomsk, Russian Federation S. Atanassova1, E. Todorovska2, T. Dimitrov3, D. Toncheva4 masha@img.tsu.ru 1Medical University Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Institute of Genetic Engineer- Short tandem repeats (STRs) present polymorphic sequences which are ing; Kostinbrod, Bulgaria; 3Department of Nephrology, Medical University - widely distributed across human genome. They are highly informative Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria; 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Universi- genetic markers and are extensively used in such fields as population ty - Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria genetics, genetic councelling, forensic medicine, and oncology. However, draga@sofiaonline.com allele frequencies may differ in the populations of different origin. So Apolymorphic (TAAA)n tandem repeat is located in an alu-repeat in the describing of allele frequencies distribution of such markers in different non-coding sequence of the ACPP (prostatic acid phospatase) gene in populations is of great interest. We have obtained population-genetic char- 3q21-3qter. acteristics of tetra-nucleotide short tandem repeat D9S768 in the popula- DNAs blood samples from 89 persons (178 alleles) were studied for poly- tion of South-West Siberia (N=128, non-related, mainly of Slavic origin), morphism in ACPPlocus - 34 from Bulgarian healthy persons (68 alleles) The study was performed by analysis of separation of PCR products and 55 from patients (110 alleles) with Balkan endemic nephropathy (amplimer UT5494 in GDB) in 7% acrylamide gel. 7 common alleles were (BEN). identified in this locus. The distribution of their frequencies was consistent Four different alleles C2, C3, C4 and C6 in the studied healthy Bulgarian with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The frequencies are; ?0  0.074; ?  individuals were identified. Their respective frequencies were as follows; 0.116; ?  0.148; ?  0.319; D  0.130; ?  0.148; F  0.065. 25 different C2 - 0.088, C3 - 0.441, C4 - 0.309 and C6 - 0.162. Our analysis showed genotypes were observed, with the most frequent CC and CE (about 10% that the frequency of the detected allelic variants in Bulgarian population is each). Allele sizes were determined (in base pairs); A0  308; A 300; B  similar to those reported in the literature (Doak et al., 1991). The most fre- 288; C  272; D  268; ?  252; F  248. Observed heterozigosity was  quent alleles in Bulgarian population were C3 and C4. 0.75, predicted value was 0.814. Probability of random match (pM) = Most of the alleles observed in the controls were also found in BEN 0.057. Power of discrimination (pD) = 0.943. Mean exclusion chance (W) patients - C2 - 0.056, C3 - 0.427, C4 - 0.345, C6 - 0.136. Alleles C1 - 0.009, = 0.813. Polymorphism information content (PIC) = 0.726. Our results sug- C5 - 0.018 and C7 - 0.009 (not reported so far in the literature) were detect- gest that this locus is highly informative and may be used in various fields ed only in BEN patients. of applied genetics. Three BEN patients were studied for LOH in ACPPlocus by using normal and tumor DNAs. No LOH or any rearrangements were observed in the studied normal and tumor DNAsamples. 356 Posters: Linkage Mapping and Polymorphism P1303. Tsp509I-D1S80 subtypes frequency distribution in deviation from the HWE in the arthritic group compared to the control Romanian population group. Individuals of 2-2 phenotype were found to be at a higher risk for A. A. Ceacareanu arthritis compared to the control group. They were also at a higher risk Cantacuzino Institute; Bucharest, Romania compared to the 1-1 and1-2 phenotypes within the arthritic group. Our find- alice_ceacareanu@yahoo.com ings strongly suggest that SOD phenotyping can be used as a genetic The D1S80 locus is one of the best known polymorphic loci, which shows marker for risk prediction in rheumatoid arthritis and to help formulate a variable number of tandem repeats, exhibiting high heterozygosity in counseling strategies. most populations and an associated high number of alleles. In the present work, we considered in parallel the frequencies of D1S80 alleles and the P1306.Polymorphism of Alpha-1 Antitrypsin (AAT) and asso- polymorphism of their subtypes generated by the presence of Tsp509 I ciation of alleles with Duodenal Ulcer (DU) restriction site in the 5 flank. Anumber of 74 genotypes were found among P. Nallari1, S. Sulekha2, P. Mokkapati2 the 193 individuals. The most common genotypes in the total samples 1Osmania University; Secunderabad, India; 2Osmania University; Hyder- seems to be; 18-24 (17%), 24-24 (8.3%) and 18-18 (5.5%). The identified abad, India Tsp509I-D1S80 subtypes presented frequencies between 0.0024 and prathinallari@yahoo.com 0.2600, the most present were the subtypes 24+, 18-, 25+ and 31-. The Duodenal Ulcer (DU) a common structural disorder of the gastrointestinal observed heterozygosity of D1S80 alleles and of D1S80-Tsp509I subtypes mucosa was found to result due to an imbalance between the aggressive was 0.84 and, respectively 0.87. Concordant to the constructed phyloge- and defensive mechanism. Since studies so far have clearly pinpointed the netic tree (DISPAN ? Genetic Distance and Phylogenetic Analysis pro- role of genetic factors in the etiology of DU, the present study aims at iden- gram) on D1S80 allele frequencies, Romania is included into the cluster tifying the polymorphic variation of AATin the 173 healthy individuals and containing Slovenia, Russia and Belarus. 210 endoscopically confirmed cases of DU. Sourcing samples from these individuals was phenotyped for AATfollowing PAGE and immunoblot tech- P1304. Transforming growth factor beta one (TGF b1) poly- niques. Increased preponderence of Z &S alleles in the disease group morphism and Dupuytrens disease compared to control group was observed. Asignificant deviation from the A. Bayat1, A. Alansari1, M. Shah1, J. S. Watson2, J. K. Stanley1, M. W. J. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was observed with respect to the gene and Ferguson1, W. E. Ollier1 genotypic frequencies in comparison to controls. The relative risk esti- 1Hand Surgery Units, Wrightington Hospital, Wigan & Withington Hospital; mates also revealed that homozygous ZZ and SS genotypes were at an Department of ARC and Cells, Immunology and Development, University increased risk for ulceration, suggesting that deficiency of serum AATin of Manchester; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Hand Surgery Units, DU cases as reported earlier could be accounted by the S & Z alleles in Wrightington Hospital, Wigan & Withington Hospital; Department of ARC the disease group, because of point mutations and Cells, Immunology and Development, University of Manchester; Mac- nhester, United Kingdom P1307. Nonsyndromic Xlmr With Inheritance Through ANor- ardeshir.bayat@man.ac.uk mal Male Dupuytrens disease (DD) is a benign fibroproliferative tumour of unknown H. A. Lubs1, B. Hane2, J. Collins2, G. Arnold3, J. F. Arena1, D. A. Cabezas1, cause. It is a familial condition and commonly affects Northern European R. E. Stevenson2, C. E. Schwartz2 Caucasian men. Genetic studies have yet to identify the genes involved in 1University of Miami; Miami, FLUnited States; 2J.C. Self Research Insti- DD formation. Transforming growth factor beta one (TGF-b1) is a multi- tute, Greenwood Genetic Center; Greenwood, SC United States; 3Univer- functional cytokine, which plays a central role in wound healing and fibro- sity of Rochester; Rochester, NYUnited States sis. TGF-b1 has been shown to stimulate fibroblast proliferation and extra- hlubs@peds.med.miami.edu cellular matrix deposition. Previous immunohistochemical studies have Alarge five-generation family with nonsyndromic X-linked mental retarda- implicated TGF-b1 in DD. In the light of above evidence, it is feasible that tion (XLMR), has been mapped to the pericentric region at Xp11-q21. TGF-b1 is a candidate gene in the pathogenesis of DD. The aim of this Twenty-five of sixty-five family members were studied, including the six liv- study was to investigate the association of four common single nucleotide ing affected males. None of the obligate carriers was retarded. Clinical polymorphisms in TGF-b1 with the risk of DD formation. A polymerase findings included a small head circumference in affected males and very chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) large testes in two affected adults. Affected males had mild to moderate method was used for genotyping TGF-b1 polymorphisms. DNAsamples mental retardation and several had accomplished independent living. Link- from 135 DD patients and 199 controls were examined. There was no sta- age analysis detected linkage to Xq11-q21 with a maximum Z=1.69 at tistically significant difference in TGF-b1 genotype or allele frequency dis- DXS1216 with a q=0.00. Multipoint linkage analysis by GENEHUNTER tributions between cases and controls for the codons 10, 25 and, -509, - yielded a maximal Lod score of 3.84 in a 30 cM region between DXS1199 800 polymorphisms. These results suggest that common TGF-b1 poly- (Xp11) and DXS986 (Xq21).. Oligophrenin I is a known XLMR gene within morphisms are not associated with a risk of DD formation. However, these this region and mutational analysis is in progress. Most interestingly, the data should be interpreted with caution as the lack of association was only haplotype analysis indicated that the mutation must have been transmitted shown in one cohort of cases (n=135) with only known common polymor- through the founding male in generation I. This family, therefore, repre- phisms of TGF-b1. We are presently increasing our sample size and look- sents the first instance of nonsyndromic XLMR in which there was inheri- ing for novel polymorphisms in the TGF-b1 for further investigations. tance through a normal male. The Fragile X Syndrome is the only other known XLMR disorder with inheritance through a normal male. P1305.Superoxide Dismutase (SOD) as a genetic marker for rheumatic diseases P1308. A genome scan for loci influencing anti-atherogenic P. Mokkapati1, P. Arumugam1, R. Babu2, P. Nallari1 serum bilirubin levels 1Osmania University, Department of Genetics; Secunderabad, India; 2King F. Kronenberg1,2, H. Coon1, A. Gutin3, M. E. Samuels3, D. G. Ballinger3, Koti Hospital; Hyderabad, India P. N. Hopkins1, S. C. Hunt1 pariplavi@eth.net 1Cardiovascular Genetics; Salt Lake City, UT United States; 2Institute of Rheumatic disorders,clinically and genetically heterogeneous in nature, Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria; 3Myriad Genet- affect all ages, sexes and ethnic groups. The commonest forms are ics, Inc.; Salt Lake City, UT United States Rheumatoid Arthiritis ( age of onset-3rd-5th decade), Juvenile Chronic Florian.Kronenberg@uibk.ac.at Arthiritis ( age of onset < 16 years)and Osteoarthrosis (age of onset > 40 Epidemiological studies have shown an association of decreased serum years).Our study aims at identifying polymorphic variations of superoxide bilirubin levels with coronary heart disease. Two segregation analyses in dismutase (SOD) in the local population and with reference to arthiritis. large pedigrees have suggested a major gene responsible for high biliru- Blood samples from 136 patients suffering from rheumatoid arthiritis, juve- bin levels occurring in about 12% of the population. Based on a recessive nile arthritis and osteoarthritis (54,16,and 66 respectively) referred from model from segregation analysis of 1967 individuals in 50 Utah pedigrees, King-Koti Hospital Hyderabad were analysed alongwith 133 age and sex we performed a genome scan using 589 markers to detect loci significant- matched controls for phenotyping SOD following PAGE of red cell-mem- ly linked to bilirubin levels. Two regions suggestive for linkage were found brane. The frequency of allelic distribution,Hardy-Weinberg by multipoint linkage analysis. The first region is on chromosome 2q with a equilibrium(HWE) and test for association were studied in the individual maximum multipoint LOD score of 3.2 for marker D2S1363. This region groups and as a whole and compared with the controls. The haplotype fre- contains a previously described gene, uridine diphosphate glycosyltrans- quencies of alleles 2 and 1 of SOD were 0.656 and 0.344 ( controls); 0.740 ferase 1, which has been associated with high bilirubin levels. Asecond and 0.259 (rheumatoid arthritis); 0.787 and 0.212 ( osteoarthrosis) and region was found on chromosome 18 with marker D18S818 having a max- 0.781 and 0.219 ( juvenile chronic arthiritis) respectively, with a significant imum multipoint LOD score of 2.7. These results provide evidence that lociPosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 357 influencing bilirubin variation exist on chromosomes 2q and 18p. cence) was coupled to unique DNA oligonucleotide sequences termed complementary ZipCodes (cZipCodes). Allele detection was based on P1309. Linkage and association of HLA class II genes with either single-base chain extension assay (SBCE) where a synthetic cap- Vitiligo in Dutch population ture oligonucleotide probe was designed to contain both a ZipCode M. Zamani1, M. Spaepen2, S. S. Asghar3, C. H. Huang2, W. Westerhof4, L. sequence at the 5 end and an SNP-specific sequence at the 3 end. ADNA Nieuweboer-Krobotova5, J. J. Cassiman2 polymerase adds a fluorescently labeled nucleotide to the capture oligonu- 1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; cleotide which was then hybridized to its cZipCode on the microsphere. Department of Human Genetics, School of Public Health, Tehran Universi- Flow cytometric analysis of the microspheres simultaneously identified ty of Medical Sciences; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Center for both the microsphere type and the fluorescent signal associated with the Human Genetics, University of Leuven; Leuven, Belgium; 3Department of SNP genotype. This system is automated by the integration of many Dermatology, University of Amsterdam, Academisch Centrum; Amsterdam, pieces of unique equipment for HTPSNPanalysis. The Netherlands; 4Department of Dermatology, University of Amsterdam, Academisch Centrum; Netherlands Institute for Pigmentary Disorders; P1312. 99 Genome-wide searches for genes predisposing to Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 5Netherlands Institute for Pigmentary Disor- complex human diseases between 1993 and 2000; Compari- ders; Amsterdam, The Netherlands son of study-design and number of probands Mzamani@excite.com J. Altmller, G. Fischer, M. Wjst Family based and case-control association studies and linkage disequilib- Institut fr Epidemiologie; Oberschleiheim, Germany rium analysis were performed on 50 Dutch vitiligo families (150 individuals) altmueller@gsf.de and 204 healthy controls. They were genotyped for HLA- class II genes by Extensive efforts have been made in recent years to search for predispos- PCR and sequence specific oligonucleotides (SSOs). Both linkage dise- ing genes of complex diseases using genome-wide scans, but only very quilibrium and case-control analysis showed the linkage and association of few genes were identified yet. The purpose of this study was to analyse the DRB4*0101 allele with vitiligo (pc = 0.0016, relative risk =2.21). The fami- data of 99 genome-wide scans done between 1993 and 2000 found by ly-based association study also provided evidence for linkage and associ- medline. In addition to statistical models and threshold definitions, trends ation of DQB1*0303 allele with vitiligo disorder (l2 = 7.36, p=0.006). We in the study-design reflect the experiences of real studies and will be help- measured the clinical relevance of the test by calculating prevalence cor- ful for further research. All scans used microsatellite markers. The number rected positive predictive values (PcPPV) of test. The PcPPV of disease of investigations increased rapidly in the observation time (from 6 in for DRB4*0101 allele was 0.017 and for DRB4*0101/0101 genotype was 1993/1994 to 45 in 1999/2000). With regard to year of publication, quanti- 0.0358. Which means that when a random person has DRB4*0101/0101 tative and qualitative traits (1;6) showed a proportionally equal increase as genotype who has a 3.58% risk to develop vitiligo. Taking all together, our did the relation of isolated and non-isolated populations (1;5). The investi- results show that both DRB4*0101 and DQB1*0303 alleles are provide sig- gation of sibpairs increased steadily in the last years while the affected rel- nificant susceptibility for vitiligo disorder and able to explain findings of atives and extended pedigrees design decreased. The most remarkable other studies on the association of the HLAclass II with vitiligo. observation is a shift in the number of probands per study from average 323 in 1993-1996 (n=18) to 456 in 1999/2000 (n=38). No conclusions can P1310.Secondary Merosin Deficiency CMD Unlinked to Chro- be derived from these results, for example which study-design proves to mosomes 6,9 and 1 in Three Tunisian Families be superior, because neither the investigation of isolated populations nor F. H. Fakhfakh1, C. Triki2, N. Louhichi1, M. Meziou2, H. Ayadi1 the calculation with quantitative traits has shown advantages in gene local- 1laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine; Sfax, Tunisia; 2service de isation. The experiences of the last 8 years, however, lead to the insight, neurologie chu H.Bourguiba; Sfax, Tunisia that an investigation of far more families per study is necessary to identify f.fakhfakh@gnet.tn predisposing genes. Congenital muscular dystrophies(CMD)are a heterogenous group of mus- cular disorder characterised by an autosomal recessive mode of inheri- P1313. New insights on the advantages of isolated versus tance.The CMD have been classified according to the involvment of the outbred populations for the genetic dissection of complex brain and the eyes.It is apparent that defects in different genes are respon- traits sable for each type.A deficiency of the alpha 2 chain of laminine A. Darvasi1, S. Shifman2 2(Merosin)occurs in about 40-50% of cases with the classical form of 1The Hebrew university of Jerusalem, idGENE Pharmaceuticals Ltd.; CMD.It is a primary phenomenon caused by defects in the gene for Jerusalem, Israel; 2The Hebrew University of Jerusalem; Jerusalem, Israel merosin(LAMA2)on chromosome 6q22.Recently a group of new separate arield@cc.huji.ac.il entities of CMD have been reported.It encompasses unclassified CMD Much attention has recently been focused on the relative values of isolat- forms with merosin deficiency with or without structural brain abnormali- ed and outbred populations in identifying genes affecting complex traits. In ties,mental retardation, absence of severe eye defects and unlinked to particular, the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) in outbred and isolated chromosomes 6,9 and 1.We have studied 3 cases affected with CMD and populations was recently studied. In those studies it has been suggested belonging to threeTunisian families. These patients had benefied from that on average there is little difference between isolated (Finns and Sar- complete clinical investigation. Immunohistochemical and western blot dinians) and outbred populations (UK, US and CEPH samples). analysis on muscles biopsies was performed using monoclonal antibodies We have explored this question by looking at Ashkenazi Jews, a known against human merosin (80 and 300 fragments).Linkage analysis was isolated population and also by re-examining the results presented in Tail- undertaken using microsatellite markers spanning LAMA2locus on lon-Miller et al. (2000). As anticipated and previously reported, for SNPs at 6q22,FCMD locus on 9q31,MEB locus on 1p32 and CMD1B locus on distances up to 200kb there is no significant difference between the levels 1q42.Clinical investigation of the three patients showed severe motor of LD for isolated and outbred populations. However, when the distance delay and moderate mental retardation in all cases and calf hypertrophy in between SNPs was greater than 200kb, the level of LD (represented by r2) one case and pontocerebellar hypoplasia associated to cerebellar cysts was higher in the Finnish, Sardinian and Ashkenazi samples by 4.7, 6.1 and white matter abnormalities in the other cases.Immunohistochemical and 7.0 fold, respectively. It should be noted that r2is proportional to sam- and western blot analysis revealed a partial merosin deficiency in all ple size required to identify a specific gene. Thus in some instances a five cases.DNAanalysis exclude any linkage to chromosome6,9 and1.In con- to sevenfold increase in sample size might be required if outbred samples lusion, these patients showed a CMD form with secondary merosin defi- are used as compared to an isolated population. ciency unlinked to chromosomes 6,9 and 1. Independent of the extent of LD, isolated populations have other important advantages, mainly in reducing genetic heterogeneity which can signifi- P1311. Microsphere-based readout technology for high cantly increase genotypic relative risk and hence increase statistical throughput multiplexing SNPanalysis power. Consequently, in some instances the use of isolated populations Y. He, J. Chen, M. Weiner, P. Rivers, H. King, D. Taylor, Q. Nguyen, M. will allow the discovery of genes that could not be discovered otherwise. Wagner, M. Li, F. Ye, D. Briley GlaxoSmithkline; RTP, NC United States yh42558@glaxowellcome.com A rapid, multiplexing, high throughput read-out technology for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis was developed employing both flow cytometric analysis of fluorescent microspheres and enzyme-based allele detection. An array of fluorescent microspheres (each population of microspheres is identified by its unique profile of red and orange fluores-358 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance P1314. Use Of Isolated Inbred Human Populations For The P1317.AGenetic Hypothesis for Chiari Type 1 Malformation Study Of Complex Traits; The Carlantino Project with or without Syringomyelia. Speer MC, George TM, Enter- P. Gasparini1, P. Palancia2, F. Lo Vecchio1, M. Villella1, A. Villella3, M. line DS, Franklin A, Wolpert CM, Milhorat TH Urbano2, M. Di Giovine1, A. DAdamo1, P. Stanziale1, F. Bertoldo4, L. M. C. Speer Zelante1 Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC United States 1IRCCS Hospital CSS; San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 2ASLFG3; Carlanti- marcy@chg.mc.duke.edu no, Italy; 3Lucera Hospital; Lucera, Italy; 4Verona University; Verona, Italy The Chiari 1 malformation (CM1) is defined as herniation of the cerebellar genetcss@fg.nettuno.it tonsils through the foramen magnum, but recently we and others have pro- The use of isolated inbred populations to reduce disease heterogeneity of posed a volumetrically too small posterior fossa as causative. CM1 is the complex disorders has already proved to be useful since it is expected that leading cause of syringomyelia (S). We propose a genetic hypothesis to at an association can be detected with a smaller sample of patients in an least a subset of CM1/S cases based on familial clustering in a rare dis- inbred population than in a panmictic one. We identified a small village, ease, co-segregation with known genetic syndromes, and concordance in named Carlantino, characterized by 1417 inhabitants and located in South- like-sex twins. We have identified 67 multiplex pedigrees. Some families ern Italy. The village has been settled 5 centuries ago by few founders, and demonstrate male-to-male transmission and transmission across more during last century the endogamy has been calculated to be 99.5%. Three than two generations. Additional support for a genetic hypothesis for different surnames accounts for the majority of the living people. In addition CM1/S comes from co-segregation of CM1 with at least 18 known genetic birth registers are available from 17th century, and in a more detailed way syndromes including, among others, achondroplasia, Klippel Feil from 19th century. The project is characterized by a full clinical examination sequence, Hadju-Cheney syndrome, Albright hereditary osteodystrophy of all individuals including anamnesis, blood pressure measurements, elec- (pseudohypoparathyroidism), hypophosphatemic rickets, Williams-Beuren trocardiogram and bone mineral density evaluation, a clinical chemistry syndrome, and renal-coloboma syndrome. Lastly, we identified 8 sets of evaluation (blood count plus 20 different biochemical parameters), a devel- like-sex twins in our family ascertainment efforts in CM1/S (7 female; 1 opment of DNAs and sera banks. The first part of the project has been com- male); 7 of 8 are concordant for CM1 (one female twin pair is discordant pleted since a) the whole population has been already enrolled in the proj- for CM1). 3 are concordant for associated syringomyelia. One unlike-sex ect and sampled, b) the DNAand sera banks have been already estab- twin pair includes a female affected with CM1/S and a male unaffected. lished, c) the inclusion of all the data (historical, clinical, biochemical and Provisional determinations of ls range from 4-21 across a broad range of instrumental) in the database has been finished. Preliminary epidemiologi- prevalence estimates. We hypothesize that the underlying gene or genes cal data suggest an increased frequency of osteporosis, hypercoles- for CM1/S will have pleiotropic effects influencing the extent of tonsillar terolemia, hypertension, heart stroke pedigrees, cancer families, and herniation, posterior fossa volume, and/or other variables such as bony miopia. Construction of DNAhaplotypes of Yand X chromosomes, and of abnormalities in the base of the skull and/or syringomyelia. These data are mithocondrial DNAindicates the presence of 6 couples as founders consistent with a genetic hypothesis in at least a subset of CM1/S. P1315.The feasibility of conducting whole-genome scans to P1318.Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis in the USA. search for multiple low-penetrance cancer susceptibility M. M. Wahidi, M.Speer, M. Steele, K. K. Brown, M. I. Schwarz, D. A. genes Schwartz A. M. Dunning, F. Durocher, M. D. Teare, C. S. Healey, F. Carlomagno, D. Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC and NJC Denver, CO, Unit- F. Easton, B. A. J. Ponder ed States University of Cambridge; Cambridge, United Kingdom marcy@chg.mc.duke.edu alisond@srl.cam.ac.uk Pulmonary fibrosis is rare form of lung disease that affects the interstitium Presently, association studies, used to find low-penetrance cancer sus- of the lungs and often fatal within 3-5 of diagnosis. Families with at least ceptibility alleles, can only be performed in candidate genes. Ultimately the two members affected by PF are recruited through a network of collabora- aim is to conduct genome-wide scans to find numerous loci in one experi- tors and advertisement on the Internet (www.fpf.duke.edu). Data on affect- ment, using markers (SNPs) spaced throughout the genome. The success ed members includes a standardized clinical history and risk factor ques- of such scans will be critically dependent on their design. We have exam- tionnaire, pedigree, DLCO, CXR, HRCT, and lung biopsy (when available). ined the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) in relation to physical dis- Asymptomatic relatives are screened with a questionnaire, DLCO, and tance using 38 SNPs in 3 autosomal genomic regions and 4 different Euro- CXR. Thirty families including 108 affected individuals have been identi- pean populations. We find a similar inverse relationship between LD and fied. Males were more frequently affected than females (55%). The pre- distance in each region and in each population. Although statistically sig- dominant race was Caucasian (94% Caucasian, 6% Hispanic). Smoking nificantly LD exists between marker-pairs >200Kb apart, only 50% of mark- was identified in 42 % of cases with available data. Exposure to known er-pairs at <5Kb display sufficient LD to be useful for association studies. fibrotic agents such as asbestos, silica, or wood dust was recorded in 19% These results indicate that a genome-wide scan would require SNPs of cases. Mean age at diagnosis was 59 (sd=15.8) and mean age of death spaced at least every 5Kb, or 600,000 markers per scan. Previous results, was 61 (sd=15.5). The diagnosis of PF was confirmed by an open lung suggesting more extensive LD may be the result of biases due to small biopsy or autopsy in 24 patients (22%). Ahigh resolution CTscan of the sample sizes. However, the estimated 40,000-100,000 genes in the human chest was obtained in 47 patients (43%). In the 24 families with at least 2 genome will be sequenced by 2003. It might be more feasible to conduct documented cases, PF occurred in multiple family members in 15 families. a scan solely using SNPs in genes, particularly since there is some evi- Ten families have at least one affected sibling pair, 4 have affected parent- dence that LD may be more extensive within genes than between them. child pairs including one pair of affected father and son, and 4 pedigrees We are examining the extent of LD between SNPs within different genes include more distantly related affected relative pairs. The familial aggrega- and will compare this with the LD observed in random genomic regions. tion documented in these families is consistent with a genetic basis in at least a subset of PF cases. P1316. Haplotype analysis in 5q31 indicates the discrete nature of linkage disequilibrium P1319.European Twin and Sibling study; Genetic modulators M. J. Daly, J. D. Rioux, E. S. Lander, S. Schaffner of Cystic Fibrosis Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for Genome Research; Cambridge, MA M. Ritzka1, F. Mekus1, U. Laabs1, H. Veeze2, B. Tmmler1 United States 1Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2Erasmus University; mjdaly@genome.wi.mit.edu Rotterdam, The Netherlands Amajor obstacle to the systematic analysis of SNPvariation and its asso- ritzka.margit@mh-hannover.de ciation to phenotype (even across relatively small genomic regions) is the Amajor purpose of the European Twin and sibling study is the search for lack of an analytic framework for interpretation of population haplotype pat- genetic modifiers for Cystic Fibrosis (CF) apart from the basic defect in the terns (linkage disequilibrium). Through the development of new mathe- CFTR gene. Evaluation of the clinical status of 114 F508 homozygous matical approaches, we show here a comprehensive exploration of the twins and sibpairs recruited from CF centres of 14 European countries patterns of variation across ~350 kb in the 5q31 region as reported in an revealed major variabilities in the clinical phenotype of this homogenous accompanying abstract (Rioux, et. al.). We observe surprisingly limited group (referred to their CF genotype), that cannot be due to environmen- haplotype diversity across significant distances discretely punctuated by tal factors only. We searched for genetic modulators of disease by a prag- sites of multiple historical recombinations. This leads us to propose a matic hypothesis driven genome wide association study in highly informa- hypothesis for the nature of haplotype variation across short genomic tive sib pairs who were ranked according to their clinical phenotype before- regions (10s-100s of kb) and a model for interpreting and using such vari- hand. In selecting candidate genes, we concentrated on three classes; ation that may provide a powerful framework for future genetic studies. First, there are molecules that could compensate for the basic defect. AsPosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 359 CFTR is an chloride channel and regulator of ion channels, alternative ion P1322. Mutations in the CFTR and SPINK1 genes in patients channels and regulators thereof are included in this group. Second, genes with idiopathic pancreatic disease which mediate an increased susceptibility to airway infections are suitable M. Stuhrmann, J. Ockenga, M. P. Manns, T. Drk candidates. We concentrate on genes mediating the innate and systemic Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany immune response. The third group was chosen for practical clinical rea- stuhrmann.manfred@mh-hannover.de sons; Genes regulating the metabolism of xenobiotics might have a large Up to 30% of the patients with idiopathic pancreatitis (IP) carry a mutation effect on the individual long range therapy success. Therefore, pharma- in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. cogenomics are a major subject of our study. In this poster, we provide Recently, mutations of the serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 1 information about the candidate regions and genes examined so far. (SPINK1/PSTI) gene have been identified to be associated with IP. Muta- tions in both the CFTR and SPINK1 genes are very likely to act as predis- P1320.Cystic Fibrosis as a Genetically Complex Disease posing or disease modifying genetic factors in IP. To elucidate whether F. Mekus1, M. Ballmann1, I. Bronsveld2, J. Bijman3, H. Veeze3, B. Tmm- double heterozygosity of CFTR and SPINK1 mutations may be responsi- ler1 ble for IP, we investigated 24 patients (12 female, 12 male, mean age at 1Medizinische Hochschule Hannover; Hannover, Germany; 2Sophia Chil- disease onset 27 years) with adult onset of IP. We screened genomic DNA drens Hospital; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 3Erasmus University; Rot- for the presence of 40 mutations and variants in the CFTR gene. In addi- terdam, The Netherlands tion, the four exons of the SPINK1 gene were investigated by SSCPanaly- Mekus.Frauke@MH-Hannover.de sis and sequencing. Seven patients (28%) had at least one abnormal The clinical phenotype of Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is characterised by a broad CFTR allele, as compared with an expected frequency of 4% in the gen- spectrum of disease severity and variation of the clinical course. The fre- eral German population. Two patients were compound heterozygous. quency of one disease-causing allele, i.e. deltaF508-CFTR, allows the Mutations in the SPINK1 gene were found in two patients, one of which recruitment of a sufficiently large number of patients with identical CFTR was homozygous for the known predisposing mutation N34S, while the genotype in order to study the cause of CF disease variability that is unre- second patient was heterozygous for the new SPINK1 mutation R65Q. The lated to the major disease-causing lesion. The European CF Twin and Sib- latter patient was also heterozygous for the CFTR mutation Y1092X. How- ling Study collected data from 158 CF clinics from central European coun- ever, segregation analysis revealed that the patients healthy mother and tries for a cohort of 277 sibling pairs, 12 pairs of dizygous twins and 29 sister as well carried both the CFTR and SPINK1 mutations. Hence, a pairs of monozygous twins. Monozygous twins were significantly more pathogenic role of double heterozygosity for SPINK1 and CFTR gene vari- concordant than dizygous patient pairs. We could demonstrate that shared ations could not be confirmed in this family, but deserves further investiga- factors in twins and siblings outweigh the individual factors for anthropom- tion in larger cohorts etry, but not for the pulmonary status (Twin Research 2000, in press). The search for inherited factors that modulate CF equals an assessment of CF P1323.Multiplex Family Autism Research Resource disease severity as a quantitative trait. Under this condition, individuals R. T. Johnson1, A. Mars2, J. C. Beck1 with extreme phenotypes are most informative. To identify the extreme 1Coriell Institute for Medical Research; Camden, NJ United States; 2Robert phenotypes among our cohort of 114 deltaF508 homozygous patient pairs, Wood Johnson Medical School; New Brunswick, NJ United States a computer-assisted method was executed to rank patient pairs within the rjohnson@cimr.umdnj.edu categories concordant mild disease (CON+), concordant/severe disease Agenetic resource of DNAsamples to support the study of autism in fam- (CON-) and discordant (DIS). We characterised these three patient pair ilies where more than one child is affected or where one child is affected cohorts as phenotypically distinct entities with respect to pulmonary func- and one demonstrates another significant and related developmental dis- tion and nutritional state of the CF patients. An on-going association study order has been built at the Coriell Institute for Medical Research in collab- in these informative deltaF508 homozygous sibpairs with extreme pheno- oration with the clinical services at the University of Medicine and Dentistry types has identified several chromosomal regions that encode modulators Robert Wood Johnson Medical School. An open bank of anonymously col- of basic defect and clinical phenotype. lected materials documented by a detailed clinical diagnosis forms the basis of this growing database of information about the disease. Three cri- P1321. Spontaneous attenuation of basic defect in inbred teria were used to assess the autistic phenotype. These include the ADI Cftr(tm1Hgu) CF mutant mice. (Autism Diagnostic Interview), the ADOS (Autism Diagnostic Observation- N. Charizopoulou1, S. Jansen2, R. Farley3, E. W. Alton3, J. Dorin4, H. J. al Schedule-Generic), and the DSM IV Diagnostic Criteria for 299.00 Autis- Hedrich5, B. Tmmler2, M. Dorsch5 tic Disorder. All clinical interviews were conducted face-to-face. For each 1Institute for Laboratory Animal Science, Medical School, Klinische donor subject tested, a representative Autistic Diagnostic Criteria Score Forschergruppe, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2Klinis- Sheet used to collect data is provided. Currently, the resource contains 20 che Forschergruppe, Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 3Ion families in which 41 individuals have been examined. Thirty-three of these Transport Laboratory, National Heart and Lung Institute; London, United individuals have a diagnosis of autistic disorder by two or more criteria; 28 Kingdom; 4Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Western Gen- of these satisfy all three criteria. There are 20 affected sib pairs with a diag- eral Hospital; Edinburgh, United Kingdom; 5Institute for Laboratory Animal nosis of autistic disorder by two or more criteria; 9 of these pairs meet the Science, Medical School; Hannover, Germany criteria for autistic disorder by all three criteria. Further information about Charizopoulou.Nikoletta@MH-Hannover.DE this resource, including information on ordering, can be found at The basic defect in cystic fibrosis relates to abnormalities of ion transport http;//locus.umdnj.edu/autism or by contact with the Coriell Cell Reposito- in affected tissues, such as the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. A ries. transgenic mouse model, Cftrtm1Hgu/Cftrtm1Hguwas generated following tar- geted insertional mutagenesis into exon 10 of the murine Cftr gene in P1324.Genome linkage analysis using affected sibling pairs embryonal stem cells. These mutant mice differ from other mutant mice for autism that although they displayed the characteristic CF electrophysiological G. H. Barnby1, I. M.G.S.A.C2 defects, they produced low levels of wt cftr mRNA. Using 4 of these ani- 1The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,University of Oxford; mals as a starting population, we have generated four inbred (over more Oxford, United Kingdom; 2http;//www.well.ox.ac.uk/~maestrin/iat.html; than 20 generations) Cftrtm1Hgu/Cftrtm1Hgumutant strains (CF/1, CF/2, CF/3, London, United Kingdom CF/4). Surprisingly, all four strains did not display the expected electro- gaby@well.ox.ac.uk physiological defect of their progenitors, but NPD measurement revealed Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by defi- that these mice had shifted towards a normal range in respect to their Cl- ciencies in three domains; reciprocal interaction, communication and ion conductance across their airway epithelia. Furthermore, in respect to stereotyped/repetitive behaviour. Evidence for a strong genetic basis for their wt cftr mRNACF/1 had a residual activity of ~10%, in contrast with the the disorder stems from twin studies and the increased rate of autism in remaining three strains which had a residual activity of less than 1%. siblings of autistic probands compared to the population prevalence. Hence, these mice must have different pathway(s) for rescue which at the IMGSAC have previously published a whole genome screen for 36 sib- same time result in a uniform phenotype. Agenome wide scan has been pairs, with a subset of 175 markers typed in a further 49 sib-pairs and 3 initiated in order to identify the modulators responsible for this compensa- sibling trios. Five regions were identified with multipoint Maximum Lod tion. This study is in synergy with the CF twin and sibling study which aims Score (MLS) > 1 (chromosomes 4, 7, 10, 16 and 22). These regions have to identify the genetic factors, apart from the CFTRgene itself, which mod- been characterised further and the results are presented here along with ulate the disease and are responsible for the variation of the clinical pic- new findings. Awhole genome screen has now been carried out for 86 sib- ture. pairs using 394 microsatellites. Asubset of 119 markers have been typed in 153 sib-pairs in 12 regions giving a multipoint MLS above 0.80. Three360 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance chromosomes generated a multipoint MLS above 3 after 153 sib-pairs had pathic cases which is 75 times greater than the general population preva- been genotyped, 2q, 7q and 16p. Chromosome 2 gave the highest result lence of 4/10,000 births. Atwo-stage genome search by IMGSAC (1998) with a multipoint MLS of 3.58 at D2S2188 followed by chromosome 7 at identified regions on six chromosomes (4, 7, 10, 16, 19, 22) with the region D7S477 with a multipoint MLS of 3.37 and then chromosome 16 with a on chromosome 7q31-q35 as the most significant result (maximum multi- multipoint MLS of 3.08 at D16S3102. Analysis of linkage data on the basis point lod score (MLS) of 2.53). In a follow-up fine mapping of chromosome of sib-pair proband status has been carried out and the parental origin of 7q was carried out by typing 104 additional markers in the interval D7S524 alleles contributing to linkage was also investigated across the regions -D7S483. Association studies using linkage disequilibrium analysis in the studied. consortium sib-pair and the German singleton sample provided further support for an autism susceptibility locus on chromosome 7q. In parallel, P1325. Multy - Disciplinary Evaluation Of Possible Aetiology screening of several neurotransmitter system genes located in other Factors In Autism, Hyperactivity Disorder And Specific Lan- genome regions were performed in the German singleton sample, but did guage Impairment not reveal a clear candidate. S. Nikolic, S. Brankovic-Niksic, G. Radivojevic-Pilic Institute of Mental Health; Belgrade, Yugoslavia P1328. De novo partial duplication of chromosome 7q in a nbrankov@eunet.yu male patient with infantile autism Recent studies suggest that those complex diseases likely result from sev- K. S. Beyer, S. M. Klauck, A. Poustka eral different aetiologies or a combination of pathological mechanisms. The Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Molecular Genome Analysis; Heidel- search we performed is based on the comprehensive multy - disciplinary berg, Germany evaluation which consisted of psychiatric examination of the child, speech k.beyer@dkfz.de and language evaluation, psychological testing and behaviorial assess- Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic component ment. Those patients who met the ICD - 10 criteria for autism, hyperactiv- as shown in family studies. The disease is characterized by impairments in ity disorder and specific language impairment and had a full scale IQ under reciprocal social interaction and communication together with restricted 70 performed a highly defined group (No 157) in which we undertook a and stereotyped patterns of interests and activities. The genetics of the dis- cytogenetic analyses. Asystematic obstetric and developmental complica- order is complex, probably involving the interaction of several genes. The tions data family history, and environmental factors were also obtained. neurobiological basis of the disorder is unknown and there are no strong Different medical conditions may be found in the developmental histories candidate genes. Several genome screens were undertaken by different of patients with those complex diseases, and we proposed some important autism consortia identifying different regions of interest, defined by a mul- distinction versus control group (No 55; healthy infants followed up five tipoint maximum lod score (MLS) greater than 1. Aregion on chromosome years after amniocentesis). On the contrary, we found no scientific occur- 7q31-35 was the most significant region (MLS of 2.53) identified first by the rence of chromosome abnormalities among probands in comparison with International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium (IMGSAC), matched control group. The objective of this review is to summarize our which we are part of. Meanwhile four other genome screens were pub- findings of the specifically contributing factors and their implications on the lished showing positive linkage on different chromosomal regions. The only aetiology of those complex diseases. common region of all analyses remained on chromosome 7q. One possi- bility to narrow down the candidate region and to identify new candidate P1326.Molecular analysis of t(5;7) in a patient with autism genes are systematic karyotype analyses of autistic patients. One male D. Tentler1, G. Annern2, C. Gillberg3, C. Betancur4, G. Brandberg5, N. patient showed a duplication on chromosome 7q in 11% of leukocytes in Dahl1 peripheral blood and in approximately 40% of the nuclei in the correspon- 1Dep. of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University; Uppsala, Sweden; ding lymphoblastoid cell line. In order to determine the exact localization 2Dep. of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University; Uppsala, Sweden; and orientation of the duplication FISH experiments using several YACs 3Child Neuropsychiatry, Sahlgren University Hospital; Gteborg, Sweden; were performed. 4INSERM U. 513, Facult de Mdecine de Crteil; Paris, France; 5Falun County Hospital; Falun, Sweden P1329.Screening for MECP2 Mutations in Females with Autis- dmitry.tentler@genpat.uu.se tic Disorder The results of several linkage studies have provided support for an autism R. J. Carney1, J. M. Vance1, R. D. Dancel1, C. M. Wolpert1, G. R. DeLong1, susceptibility locus on the long arm of chromosome 7. We report a girl with C. McClain2, L. von Wendt3, J. R. Gilbert1, S. L. Donelly1, S. A. Ravan4, H. autistic features carrying a balanced translocation t(5;7)(q14;q34). Fluo- L. Abel1, R. K. Abramson4, H. H. Wright4, H. Y. Zoghbi5, M. L. Cuccaro4, M. rescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis with chromosome 7q specific A. Pericak-Vance1 YAC clones showed that the chromosome 7 breakpoint is located between 1Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC United States; 2University markers D7S684 and D7S661. The region coincides with the candidate of New Mexico; United States; 3University of Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; region for autism on chromosome 7 from previous linkage studies. ABAC 4University of South Carolina; United States; 5Baylor College of Medicine; clone of 82 kb spanning the translocation breakpoint was identified, and United States the breakpoint was mapped to 2 kb region within the BAC. Mutation mpv@chg.mc.duke.edu screening of the 2 genes closest to the breakpoint was performed in a set Autistic Disorder (AD) is categorized as a Pervasive Developmental Disor- of 30 autistic patients. We found no sequence variant which predicts der (PDD) in DSM-IV. Rett Disorder (RD) is also a PDD with unique clini- aminoacid alteration associated with the phenotype. Two polymorphic cal features including microcephaly and loss of purposeful hand move- nucleotides were identified in one of the genes, and the significance of the ments followed by development of stereotyped, repetitive hand move- polymorphism in autism remains to be clarified. Study of the methylation ments. Mutations in the MECP2 gene cause RD. Because of the pheno- pattern of the breakpoint region failed to find any difference between typic similarity between RD and AD, we screened 69 females in families patient with the translocation and normal individuals. Apositional effect of ascertained for AD gene mapping studies. Patients had a clinical diagno- the translocation is not excluded, and further investigation of the 7q methy- sis of AD, confirmed using the ADI-R. Patients with RD features such as lation pattern in the patient is in progress. microcephaly were excluded. Patients were screened using DHPLC to detect variants followed by sequencing. Two were found to have mutations P1327. Infantile autism - association studies in candidate in the MECP2 gene. Patient one (age 10 years) developed normally until regions of interest with focus on 7q age 30 months when she regressed in language and motor skills. Head cir- S. M. Klauck1, K. S. Beyer1, A. Benner2, S. Epp1, F. Poustka3, A. Poust- cumference is at the 25th percentile. She did not lose purposeful hand ka1,. Imgsac4 movements and never developed RD stereotyped hand movements. She 1Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Molecular Genome Analysis; Hei- has a 880C>T, relative to the start of the CDS, nonsense mutation result- delberg, Germany; 2Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Biostatistics; ing in an R294Xaa change and premature protein truncation. Patient two Heidelberg, Germany; 3Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, (age 16 years) developed normally until 18 months when problems in J.W. Goethe University; Frankfurt, Germany; 4International Molecular response to social and language stimuli were noted. Head circumference Genetic Study of Autism Consortium; is at the 50th percentile. She never developed RD sterotyped hand move- http;//www.well.ox.ac.uk/~maestrin/iat.html, United Kingdom ments. She is heterozygous for a 41 bp deletion at 1157-1197del, resulting s.klauck@dkfz.de in a frameshift and protein truncation. Mutations in both patients are de Autism is a severe developmental disorder with an onset in early child- novo. These results indicate the need to screen the MECP2 in all female hood, characterized by marked social deficits, deviant language and a patients presenting with a diagnosis of AD. restricted range of stereotyped repetitive behaviors. Agenetic etiology is strongly indicated by twin and family studies with a risk to siblings of idio-Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 361 P1330.Alzheimers disease in a genetically isolated popula- Kingdom; 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital tion; the GRIPstudy. of Oulu; Oulu, Finland K. Sleegers1, G. Roks1, P. Heutink2, J. C. Van Swieten3, L. A. Sandkuijl1, mikko.hiltunen@kuh.fi P. J. L. Snijders1, C. Van Broeckhoven4, B. A. Oostra2, C. M. Van Duijn1 Alzheimers disease (AD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder, for 1Epidemiology & Biostatistics; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 2Clinical which several disease-associated loci have been located on various chro- Genetics; Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 3Neurology; Rotterdam, The mosomes. In order to find novel susceptibility genes for late onset AD, we Netherlands; 4Flanders Interuniversity Institute of Biotechnology (VIB); have performed a population based genome-wide search using linkage Antwerp, Belgium disequilibrium (LD) mapping. To avoid population stratification, 47 late Sleegers@epib.fgg.eur.nl onset AD patients and 51 age-matched controls were carefully chosen Genetic factors play an important role in Alzheimers disease (AD). Muta- from the same geographical area in Eastern Finland. Initial genome-wide tions in the amyloid precursor protein gene (APP) and the presenilin genes screening with 366 polymorphic microsatellite markers revealed 22 chro- (PSEN1/PSEN2) cause autosomal dominant early-onset AD. The most mosomal loci associated with AD with P-values in the range of 0.05 > P> important genetic determinant for AD in the general population is the 0.001. Subsequent comparison of single allele frequencies of the apolipoproteinE gene (APOE) which explains about 17% of the occurrence microsatellite markers in the AD and control groups indicated the presence of AD in the general population. Several genome wide studies identified of risk alleles displaying suggestive association with AD (odds ratios rang- regions of interest of which the chromosome 10 and 12 regions are the ing from 2.0 to 6.3). In addition, certain markers revealed significantly lower most promising. There is increasing interest in identifying genes in geneti- frequencies of particular alleles in the AD group than in the control group cally isolated populations such as the Finnish and Icelandic populations. In suggesting a protective effect conferred by these alleles against the devel- this study we evaluated the feasibility of studying the genetics of AD in a opment of AD (odds ratios ranging from 0.0 to 0.4). Screening of the 22 LD Dutch recently isolated population of 20,000 inhabitants. This population regions with additional microsatellite markers revealed eight chromosomal was founded 300 years ago by 150 subjects and is characterized by mini- loci in 1p36.12, 2p22.2, 3q28, 4p13, 10p13, 13q12, 18q12.1 and 19p13.3 mal immigration. We ascertained 74 probable AD patients with a mean to be associated with AD with in more than one microsatellite marker. Chro- onset age of 73 years. The patient population comprised 65% females. mosome regions found to be associated with AD in the present study will Family history in first degree relatives was positive in 58%. We studied provide the primary targets for future genetic and functional studies into genealogy up to 15 generations, which revealed that at least 63 patients AD. (79%) were related within 14 generations. We found no causal mutations in APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2. The APOE e4 allele frequency was 38% P1333. The Cystatin C gene and late onset Alzheimers dis- which is comparable with Caucasian AD patients (37%). Our study shows ease. that AD in this isolated population is not fully explained by the known AD F. C. Crawford1, J. Schinka1, M. Freeman1, L. Abdullah1, M. Morris1, R. genes, and given the high percentage of patients with a positive family his- Hartman2, M. Gold3, D. Richards1, R. Duara4, R. Anand2, M. Mullan1 tory other AD genes are to be expected. At present a genomic screen is 1Roskamp Institute; Tampa, FLUnited States; 2Novartis Pharmaceuticals; performed on a cluster of closely related patients. Results on chromosome East Hanover, NJ United States; 3Bristol Myers Squibb; Princeton, NJ Unit- 10 and 12 will be presented. ed States; 4Wien Center; Miami, FLUnited States fcrawfor@com1.med.usf.edu P1331. Genomic Screen of 726 Sibpairs with Late-Onset Cystatin C is a cysteine protease inhibitor which is found to colocalize with Alzheimer Disease (AD) A in plaques and cerebrovascular deposits in Alzheimers Disease (AD), M. A. Pericak-Vance1, L. R. Bailey2, K. Nicodemus1, D. Hedges1, J. Grub- cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), and transgenic mouse models of AD. ber1, P. T. Xu1, S. Walters1, K. De Sombre1, M. B. Gardiner2, A. Reed2, J. Amutation in the gene (CST3) enhances dimerization, reduces biological L. Hall2, A. M. Saunders1, A. D. Roses1, G. W. Small3, W. K. Scott2, P. M. activity, and causes hereditary Icelandic CAA. Acommon Ala/Thr substitu- Conneally4, J. M. Vance1, J. L. Haines2 tion in the signal peptide has also been reported, and we investigated this 1Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC United States; 2Vanderbilt variant in a clinic and population based group of Caucasian AD cases University Medical Center; Nashville, TN United States; 3UCLA Medical (n=309, age range 60-90, mean 75.1) versus population based Caucasian Center; Los Angeles, CAUnited States; 4Indiana University Medical Cen- controls (n=134, age range 60-90 years, mean 76.1). Our data showed no ter; Indianapolis, IN United States association between AD and CST3, but the expected association of AD mpv@chg.mc.duke.edu with APOE-e4 genotype. However, logistic regression analyses revealed a Two relatively small genomic screens (n=54, Pericak-Vance et al., JAMA significant interaction between CST3 G/G status and age/age of onset on 1997; 278;1237-1241; n=230 Kehoe et al., Hum Mol Gen 1999; 8;237-245) AD diagnosis (p=.003) suggesting that the genetic risk changes differen- have been published for late-onset AD. These have identified several tially for CST3 as a function of age. We therefore stratified our sample potential regions for novel AD genes, including the as yet unidentified chro- based on age (of controls) or age of onset (of cases); 60-69, 70-79 and mosome 12 gene. However, the modest sample sizes provided minimal 80+ years. In the youngest age groups an APOE e4-carrying genotype power to detect effects that might arise in only a subset of families. We conferred significant risk for AD (p<.001) while CST3 genotype was not a undertook the largest AD genomic screen to date using 455 families (from significant risk (p>.18). In the oldest age group (controls n=49; cases n=79) DUMC, VUMC, UCLA, IU, and NIMH), a total of 726 affected sibpairs the effect of APOE e4-carrying genotype on AD was not significant (p=.28), (ASPs). Over ? of these families have not been previously genotyped. We while CST3 genotype, specifically the G/G homozygous genotype, had sufficient sample size to examine the data independently in a subset becomes a significant risk factor (p=.04) with an odds ratio of 2.2 com- of autopsy-confirmed (>1 autopsy-confirmed case per family; CONF) fam- pared to A-carrying genotypes. We further investigated this association in ilies. We used 2-point and multipoint parametric lod score and non-para- Hispanic AD cases (n=146, age range 61-89, mean age of onset 72yrs) metric analyses. We identified several potential regions (n=14; MLOD or and controls (n=182, age range 60-90, mean age 70) and again found no MLS > 1.00) as locations for novel AD genes. The most interesting novel association between CST3 and AD in the total Hispanic dataset, but a ten- region is on 9p22 (MLOD = 3.45; MLS=3.30 in the overall and MLOD = dency towards an increase in the GG genotype in cases versus controls in 3.97; MLS = 4.42 in the CONF). We also found evidence supporting the the over 80 dataset. These data suggest that variation at the cystatin C recently reported linkage to chromosome 10q22 (MLOD=2.65; MLS=2.12 locus is a novel risk factor for late onset Alzheimers disease, particularly in the overall and MLOD=2.94; MLS=1.96 in the CONF. Linkage to 9p22 at an age when APOE genotype no longer confers increased risk. It is like- was independent of APOE genotype. These data suggest chromosomes ly that variation at this locus, or one with which it is in linkage disequilibri- 9p22 and 10q22 contain potential AD risk genes. Stratification by autopsy um, confers risk for AD via effects on cystatin C trafficking and/or function, confirmation strengthened the results of the linkage studies. Haplotype and contributing to vascular AD pathology and possible exacerbation of -amy- candidate gene analysis of the novel chromosome 9 region is ongoing and loid pathogenic mechanisms. will be presented. P1334.Amyloid beta-secretase gene (BACE) is neither mutat- P1332.Genome-wide Linkage Disequilibrium Mapping Of Late ed nor associated with early-onset Alzheimers disease. Onset Alzheimers Disease In Finland B. Dermaut1, R. Rademakers1, G. Roks2, M. Van den Broeck1, G. M. Hiltunen1, A. Mannermaa2, D. Thompson3, D. Easton3, M. Pirskanen1, Munteanu1, C. M. van Duijn2, C. Van Broeckhoven1, M. Cruts1 S. Helisalmi1, A. M. Koivisto1, M. Lehtovirta1, M. Ryynnen4, H. Soininen1 1Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB); Antwerpen, Bel- 1Department of Neurology, Kuopio University and Kuopio University Hos- gium; 2Erasmus Medical Center; Rotterdam, The Netherlands pital; Kuopio, Finland; 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Kuopio University bdermaut@uia.ua.ac.be Hospital; Kuopio, Finland; 3CRC Genetic Epidemiology Group, University The major hallmark of Alzheimers disease (AD) pathology is beta-amyloid of Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory; Cambridge, United (Abeta) deposition in the brain. Three protease activities named alpha-,362 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance beta- and gamma-secretase are crucial in the proteolytic cleavage of the cause oxidative stress due to impaired respiratory capacity. This age-relat- amyloid precursor protein (APP) to generate Abeta. Recently, the beta-sec- ed decrease in the capacity to produce energy is proposed to be caused retase was identified and named beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE). by the accumulation of somatic mtDNAmutations, which have been shown Since all known familial early-onset AD (EOAD) related mutations in APP to cause a variety of other neurodegenerative diseases. and presenilin (PSEN) increase Abeta production by affecting one of the The Donauspital-study on AD focuses on a cohort (1,200 persons) of secretase activities, we hypothesized that genetic variations within BACE apparently healthy 75 year old volunteers, whose neurophysiologic status might be similarly involved in the etiology of EOAD. We performed genet- is examined and related to multiple clinical analyses. In the course of this ic linkage analyses in families of 9 autosomal dominant probands that had task, we try to correlate the occurence of mtDNAmutations with the onset no mutation in APP or PSEN using markers D11S1327, D11S939, of AD. In the first phase, the mtDNAof 80 probands is sequenced and D11S1336 located near BACE. No family showed conclusive linkage and sequence changes are catalogued. In three years from now, an expected in 3 families linkage with BACE was excluded. cDNAand genomic muta- percentage (5%) of the probands will show obvious signs of AD. The tion analysis revealed no mutations except for a frequent silent c.786C>G mtDNAof these persons will then be re-sequenced, to obtain data on pos- polymorphism (V262) and a c.840+5G>Tvariation at the fifth nucleotide of sible pathogenic mtDNAmutations causing or at least related to late-onset intron 5 that was observed in only 1 patient. Next, the V262 polymorphism Alzheimers disease. was analyzed in a sample of 101 presenile AD patients and 185 control subjects. Allele and genotype distributions were not significantly different in P1337. Prevalence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DRB1 cases and controls. Also, no differences were found when the sample was alleles in Kuwaiti Arabs with schizophrenia stratified for positive family history or the presence of an APOE4 allele. M. Z. Haider1, M. A. Zahid2, M. A. Razik3 Together these results show that BACE is not genetically involved in the 1Clinical Genetics Group, Kuwait University; Jabriya, Kuwait; 2Department etiology of EOAD. of Psychiatry Kuwait University; Jabriya, Kuwait; 3Hospital for Psychologi- cal Medicine; Sulebikhat, Kuwait P1335.Screening For Presenilin-1 Mutations In Finnish Early haider@hsc.kuniv.edu.kw Onset Alzheimers Disease Patients The frequency of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DRB1 alleles has been S. Iivonen1, M. Hiltunen1, A. Mannermaa2, S. Helisalmi1, M. Pirskanen1, I. determined in a cohort of 194 Kuwaiti Arabs consisting of 80 schizophre- Alafuzoff3, M. Lehtovirta4, A. M. Koivisto4, S. Tuisku5, H. Soininen4 nia patients and 114 ethnically matched healthy controls, using a poly- 1Department of Neurology and Department of Clinical Genetics, University merase chain reaction-sequence specific primers (PCR-SSP) method. A Hospital and University of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 2Department of Clini- total of twelve DRB1 alleles were identified in this Kuwaiti cohort. Astatis- cal Genetics, University Hospital of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 3Department tically significant difference was detected in the frequency of alleles of Neurology and Department of Pathology, University Hospital and Uni- DRB1*04 and DRB1*13 between the schizophrenia patients and controls. versity of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 4Department of Neurology, University Allele frequency of DRB1*04 in schizophrenia patients was 14 % com- Hospital and University of Kuopio; Kuopio, Finland; 5Kokkola Central Hos- pared to nearly 7 % in controls (P= 0.028). For DRB1*13, the allele fre- pital; Kokkola, Finland quency was found to be 18 % in schizophrenia patients compared to 9 % susan.iivonen@kuh.fi in the controls (P= 0.015). For alleles, DRB1*03, DRB1*07 and DRB1*16, Mutations in the presenilin-1 (PSEN-1) gene on chromosome 14 are the frequency was higher in controls compared to the schizophrenia known to cause familial early onset Alzheimers disease (AD). Over 70 dif- patients. The frequency of DRB1*01, DRB1*08, DRB1*10, DRB1*11 and ferent PSEN-1 mutations have been found so far and the highly penetrant DRB1*15 alleles was almost identical in schizophrenia patients and con- PSEN-1 gene mutations are more frequent cause of AD than mutations in trols. For the remaining alleles, the differences amongst the two groups two other early onset AD genes, PSEN-2 and amyloid precursor protein. were not statistically significant. Here we present our PSEN-1 screening results among Finnish early onset AD patients. The major findings were as follows; We identified a novel 4.6- P1338. Association analysis of a 5-HT2A receptor polymor- kb genomic deletion in PSEN-1 in an early onset AD family (mean onset phism in schizophrenia and associated tardive dyskinesia age 43 years), which leads to an inframe exclusion of exon 9 from the E. C. Tan1, S. A. Chong2, R. Mahendran2, C. H. Tan3 mRNAtranscript. The clinical and neuropathological features of patients in 1Defence Medical Research Institute; Defence Science and Technology this family resembled those of the typical AD (Hiltunen et al., EJHG (2000) Agency, Singapore; 2Institute of Mental Health; Woodbridge Hospital, Sin- 8, 259-266). We also found a missense mutation P264Lin exon 8 in an gapore; 3National University of SIngapore; Kent Ridge, Singapore early onset AD family (mean onset age 54 years). In addition, E318G sub- nmiv27@nus.edu.sg stitution was found in AD patients and controls indicating that this substitu- Schizophrenia is a serious and debilitating psychiatric disorder with a life- tion is noncausative for AD. However, the allele frequency of the E318G time prevalence of 1%. Neuroleptics are the mainstay of treatment, but variant was significantly increased in both familial (P= 0.005; OR 7.6, CI long-term use may result in the development of tardive dyskinesia (TD). 2.2-25.7) and sporadic (P = 0.03; OR 3.1, CI 1.1-8.2) AD groups when Besides age and cumulative neuroleptic dosage, the incidence of TD is compared to the control group, suggesting that the substitution may be a higher among patients with a family history of mental illness, indicating the risk factor for AD. It is therefore possible that the E318G substitution is in presence of genetic susceptibility factors. linkage disequilibrium with yet another change located in the regulatory We genotyped 97 healthy controls and 221 patients with schizophrenia (87 regions of the PSEN-1 gene. with TD, 134 without) for the 5-HTR2A T102C polymorphism by PCR- RFLP. Between controls and patients, there was an excess of the T-con- P1336. Donauspital-study on the prediction of memory loss taining genotypes but the difference did not reach statistical significance. and dementia in Vienna; Is Alzheimers disease related to There was also little difference at the allelic level. Mutations in the mitochondrial DNA? Among the patients, there was an excess of the T/Tgenotype for the TD H. Hombauer1, R. E. Bittner2, P. Fischer3, K. Huber1, K. H. Tragl3 group compared to those without TD (c2=6.517, df=2, p=0.038). There was 1Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut fr molekulargenetische Laboratoriumsdiag- also significant difference in allele frequencies between the two groups nostik; Vienna, Austria; 2Institute of Anatomy, Neuromuscular Research (c2=4.189, df=1, p=0.044) with the odds ratio of 1.54 (95% CI=1.02-2.33). Department, Univ. of Vienna; Vienna, Austria; 3Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut For genotype distribution, the significance level is lower (p=0.055) after f r Altersforschung, Donauspital; Vienna, Austria adjusting for age and daily neuroleptic dose in CPZ eq. Significant differ- Klaus.Huber@SMZ.magwien.gv.at ence in allele frequency remains even after adjusting for the two significant Alzheimers disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder variables (p=0.041) with the odds ratio at 1.64 (95% CI=1.02-2.62). of aging, accounting for an estimated two-thirds of all cases of senile The C allele has been associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia and dementia. Epidemiological studies suggest a complex etiology, with envi- non-responsiveness to clozapine. Our results showed that it might also be ronmental and genetic factors influencing the pathogenesis. Considerable associated with increased risk for neuroleptic induced-TD. This polymor- advances have been made in the last years in the understanding of the phism might thus be a useful marker to screen for patients who might be genetic factors causing the disease; Several mutations have been found in at higher risk of developing TD. the amyloid precursor protein gene on chromosome 21. Two other domi- nantly operating genes on chromosome 1 and 14 were cloned recently (presenilin I and II) and a susceptibility gene for AD (apolipoprotein E gene) was found. Furthermore, several other hypotheses have been proposed to explain the age-relationship of this disease, including systemic metabolic changes, altered calcium homeostasis, neurotransmitter dependency, and oxidative stress. Pathological mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 363 P1339.On the role for glutamate in the pathogenesis of schiz- P1341.Association analysis of polymorphisms of the human ophrenia; association study with the N-methyl-D-aspartate dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) with Japanese schizo- receptor 2B phrenia patients E. Di Maria1, R. Gulli1, S. Begni2, R. Pioli2, E. Bellone1, F. Ajmar1, M. H. Mitsuyasu1, H. Kawasaki1, A. Tahara1, T. Tahira2, H. Ninomiya3, Y. Gennarelli2, P. Mandich1 Fukumaki4, K. Hayashi2, N. Tashiro1 1University of Genova; Genova, Italy; 2I.R.C.C.S. Fatebenefratelli; Brescia, 1Kyushu University, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Dept. Neu- Italy ropsychiatry; Fukuoka, Japan; 2Kyushu University, Institute of Genetic edimaria@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk Information, Div. Genome Analysis; Fukuoka, Japan; 3Fukuoka Prefectur- Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter of the central nervous system. al Dazaifu Hospital, Psychiatric Center; Fukuoka, Japan; 4Kyushu Univer- Its action is mediated by different classes of ionotropic receptors. Among sity, Institute of Genetic Information, Div. Disease Genes; Fukuoka, Japan them, the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) are involved in neu- hrmitsu@npsych.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp ronal plasticity and in glutamate excitotoxicity. The pathophysiological The human dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) is of major interest in molecu- model of NMDAR-mediated glutamate hypofunction as a mechanism lead- lar studies of schizophrenia, because an atypical antipsychotic drug, cloza- ing to the development of schizophrenia is supported by the evidences that pine has a relatively high affinity to DRD4 (Van Tol et al., 1991), and ele- administration of non-competitive NMDAR antagonists trigger psychotic vations in the density of DRD4 and DRD4 mRNAexpression were found symptoms in schizophrenic patients, and induce psychotic-like behaviours postmortem in the brains of schizophrenia patients (Seeman et al., 1993, in normal subjects. Functional NMDARs are composed of the ubiquitous Stefanis et al., 1998). Many polymorphisms have been reported in the NR1 subunit and one of four NR2 subunits. The 2B subunit gene, named DRD4 gene locus. Previously we have reported 9 novel polymorphisms (7 GRIN2B, is expressed in human brains in the hyppocampus, basal ganglia single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 2 insertion/deletion polymor- and cerebral cortex. We tested the hypothesis that a certain genetic back- phisms) in the upstream region of the DRD4 gene in the Japanese popu- ground of the NMDAR2B is associated with susceptibility to develop schiz- lation (Mitsuyasu et al., 1999). We genotyped 5 of the polymorphisms ophrenia. The genomic sequence of the GRIN2B gene was inferred from including one known RFLPin 208 Japanese schizophrenia patients and the known cDNAsequence through in silico analysis. Subsequently, three 210 normal controls (Mitsuyasu et al., 2001 in press). Including these, we informative polymorphisms were identified; a silent G/C single nucleotide collected 22 SNPs and 6 other polymorphisms (repeat polymorphisms; 4, polymorphism (SNP) in exon 12 (SNP2664); a C/T SNP in the 3UTR deletion polymorphisms; 2) from a 4.9 kb region of entire DRD4 gene, (SNP890); a multiallelic short tandem repeat (STR) in intron 2 (D12S364). based on our experiments, database, and literatures. Most of them were Allele and genotype frequencies were estimated on a series of 105 unre- clustered within an approximately 1 kb area containing exon 1 and the pro- lated patients with schizophrenia (DSM-IV) and on 150 normal controls. No moter region. In this study, we report evaluation of these polymorphisms significant difference between patients and controls was observed in allele and genotyping of them using the Japanese schizophrenia patients and and genotype frequencies of SNP2664 and D12S364. The T allele of normal controls above mentioned. The methods adopted in the evaluation SNP890 was found to be less frequent in patients than in controls (p<0.05), and genotyping were PLACE-SSCP (Inazuka et al., 1997), single resulting an odds ratio associated with the G/G genotype equal to 3.39. nucleotide extension, RFLP, and direct sequencing of PCR products. We These results did not allow to reject the hypothesis of association between analyzed the linkage disequilibria between these polymorphisms and the the NMDAR2B genetic background and the susceptibility to schizophrenia. association between these polymorphisms and schizophrenia patients in In order to confirm the preliminary analysis, the case control study on the Japanese population. extended haplotypes is in progress. P1342. Candidate genes for familial catatonic schizophrenia P1340.Association of polymorphisms of the human Ra on chromosome 22q13.33 P1-targeting cAMP-GEFI gene with Japanese schizophrenia patients J. Meyer, G. Ortega, I. Ulzheimer-Teuber, O. Grimm, S. Jatzke, A. H. Kawasaki1, H. Mitsuyasu1, A. Tahara1, T. Tahira2, H. Ninomiya3, Y. Huberth, J. Gross, K. P. Lesch Fukumaki4, D. E. Housman5, A. M. Graybiel6, N. Tashiro1, K. Hayashi2 University of Wuerzburg; Wuerzburg, Germany 1Kyushu University, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Dept. Neu- nerk108@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de ropsychiatry; Fukuoka, Japan; 2Kyushu University, Institute of Genetic We have recently reported a 5 cM region on chromosome 22q13.33 with Information, Div. Genome Analysis; Fukuoka, Japan; 3Fukuoka Prefectur- suggestive evidence for linkage with familial, catatonic schizophrenia al Dazaifu Hospital, Psychiatric Center; Fukuoka, Japan; 4Kyushu Univer- (periodic catatonia according to Leonhards classification; Stber et al., sity, Institute of Genetic Information, Div. Disease Genes; Fukuoka, Japan; AJHG 67; 1201-1207, 2000). The region has been reduced to at least 4 cM 5MIT, Center for Cancer Research; Cambridge, United States; 6MIT, Dept. by genotyping additional polymorphic markers. Gene annotation in this Brain and Cognitive Sciences; Cambridge, United States region shows a total of 30 genes and 47 small transcripts of viral origin or hkawasaki@aol.com detected very rarely in cDNAlibraries. One of the the strong candidate We previously reported the cloning of novel genes of a second-messenger genes in this region is CELSR1, a gene encoding a neuronal seven-pass regulated Rap1-GEF (guanine nucleotide exchange factor) gene family transmembrane receptor cadherin. Routing, branching, and final destina- whose GEF activities are regulated by the binding of second-messenger tion of developing neurons is mediated by cell-surface proteins and mem- molecules such as cAMP, calcium (Ca2+) and diacylglycerol (DAG) bers of the cadherin cell adhesion protein family such as CELSRI. We have (Kawasaki et al., 1998) indicating that three major second messengers studied CELSR1 in detail and found a number of allelic variants within the transduce their signals to targets different from protein kinases. This gene coding region. Additionally, a polymorphic intronic repeat has been detect- family includes cAMP-GEFI (identical to Epac, de Rooji et al., 1998), ed. These variants provide a powerful tool to investigate the role of cAMP-GEFII, CalDAG-GEFI and CalDAG-GEFII (identical to RasGRP, CELSR1 in the etiopathogenesis of complex psychiatric disorders. Some Ebinu et al., 1998). Both cAMP-GEFs have binding domains for cAMPmol- of the other genes with unknown function in this region are expressed ecules as well as for Rap1-targeting GEF domains. As antipsychotics have exclusively in the brain. Further studies will show if the variants of these antagonistic actions at dopamine receptors regulating intracellular cAMP genes detected so far may alter brain function and contribute to the patho- concentrations in the central nervous system, cAMP-GEFs could be good genesis of psychiatric disorders. Comparative sequencing of the coding candidates for molecular studies of schizophrenia. We determined the regions of candidate genes in this chromosomal region may lead to the exon-intron structure of human cAMP-GEFI gene based on sequence detection of a major gene involved in the etiopathogenesis of schizophre- information from cosmids we isolated and draft sequence files in GenBank. nia. The result indicate that there are 28 exons in the locus. All 28 exons were amplified by PCR to isolate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using P1343. The Dopamine Transporter Gene (DAT1) And Schizo- 12 Japanese individuals. Initial screenings were by dHPLC; subsequently, phrenia; AFamily Based Association Study the SNPs were evaluated by PLACE-SSCP (Inazuka et al. 1997) and L. Georgieva1, I. Nikolov1, A. Z. Dimitrova1, S. Koleva1, D. Toncheva1, M. direct sequencing. By genotyping these SNPs in the schizophrenia J. Owen2, G. Kirov2 patients and normal controls (Japanese population), the association 1Medical University Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2Neuropsychiatric Genetics Unit between schizophrenia phenotype and these markers were evaluated. We at UWCM; Cardiff, United Kingdom also analyzed the linkage disequilibria between markers. PLACE-SSCP, bbcollaboration@hotmail.com single nucleotide extension, RFLPs and direct sequencing were employed Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder which affects 1% of the gen- as genotyping methods. Both individual and pooled DNAs were used for eral polulation. The aetiology is not known but neuroleptic drugs improve PLACE-SSCPanalysis. the symptoms in the majority of patients. These drugs block the dopamine receptors in the brain and therefore dopamine is supposed to play a role in the pathophysiology of the disease. The Dopamine transporter gene364 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance (DAT1) encodes a protein which re-uptakes synaptic dopamine, making it cc@anat.uct.ac.za a stong candidate gene to study in schizophrenia. A40-bp VNTR in the Bipolar disorder is a severe neuropsychiatric condition that affects approx- 3UTR of the gene has been exmined in previous case-control studies but imately 1% of the U.S. population. The condition is complex with a strong no positive results were found. We used the more robust method of family genetic influence. The objective of this study was; (1) to assess the famil- controls from parent-offspring trios to test for association with disease. iality of bipolar disorder in South Africa, (2) to assess the significance of We genotyped 178 trios with Schizophrenia (SZ) of Bulgarian origin. The association of other psychiatric disorders with bipolar disorder (in a famil- results were analysed with the Extended Transmission Disequilibrium Test. ial setting), and (3) to identify the possible genetic loci which predispose to We observed alleles of 5 6 8 9 10 and 11 repeats of the VNTR. The allele bipolar disorder in the families under investigation. Atotal of 130 families frequencies and transmissions from heterozygous parents are shown in were recruited, who met the criteria for a diagnosis of either bipolar I dis- the table. order (BPI), bipolar II disorder (BPII) or major depressive episode recurrent We confirm previous results that the VNTR in DAT1 does not increase sus- (MDE-R), as confirmed by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV ceptibility for schizophrenia. Axis I disorders (Version 2.0). In a review of the 130 families, BPI was seen We examined the data sample for correlation between DAT1 genotypes to cluster with BPII and MDE. Compared to males a greater number of and certain characteristics of auditory hallucinations, which are among the females with a mood disorder were observed. 51% of the cohort met the most important clinical features of Schizophrenia. We found a statistically criteria for BPI and BPII, 44% for MDE (recurrent and single) and 5% for significant positive correlation between DAT1 genotype and the severity of other mood disorders. 19% of the cohort failed to meet the criteria for any voices reported by patients; Spearmans rho=0.183, p=0.01, n=176, how- of the mood disorders. Current molecular genetic analysis involves screen- ever this result is not corrected for multiple testing. By now, the importance ing a cohort of 12 South African families with fluorescent microsatellite of this relationship is unclear. We suggest that the occurrence of allele 10 markers, covering a comprehensive set of candidate loci/genes thought to could modify the severity of certain symptoms of Schizophrenia. play a role in the aetiology of bipolar disorder. It is likely that similar/com- Table 1. Allele frequencies mon genetic factors underlie mood disorders and other psychiatric condi- tions. Allele number 5 6 8 9 10 11 P1346.Investigation of Notch 3 as a candidate gene for bipo- repeat repeat repeat repeat repeat repeat lar disorder suing brain hyperintensities as an endopheno- Allele frequencies type. Ahearn EP, Speer MC, Steffens DC, vanMeter S, Cassidy Parents 0.1% 0.4% 0.3% 31.1% 67.1% 0.8% F, Chen YT, Provenazle J, Weisler R, Krishnan R. Children 0.3% 0.8% 0.3% 30.1% 67.9% 0.6% E. P. Ahearn Transmission from heterozygous parents Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC United States Transmitted 1 3 1 77 85 2 marcy@chg.mc.duke.edu Not 0 0 1 84 80 4 Genetic linkage studies in psychiatric disorders like bipolar disorder (BPD) transmitted have been complicated by extensive genetic and phenotypic heterogene- p-value 0.58 0.69 ity. One way to maximize the power of linkage analysis is to identify endophenotypes that may predict the genetic basis of a phenotypic subset. P1344.Evidence For An Involvement Of The Notch4 Locus In Several studies suggest an increased prevalence of MRI hyperintense foci The Development Of Schizophrenia in BPD; these foci are located in both subcortical white matter and grey S. Cichon1, J. Schumacher1, R. Ivo1, F. Macciardi2, T. G. Schulze3, D. J. nuclei. Between 25-40% of young bipolars (< 45 years) demonstrate these Mller3, I. Kremer4, M. Dobrusin5, M. Mujaheed6, I. Murad6, M. Blanaru3, I. MRI findings, which are similar to those in CADASIL(cerebral autosomal Bannoura6, A. Reshef4, R. Bachner-Melman4, R. H. Belmaker5, R. P. dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy), Ebstein7, W. Maier3, M. Rietschel3, P. Propping1, M. M. Nthen1 which has been associated with mutations in Notch3. We identified a large 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 2Center pedigree in which all 9 BPD patients were positive for MRI hyperintense for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), Section of Neurogenetics, Uni- foci; 6/10 relatives with no affective disorder were also positive for these versity of Toronto; Toronto, Canada; 3Department of Psychiatry, University MRI changes. Linkage analysis (parametric and non-parametric) using of Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 4Emek Hospital; Afula, Israel; 5Beersheva Men- markers flanking Notch3 demonstrated negative lod scores across a vari- tal Health Center; Beersheva, Israel; 6Dr. Kemal Hospital; Bethlehem, ety of disease models, except for slightly positive lod scores for D19S923 Israel; 7Herzog Hospital; Jerusalem, Israel when all MRI lesion-positive individuals, regardless of BPD status, are cichon@mailer.meb.uni-bonn.de affected (z(q) ] 0.86). Since Notch3 is a compelling functional candidate, Genetic epidemiology has provided consistent evidence that schizophrenia we investigated exons 3 and 4, where mutations in CADASILcluster, with has a genetic component, and that this genetic component is complex. SSCP. We found no evidence for gel shift in these two exons, providing fur- Molecular genetic studies, however, have so far failed to reproducibly iden- ther evidence that this gene is not involved in either the bipolar or MRI phe- tify any DNAvariant conferring susceptibility to this common neuropsychi- notype in this family. In addition to this large family, we have identified two atric disorder. Recently, the NOTCH4 locus on chromosomal region 6p has other sets of sib pairs concordant for BPD and hyperintense foci and fur- been reported to be highly associated with schizophrenia in the British pop- ther investigations are on-going. ulation [Wei & Hemmings, Nature Genet. 25; 376-377 (2000)]. This locus contains the gene encoding the NOTCH4 receptor which is involved in P1347.Linkage Disequilibrium Study Of The Serotonin Trans- neurodevelopmental processes. Because credibility of association findings porter Gene (SLC6A4) In Bipolar Disorder. in genetically complex traits strongly depends on replication in independ- E. Mundo1, M. Walker1, T. Cate1, S. Parikh2, F. Macciardi1, J. L. Kennedy1 ent samples, we examined four variants [(TAA)n repeat, SNP1, SNP2, 1Neurogenetics Section, CAMH, University of Toronto; Toronto, ON Cana- (CTG)n repeat] in the 5-flanking region and in the coding region of the da; 2Bipolar Disorders Clinic, CAMH, University of Toronto; Toronto, ON NOTCH4 gene in parent-offspring trio samples from two different popula- Canada tions; 159 trios of German and 209 trios of Palestinian Arab descent. Link- Emanuela_Mundo@CAMH.net age disequilibrium analysis was performed using the transmission disequi- Bipolar Disorder (BP) is a severe psychiatric condition with a strong genet- librium test (TDT). In concordance with the British trio sample, we found a ic component (Gershon, 1990). The serotonin transporter gene (SCL6A4) susceptibility locus for schizophrenia in significant linkage disequilibrium is a good candidate for BPas the serotonin transporter protein is the site with the (TAA)n repeat in the Palestinian Arab sample (p=0.0082) and of action of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) that success- observed a borderline significant trend in the German sample (p=0.0547). fully treat bipolar depression (Potter, 1998). The SLC6A4 is located on Furthermore, the four-marker haplotype (TAA)n-SNP1-SNP2-(CTG)n was chromosome 17q11.1-q12 and it has two known polymorphisms; a 44bp associated in both German (p=0.0038) and Palestinian Arab (p=0.0111) deletion/insertion in the promoter region (5HTTLPR) (Lesch et al, 1996) trio samples. Thus, our results provide further support for the hypothesis and a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) in the second intron that the NOTCH4 gene or a nearby locus is involved in the etiology of (Ogilvie et al, 1995). Results from previous association studies on SCL6A4 schizophrenia. and BPare conflicting (Furlong et al, 1998; Mundo et al, 2000). To investi- gate for the presence of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between SCL6A4 and P1345. molecular genetic analysis of bipolar disorder in BP, we studied 280 subjects with BPI, BPII, or Schizoaffective Disorder, South Africa bipolar type, and their living parents. Diagnoses were assessed by a struc- C. Cupido, E. Pietersen, R. S. Ramesar tured interview for DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) Department of Human Genetics,University of Cape Town; Cape Town, (SCID-I). Genotyping data were analyzed using the transmission disequi- South Africa librium test (TDT) (Spielman et al, 1993). With respect to the 5HTTLPR,Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 365 206 triads were informative for the analysis. The two alleles of the 5HTTL- Mouthon3, A. Malafosse3, D. Mouthon3, P. Baud3, A. Malafosse3 PR were transmitted equally to the affected (chi-square=0.262, df=1, 1Geneva University Hospital; Chene-Bourg, Switzerland; 2Lapeyronie Hos- p=0.608). For the VNTR polymorphisms 185 families were informative and pital, INSERM E99-30; Montpellier, France; 3Geneva University Hospital, no biases in the transmission of the alleles were found. The two polymor- Neuropsychiatry; Geneva, Switzerland phisms were in LD (chi-square=43.115, df=2, p<.00001), but a Haplotype- Catherine.Buresi@hcuge.ch TDTanalysis (Chiano & Clayton, 1998) did not show any association with There is compelling evidence that serotonin system dysfunction is associ- BP (overall chi-square=1.3514, df=4, p=0.8525). It appears unlikely that ated with certain behavioral disorders, such as suicidal behavior and the SLC6A4 plays a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of BP. However, impulsive aggression. Afunctional polymorphism in the promoter region of further studies focusing on the role of the gene in determining susceptibil- the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) was recently identified and the ity to alternative phenotypes related to BP(e.g., the response to SSRIs) presence of the short allele found to be associated with a lower level of might be worthwhile. expression of the gene, lower levels of 5-HTuptake, suicidal behavior and anxiety-related traits. We genotyped 51 West European Caucasians who P1348.Linkage and TDT analyses of markers on chromosome had made violent suicide attempts and 139 controls of the same ethnic ori- 22q in Bulgarian families with affective disorder gin, with no history of suicidal behavior. The frequencies of the S allele and V. M. Chorbov1, R. P. Kaneva1, V. K. Milanova2, C. Kostov2, V. Stoyano- the SS genotype were significantly higher in the violent suicide attempters va2, S. Krastev2, I. Kremensky1, A. Jablensky3 than in the controls. The odds ratio for the SS genotype vs. the LLgeno- 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia Medical University; Sofia, Bul- type was 3.63 (95% CI [1.27-10.40]). The association was even stronger in garia; 2First Psychiatric Clinic, Department of Psychiatry; Sofia, Bulgaria; those with a history of major mood disorder (odds ratio for SS genotype vs. 3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Science, University of Western LL genotype; 5.6, 95% (CI [1.36-23.06]), whereas no difference was Australia; Perth, Australia observed between non suicide attempters with and without a history of mitkov@excite.com major mood disorder. This suggests that a change in expression of the Several studies have provided evidence of a susceptibility locus for bipo- gene encoding the 5-HTtransporter may be involved in a subgroup of sui- lar disorder on chromosome 22q. We analysed 18 Bulgarian pedigrees cide attempters, in whom violent suicidal behavior is combined with major with affective disease for linkage with 4 polymorphic markers from 22q mood disorder. Possible interaction between 5-HTTLPR and other genes (D22S427, COMT, D22S264, D22S278), covering 17.4 cM. Two point link- of the serotonin pathway in these behavioral disorders will be presented. age analysis under assumption of homogeneity and a dominant model with reduced penetrance produced small positive values only for marker P1351. Psychotic Disorders And The Serotonin Transporter D22S278 with maximum Lod=1.12 for marker D21S278 (q=0.05) and Gene; AFamily Based Association Study broad phenotype definition. Nonparametric linkage analysis under a phe- A. Dimitrova1, G. Kirov2, I. Nikolov1, L. Georgieva1, S. Koleva3, N. Poria- notype model, including bipolar I, II and schizoaffective disorder, gave pos- zova4, M. J. Owen2, D. Toncheva1 itive NPLall values (p<0.05) over the distal part of the studied region peak 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University - Sofia; Sofia, Bul- at D21S278 (Npl Zall=1.73, p=0.02). The multipoint Lod score analysis, garia; 2Neuropsychiatric Genetics Unit at UWCM; Cardiff, United Kingdom; performed by GENEHUNTER produced small positive score at the same 3Medical University Sofia; Sofia, Bulgaria; 4Plovdiv Medical University; locus (Lod=0.63). The transmission disequilibrium test was applied and Plovdiv, Bulgaria preferential transmission could not be found for the analysed markers. The draga@sofiaonline.com combined data does not support the hypothesis for the role of COMTand Background.The human Serotonin transporter gene (5-HTT) is a strong the adjacent region in the susceptibility to affective disorder in the analysed candidate for involvement in the pathogenesis of mood disorders, as it is sample. The significant NPLscores and small positive Lod scores at locus the target of antidepressants blocking the re-uptake of Serotonin. Previous D22S278 confirm previous findings and focus the attention on the distal studies have proposed that certain alleles of a 16/17bp VNTR in intron 2, part of chromosome 22q for further investigations. might increase susceptibility to Bipolar affective disorder 1 (BP1). Associ- ation studies using case-control designs can, however produce spurious P1349. Linkage disequilibrium analysis of affective disorder results. We used the more robust method of family controls from parent- and loci on chromosome 21q offspring trios. R. P. Kaneva1, V. Chorbov1, V. Milanova2, C. Kostov2, V. Stoyanova2, S. Methods.We genotyped 255 trios of Bulgarian origin. The distribution of Krastev2, I. Kremensky1, A. Jablensky3 DSM-IV diagnoses in the affected offspring is as follows; BP1- 72 families, 1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology; Sofia, Bulgaria; 2First Psychiatric Clin- Schizophrenia (SZ)- 157 families, Schizoaffective disorder (SA)- 26 fami- ic, Department of Psychiatry; Sofia, Bulgaria; 3Department of Psychiatry lies. The results were analysed with the Extended Transmission Disequi- and Behavioural Science, University of Western Australia; Perth, Australia librium Test. radiva@techno-link.com Results.We observed alleles of 9, 10 and 12 repeats of the VNTR. The We analysed 18 Bulgarian pedigrees with affective disorder with 6 poly- frequencies are shown in the table. For the whole sample, the 9 repeat was morphic markers on chromosome 21q (D21S65, D21S211, D21S1252, passed 9 times, not passed 7 times (c2=0.25,p=0.6); allele 10 was passed D21S1255, D21S1260, D21S416) implicated in previous studies. The 110 times v. 129 times (c2=1.51, p=0.2); and allele 12 was passed 130 region encompassed by the markers was 7.7 cM. We genotyped 42 times v. 113 times (c2=1.19, p=0.3). None of the three diagnostic samples patients (27 BPI; 3 BPII; 1 schizoaffective (manic); 7 recurrent major showed significant preferential transmission of any alleles. Some, but not depression; 4 major depressive disorder, single episode) and 28 unaffect- all previous studies reported that allele 12 is more common in patients with ed persons. Two affection models were tested; narrow including only BP BPI (Kirov et al, Psychol Med, 1999, 29;1249-54). The only trend for the 12 I, BPII and schizoaffective manic and broad, including in addition to the repeat to be preferentially transmitted was in SAdisorder (passed 17, not narrow recurrent depression and major depressive episodes. The trans- passed 10 times, c2=1.82, p=0.178). There was no significant correlation mission disequilibrium test (TDT) and the ETDTtests were applied. Signif- between the presence of allele 12 and any of the psychiatric symptoms icant results were obtained for two of the studied markers and the narrow recorded. model of the disease; marker D21S1252 (allele-wise p=0.03, genotype- Conclusions.We could not confirm previous results that the 12 repeat in wise p=0.02) and D21S416 (allele-wise p=0.005, genotype-wise p=0.02). the VNTR in intron 2 in 5-HTTincreases susceptibility to BP1. The weight There was also evidence for LD between marker D21S416 and the broad of evidence now points against such an involvement. It appears that this affection status (allele-wise p=0.003, genotype-wise p=0.002). Genotypic polymorphism in the 5-HTTgene is not a risk factor in the pathogenesis of disequilibrium between the used markers was tested in the group of affect- Schizophrenia either. Its role in behavioural or personality traits, such as ed and their healthy relatives using the program Genepop 3.1b. Almost all anxiety, remains more plausible. pairs of markers revealed significant disequilibrium in the affected, com- Table 1. Allele frequencies pared with lack of disequilibrium in the healthy group. The strongest level Allele frequencies of genotypic disequilibrium was observed for marker pairs; D21S65- Diagnosis Member 9 repeat 10 repeat 12 repeat D21S1252, D21S1252-D21S416, D21S1252-D21S1260. The combined Parents 1.4% 30.7% 67.8% data from the current study provide additional support for the existence of SZ, n=157 Children 1.3% 29.6% 69.1% a susceptibility gene for bipolar affective disorder on chromosome Parents 1.9% 37.5% 60.6% 21q22.3. SA, n=26 Children 3.8% 28.8% 67.3% Parents 1.7% 34.8% 63.4% P1350. Association Between Violent Suicidal Behavior And BP1, n=72 Children 2.1% 33.8% 64.1% The Low Activity Allele Of The Serotonin Transporter Gene C. M. N. Buresi1, P. Courtet2, D. Mouthon3, P. Courtet2, P. Baud3, D.366 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance P1352.Characterization of a novel gene at 7q31 disrupted in P1355. Insertion-deletion ACE gene polymorphism is age a patient with Tourettes Syndrome dependent E. Petek1, J. B. Vincent2, C. Windpassinger1, H. M. D. Gurling3, P. M. O. Milosserdova, P. Slominsky, S. Limborska Kroisel1, K. Wagner1, S. W. Scherer2 Institute of Molecular Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation 1University of Graz; Graz, Austria; 2The Hospital for Sick Children; Toron- omil@img.ras.ru to, ON Canada; 3Windeyer Institute of Medical Science; London, United The angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) is key element of the renin- Kingdom angiotensin system. However, data on relative contributions of alleles and petek@kfunigraz.ac.at genotypes of this gene into vascular disorders and survival are contradic- Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) is a complex neuropsychiatric disor- tory. We have investigated the frequency of ACE insertion/deletion (I/D) der characterized by multiple motor and phonic tics. We identified a male polymorphism in 4 group of subjects living in Moscow; a sample of children patient with GTS and other additional anomalies carrying a de novo dupli- (mean age is 2.9+3.4 y.o), and 3 samples of adults aged 30-80 years ( cation of the long arm of chromosome 7 [46,XY,dup(7)(q22.1-q31.1)]. The means age are 34.2+2.37, 56.4+4.5, 83.17+3.39 y.o). We observed the distal chromosomal breakpoint occurred between the two markers D7S515 tendency of increased the frequency D-allele (p<0.05) and DD genotype and D7S522, a region previously shown to be disrupted in a familiar case (p<0.01) in centenarians. For example, a frequency of D allele was 0,48 for of GTS. Sequence analysis of the distal breakpoint determined that the children group and 0,68 for centenarians group. Such results can have rearrangement occurred within a novel gene named mitochondrial inner population-specific effect. Thus, genotype differences between age-group peptidase subunit 2 (IMP2) due to its similarity to yeast IMP2. The human should be taken into account and the control group thoroughly selected gene encodes 175 amino acids and spans about 900 kb of genomic DNA. when association are studied. An ubiquitous expression pattern could be demonstrated on several tis- sues by performing Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis. In yeast, IMPis P1356. A candidate genetic marker of outstanding sport required for proteolytic processing of the mitochondrially encoded protein achievements Cox2 and the nucleus-encoded Cyt b2, Mcr1, and Cyt c1. Mitochondrial I. Nazarov1, V. Kazakov1, V. Rogozkin2, O. Shneider2, N. Tomilin1 proteins have previously been associated with the appearance of neu- 1Institute of Cytology of the Russian Academy of Sciences; Saint Peters- rodegenerative disorders such as Friedreichs ataxia, MERRF and burg, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Physical Culture; Saint Petersburg, MELAS, and have been hypothesized to be involved in neuropsychiatric Russian Federation disorders. To confirm of whether a defective IMP2 gene may predispose i_naz@mail.ru Tourettes syndrome or related disorders we are in the process of examin- The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene insertion/deletion poly- ing the IMP2 gene for mutations in unrelated Tourettes syndrome patients. morphism may play a role of genetic marker of physical performance and athletic excellence (Montgomery et al., 1998, Gayagay et al., 1998). How- P1353.No evidence for variations of the cannabinoid receptor ever, Rankinen et al. (2000), and Taylor et al. (1999) do not confirm this gene (CNR1) in German IV drug users hypothesis. In this study was examined possible association of the ACE D. Heller, U. Schneider, J. Seifert, M. Stuhrmann gene insertion (I) and deletion (D) allele frequencies and ACE genotypes Medizinische Hochschule Hannover; Hannover, Germany (II,ID,DD) with sport specialization in Russian athletes on different sport stuhrmann.manfred@mh-hannover.de levels. Athletes specialized in swimming, track and field, triathlon, and ski To date, no human disease has been definately proven to be caused or participated in the study. All athletes was divided into three groups. The predisposed by mutations within the human central cannabinoid receptor group Aconsisted of sprinters who make their competition load into 1 (CNR1) gene. In 1997, Commings et al. reported on a significant associa- minute. The group B consist of athletes who make competition load in time tion between homozygosity for a group of certain alleles of a polymorphic period from 1 to 20 minutes. And the group C included marathoners who triplet repeat (AAT) marker for the CNR1 gene, prompting us to investigate perform their competition load during more then 20 minutes. Moreover, the this marker in 40 German unrelated opioid addicts (27 males and 13 athletes was classified as middle level athletes, standing (members and females; mean age 37.9 Years) and 81 age and sex matched controls. In candidates of Russian national teams) and outstanding (champions of contrast to Comings et al., we found no association of AATrepeat alleles Russia, Europe and higher level) athletes. DNAwas extracted from buccal with IV drug use in our study group. In addition, no association was epithelia. The ACE I/D polymorphism was genotyped by polymerase chain observed for alleles of an intragenic biallelic CNR1 polymorphism reaction as reported earlier (Evans et al. 1994). Significance was assessed (1359G/A). Finally, by SSCPanalysis and direct sequencing of the entire by chi squared analysis. The results of this investigation are shown in the CNR1 gene of all probands, we did not detect any sequence variation table 1. It is seen from the table 1 that at the middle and the standing ath- which could confer susceptibility to IV drug abuse. Hence, in contrast to letes there are no significant differences of the ACE genotypes or I/D alle- previous investigations, we found no evidence for an involvement of the les frequencies in all groups compared to control group. However, signifi- CNR1 gene in a cohort of German IV drug users. cant increase of the D allele was detected among outstanding sprinters (group A). It accords to data that the response to strength training effect is P1354. The mu-Opioid Receptor Gene and Risk for Use of increased by the presence of the D allele in ACE genotype (Folland et al., Alcohol and Other Substances 2000). Significant increase of the I allele is detected among outstanding M. J. Mullan1, T. Town1, L. Abdullah1, F. Crawford1, P. Ordorica2, E. Fran- athletes of group B. This possibly can be explained by some preference cis2, P. Hughes2, A. Graves3, J. Mortimer3, J. Schinka1,2 owing to better oxygen delivery to skeletal muscles during exercises at 1Roskamp Institute; Tampa, FL United States; 2Veterans Administration submaximal intensity. This point is confirmed that among marathoners Medical Center; Tampa, FLUnited States; 3Institute on Aging; Tampa, FL was not found significant association with frequencies of ACE gene I and United States D alleles, so as an intensity of physical load in this group lower and the mmullan@com1.med.usf.edu oxygen delivery rate is not limiting factor for their exercising. We have previously reported association of the +118Aallele of the human Table 1 Frequencies of ACE gene I and D alleles and ACE genotype dis- mu-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) with alcohol dependency in a popula- tribution in athletes were gro tion recruited through the Veterans Administration. However, other genetic ACE genotype ACE allele association studies investigating the role of this functional polymorphism in Group n II ID DD P value I D risk for alcohol dependency have produced inconsistent findings, possibly Middle level because of the failure to recognize sampling methodology difficulties inher- A 39 0,13 0,45 0,42 0,124 0,36 0,64 0,069 ent in association studies of polygenic disorders. We therefore examined B 23 0,17 0,39 0,43 0,247 0,37 0,63 0,133 the frequency of the AAgenotype and Aallele in several groups of sub- C 16 0,25 0,56 0,19 0,807 0,53 0,47 0,670 stance dependent cases, unscreened controls, and super controls Standing (Intermediate) screened for the use of alcohol and cigarettes. Our findings and analyses A 10 0,10 0,40 0,50 0,241 0,30 0,70 0,101 suggest that the OPRM1 +118 polymorphism is a general risk gene for B 24 0,12 0,71 0,18 0,259 0,47 0,53 0,092 substance dependence, but is not specific to a particular substance. The nature of the conferred risk is likely to be in use of multiple substances, but C 26 0,19 0,58 0,23 0,747 0,48 0,52 0,894 it is not yet determined if the risk could be expressed in severity of use of Outstanding any particular substance. The contribution of the gene to risk for substance A 18 0,06 0,44 0,50 0,061 0,28 0,72 0,017* dependence is small, and is detected most easily in studies that use con- B 15 0,64 0,29 0,07 0,007* 0,79 0,21 0,002* trol samples that are screened for all forms of substance dependence. C 26 0,15 0,65 0,19 0,341 0,48 0,52 0,894 Controls - 111 0,24 0,50 0,26 - 0,49 0,51 -Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 367 P1357.ACE genotype - making of an elite athlete? tor tone and natriuresis, and regulation of the secretion of renin, B. Schimmel1, R. Dahse1, H. Wagner2, S. Thaller3, M. Sust3 angiotensin, and aldosterone. The effects are mediated through two class- 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Jena, Germany; 2Institute es of receptors, D2/D3/D4 and D1/D5. We investigated the role of the of Sportsciences, Friedrich-Schiller-University; Jena, Germany; 3Institute dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) in a genetic linkage study of hypertension. for Sport Sciences, Karl-Franzens University; Graz, Austria We enrolled Chinese hypertensive persons, whose mean pretreatment bschi@mti-n.uni-jena.de blood pressure was >140/90 mmHg on 24-hour ambulatory recording. We Human physical performance and fitness phenotype is influenced by selected for disease onset <60 years, and excluded diabetes and a body genetic factors. Avariation in the structure of the human angiotensin - con- mass index > 30. Forty-nine sib-pairs concordant for hypertension were verting enzyme (ACE) gene has been detected in which the absence (dele- enrolled. Two polymorphisms in the coding region (Ser311 and NcoI) and tion, D allele) rather than the presence (insertion, I allele) of a 287 bp frag- a 3 marker (TaqIA) were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restric- ment is associated with high ACE activity in tissues. Lower enzyme activi- tion fragment length polymorphism. We carried out non-parametic linkage ty (associated with the longer I allele) has been reported to be linked to analysis of each marker. There was an increased sharing of alleles identi- enhanced endurance performance possibly by improving the mechanical cal by state (hypertension) at the TaqIAlocus (p=0.0025). The result sug- efficiency of trained muscle (Williams AG et al., Nature 403; 614, 2000). gests that DRD2 may be linked to essential hypertension in this Chinese The I variant was associated with greater training response also in other population, and justify further studies of larger sample sizes and more poly- studies and it was reported that the frequency of the DD genotype was sig- morphic markers. nificantly lower in elite athletes like Olympic rowers or mountaineers. In contrast, data from fitness phenotypes in a huge HERITAGE Family Study P1360.An angiotensin-converting enzyme and angiotensino- with 700 individuals did not support the hypothesis that the ACE polymor- gen gene polymorphisms, ischaemic stroke and carotid phism plays a major role in cardiorespiratory endurance (Rankinen Tet al., stenosis; association and sibs study J. Appl. Physiol. 88; 1029-1035, 2000). The aim of our study was to con- P. A. Slominsky1, T. Tupitsina1, E. Koltsova2, V. Skvortsova2, S. Limbors- tribute to this controversial discussion by determining the influence of the ka1 ACE genotype on special muscle properties with the hypothesis, that indi- 1Institute of Molecular Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Russian vidual muscle characteristics rather than parameters from the above State Medical Academy; Moscow, Russian Federation named studies are associated with the ACE genotype. The ACE genotype slomin@img.ras.ru was determined by PCR from 0.9% saline mouthwash samples. Muscle Family and twins study demonstrated that genetic factors may be involved properties were measured in 72 subjects (II; n= 25; ID; n= 17; DD; n= 30) in stroke. Previously, insertion/deletion (I/D) Alu-polymorphism in the by determining the individual force-velocity relation described by an Hill- angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene and M235Tpolymorphism in type muscle model. The subjects performed maximum voluntary single- the angiotensinogen gene has been suggested as a risk factors for some joint leg-extension sitting on a leg-press. The dynamics and kinematics cardiovascular diseases. There fore, cardiovascular factors are well-known have been used to determine the individual muscle properties using a non- risk factors for ischaemic cerebrovascular disease (ICVD). We have inves- linear regression analysis. We found no significant correlation between the tigated the distribution of alleles of ACE and angiotensinogen genes in ACE genotype and the single parameters of Hills equation. This result indi- group of patients with ischaemic and their sibs. All patients and sibs with cates that our hypothetical model of single Hill type parameters in correla- ischaemic stroke were investigated for the stenosis of the internal carotid tion to the ACE genotype can not contribute to the discussion whether ACE artery (CS). There was a significant difference (P< 0.05) in the distribution genotype is making of an elite athlete. of ACE alleles, homozygosity for the presumed susceptibility deletion allele being more common in patients with profound (>50%) CS than in healthy P1358. Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene polymorphism control subjects and healthy sibs. There was also a significant difference in Saudis - association with hypertension. (P< 0.05) in patients with CS in comparison with matched ICVD patients M. A. F. El-Hazmi without CS, both in allelic frequencies and in homozygosity for the deletion College of Medicine, King Saud University; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia allele. However, I\D allele distibution demonstrated no evidence for statis- mohsen@ksu.edu.sa tically significant differences in frequencies of I/D alleles or II/DD/ID geno- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE; kininase II; EC 3.4.15.1) plays an types between ICVD patients and healthy control subjects. Our results indi- essential role in the maintenance of vascular tone as it activates cate that the ACE gene polymorphism may be a risk factor for the devel- angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictory peptide- angiotensin II, and inacti- opment of CS - but not for ICVD. M235Tangiotensinogen gene polymor- vates the vasodilatory peptide, bradykinin. Variations in the levels of ACE phism is not risk factor for ICVD or CS in our patients group - we dont find have been reported in different individuals and are related to occurance of any significant differences in allele and genotype distribution between different alleles of ACE gene.Awell studied polymorphism in the intron 16 ICVD and CS patients and healthy control subjects. of the ACE gene due to insertion (I) or deletion (D) of a 287 bp sequence has been reported to occur producing three genotypes; DD, DI and II. The P1361. Family based investigation of the role of the C677T highest ACE levels occur in individuals with DD genotype and the lowest in polymorphism of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase the II homozygous. We investigated ACE polymorphism in 300 Saudi (MTHFR) gene in ischaemic heart disease (IHD) males and females. Primers spanning the polymorphic site in intron 16 of M. S. Spence1, P. G. McGlinchey1, C. Patterson2, C. Belton3, G. Murphy1, ACE gene were used to amplify the polymorphic site by PCR and the PCR D. McMaster3, D. Fogarty3, A. Evans2, P. P. McKeown1,3 product was subjected to agarose gell electrophoresis. Based on the frag- 1Regional Medical Cardiology Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital; Belfast, ments produced each individual was classified as DD, ID and II and the fre- United Kingdom; 2Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, The quency of each genotype and the D and I alleles were determined in the Queens University; Belfast, United Kingdom; 3Department of Medicine, males and females. The overall genotype frequency was 0.560, 0.026 and The Queens University; Belfast, United Kingdom 0.414 for DD, II and ID genotypes, while the allele frequency were 0.767 cardiac.research@royalhospitals.n-i.nhs.uk and 0.233 for D and I alleles. The individuals with different genotypes were Background; elevations in plasma homocysteine levels are associated with seperated and the prevalence of hypertension was calculated in each IHD. AC677Tpolymorphism in the MTHFR gene results in reduced folate- group. In addition prevalence of obesity and serum lipid abnormalities were dependent enzyme activity and reduced methylation of homocysteine to investigated in each genotype. This paper will present our findings of ACE methionine. The homozygous (TT) mutant genotype is associated with gene polymorphism in normotensive and hypertensive Saudi individuals mild hyperhomocysteinemia, particularly in those populations with low and will discuss the role of ACE in the development of hypertension. plasma folate levels. There is controversy as to whether the TTgenotype is associated with an increased risk of IHD and theoretically it may even P1359. Non parametric linkage analysis of dopamine D2 protect against endothelial damage. receptor and essential hypertension in Singaporean Chinese Aims; to investigate the presence of linkage disequilibrium between the affected sib -pairs C677TMTHFR polymorphism and IHD in a well defined population. H. Wu1, E. P. H. Yap1, E. Taylor2, V. Oh2 Methods; Atotal of 129 families were recruited (353 individuals). The pres- 1Defence Medical Research Institute; Singapore, Singapore; 2Department ence of linkage disequilibrium between the C677TMTHFR polymorphism of Medicine, National University of Singapore; Singapore, Singapore and IHD was tested for using the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) / nmiv14@nus.edu.sg sib TDTand pedigree disequilibrium test (PDT). These tests are unaffect- The several genes that together predispose individuals to essential hyper- ed by population admixture. We tested for excess transmission of the C or tension are unknown. Abnormalities in the dopaminergic system, which Tallele to affected individuals using two-tailed tests. occur in rat models of hypertension, are implicated in human hypertension. Results;TDT/ sib-TDT; 47 of 112 discordant sibships and 12 of 20 trios Dopamine produces several effects, such as the control of renal vasomo- were informative (one sibship or trio per family). There was a statistically368 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance significant excess transmission of the C allele to affected individuals, P1364.Variant alleles in methionine cycle; association study (p=0.016). in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) PDT; 59 families were informative. There was a statistically significant B. Janosikova1, J. Sokolova1, E. Richterova1, M. Vackova1, J. Krijt1, L. excess transmission of the C allele to affected individuals, (p=0.021). Meixnerova1, K. Vesela2, A. Vitova2, P. Kraml2, M. Andel2, V. Kozich1 Conclusion; using newly developed family-based association methods we 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University; Prague, have demonstrated excess transmission of the C allele to individuals Czech Republic; 22nd Clinic of Internal Medicine, Hospital Kralovske affected with IHD, suggesting that the Tallele may be protective against Vinohrady; Prague, Czech Republic IHD. bjano@lf1.cuni.cz Numerous studies demonstrated that CAD is associated with mild hyper- P1362. Association of common noncoding mtDNA polymor- homocysteinemia. Plasma homocysteine concentrations are modulated in phisms with the status of the cardiovascular system part by variants in genes coding for enzymes of the methionine cycle. We V. P. Puzyrev1, M. V. Golubenko1, M. B. Freidin1, V. B. Salukov1, E. R. performed a case-control study to analyze the role of 7 variants in select- Eremina2 ed genes of the methionine cycle; cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS), 1Institute of Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methionine synthase (MS) Tomsk, Russian Federation; 2Buryat division of th Institute of pediatry and and methionine synthase reductase (MSR). We genotyped 591 healthy human reproduction of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; Ulan-Ude, controls (48% men, median age 50, range 18-65 years) and 296 patients Russian Federation with coronarographically verified CAD (82% men, median age 56, range valery@img.tsu.ru 33-65 years) using ARMS-PCR. All subjects underwent standard methion- Mitochondrial DNAis a very variable locus of human genome. Traditional- ine loading test, their fasting and post-load concentrations of aminothiols ly, mtDNApolymorphisms are considered as neutral, especially those in were determined by HPLC method. The calculated odds ratios (and 95% noncoding regions. We have studied restriction polymorphism in D-loop of confidence interval) for the rare variants in each locus are as follows; mtDNAand V region length polymorphism in several Siberian populations MSR524, TTvs. CT+CC, 1.05 (0.7-1.57); MSR66, GG vs. AG+AA, 0.94 as well as some affected groups (hypertension, heart blocks, complicated (0.68-1.28); MS2756, GG vs. AG+AA, 1.32 (0.64-2.68); MTHFR1298, CC pregnancy). Several traits concerning cardiovascular system function also vs. AC+AA, 0.78 (0.45-1.32); MTHFR677, TTvs. CT+CC, 1.37 (0.87-2.15); have been investigated in the samples (blood pressure, lipid levels, ECG heterozygosity for CBS844ins68bp vs. CBS844del/del, 0.53 (0.33-0.85, parameters) By comparing allele frequencies, we have found some signif- p=0.005). The impact of the 844ins68 on aminothiol concentrations was icant (P<0.05) differences in the HaeIII 16517 frequency between case and assessed by non-parametric test; the heterozygotes for 844ins68 had ethnically matched controls; in Buryats with complicated pregnancy (42% insignificantly lower fasting and postload concentrations of plasma homo- vs 62% in controls) and in Russians with heart blocks (77% vs 58% in con- cysteine and fasting blood glutathione, the median post-load decrease of trols). Also, this polymorphism contributes in blood pressure variability in plasma cysteine concentrations was 23 and 15 micromol/l in del/del and healthy Tuvinian population, with HaeIII+ individuals having lower blood ins/del individuals, respectively (Man-Whitney, p= 0.0002). Our data show pressure levels. V region length polymorphism contributes in ECG inter- that the 844ins68 variant is associated with a significantly decreased risk vals and peaks variability in Tuvinians (PQ, QT, RR-ratio), where individu- of coronary artery disease, its mechanism remains obscure and may be als harboring deletion or insertion in this region have lower values of these mediated through modulation of cysteine metabolism. parameters. Some differences were revealed also for haplotype frequen- cies. These findings suggest possible involving of mtDNAin the function of P1365. The study of the 4G/5G genetic polymorphism in the cardiovascular system and allow it to be considered as susceptibility locus promoter of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) for common cardiovascular diseases. In particular, non-coding polymor- gene in different groups of myocardial infarction patients. phisms which were investigated may also have functional consequences. M. V. Volkova1, O. A. Berkovich2, E. A. Bazhenova2, V. I. Larionova3, E. V. Major noncoding region of human mtDNAcontains regulatory elements Fomicheva1, E. V. Schlyakhto2, E. I. Schwartz1 which are necessary for mtDNAexpression. Hence, sequence polymor- 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; phisms may change the structure of these elements, that in turn con- 2Pavlovs State Medical University; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; tributes to mitochondrial function alterations. 3Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- tion P1363.Investigation of genetic variants of the tumor necrosis wolf@sp.ru factor alpha (TNF-a) and their importance in the risk profile of We have investigated the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism in different group of CAD myocardial infarction (MI) patients and controls. Group 1 - 289 male MI U. Schagdarsurengin1, P. Greiser1, S. Schulz1, U. Mller-Werdan2, A. patients (mean age 60 years) were collected from emergency department Kabisch3, D. Rehfeld1, C. Schnrer2, T. S 1, L. Weidhase2, A. Nordwig2, during 1-2 days after acute MI. Group 2 - 100 male patients with MI before K. Werdan2, C. Glser1 45 years (mean age 41 years) were recruited from Medical University Clin- 1Inst. of Human Genetics & Med. Biology, University Halle; Halle, Ger- ic at least 6 months after their MI. As a control group 284 randomly sam- many; 2Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Halle; Halle, Germany; 3Inst. pled schoolchildren were used. Aprevalence of the 5G allele in MI group 1 of Transf. Medicine/Bloodbank, University Halle; Halle, Germany compared to controls was found (p<0.001). In MI group 2 higher frequen- christiane.glser@medizin.uni-halle.de cy of the 4G/4G genotype compared to control subjects was determined TNF-a, a potent cytokine, plays an important role in atherosclerotic devel- (p<0.01). The comparison of 4G/5G alleles distribution between MI group opment and could been identified in many tissues involved in the progres- 1 and 2 showed a strong prevalence of 5G allele in MI patients collected sion of atherosclerosis. Interested in the effect of genetic variants of TNF- during 1-2 days after their MI. Recently Heymans S. et al. (Nat.Med.,1999) a on CAD we investigated 5 polymorphic sites (C-863A, C-857T, G-308A, found out that exogenic expression of PAI-1 in mice could prevent cardiac G-238A and A+1312G) in 234 patients (76,6% male, mean 50,3y) with rupture. Such differences in the PAI-1 alleles distribution among MI angiographically proven severe CAD and 161 healthy controls (63% male, patients, who were taken into analysis during different time period after mean 42,3 y). The patient group was analyzed regarding; age at 1.MI their MI, allow us to make a following conclusion; MI patients carrying the (<=or>=45y), survival time after 1.MI (<=or>=1y), number of affected ves- 4G allele of the PAI-1 gene and, accordingly, higher PAI-1 levels, could sels (1or more) and therapy (PTCAor ACVB). C-863A; we found a signifi- have more chances to get rid of such MI complication as a cardiac rupture. cantly increased frequency of A-allele carriers (dominant-model for mutant But this supposition requires more detailed prospective study concerning A-allele) in the patient group with 1-vessel disease compared to patients survival after MI. with 2 or more affected vessels (0,4 vs. 0,2; p<0,02). G-308A; the fre- quency of A-allele carriers (dominant-model for mutant A-allele) was sig- P1366.The Asn291Ser, Asp9Asn and Ser447Ter mutations in nificantly increased in the patient group with MI (0,297 vs. 0,197; p<0,05) the lipoprotein lipase gene in myocardial infarction survivors. compared with healthy controls. G-238A; MI patients, who had the 1.MI D. V. Demidova1, E. A. Bazhenova2, O. A. Berkovich2, V. I. Larionova1, E. <=45y, have significantly increased frequency of A-allele carriers (domi- V. Schlyakhto2, E. I. Schwartz3 nant-model for mutant A-allele) compared with MI patients, who had the 1Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- 1.MI >45y (0,162 vs. 0,049; p<0,02). A+1312G; the patient group with 1- tion; 2Pavlovs State Medical University; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- vessel disease had a significantly decreased frequency of mutant G-allele tion; 3Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute; St.Petersburg, Russian Feder- carriers (dominant-model for the mutant G-allele) compared to patients ation with 2 or more affected vessels (0,057 vs. 0,192; p<0,02). Our results sug- wolf@sp.ru gest an assoziation of genetic variants of TNF-a to the progress and sever- Prevalent mutations in the lipoprotein lipase gene (LPL) Asn291Ser and ity of CAD and should be considered in the genetic risk profile of CAD. Asp9Asn had been shown to be associated with increased plasma triglyc-Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 369 erides and decreased HDLcholesterol, whereas Ser447Ter on the contrary the Newfoundland population (0.6%) compared with that usually reported with decreased triglycerides and increased HDLcholesterol levels. Hence for the general Caucasian population (2%). Nevertheless, the FII 20210A these variations may affect cardiovascular risk. The aim of this study was mutation is associated with an increased risk for MI in the Newfoundland to investigate the frequency of these substitutions in the LPL gene in population. Based on the limited number of samples analyzed so far our myocardial infarction (MI) survivors (cases) and in the general population results have failed to support the FXIII 34Lallele as a strong protective fac- (controls) and to examine whether the carriers of Asn291Ser and Asp9Asn tor, or FVLas a risk factor for MI. are at an increased risk of MI. We examined 158 cases (males survived FXIII 34L FVL FII20210A after MI before 45 years) and 124 controls. The frequencies of mutations CF AF CF AF CF AF carriers in the cases were 3,8% for Asn291Ser, 0,6% for Asp9Asn and Patients (n 16,4% for Ser447Ter and in the controls 0,8%, 1,6% and 19,4%, respec- 46.2% 25.8% 4.6% 2.3% 3.2% 1.6% = 221) tively. All differences between the groups were not significant. Thus our Controls (n results did not confirm the role of investigated LPLgene mutations in mod- 43.5% 25.0% 4.5% 2.3% 0.6% 0.3% = 159) ulation of MI risk. P value N.S. N.S. N.S. N.S. <0.05 <0.05 OR (95%1.1(- 1.1(- 1.0(- 1.0 (-5.1 5.1 P1367. The association of the Q191R polymorphism of the CI) 2.1,4.4) 1.9,4.1) 17,19) 42,44) (4.1,6.1) (4.1,6.0) paraoxonase gene with myocardial infarction in young men (<45 years). Tab -1 (note; CF-carrier frequency; AF-allele frequency; N.S.-Not Significant) S. N. Pchelina1, N. Grudinina2, E. Bazhenova3, O. Berkovich3, D. Cherkashin3, S. Boitsov3, E. Schlyakhto3, V. Gorbunova1, E. Schwartz1 P1369.Cholesterol-lowering gene affects Lp(a) plasma levels 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; B. Kunz1, A. Lingenhel1, O. Eliav2, E. Leitersdorf2, G. Utermann1, H. G. 2Petersburg State Technical University; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- Kraft1 tion; 3Pavlovs State Medical University; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics; Innsbruck, Austria; tion 2Hadassah University Hospital; Jerusalem, Israel wolf@sp.ru Birgit.Kunz@uibk.ac.at Myocardial infarction (MI) remains the main cause of mortality and mor- Alocus for a cholesterol lowering gene (CLG) which lowers the cholesterol, bidity in developed countries. The role of genetic factors is thought to be LDL, and HDLlevels was recently identified on chromosome 13q in a fam- more likely in premature MI. We studied the Q191R and L54M polymor- ily with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH).( Am.J.Hum.Genet. 66;157- phisms of the paraoxonase (PON1) gene and the C677Tmutation of the 166,2000) Since Lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) is assembled from LDL and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene in 216 men survived apolipoprotein(a) (apo(a)) we here addressed the question whether the after MI at the age of 45 years. The age-marched control group consists of CLG affects also Lp(a) levels. Lp(a) concentration is extremely variable 157 unrelated healthy men from the same community. PON1 is a high-den- (>1000 fold differences among subject) and is controlled by a major gene, sity lipoprotein-associated enzyme capable of hydrolysing lipid peroxides. the structural gene for apo(a). We have previously shown that in addition C677TMTHFR is responsible for reduced MTHFR activity and associated FH causing mutations in the LDL-receptor gene have an influence on Lp(a) with increase in plasma homocysteine levels. The genotype distributions levels. We analysed Lp(a) levels and apo(a) phenotypes in the original and allele frequencies of the L54M PON1polymorphism and C677T family (65 individuals) in which the CLG had been detected. Lp(a) concen- MTHFR did not differ in patients compared to the controls. The genotype trations were measured by ELISAand apo(a) isoforms were specified by distributions of the Q191R PON1 polymorphism were significantly different immunoblotting. In addition to the K-IV polymorphism in the apo(a) gene between the groups (?2=8.85, df=2, P<0.01). The R191 allele (B allele) and the FH genotype also the CLG had a significant independent effect on was significantly increased in patients (?2=8.62, df=1, P<0.003). The odds Lp(a) levels. Employing ANOVAthe K-IV polymorphism explained 70% of ratio of MI for subjects homozygous for the R191 allele was 3.3 [95% CI; the variation of Lp(a) levels and the LDL-R and the CLG explained 17,3% 1.46-7.34] compared to the Q allele carriers. The paraoxonase B isotype and 6,6% of the residual variation, respectively. Therefore we conclude might not protect well against lipid oxidation, a major atherogenic pathway. that the cholesterol-lowering gene affects also Lp(a) levels. Thus, the RR genotype of the PON1 gene may be considered to be an independent risk factor for MI in men at the age of 45 years. P1370.Family based association study (qTDT) on lipid abnor- mality-candidate genes on an isolated, admixtured popula- P1368. Factor XIII V34L, factor V Leiden, and prothrombin tion. G20210A; relationship of common gene variants of blood Z. Han1, W. Li1, H. C. Simon2, D. Shmulewitz11, S. B. Auerbach3, T. Lehn- coagulation factors to risk of myocardial infarction. er1, J. Ott1, M. Stoffel1, J. M. Friedman1, J. L. Breslow1 H. Zheng1, C. Butt1, E. Randell2, M. Porter1, P. Parfrey3, Y. Xie2 1the Rockefeller University; New York, NY United States; 2Mathematical 1Discipline of Laboratory Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland; Genetics, MSKCC; New York, NY United States; 3HRSA,Department of St. Johns, NF Canada; 2Disciplines of Laboratory Medicine, Genetics, Health & Human Services; New York, NYUnited States Pediatrics, Memorial University of Newfoundland; St. Johns, NFCanada; hanz@rockvax.rockefeller.edu 3Discipline of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland; St. Johns, Traditional linkage analyses lack power and precision when applied to NFCanada complex traits such as cholesterol (chol) level. Association may be more yxie@morgan.ucs.mun.ca successful at identifying genes of small effect, but are often controversial Factor V leiden (FVL) and prothrombin 20210A(FII20210A) were suggest- due to problems such as population stratification (PS). We examined 8 ed as candidate risk factors for myocardial infarction (MI) based on an polymorphic sites, previously shown to be associated with abnormal lipid association with increased thrombotic tendency. Acommon polymorphism, and lipoprotein levels, on the Kosrae Island where the population is an FXIII V34Lhas recently been associated with a protect role against the admixture of native Kosraeans and Caucasian from late 19thcentury. The pathogenesis of MI. However, some studies have reported conflicting 1102 individuals collected in this study aggregate along a main branch of results. These inconsistencies may be due to a number of factors includ- the Kosraean pedigree. The traits studied included triglyceride (Tg), chol, ing the effect of gene-gene interactions, and the heterogeneous genetic apolipoprotein-AI (apoAI), apolipoprotein-AII (apoAII), apolipoprotein-B background of samples used in studies, and a relatively small number of (apoB), body mass index (BMI) and blood pressure (BP) levels. The 8 samples used for study. We are carrying out an extensive study of genetic markers were common polymorphisms in following candidate genes; apo prediposition in MI using a relative isolated Newfoundland population, AI-CIII-AIV gene cluster (apo CIII/SstI), apo AII (MspI), apo E (HhaI), cho- which has a relatively homogeneous genetic background. The goal of this lesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP/TaqIB), cholesterol 7?-hydroxylase study is to evaluate the possible roles of these three gene variants in the (CYP7/BsaI), hepatic lipase (HL/DraI) and microsomal triglyceride transfer pathogenesis of MI and examine any potential interaction that may occur protein (MTP/HhpI). The method we used was QTDTprogram by Abeca- between them. As part of a pilot study, we concurrently analyzed the preva- sis GR et al. When analyzed under a variance component model, the lence of FXIII V34L, FVL, FII 20210A, in approximately 221 patients with apoCIII/SstI was associated with Tg (p=0.0031), and apoE/HhaI was asso- MI and 154 normal controls from the Newfoundland population. The details ciated with apoB level (p=0.0004, 0.0070 and 0.0285 for allele E4, E3 and of the carrier frequency, allele frequency of these three gene variants in E2). There was suggestive evidence for linkage of apoAII/MspI to systolic both MI patients and controls are summarized in Tab-1. The incidence of BP (p=0.0497), and the linkage evidence was accounted for by adding FXIII 34Lhomozygotes in the MI patient group (5.4%) is lower than in nor- association to the model. Our study have the advantages of reducing like- mal controls (6.9%), but the difference is not statistically significant. No lihood of false-positive result from PS and increasing the chance of dis- homogygotes for FVL or FII 20210A were found. Conclusions; These covering relevant genetic factors due to a more homogenous environmen- results clearly show the prevalence of the FII 20210Aallele to be lower in tal effect.370 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance P1371.Predisposition to thrombotic complications in patients 2Russian Research Institute of Hematology and Transfusiology; St.Peters- with varicose veins. burg, Russian Federation; 3Sokolov Central Hospital; St.Petersburg, Russ- A. M. Sheydina1, O. L. Kolobova2, S. S. Baranovskaya1, V. I. Larionova2, ian Federation V. A. Kobilianskaya3, K. A. Papayan3, N. A. Bubnova4, L. P. Papayan3, E. wolf@sp.ru I. Schwartz1 Stroke and ischemic heart disease are the major causes of death and dis- 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; ability in industrial countries. Ischemic stroke is uncommon at young age 2Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy; St.Petersburg, Russian Federa- and large proportions of stroke are of undetermined etiology. We investi- tion; 3Russian Research Institute of Haematology and Transfusioligy; gated 111 relatively young individuals ( mean age 36.5, range 15 to 56 St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; 4Pavlovs State Medical University; years) with cerebral-vascular disease (CVD) and 94 subjects of control St.Petersburg, Russian Federation group was recruited from blood donors (mean age 41, range 24 to 60 oskar@mail.wplus.net years). Factor V Leiden mutation, 20210GApolymorphism in 3-untranslat- Despite intensive studies of predisposition to thrombotic complications in ed region of the prothrombin gene, G-455Ain the ?-fibrinogene gene, the patients with varicose veins is disputed.We studied 158 patients with vari- 4G/5G PAI-1 promoter polymorphism, C677T transition in the MTHFR cose veins without history of venous thrombosis (VV), 111 patients with gene, PlA1A2 polymorphism in GPIII gene were analyzed. 41 patients with vein thrombosis (VT), 50 patients with varicose veins, having complica- CVD had antiphospholipid antibodies (APA)  lupus anticoagulant or anti- tions of vein thrombosis (VV/VT) and 229 healthy controls. The C677T cardiolipin. Asignificant increase in the prevalence of the T677 allele of the MTHFR gene, the R506Q FV gene, the C1565TGPIIIa gene were deter- MTHFR gene in patients with cerebral-vascular disease carried antiphos- mined. The frequencies of the MTHFR gene TTgenotype among patients pholipid antibodies compared with subjects without APAwas found (allele with VV, VT, VV and VT, and control group were 5.7%, 10%, 16 %, 8.4%, frequency 36% and 22%,respectively, p=0.02, OR=1.9, CI 95% 1.2-3.3). A respectively. This mutation is not independent risk factor for VTdevelop- significant increase in the prevalence of the 5G allele of the PAI-1 gene in ment in Russians. However, this genotype is a significant risk factor in non-carried antiphospholipid antibodies CVD patients compared to con- patients with both VV and VT{OR2.1, CI [0.1924.01]}. The frequencies of trols was also found ( allele frequency 46% and 39%,respectively, p=0.036, the GPIIIa genes CT+TTgenotypes were 18.4%, 33.3%, 36%, 21.8% in OR=1.8, CI 95% 1.3-2.6). Platelet activation was increased in carriers of different groups, respectively. In patients with both VV and VTcomplica- APAcompared with non-carriers (p=0.01, OR=4.1, CI 95% 1.6-10.6) No tions was higher then in subjects with VT2.1, (CI [ 1.344.99]) and 1.79 other differences between patients and controls were observed. (CI [1.122.67]), accordingly. Although, the R506Q FV gene mutation is not a risk factor for thrombotic complications development in patients with VV P1374. A Familial Typical Migraine Susceptibility Region (6% vs 3.5% in control group). While this mutation has a strong associa- Localises to Chromosome 1q31 tion with VT(OR 4.99, CI [2.639.46]). Our results allow us to make a con- R. A. Lea1, R. A. Curtain1, S. Quinlan1, P. J. Brimage2, L. R. Griffiths1 clusion that varicose veins may be an additive factor for thrombotic com- 1Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Sciences, Griffith Universi- plications development in patients with other risk factors. ty; Gold Coast, Australia; 2Institute of Neurological Sciences, Prince of Wales Hospital; Sydney, Australia P1372. Genetic thrombophilic background in thalassemia r.lea@mailbox.gu.edu.au major patients Migraine is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Currently, the number of A. Iolascon1, S. Storelli1, B. Coppola1, G. Forni2, P. Cianciulli3, A. Piga4, A. genes involved in this common disorder and the mode of inheritance is Maggio5, S. Perrotta6, P. Giordano1, C. Magnano7, A. Mangiagli8, G. unclear. However, some insight has been gained from genetic studies into Sechi9, H. H. Li10, M. Devoto10 a very rare and severe subtype of migraine known as familial hemiplegic 1University of Bari; Bari, Italy; 2University of Genova; Genova, Italy; 3Uni- migraine (FHM). In this study, we took a family-based linkage and associ- versity of Rome; Rome, Italy; 4University of Torino; Torino, Italy; 5Ospedale ation approach to investigate the FHM susceptibility region for involvement Cervello; Palermo, Italy; 6University of Naples; Napoli, Italy; 7University of in typical migraine. Initial multipoint ALLEGRO analysis provided good evi- Catania; Catania, Italy; 8Ospedale di Siracusa; Siracusa, Italy; 9Ospedale dence for linkage of Chr1q31 markers to migraine in a large multigenera- Maggiore Milan; Milan, Italy; 10DuPont Child. Hospital; Wilmington, DE tional pedigree. The 1-LOD* unit support interval for suggestive linkage United States spanned ~18cM with a maximum allele sharing LOD* score of 2.04 a.iolascon@bioetaev.uniba.it obtained for marker D1S249, P= 0.001. Subsequent analysis of an addi- It is well known that the frequency of thrombosis is increased in the tha- tional sample of 82 independent pedigrees added support to the initial find- lassemia syndromes. Moreover a higher thrombotic risk has been ings with a maximum LOD* of 1.07 (P= 0.013). Combining LOD* scores described in patients with thalassemia intermedia, expecially in untrans- across families resulted in a maximum overall LOD* score of 3.11 at mark- fused cases. The underlying hypercoagulable state has been attributed to er D1S249 (P = 0.00007). Utilising the independent sample of 82 pedi- widely variable hemostatic alterations including platelet hiperaggregability, grees we also performed a Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) using particularly post splenectomy, and reduced levels of physiologic anticoag- the TRANSMITprogram. Results of this analysis indicated significant dis- ulants such as antithrombin III (ATIII) , protein C (PC) and protein S (PS) tortion of allele transmission at marker D1S205 (global X2(11) = 22.47, P The aim of this study was to investigate the genetic background of the = 0.021), located 8.2cM telomeric to D1S249. These positive linkage and thrombotic thalassemic patients. We recruited 33 thalassemia major association results will need further confirmation by independent affected with thrombosis (venous and arterial), and a group of age and sex researchers, but overall they provide good evidence for the existence of a matched non-thrombotic thalassemia major patients and healthy control typical migraine locus near these markers on Chr1q31 and support the subjects. After informed consent a sample of 5 ml of blood was obtained. idea of a common defective migraine gene within this genomic region. Molecular analysis of the factor V G1691Amutation (fV Leiden), the C677T mutation in the MTHFR gene, the prothrombin G20210Amutation in 3- P1375.Mapping of Migraine Genes to Chromosomes 1q, 19p untranslated region, the hypervariable region 4 of intron 7 of the factor VII and Xq. gene and the glycoprotein IIIa gene polymorphism was performed by L. R. Griffiths1, R. A. Lea1, R. P. Curtain1, P. J. Brimage2 means of PCR, restriction digestion and electrophoresis. Statistical analy- 1Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Science, Griffith University; sis was performed by contingency table analysis using Fishers exact test Gold Coast, Australia; 2Institute of Neurological Science, Prince of Wales or chi-square test as appropriate. Ap-value of 0.0001 was obained by com- Hospital; Sydney, Australia paring allele frequencies of the fVII polymorphism in thrombotic and non l.griffiths@mailbox.gu.edu.au thrombotic thalassemia patients, suggesting that the H7 allele is protective Migraine is a painful and debilitating neurovascular disorder affecting a against thrombosis in Cooley patients. All other p-values were > 0.05. Our large proportion (~12%) of Caucasian adults. The disease is genetically results demonstrate that no one of the investigated factors seems to play heterogeneous and the number of involved genes is currently not known. a statistical significant role in the trombophilia status of thalassemic Studies in our laboratory have utilised the complementary strategies of patients, with the exception of factor VII, which appear involved in throm- family-based linkage analysis and allelic association testing to localise bophilia status. The possible pathogenesis of this finding could be repre- genes involved in migraine. We have incorporated techniques that employ sented by modifying factor VII blood levels associeted with different haplo- both parametric and non-parametric statistical measures. To date we have types. localised three migraine susceptibility loci. One large family displayed sig- nificant excess allele sharing and cosegregation of chromosome 19p13 P1373.Inherited risk factors for cerebral vascular disease. markers, thus localising a migraine susceptibility near the CACNA1Agene O. V. Sirotkina1, S. Kapustin2, S. Lomakina3, A. Elchaninov3, L. Papayan2, implicated in familial hemiplegic migraine, a rare and severe subtype of V. Gorbunova1, E. Schwartz1 migraine. Further linkage analyses using families showing linkage to chro- 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; mosome 19, have localised a second major migraine gene locus to chro-Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 371 mosome Xq. Here, we report results of a recent fine mapping project that CACNA1A, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) present in exon 8 has refined this localisation to Xq24-28. As well, we provide new evidence gave a significant result in a case-control study. We confirmed this result implicating a third migraine susceptibility region on chromosome 1q31 that by HHRR and TDT, which excluded possible population stratification arte- may be partially interacting with the Xq region. Finally, we will also be pre- facts. We have investigated this association further using 3 novel SNPs senting new genome scan data using a large independent sample of 92 identified by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC). migraine affected families and some positive case-control results from can- These polymorphisms are in the introns adjacent to exon 8. Genotyping didate gene studies. Overall, our findings show that migraine is a polygenic was carried out in 230 IGE patients unselected for subtype and 238 con- disorder and suggest that defective genes on different chromosomes may trols. All three SNPs gave significant p values by genotype and by allele be interacting epistatically to influence this complex disorder. (p=0.0003, p=0.0015 and p=0.0104 respectively). These results provide confirmation of the initial result. To date none of the SNPs appear to be P1376.Identification of epilepsy susceptibility mutations in a functional and probably exert their effect by being in linkage disequilibrium regulatory subunit of a calcium-activated potassium channel with a putative functional mutation. Future work will involve screening gene (KCNMB3) on 3q26. CACNA1Afor mutations at greater distances from exon 8 to define the M. Z. Labuda1, A. Siren2, S. Bourgoin3, S. Hu4, H. McDermid4, D. DAgosti- region of interest more precisely and to identify functionally significant no5, E. Andermann5, A. Gambardella6, M. St-Hilaire3, H. Kwiecinski7, M. SNPs, which might identify the putative IGE susceptibility locus itself. Pandolfo3 Positions and Genotype Frequencies of CACNA1APolymorphisms in IGE 1CHUM, Notre Dame Hospital; Montreal, PQ Canada; 2Tampere Universi- Patients and Control Subjects ty Hospital; Tampere, Finland; 3CHUM; Montreal, Canada; 4University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada; 5Montreal Neurological Institute; Montre- P1378. Significant association of the tumor necrosis factor- al, PQ Canada; 6School of Medicine; Catanzaro, Italy; 7Medical University alpha and its receptor 2 genes with human narcolepsy of Warsaw; Warsaw, Poland H. Hohjoh1, N. Terada1, M. Kawashima1, Y. Honda2, K. Tokunaga1 mlabuda@total.net 1University of Tokyo; Tokyo, Japan; 2Seiwa Hospital; Tokyo, Japan Arecent study on 130 multiplex families with idiopathic generalized epilep- hohjohh@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp sy provided evidence for susceptibility genes on chromosomes 2q36, 3q26 Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder characterized by recurrent daytime sleep and 14q23. Prompted by this finding, we sequenced a gene on chromo- episodes and cataplexy, and also a multifactorial disorder, involving genet- some 3q26 that encodes a regulatory beta subunit (KCNMB3) of a calci- ic and environmental factors. Agenetic factor strongly associated with nar- um-activated potassium channel. We identified three variants in exon 3 of colepsy has been found in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II that gene; N161S, M226T, and a single base deletion introducing a stop region; the HLA-DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 haplotype predisposes to the codon which truncates the last 23 aminoacids, delA807. We compared the disorder. We have been searching for other genetic factors associated with distribution of these polymorphisms between a group of 115 individuals the disorder, and our previous study, where the tumor necrosis factor-alpha with idiopathic epilepsy and a group of 165 controls. The N161S polymor- (TNF-a) gene were investigated in narcoleptic patients and healthy con- phism was found on 8.3% of patients chromosomes (19/230) and on 4.9% trols, suggested that TNF-a could be a new susceptibility gene for human of control chromosomes 16/330). delA807 was found on 10.9% (25/230) of narcolepsy. In the present study, we focused on the tumor necrosis factor patients and 8.5% (28/330) on control chromosomes. This difference is receptor 2 gene (TNFR2) and examined if there were any associations of non-significant. However, the distribution of genotypes in the patients the receptor with human narcolepsy. The TNFR2 gene is mapped on chro- group was in departure from Hardy-Winberg equilibrium (p< 0.005) and dif- mosome 1p36 and possesses the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) ferred significantly from the control group; 10/115 epileptic patients were that participates in an amino acid substitution at position 196, i.e., gener- homozygotes or compound heterozygotes for the polymorphisms (three ates two alleles having methionine (196M) and arginine (196R). Using the N161S/N161S, one delA807/delA807, five N161S /delA807, one SNP(196M/R) as a marker, we investigated TNFR2 in narcoleptic patients M226T/delA807), compared to only 2/165 controls (one N161S/N161S and and healthy controls. Results indicate that the frequency of the TNFR2- one N161S/delA807). These patients had generalized as well as partial 196R allele in the patients was higher than that in the healthy controls. We epilepsy. We analyzed genetic association and linkage of these variants in further examined the relationship of the TNFR2 and TNF-a genes with the epileptic families by the transmission disequilibrium test (Tdt). N161S and susceptibility to human narcolepsy. Results suggested that the combina- delA807 were trasmitted significantly more often to affected offspring tion of TNFR2-196R and TNF-a(-857T) could increase predisposition to andthe wild type allele was trasmitted significantly more often to unaffect- the disorder. Accordingly, these observations suggest the possibility that ed offspring (P=0.004). This analysis could not be carried out for M226T TNF-a-signal transduction system could participate in the pathogenesis because this variant was found in only one family. We genotyped 33 indi- and pathophysiology of human narcolepsy. Finally, we add that viduals in five families segregating both N161S and delA807. We detected DRB1*1502 appears to have a negative association with narcolepsy, lead- 14 homozygotes or compound heterozygotes, 11 of which have epilepsy. ing to the possibility that the haplotype carrying DRB1*1502 confers pro- Among the 19 remaining subjects, 15 were heterozygotes (two affected) tection against human narcolepsy. and four wild type homozygotes (none affected). KCNMB3, though expressed at a low level in the brain, may play a role in the regulation of P1379. Further Studies on Association Studies Between neuronal excitability. It accelerates the opening of a calcium-activated OPRM1 and IGE potassium channel in response to an increase of intracellular calcium, facil- H. J. Wilkie1, B. Chioza1, D. McCormick2, L. Nashef2, P. Asherson1, A. J. itating repolarization after sustained firing. If the variants we identified Makoff1 affect its function, KCNMB3 may be a suceptibility gene that contributes to 1Institute of Psychiatry; London, United Kingdom; 2Kent and Canterbury the multifactorial etiology underlying epilepsy. Hospital; Canterbury, United Kingdom h.goodwin@iop.kcl.ac.uk P1377. An Association Study Of 3 Novel Single Nucleotide Animal studies have provided compelling evidence for a role for opioid Polymorphisms In The Calcium Channel Gene CACNA1AAnd receptors in idiopathic generalised epilepsy (IGE), and in particular Idiopathic Generalised Epilepsy absence epilepsy. The WAG/Rij strain of rats exhibits both non-convulsive B. A. Chioza1, H. J. Wilkie1, B. Suarez-Merino2, D. McCormick3, J. Blow- epileptic seizures similar to absences and a high density of mu-opioid er3, L. Nashef3, P. Asherson1, A. J. Makoff1 receptors in the thalamic nuclei, striatum and cortex. The mu-opioid recep- 1Institute of Psychiatry; London, United Kingdom; 2University College Lon- tor can decrease neuronal excitability by activating G-protein coupled don; London, United Kingdom; 3Kent & Canterbury Hospital; Canterbury, inwardly rectifying potassium channels. A number of polymorphisms in United Kingdom OPRM1 have been previously detected through mutation screening. An A spbcaja@iop.kcl.ac.uk to G substitution at position 118 in exon 1 results in the replacement of The CACNA1Agene encodes the main pore-forming ?1Asubunit of P/Q- asparagine by aspartic acid (position 40). Arecent study reported associ- type voltage-gated calcium channels. These channels are expressed in a ation between the Asp40 allele and an idiopathic absence epilepsy sample large variety of neurones, where they have important roles in the control of comprised of childhood and juvenile absence epilepsies (p=0.019). We membrane excitability, neurotransmitter release and gene expression. undertook this study in order to replicate these findings. Genotyping was Mutations in the mouse homologue of this gene are responsible for phe- performed on 218 probands and 200 controls for A118G and a less fre- notypes mainly comprising absence type epileptic seizures and ataxia in quent polymorphism, C17T. Only A118G was found to be significant the models tottering and leaner. In humans, mutations are involved in the (p=0.00028). Within family studies were performed for 104 probands and pathogenesis of episodic ataxia 2 (EA-2), spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 both parents. Both HHRR and ETDTanalysis gave a significant difference (SPA6), familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM). In a previous association between transmitted and untransmitted alleles (p=0.006 and p=0.0087 study for idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) we conducted with respectively). Mutation screening by denaturing high performance liquid372 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance chromatography (dHPLC) has so far detected a number of mutations. type or allele frequencies reveal an association with colorectal cancer or These results confirm and improve upon the earlier findings. To date, it is IBD. Methods; DNAfrom 124 IBD patients (68 Crohns disease, 56 ulcer- unclear how the Asp40 allele is involved in the generation of absence ative colitis), 33 colon cancer patients and 77 controls were PCR amplified seizures. We will be genotyping polymorphisms detected by dHPLC in using primers specific for the RFLPsite in intron 1 of TNF-beta. This gen- exonic and intronic regions of OPRM1 soon. erated a 782bp product, which was digested with Nco1 and gel elec- trophoresed. All patients were Caucasians from a predominantly rural P1380. Early Onset Familial Parkinsons Disease and Parkin region. Results. The digest produced two alleles and three genotypes. Sta- Gene Mutations tistical analysis of the allele and genotype frequencies revealed a differ- A. Parsian1, B. Racette2, R. Sinha1, J. S. Perlmutter2 ence in the TNFB1/B1 genotype frequency between cancer and control 1University of Louisville; Louisville, KYUnited States; 2Washington Univer- patient populations (p=0.034). There were no significant differences sity; St. Louis, MO United States between IBD patient groups and controls. Conclusions; The TNF-beta parsian@louisville.edu intron 1 polymorphism TNFB1/B1 genotype was more common in cancer Idiopathic Parkinsons disease (PD) is an age dependent, neurodegenera- patients than in controls, confirming results reported by Park et al (1998). tive condition. Although it is predominantly a sporadic disease, 20-25% of It does not appear to be related to ulcerative colitis or Crohns disease, cases are familial suggesting a complex mode of inheritance. a-Synuclein supporting Hampe et al (1999). and ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase genes have been implicated in a few families with autosomal dominant form of PD. In addition, mutations in P1383.Genome wide scan in celiac disease - confirmation of parkin gene have been identified as cause of autosomal recessive juvenile previous results, strengthens the hope for positional cloning parkinsonism. Recently, Lucking et al., (2000) reported that 49% of their in complex diseases. autosomal recessive PD families with early onset (7 to 58 years) had . Torinsson Naluai1, S. Nilsson2, L. Samuelsson1, A. H. Gudjnsdttir3, parkin mutations. In the isolated PD group, 77% of those with age of onset H. Ascher3, J. Ek4, B. Hallberg1, B. Kristiansson3, T. Martinsson1, O. Ner- less than 20 and 3% with age of onset less than 30 years had mutations in man2, L. M. Sollid5, J. Wahlstrm1 the parkin gene. In order to determine the role of mutations in parkin gene 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics; Gteborg, Sweden; 2Chalmers University of in our familial PD sample, we screened a sample of 161 patients with a Technology; Gteborg, Sweden; 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Queen Silvia Chil- positive family history for PD and 108 matched normal controls with muta- drens Hospital; Gteborg, Sweden; 4Dept.; Drammen, Norway; 5Institute tions in exons 4, 6, 7, and 8. The PD sample was divided into two groups of Immunology, Rikshospitalet; Oslo, Norway based on the age of onset of 40 years. None of the reported mutations in asa.torinsson@sahlgrenska.se parkin gene was detected in our PD subgroups or normal controls. We Celiac disease(CD) is a common chronic inflammatory disorder of the concluded that parkin gene dose not play a role in the development of early small intestine. In fact, in Sweden and probably in the entire western world, onset familial PD in our sample. it is the third most common chronic disorder among children. CD is asso- ciated to HLAbut is strongly influenced by genetic factors other than the P1381. Detection of heterozygous exon deletions in a large HLA-complex. We have performed a genome-wide scan in CD. Based on family with parkinsonism using the LightCycler the relatively high risk of siblings to develop CD, also in comparison with K. Hedrich1, P. P. Pramstaller2, C. Eskelson1, B. Kis1, M. Kann1, J. Gar- other autoimmune and chronic inflammatory disorders, we believe that rels1, P. Vieregge1, L. J. Ozelius3, P. L. Kramer4, E. Schwinger1, C. Klein1 genome-wide screening is a very promising way to find important genes 1Medizinische Universitaet zu Luebeck; Luebeck, Germany; 2Region- that predispose individuals to CD. We investigated familiar segregation at alkrankenhaus Bozen; Bolzano, Italy; 3Albert Einstein College of Medicine; 400 microsatellite markers in 108 well defined Swedish and Norwegian Bronx, NYUnited States; 4Oregon Health Sciences University; Portland, families. We found several interesting regions. Strikingly, our best results OR United States coincide with earlier findings in independent families! This gives strong evi- hedrich_k@neuro.mu-luebeck.de dence that these regions are indeed true susceptibility regions in CD. Autosomal recessive parkinsonism is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder which is clinically similar to idiopathic Parkinsons disease but P1384. Localization of a susceptibility gene for atopic der- associated with additional neurological signs. We studied a large family matitis to chromosome 3q21 (194 members) from South Tyrol (Northern Italy) with parkinsonism in three Y. A. Lee1,2, U. Wahn2, R. Kehrt2, L. Tarani3, L. Businco3, D. Gustafsson4, successive generations (definitely affected; n=13, possibly affected; n=12) F. Andersson4, A. P. Oranje5, A. Wolkertstorfer5, A. von Berg6, U. Hoff- and other movement disorders, such as isolated postural and kinetic upper mann7, W. Kster8, T. Wienker9, F. Rschendorf1,9, A. Reis1 limb tremor (n=10) and restless legs syndrome (RLS; n=14). In the pater- 1Gene Mapping Center, Max-Delbrck-Center; Berlin, Germany; 2Dept. of nal branch, parkinsonism in four affected siblings was shown to be due to Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Humboldt-University; Berlin, Ger- a compound heterozygous mutation previously reported as DC1 (del Ex1- many; 3Dept. of Pediatrics, University La Sapienza; Rome, Italy; 4Dept. of 7) and DC2 (del1072), respectively, while the origin of parkinsonism in the Pediatrics, rebro Medical Center Hospital; rebro, Sweden; 5Dept. of maternal branch was unknown. By haplotype analysis, linkage to loci for Dermatology and Venereology, University Hospital; Rotterdam, The parkinsonism on 4p, 4q and 2p, as well as to the GCH1 gene could be Netherlands; 6Dept. of Pediatrics, Marienhospital; Wesel, Germany; 7Dept. excluded for both parkinsonism and RLS. However, incompatibilities at the of Pediatrics, Technical University; Munich, Germany; 8TOMESA-Fachk- markers D6S411 and D6S305 (located in intron 7 of parkin) suggested linik; Bad Salzschlirf, Germany; 9Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics hemizygosity and thus a partial deletion of one allele of parkin. By quanti- and Epidemiology; Bonn, Germany tative PCR using the LightCycler (Roche), we identified a heterozygous yolee@mdc-berlin.de deletion of exon 7 and in additon, redefined the DC1 mutation to be a dele- Atopic dermatitis (eczema) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with tion of exon 7 only. For this analysis we developed a new method of quan- onset mainly in early childhood. It is commonly the initial clinical manifes- titative duplex PCR, involving PCR of all 12 exons of parkin and coamplifi- tation of allergic disease, often preceding the onset of respiratory allergies. cation of beta globin as internal standard. Taken together, we present a Along with asthma and allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis is an important new and accurate method to detect heterozygous exon deletions in parkin. manifestation of atopy that is characterized by the formation of allergy anti- Patients with parkinsonism should be tested for the presence of this kind bodies (IgE) to environmental allergens. In the developed countries, the of mutations. prevalence of atopic dermatitis is approximately 15% with a steady increase over the past decades. Genetic and environmental factors inter- P1382.Associtions Between Tnf Beta, Colorectal Cancer And act to determine disease susceptibility and expression. Family and twin Inflammatory Bowel Disease studies indicate that the genetic contribution is substantial and previous M. R. Eichenberger, R. Lewis, S. Plymale, S. Galandiuk studies reported associations of atopic dermatitis with several candidate University of Louisville; Louisville, KYUnited States genes. To identify susceptibility loci for atopic dermatitis, we ascertained mreich01@athena.louisville.edu 199 families of European origin with at least two affected siblings based on Background; Ulcerative colitis and Crohns disease are disorders that established diagnostic criteria. A genome-wide linkage study revealed affect 1 million Americans and are collectively referred to as inflammatory highly significant evidence for linkage on chromosome 3q21 (Zall=4.31, bowel disease (IBD). In many patients, it is difficult to distinguish which dis- P=8,42x10-6). Moreover, this locus provided significant evidence for link- ease is present and both are associated with increased risk of cancer. age of allergic sensitisation under the assumption of paternal imprinting Tumor necrosis factor beta (TNF-beta)is involved in rapid host response (hlod=3.71, a=44%) further supporting the presence of an atopy gene in and has been linked to IBD. Therefore, polymorphisms in this gene may be this region. This locus has not previously been noted in genome wide stud- associated with IBD or cancer. ANco1 RFLPin intron 1 of the TNF-beta ies investigating asthma or other atopic phenotypes. Our findings suggest gene, is such a site. The goal of this study was to determine whether geno- that distinct genetic factors contribute to susceptibility to atopic dermatitisPosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 373 and that the study of this disease opens new avenues to dissect the genet- morphic microsatellite markers covering the region from marker D19S216 ics of atopy. to D19S412 were genotyped. To test for allelic association, we performed the family based association test (FBAT) and the classical transmission/ P1385.Studies on linkage and association of asthma with the disequilibrium test (TDT). Two regions of interest were identified. The first Interleukin 4-Receptor alpha chain gene (IL-4Ra) in Sardinian region comprises about 1.5 cM and is defined by the three closely linked population. markers D19S928 (p=0.0269); D19S414 (p=0.0027); D19S871 G. Sole1, G. Pilia1, L. Balaci2, D. Altea2, C. Maganucco2, N. Olla1, C. (p=0.0114), and by the adjacent D19S431 (p=0.0046). The second region Spada2, M. Fattori2, S. Rassu2, V. Brancolini3, M. Devoto3, A. Cao1 is defined by D19S922 (p=0.0260), by D19S391 (p=0.0027), and by 1Istituto di Ricerca sulle Talassemie ed Anemie Mediterranee, CNR; D19S916 (p=0.0094) and extends about 4.8 cM. P-values were corrected Cagliari, Italy; 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Uni- for multiple testing. We conclude that this LD profile confirms the existence versit di Cagliari; Cagliari, Italy; 3Dipartimento di Oncologia, Biologia e of at least one psoriasis susceptibility locus in the newly defined region on Genetica, Universit di Genova; Genova, Italy chromosome 19. This locus maps between 51.7 cM and 53.2 cM from G.Sole@irtam.ca.cnr.it pTEL (nucleotide coordinates 36.9 Mb to 40.2 Mb). Asecond region of Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of bronchial epithelium and sub- interest spanning from 26 cM to 30.8 cM also displays significant LD. Iden- mucosa and it is one of the most common chronic diseases, affecting 2-4% tification of this locus will require genotyping of more densely spaced mark- of the population. It is a complex disease with multiple genetic and envi- ers iin order to further narrow this candidate gene region with positional ronmental determinants. Several studies have shown linkage or associa- cloning methods. tion of atopic asthma and IgE levels to the IL-4Ra gene in ethnically diverse populations, but not in all populations. The aim of this study was to P1388. Refinement of the PSORS4 psoriasis susceptibility determine the involvement of the IL-4Ra gene in the genetic determination locus on chromosome 1q21 of asthma and/or the production of IgE in Sardinian population, that is a G. Novelli1, F. Capon1, S. Semprini1, S. Chimenti1, G. Fabrizi2, G. Zam- isolated founder population. We studied the ILE50VALvariant and in addi- bruno3, C. Carcassi4, R. Mingarelli5, B. Dallapiccola5 tion we looked for and genotyped 3 highly polymorphic microsatellite mark- 1Tor Vergata University of Rome; Rome, Italy; 2Catholic University of ers of the IL-4Ra gene, in a sample of 121 affected sib-pairs belonging to Rome; Rome, Italy; 3IDI IRCCS; Rome, Italy; 4University of Cagliari; 110 families of Sardinian ancestry. All the subjects were phenotyped for Cagliari, Italy; 5CSS Mendel Institute; Rome, Italy asthma, atopy and total serum IgE. We performed a linkage analysis by novelli@med.uniroma2.it affected sib-pair method and an association study by the TDT(Transmis- Psoriasis is a chronic skin disorder affecting approximately 2% of the Cau- sion disequilibrium test), using Genehunter 2.0 program. Linkage analysis casian population. Family clustering of the disease is well established and indicated no significant increase in allele sharing for asthma, atopy or IgE non-parametric linkage analyses have mapped disease susceptibility loci levels. No allele transmission disequilibrium was observed and neither par- on chromosomes 6p (PSORS1) and 17q (PSORS2). Non confirmed evi- ticular 3 point haplotype was associated with any phenotype. We conclude dence for linkage is also available for chromosomes 2q 3q, 4q (PSORS3), from our data that IL-4Ra are unlikely to exert a major effect on the induc- 8q, 16q and 20p. We mapped an additional susceptibility locus on chro- tion of the asthmatic phenotype in Sardinian population. mosome 1q21 (PSORS4). In this study, we have carried out a linkage dis- equilibrium analysis, in order to achieve a finer localization. We recruited P1386. Searching for Candidate Genes for Asthma using 79 triads from continental Italy and typed them at five loci spanning the 1.6 Combined Linkage and Segregation Analysis Mb region generating the highest multipoint LOD scores in our previous N. MANIATIS1, C. Lonjou2, A. Collins2 linkage study. We observed significant evidence for association with 1University of Southampton; Southampton S016 6YD, United Kingdom; D1S2346 marker (p = 0.004). Results consistent with this data were 2University of Southampton; Southampton, United Kingdom obtained by typing an independent sample that included 28 patients and nikmaniatis@hotmail.com 56 controls, originating from Sardinia. In fact, p values of 0.02 were Segregation analysis involves fitting a general model to the inheritance observed with both D1S2346 and D1S2715 markers. We sought further pattern of a trait. This method is used for parametric linkage analysis where confirmation of our results by typing both samples with two novel markers the mode of inheritance must be specified exactly. Several non-parametric (140J1C and 140J1D) flanking D1S2346. Marker 140J1D generated a p methods, however, have been proposed for linkage analysis of complex value of 0.003 in the continental Italy sample where a D1S2346/140J1D traits with unknown mode of inheritance and therefore comparison of para- haplotype was found with a higher frequency among patients chromo- metric and nonparametric methods to search for candidate genes affecting somes. Altogether our data indicate that the 1q21 susceptibility gene may asthma form the core of this study. Data on chromosome 5 from the Con- be localized in the genomic interval spanned by D1S2346 and 140J1D. sortium on Asthma Genetics (COAG) were studied. Various analyses of This is the first evidence supporting the refinement of a non-HLApsoriasis individuals affected with asthma were compared. This study is ideal for susceptibility locus. comparison in that it has been previously analysed by COAG using non- parametric alternatives. Three phenotypes were used; a) affection dichoto- P1389.Ahaplotype-based case-control approach to mapping my, where both normal and affected sibs were included in the analysis; b) multiple sclerosis susceptibility genes in the Tasmanian pop- analysis of affection status, which was based on affected sibs only and c) ulation analysis with severity and diathesis, which were defined as a polychotomy J. P. Rubio1, M. Bahlo1, H. Butzkueven1, J. Dickinson2, T. Dwyer2, P. or a quantitative trait within affected or normal individuals, respectively. Groom2, T. J. Kilpatrick1, M. Ring2, M. Sale2, R. Simmons3, T. P. Speed1, I. Single-point analyses were performed using the COMDS program (com- van der Mei2, R. Williamson4, S. J. Foote1 bined segregation and linkage analysis with diathesis and severity). Anum- 1The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Melbourne, Aus- ber of models were employed throughout the study but emphasis was tralia; 2The Menzies Centre for Population Health Research; Hobart, Aus- given to the additive single and two locus models. There is evidence to tralia; 3The Australian National Register of Multiple Sclerosis Families; suggest that certain classes of parametric models are useful for linkage Canberra, Australia; 4The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute; Mel- analysis of complex traits. bourne, Australia rubio@wehi.edu.au P1387.Linkage disequilibrium mapping of the novel psoriasis Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common autoimmune disorder of the susceptibility region on chromosome 19 nervous system. Its onset is usually in young adulthood, and it affects A. Reis1, P. Hensen2, C. Windemuth3, F. Rschendorf3, G. Nrnberg4, A. mainly Caucasians of North European origin. Previous studies have iden- Stadelmann2, V. Hoppe2, D. Fennecker2, M. Stnder5, M. Schmitt- tified a number of suggestive linkages with association between MS and Egenolf6, T. Wienker3, H. Traupe2 human leukocyte antigen (HLA) polymorphisms on chromosome 6p21, 1Inst. of Human Genetics; Erlangen, Germany; 2Dept. of Dermatology; thus far, the only consistently replicated finding. Genetically isolated popu- Mnster, Germany; 3Inst. of Med. Biometry; Bonn, Germany; 4Max-Del- lations such as Finland, Iceland and Sardinia offer attractive environments brck-Center; Berlin, Germany; 5Fachklinik; Bad Bentheim, Germany; for the study of complex diseases. There is good evidence to suggest that 6Dept. of Dermatology; Trondheim, Norway the Tasmanian population is also a genetic isolate, which is more homo- reis@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de geneous than mainland Australia. Ahaplotype-based case-control strategy Recently we identified a novel psoriasis susceptibility region on chromo- has been developed to search genome-wide for shared MS susceptibility some 19 by genome-wide linkage analysis. To further evaluate the role of genes in people of Tasmanian ancestry. Our recruitment strategy has the susceptibility gene(s) in this region, we performed linkage disequilibri- focussed on identifying individuals (cases and controls) who are descen- um (LD) studies using densely spaced DNAmarkers. We recruited a com- dants of the initial settlers, from the early to mid 1800s. To date, we have pletely new sample of 199 nuclear psoriasis families (trio-design). 49 poly- collected samples for 180 MS patients, 100 controls and a close constel-374 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance lation of relatives for both. Theoretically, the expected size of a shared seg- course of the disease, at a later stage plasma levels of insulin fall and can ment between two people in such a young population is 25 centimorgans no longer compensate for the insulin resistance. (cM), with a standard deviation of 18 cM. Therefore, we are performing a Specific mutations have been identified that cause diabetes, e.g., muta- genome-wide search at a resolution of 5 cM to detect shared chromoso- tions in the insulin receptor, mutations that decrease the number of recep- mal regions inherited identical-by-descent in distantly related MS patients tors, mutations in the insulin gene and many others. The aim of this proj- using 811 genetic markers from the ABI PRISM HD-5 set. In addition, we ect is to find genes involved in the pathogenesis of NIDDM by gene-profil- are attempting to replicate findings for some regions of suggestive linkage ing of tissue samples from patients and controls with microarrays. In a sec- identified previously using more densely spaced markers. ond step the contribution of allegedly critical genes to the disease will be validated on all patients. In a first phase of this project, methods for the rep- P1390.Analysis of the NRAMP1 gene implicated in iron trans- resentative amplification of mRNAisolated from various tissues were com- port; association with multiple sclerosis and age effects pared. To this end, a one-step RTPCR protocol was found fit to amplify N. de Villiers, L. du Plessis, R. Rooney, C. Bouwens, J. Carr, M. Kotze mRNAfrom sparse tissue samples. Subsequently, minute samples of adi- University of Stellenbosch; Tygerberg, South Africa pose tissue will be collected during surgery for RNAextraction and gene- jnpdv@gerga.sun.ac.za expression profiles be investigated with micro-arrays. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is believed to be an autoimmune process occurring in genetically susceptible individuals after an appropriate environmental P1393.An association between NIDDM and GAAtrinucleotide exposure. We have exploited the homogeneous Afrikaner population of repeat polymorphism in the X25/frataxin (Fridreichs ataxia) European ancestry to investigate the likelihood that iron dysregulation, in gene in Russia association with infectious and/or autoimmune disease susceptibility, may M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, O. V. Milosserdova1, M. Balabolkin2 underlie the MS phenotype in a subgroup of patients. The functional Z- 1Institute of Molecular Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Institute of DNA forming repeat polymorphism of the natural resistance-associated Endocrinology; Moscow, Russian Federation macrophage protein-1 (NRAMP1) gene was analyzed in 104 patients diag- shadrina@img.ras.ru nosed with MS and 522 Caucasian controls. Afamily-based control group Multiple and different genetic defects may be associated with the develop- consisting of 32 parental alleles not transmitted to MS offspring was addi- ment of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). Friedreichs tionally studied to exclude the likelihood of population substructures. Sta- ataxia (FA) is an autosomal recessively inherited neurologic disease asso- tistically significant differences in allelic distribution were observed ciated with a high prevalence of diabetes. This disease is caused by the between the patient and control samples drawn from the same population decreased expression of a mitochondrial protein, frataxin, encoded by the (P<0.01). Evidence is furthermore provided that alleles considered to be X25 gene. Avariable expansion of a GAArepeats is present in the fist detrimental in relation to autoimmune disease susceptibility may be main- intron of the X25 gene. Long repeats (> 66 repeats) are present in patients tained in the population as a consequence of improved survival to repro- with Friedreichs ataxia, while a shot repeats may be associated with ductive age following infectious disease challenge. Although it remains to NIDDM. Using a polymerase chain reaction-based assay, We evaluated be determined whether the disease phenotype in MS patients with allele 5 expansions of the triplet repeat in the X25 gene in two populations; control of the NRAMP1 promoter polymorphism is directly related to dysregulation random group and NIDDM patients group from Russia. We found 11 allel- of iron or modified susceptibility to viral infection and/or autoimmunity, a ic variants with a variable number GAArepeats ( from 1 to 15 repeats). Suf- combination of these processes most likely underlie the disease pheno- ficient differences in distribution of alleles between control population and type in these patients. In view of the emerging role of polymorphic variants patients were observed (X2=37,14, p<0,0001). A frequency allele con- in complex diseases and minimizing of possible confounding factors in this tained 4 GAArepeats, especially, was distinguished between control sub- association study, we conclude that allelic variation in the NRAMP1 pro- jects (69%) and patients (44%). We conclude that the X25/frataxine GAA moter may contribute significantly to MS susceptibility in the South African polymorphism, probably, is associated with the pathogenesis of NIDDM in Caucasian population. Russia. P1391.Mapping the murine hindshaker (hsh) gene locus; the P1394. Two-locus linkage-allelic association model using story so far. grade-of-membership analysis; IDDM recurrence risk in mul- D. A. Vouyiouklis, H. King, D. Kirkham, J. T. Anderson, S. A. Karim, K. J. tiplex families. Johnson, I. R. Griffiths E. H. Corder1, D. K. Madsen1, L. L. Field2 University of Glasgow; Glasgow, United Kingdom 1Duke University; Durham, NC United States; 2University of British Colom- D.Vouyioukus@vet.gla.ac.uk bia; Vancouver, BC Canada Spontaneous myelination-defective mutants may help identify individual beth@cds.duke.edu genes involved in myelination or disorders affecting myelin. The autosomal Recurrence risk was investigated for 578 sibling pairs derived from multi- recessive hsh mouse displays hindquarter and tail tremors during the peri- plex IDDM families (Field et al., 1996) using a pattern recognition approach od of maximum CNS myelination (P5-P20), that largely disappear in the called grade of membership analysis. The genetic information used to con- adult. Ultrastructural examination showed hypo-myelination that was most struct model-based groups included 1) the number of alleles shared IBD pronounced in the spinal cord and brain stem . This has implications for the within sib pairs for each of 8 markers spanning the IDDM11 locus on chro- regional control of myelination by local oligodendrocytes, by comparison mosome 14, 2) IBD sharing for the HLA-DQ locus, and 3) the specific with their brain hemisphere counterparts. Initial experiments identified the shared HLA-DQ alleles. Sex and disease status for the pair (AA; both chromosomes which harbour the hsh gene and a major modifying locus. affected; AU; discordant) were also input into the model. Six latent groups Fine mapping originally placed the hsh mutation at an interval of 2.8cM. best represented the data. Each variable was highly informative. The Recent experiments have reduced this interval to 1.2cm, with the mutation groups had distinct profiles of model-based frequencies for the input vari- positioned up-stream of a calcium-binding protein gene cluster. At least two ables. Group 1; male AApairs, no IDDM11 region sharing, both HLA-DQ genes present within this family are up-regulated at the mRNAtranscrip- alleles shared IBD (usually 4-4, 3-3, or 1-3), and 18% prevalence. Group tion level when the hsh phenotype is most strongly expressed (P20), which 2; no recurrence risk or sharing for either loci. Groups 3 and 4; exactly one may suggest that the hsh gene is involved in their regulation. Current IDDM11 region allele shared from the mother or father, respectively, recur- experiments are aimed at generating novel polymorphic markers within the rence risks of 34% and 50%, and similar prevalences of 20%. Group 5; area of interest, in order to identify putative candidate genes. female AApairs most of whom shared the high-risk HLA-DQ 3-4 haplotype (6% prevalence). Group 6; complete IDDM11 region IBD sharing and 80% P1392.Genetics of Non-Insulin-Dependent-Diabetes mellitus recurrence (26% prevalence). Seventy-six pairs (13%) belonged entirely to M. L. Hpler1, T. Egger1, K. Huber2, K. Bauer2, R. Schrder3, K. H. Tragl3 a single group. The remainder divided membership. We conclude that the 1Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut fr Altersforschung; Vienna, Austria; 2Ludwig distinct genetic patterns for the IDDM11 and HLA-DQ loci predict recur- Boltzmann-Institut fr Molekulargenetische Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, rence risk for IDDM in multiplex families. Donauspital, SMZ-Ost; Vienna, Austria; 3Intitut fr Mikrobiologie und Genetik, Universitt Wien; Vienna, Austria P1395.Leptin - is it a marker for obesity in Saudis? Klaus.Huber@SMZ.magwien.gv.at A. S. Warsy1, M. A. F. El-Hazmi2 Non Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM) is one of the most fre- 1College of Science, King Saud University; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 2College quent diseases and patient numbers are rising worldwide. While the of Medicine, King Saud University; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia molecular basis of the common form of NIDDM has not been elucidated, it aswarsy@ksu.edu.sa is thought to result from genetic defects that cause both insulin resistance Leptin, the protein product of the obesity(OB) gene, is produced by the adi- and insulin deficiency. Insulin resistance can be demonstrated early in the pose tissues and plays an important role in regulation of body weight andPosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 375 energy expenditure through CNS feedback mechanisms. Levels of leptin P1398.Association with polycystic ovary syndrome and func- are elevated in patients with obesity and this is believed to result from lep- tional analysis of the follicle stimulating hormone receptor tin resistance. We conducted a Nation wide study to determine the preva- (FSHR) gene G2039Apolymorphic site lence of obesity in Saudi Arabia and screened 14805 adult males and S. K. Sahota, C. Bell, I. Huhtaniemi, N. E. Haites female Saudis. Using Body Mass Index (BMI) values the individuals were University of Aberdeen; Aberdeen, United Kingdom classified as overweight( BMI; 25-29.9), obese (BMI >30) and normal (BMI s.sahota@abdn.ac.uk <25). The overall prevalence of overweight and obesity in the Saudi males Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder affect- was 27.23% and 13.0% and in Saudi females was 25.20% and 20.3%, ing up to 10% of women of a reproductive age characterised by polycystic respectively. We then conducted a study of serum leptin level, plasma ovaries, hyperandrogenism and chronic anovulation. Consequently, it is a lipids (cholesterol and triglycerides) and glucose on randomly selected 173 major cause of infertility. The heterogeneity of symptoms presented has individuals. 75 of these were obese, 49 were overweight and the rest were contributed to an elusive genetic aetiology. We performed a case-control normal weight individuals. Serum leptin was estimated by RIA and the study showing that the AAgenotype of the G2039AFSHR gene polymor- other parameters on autoanalyser. The serum leptin was significantly high- phism confers a reduced risk of PCOS (OR = 0.04;P< 0.05) in the control er in the obese group compared to the non obese both in the males and population (n=75) in comparison to PCOS women (n=29). This concurs females(p<.001). Asignificant correlation was obtained with BMI. However with a recent study suggesting that women with the 2039G FSHR allele no correlation could be established with age, plasma cholesterol, triglyc- require higher ampoules of FSH during ovarian stimulation therapy with erides and blood glucose. This paper will present a comprehensive cover- comparison to those with the 2039AFSHR allele. We are currently per- age of leptin functions, its genetics and its role in obesity in Saudis. forming expression studies of each of the FSHR alleles (2039A& 2039G) in COS-7 cells in order to identify functional effects of the polymorphic P1396. A balanced translocation t(4;15) associated with locus on ligand-binding receptor-mediated second messenger signalling. severe obesity The identification of genes involved in the pathogenesis of PCOS will J. Klar1, C. Rehnman2, G. Annren1, N. Dahl1 assist in the accurate diagnosis of this disorder and improve clinical man- 1Department of Genetics and Pathology; Uppsala, Sweden; 2rebro agement of these patients, with particular significance in fertility treatment. Regional Hospital; rebro, Sweden joakim.klar@genpat.uu.se P1399. A Full Genome Screening in a large Tunisian family Obesity is a highly prevalent, multigenic trait that predicts increased mor- affected with Thyroid Autoimmune Disorders bidity and mortality and contributes to many health problems in the West- H. Ayadi1, A. Maalej1, H. Makni1, F. Ayadi1, M. Bellassoued1, J. Jouida2, N. ern society. Bougacha1, M. Abid1 We have identified a family in which a balanced reciprocal translocation 1Facult de Mdecine; Sfax, Tunisia; 2Dispensaire Bir Elhfa; SidiBouzid, between chromosome 4 and 15 is associated with severe obesity. Chro- Tunisia mosome analysis revealed the translocation in the mother and her two chil- hammadi.ayadi@fmsf.rnu.tn dren. Clinical evaluation and investigation of family members revealed a The autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) including Graves disease (GD) body mass index (BMI) of >= 45 kg/m2, but no other pathological features and Hashimotos thyroiditis (HT) are inherited as complex traits. We initiat- in individuals carrying the translocation. Metabolic and dietary factors ed a whole genome linkage study of patients with AITDs, in order to iden- behind the increased BMI were excluded. tify the susceptibility genes involved in their pathogenesis. We have stud- We suggest that the phenotype in this family is caused by a disruption of a ied 39 patients affected with GD or HT and 68 related controls, who functional gene or a positional effect at one of the two breakpoints. There belonged to a large consanguinous family composed of more than 200 are no identified genes corresponding to obesity close to the translocation members. Linkage analysis was performed using the lod score method breakpoints at chromosome 4 or 15 in our family. The Prader-Willi region under two arbitrary models, dominant and recessive ones. Apositive lod is located on chromosome 15, but not close to the breakpoint. score was found for D2S171, assuming a recessive mode of inheritance To further map the translocation breakpoints, we are in using fluorescence and 50% penetrance, which suggests the presence of a major AITDs sus- in situhybridisation (FISH) to metaphase chromosomes from affected fam- ceptibility gene on chromosome 2p21. The examination of genes mapped ily members. to this region showed that the hFKBP-12 gene which modulates the immune system was mapped near D2S171 and could be therefore a can- P1397.Analysis of candidate gene region for polycystic ovary didate gene in AITDs pathogenesis. Genetic and functional studies of the syndrome (PCOS) on Chr19p13 hFKBP-12 gene in AITDs patients are being accomplished. M. Urbanek1, A. Woodroffe1, J. McAllister2, R. S. Legro2, D. A. Driscoll1, J. F. Strauss1, A. Dunaif3, R. S. Spielman1 P1400. CTLA4 polymorphisms in a large Tunisian family 1University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 2Pennsylvania affected with thyroid autoimmune disorders State University; Hershey, PAUnited States; 3Brigham and Womens Hos- A. Maalej pital; Boston, PAUnited States Faculty of Medecine; Sfax, Tunisia murbanek@mail.med.upenn.edu abdellatifmaalej@eudoramail.com PCOS is a common cause of infertility in reproductive age women and is We investigated the role of CTLA-4 gene in the autoimmune thyroid dis- characterized by hyperandrogenism and chronic anovulation. One promis- eases (AITDs) development. We used three polymorphic microsatellites ing candidate region for PCOS identified by a candidate gene screen is the D2S311, D2S143 and the intronic CTLA-4 (AT)n marker to look for linkage insulin receptor gene (INSR) region on Chr19p13. This region has evi- and two CTLA-4 dimorphisms located in the promotor region at position - dence for both linkage and association with PCOS. The strongest evidence 318 (C/T) and in exon 1 (49 A/G) to test an association. Forty-two patients for linkage with PCOS in 95 affected sister pairs was with short tandem and fifty-one related controls who belong to a large Tunisian family were repeat polymorphism D19S884 (IBD = 0.62; Chi Square = 7.04). The investigated. We obtained no significant lod scores for each microsatellite strongest evidence for association with PCOS as measured by the trans- assuming either dominant or recessive mode of inheritance. Looking for a mission disequilibrium test (TDT) in a sample of 347 parent-affected off- genetic association, the allelic, genotypic and phenotypic frequencies cor- spring trios was observed with allele 8 of D19S884 (Chi Square = 14.58) responding to the CTLA-4 49 (A/G) position were compared. No significant and allele 12 of D19S922 (Chi Square = 10.38). D19S884 and D19S922 differences between patients and controls were found. In addition, the are separated by 13 kb and both markers are located approximately 1 Mb CTLA-4 alleles transmission showed no statistical deviation from the centromeric to INSR. Association in the presence of linkage as determined expected 50% distribution. Therefore, CTLA-4 was neither a major nor a by the TDTis dependent on the presence of disequilibrium between the minor contributing gene to AITDs susceptibility. phenotype and marker allele tested, and disequilibrium generally is not maintained over such extensive regions in outbred populations. It is there- P1401.CTLA-4 gene polymorphisms in Tunisian patients with fore unlikely that the observed association is due to a variant at the INSR Graves Disease gene itself. More likely the association is due to a variant in an unidentified H. Hadj Kacem1, M. Bellassoued2, N. Bouguacha1, M. Abid2, H. Ayadi1 gene or a very distal regulatory element of INSR. Six known genes and 12 1Facult de Mdecine; Sfax, Tunisia; 2Service dEndocrinologie, CHU Hdi unnamed mRNAs or ESTs have been mapped within 250 kb of D19S884 Chaker; Sfax, Tunisia and D19S922. We are currently evaluating these genes and ESTs as can- hammadi.ayadi@fmsf.rnu.tn didate genes for PCOS. Graves disease (GD) is organ-specific autoimmune disorder of multifacto- rial aetiology with a polygenic mode of inheritance. Arecent report has demonstrated a linkage and an association between a genetic markers of CTLA-4 gene on chromosome 2q33 and GD. To confirm this association in376 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance Tunisian population, three polymorphisms of CTLA-4 gene were analysed; posing factor to ESRD progression regardless of etiology, not excluding one at -318 position from the ATG start codon consisting of a C/Tchange, diabetics. a second in position 49 of the exon 1, which lies in a A/G transition and third in the 3 untranslated region with variant lenghts of dinucleotide (AT)n P1404.Variance component analysis of a candidate region for repeat. The genomic DNAfrom 87 patients with GD and 205 healthy indi- bone mineral density in 1p36 viduals were genotyped after specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) C. Specchia1, H. Li2, A. Tenenhouse3, H. Rodriguez4, L. D. Spotila4, M. amplification. Comparative analysis using chi(2) test showed significant dif- Devoto2,1 ferences in allele and genotype frequencies of A/G dimorphic marker 1Universita degli Studi di Genova; Genova, Italy; 2AI duPont Hospital for between patients and controls. Asignificant increase of A/Ahomozygous Children; Wilmington, DE United States; 3McGill Bone Centre; Montreal, individuals among patients (25.3% vs 12.7%, p=0.007, OR=2.33) was PQ Canada; 4Drexel University; Philadelphia, PAUnited States found. Analyses of CTLA-4 A/G polymorphism with respect to sex showed claudia@eco.unipv.it a significant difference in AAgenotypes between female patients and con- Osteoporosis (OP) is a common condition characterized by reduced skele- trols (OR=2.52; 95%, 1.22<OR< the of that The and was with in Popula- tal strength and increased susceptibility to fracture. It is estimated that 10 tion. Tunisian GD to susceptibility confers it, associated closely one or million people are affected with OPin the USAalone, and each year more gene, CTLA-4 confirm results these conclusion, In 2.23<OR than 1.5 million people worldwide suffer from fractures of the hip, the most debilitating consequence of OP. Low bone mineral density (BMD) is the P1402. Linkage And Association Analysis Of 70 Candidate single most important risk factor for OP. The risk of fracture approximately Genes For Diabetic Nephropathy doubles with each 1 SD below the normal (young adult) BMD. The impor- K. G. Ewens, K. E. OBrien, M. M. Kelly, F. N. Ziyadeh, R. S. Spielman tance of genetic factors in variability in BMD is suggested by several epi- University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States demiological studies showing increased concordance in monozygotic vs. ewens@mail.med.upenn.edu dizygotic twins, increased risk of low BMD with parental history of low Familial clustering of diabetic nephropathy (DN) suggests the existence of BMD, and the results of segregation analysis consistent with major gene susceptibility genes that contribute to the development of kidney disease influences on BMD and other related traits. Our initial genome screen in in diabetic patients. In order to identify these genes, we have analyzed 70 seven large Canadian pedigrees suggested a candidate region for BMD in candidate genes for linkage and association with DN. Families were ascer- 1p36, with a peak multipoint lod-score for hip BMD of 2.29 near marker tained through a proband with diabetes and ESRD. DN in diabetic sibs of D1S450 obtained with the Haseman-Elston test. In order to verify this find- the proband was defined by elevated albumin (ACR >300 ug/mg) in two of ing, we typed the same families and an additional sample of 42 Canadian three urine samples. Diabetic sibs were considered unaffected for DN if nuclear families for 9 markers spanning ~30 cM around D1S450. Variance they had normoalbuminuria (ACR<30 ug/mg), duration of diabetes >15 component analysis using the Genehunter program gave a maximum mul- years, and were not taking ACE inhibitor medications. Microsatellites <1cM tipoint lod-score of 1.2 for the old families, of 1.1 for the new families, and from each candidate gene were genotyped in 32 parent-child trios and 47 of 2.1 for all families combined for hip BMD. These results seem to confirm multiplex families. Nominally significant TDTresults were obtained at sev- that a locus for BMD may be located in this region of chromosome 1. eral genes (e.g., lamiminC1 and integrinA2). We focus here on the findings with two microsatellites in the region of the angiotensin receptor 1 gene P1405. Two new SNPs in the COL1A1 promoter are involved (AGTR1; chromosome 3q) where Moczulski et al (Diabetes, 47;1164, in specific binding to osteoblast nuclear factors. 1998) found evidence for linkage with DN in discordant sibs (DSPs) but not N. Garcia-Giralt1, X. Nogus2, A. Enjuanes2, S. Quintana2, A. Bay from TDT. Although we found no evidence for linkage in DSPs, there was Jensen1, L. Mellibovsky2, A. Dez-Prez2, D. Grinberg1, S. Balcells1 an elevated TDT at D3S1308 (allele 7; 64% of 44 transmissions; chi- 1Department of Genetics, Universitat de Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; square=3.3) and ATCA(allele 6; 72% of 18 transmissions; chi-square=3.6). 2URFOA, Hospital del Mar, UAB; Barcelona, Spain When these results are combined with transmissions to unaffected off- ngarcia@porthos.bio.ub.es spring (diabetic but non-DN), the results for D3S1308 become more strik- In an effort to identify genes involved in bone mineral density determina- ing; allele 7 was transmitted to only 7 of 23 non-DN offspring, resulting in tion, the 800 bp region of the human COL1A1 promoter containing cis-ele- a contingency chi-squared of 6.7. In view of the small sample size these ments important for in vivo osteoblast expression was screened searching results must be considered preliminary; results from additional families will for new allelic variants. Two new SNPs (PCOL1 and PCOL2) were found. be presented. PCOL1was in strong linkage disequilibrium with the previously described Sp1 polimorphysm of intron 1, whereas PCOL2 showed association to P1403. Evidence for an association of the endothelial nitric BMD (P< 0.05) in a cohort of 256 postmenopausal women. Electrophoret- oxide synthase gene polymorphism in intron 4 and progres- ic mobility shift assays (EMSA) were performed using single or double- sion to end-stage renal failure in a Cypriot population stranded oligonucleotides containing the PCOL1 or the PCOL2 sites and K. Lamnisou1, M. Koptides2, K. Demetriou3, A. Pierides4, C. Deltas2 showed, in both cases, a specific binding to osteoblast nuclear proteins. 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 2The PCOL1 is a deletion of a T in a tract of eight T residues. In the EMSA Cyprus Inst. of Neurology and Genetics; Nicosia, Cyprus; 3Dept of results, the binding seems to specifically involve the T-bearing strand. This Nephrology, Nicosia General Hospital; Nicosia, Cyprus; 4Dept. of Nephrol- result suggests that poly-pyrimidine single-strand DNA-binding proteins ogy, Nicosia General Hospital; Nicosia, Cyprus are involved. Several studies show the capacity of these sequences to Deltasco@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy adopt alternative DNA conformations. EMSAs perfomed using several Avariable number tandem 27-bp repeat in intron 4 of the endothelial nitric competitions of double and singlestranded oligonucleotides seem to oxide synthase (ecNOS) gene has been found to affect the plasma levels agree with this possibility. PCOL2 is a G to Ttransversion that lies within of NO metabolites. Two alleles are of varied frequencies in different popu- putative and overlapped GKLF and Sp1 binding sites. When comparing the lations (a and b). The shorter allele, a, has been associated in Japanese two alleles, the affinity of the binding is stronger for the G allele. This might populations with the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease and progres- result in a different rate of gene transcription. Interestingly, the oligonu- sion of renal failure. The progression of renal failue was tested in patients cleotide bearing the consensus Sp1 binding site is able to compete in the with ESRD of various etiologies or in patients with various nephropathies, EMSAanalyses. This result suggests that either Sp1 or a related factor is excluding diabetic nephropathy. Here we tested the putative association of involved in the binding to PCOL2. this polymorhism in a Cypriot population of patients with ESRD, by study- ing the genotypes in 70 ESRD patients and 92 non renal patients or P1406.Analyses of the developmental genes TFAP2a, MSX2 healthy subjects. The two alleles were of similar frequencies in the two and SLUG potentially involved in human neural tube defects populations, 0.15 and 0.85 for alleles a and b respectively. The frequencies (NTDs). of aa, ab, and bb genotypes were 0% (0/92), 33.7% (31/92), 66.3% (61/92) M. C. Koch, B. Richter, K. Stegmann in the control group, and 8.6% (6/70), 15.7% (11/70), 75.7% (53/70) in the Center of Human Genetics; Marburg, Germany patient group. The data between patients and controls were analysed by koch2@mailer.uni-marburg.de chi square test, and showed that the frequency of ecNOS4 aa genotype in Little is known about the identity of genetic factors involved in the complex the patient population was significantly higher than that in the control group aetiology of non-syndromic neural tube defects (NTDs). Reasonable (P<0.005). Our work perhaps represents the first study supporting the human NTD candidate genes are the human homologs of mice exen- association of ecNOS gene polymorphism with ESRD in a Caucasian pop- cephaly genes and other vertebrate genes, for which a functional role in ulation. Not surprisingly, the frequency of allele a is somewhat increased neural tube closure is well established. TFAP2a, MSX2 and SLUG are (15%) compared to Japanese populations reported (~10%). Also of inter- expressed in the dorsal part of the developing neural tube and were there- est is the finding that in our study population the aa genotype is a predis- fore tested as candidates contributing to the aetiology of human NTD. ThePosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 377 coding sequence of the three genes was screened for mutations in 200 Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1) and the growth factor bound protein 2 NTD patients using single strand conformational analysis (SSCA). We (GRB2) play an important role in the IGF and insulin signal tranduction identified sequence variants in all three genes; Two TFAP2a point muta- pathway by being the major substrates of IGF1 receptor tyrosine kinases. tions in individual patients were silent on amino acid level (C308C, T396T). Several members of the IGF pathway have been proposed as candidates On nucleic acid level, these mutations change evolutionary conserved for growth retardation, particularly in Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS). Due codons and thus may influence mRNAprocessing and translation efficien- to their role in intracellular IGF signalling and their genomic localisation cy. One NTD patient displayed an exonic 9 bp deletion in MSX2 leading to (2q36 and 17q24-25), we searched for genetic variations in IRS1 and a shortened and possibly less functional protein. In yet another patient a GRB2. Loss of function of these proteins might contribute to the clinical missense mutation (D119E) was found in the Slug subfamily-defining feature of growth retardation. Aberrations in the regions on chromosomes region preceding the first zinc finger. Seven polymorphisms detected in 2 and 17 have been described to be involved in growth restriction. Our TFAP2a and MSX2 were equally distributed in patients and controls. screening approach included 17 patients with idiopathic pre- and postnatal Patients with combined heterozygosity of a MSX2 and a TFAP2a polymor- growth retardation and 10 SRS patients. Applying single strand conforma- phism were at a slightly increased risk for NTD (OR 1.71; 95% CI 0.57- tion polymorphism analysis, restriction assays and sequencing, we found 5.39). The present study defines new genetic variants, which may act in two amino acid substitutions (D90E and G971R) and two silent variants concert with other yet unidentified factors to increase susceptibility to (c1722G>Aand c3432G>A) in IRS1. The variants D90E and c3432G>A human NTD. Further association and functional studies are necessary to have not been reported before. All of these variants occurred in similar fre- support these observations. quencies in both patient groups and in controls. In GRB2, we did not find any mutation or polymorphism. Thus, it is strongly conserved underlining P1407. Chromosome 17; Gene Mapping Studies of Cleft lip its important in role in the IGF signal transduction. In conclusion, mutations With or Without Cleft Palate in Chinese Families in the coding regions of IRS1 and GRB2 do not play a major role neither in S. Peanchitlertkajorn1, M. E. Cooper1, Y. Lui2, L. L. Field3, M. L. Marazi- the aetiology of growth retardation. However, the new polymorphisms in ta1 IRS1 are powerful tools for association studies in other diseases related to 1University of Pittsburg; Pittsburgh, PAUnited States; 2Zhabei Eye Hospi- the IGF and insulin signal transduction axis. tal; Shanghai, China; 3University of British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada P1410.The study of beta myosin heavy chain gene in patients supst5+@pitt.edu with hyperthrophic cardiomyopathy from Russian population Loci on chromosome 17 (including RARA) have shown allelic association M. V. Goloubenko1, V. P. Puzyrev1, K. V. Puzyrev2, V. B. Salukov1 with non-syndromic oral clefts in Caucasian populations, although never 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Scientific Center of Siberian Branch investigated in Asian populations. Furthermore, there is a major oral cleft of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; Tomsk, Russian Federation; gene on murine chromosome 11, homologous to human chromosome 17. 2Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk Scientific Center of Siberian Branch of 17 markers spanning chromosome 17 (10cM apart, including RARA), were Russian Academy of Medical Sciences; Tomsk, Russian Federation assessed in 36 multiplex families from Shanghai, China. LOD scores (sin- masha@img.tsu.ru gle point and multipoint), model free linkage analyses (SimIBD), and allel- Hyperthrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is in most cases genetically deter- ic association tests (TDT, Fishers exact test and Chi square tests) were mined disease with high level of allele and locus heterogeneity. There are performed on the total sample, plus families whose probands had either several candidate genes for HCM. The most often mutated one is the beta cleft lip and cleft palate (CLPsubgroup, n=23), or cleft lip only (CLsub- myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7), which is responsible for about half of group, n=13). LOD scores from single point analyses were inconclusive, genetic cases. To study causes of HCM in Russian population, we have multipoint LOD scores rejected linkage except for a few regions in the CL collected the sample of patients with idiopathic HCM. Searching for func- subgroup. However, positive results were found for the RARAregion and tional mutations and SNPs in this gene was performed by means of auto- nearby loci using the model-free methods, with variable results for the CL mated sequencing with dye-terminator chemistry. Exons 3-24 of the gene and CLP subgroups. Therefore, genetic variation within or near RARA were screened, which frequently mutate in HCM. Some presumable mod- appears to be involved in cleft formation in this population. Furthermore, ifying loci also were investigated (i.e., NOS3, ACE, mtDNA). We have based on the differing pattern of results in the CLversus CLPsubgroups, found several MYH7 sequence alterations (SNPs) in the affected sample. it appears that the formation of CLand CLPis either due to differing alle- Although representing common polymorphisms, some of them may be rel- les at the same genetic locus, or to different but related (and/or linked) evant to the disease. SNPs may be in linkage disequilibrium with unidenti- genes, that modify the severity and expression of oral clefting. fied mutations that contribute to the HCM phenotype. We have found that novel silent substitution in exon 24 (T15753C, with frequency of rare allele P1408.G protein beta3 subunit gene C825T polymorphism in C 27% in affected sample) is associated with the extent of cardiac hyper- patients with vesico-ureteric reflux throphy. Left ventricular mass index mean value was 161.75 in the group B. Zagradisnik, K. Bracic, A. Gregoric, N. Kokalj-Vokac of carriers of rare allele, whereas it was 229.44 in the group of non-carri- Maribor Teaching Hospital; Maribor, Slovenia ers (F=6.73, P=0.0212). Our findings confirm high genetic heterogeneity of boris.zagradisnik@sb-mb.si HCM. Association of silent SNPwith extent of hyperthrophy suggests pres- A C825T polymorphism in the GNB3 gene encoding a subunit in het- ence of other mutations which are in linkage disequilibrium with this SNP erotrimeric G proteins was found to correlate strongly with the activity of and which may be either causal for HCM or having modifying effect on the the G proteins. This difference in cell signaling could participate in the phenotype. development of a variety of clinical entities. The aim of this study was to investigate the association of the polymorphism C825Twith primary con- P1411. Vitamin D and Breast Cancer; Interaction between genital vesico-uretric reflux (VUR). Genotyping was done in a sample of 65 dietary vitamin D and genetic variation in the Vitamin D recep- children diagnosed with third- or fourth-degree reflux and in 50 healthy tor may be implicated the aetiology of breast cancer controls. Following genotype frequencies were detected; 23 (35.4%) Z. H. Miedzybrodzka1, L. Sharp1, J. Richardson1, A. Schofield2, F. patients with VUR were CC homozygotes, 35 (53.8%) were CTheterozy- McGuigan1, S. D. Heys1, J. Little1, N. E. Haites1 gotes and 7 (10.8%) were TT homozygotes; 26 (52%) healthy controls 1University of Aberdeen; Aberdeen, United Kingdom; 2Univeristy of were CC homozygotes, 18 (36%) were CT heterozygotes and 6 (12%) Aberdeen; Aberdeen, United Kingdom were TT homozygotes. A significant overrepresentation of CT and TT zosia@abdn.ac.uk genotypes in patients with VUR in comparison with healthy controls was The active form of vitamin D has been shown to induce apoptosis and found (chi square 8.4, p= 0.015). Therefore, C825Tpolymorphism in the inhibit breast cancer cell growth, mediated by the vitamin D receptor GNB3 gene might have a role in the development of primary congenital (VDR). Although at least three groups have studied VDR polymorphisms in vesico-ureteric reflux. breast cancer, we are not aware of any published study of interactions. We describe a pilot case-control study. Sixty-five breast cancer cases were P1409. Exclusion of a major role of the IGF signal transduc- recruited through the breast service at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Scotland. tion axis members IRS1 and GRB2 in the aetiology of growth 58 female controls were selected at random from local general practition- retardation and Silver-Russell syndrome er registers. Subjects completed a food-frequency questionnaire and pro- K. Eggermann1, P. Kloos1, S. Mergenthaler1, M. B. Ranke2, H. A. Woll- vided a DNAsample (Fok1 and Bsm1 VDR polymorphisms). Women in the mann2, T. Eggermann1 highest tertile of vitamin D intake were at two-fold raised risk of breast can- 1Institute of Human Genetics; Aachen, Germany; 2University Childrens cer, compared to the lowest tertile (OR=2.18; 95% CI 0.88-5.39), but this Hospital; Tbingen, Germany did not reach statistical significance. No association was found between teggermann@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de breast cancer risk and the BsmI polymorphism. There was a trend of378 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance reducing risk with increasing number of FokI variant alleles; compared to and other diseases. The iron deficiency anemia is one of the widespread homozygous wild-type, heterozygous women had an almost 30% reduced diseases; on a Globe 700 - 800 million persons suffer iron anemia or latent risk (OR=0.72; 95% CI 0.30-1.70) and homozygous mutants a 60% lower deficit Ferri lactas. This disease most frequently meets for children, ado- risk (OR=0.40; 95% CI 0.08-1.95). To investigate interactions, subjects lescents and women. Iron anemia is complex disease caused by a combi- were stratified by presence or absence of the FokI variant allele and odds nation of both genetic and environmental influences. Polymorphism at the ratios for vitamin D intake computed within each strata. Compared with GSTM1 gene locus in 93 patients with iron anemia from Bashkortostan and lowest vitamin D intake levels, higher intake was associated with increased in 90 healthy individuals from control group was studied by PCR method. risk in both strata; among women FokI homozygous wild-type OR high vs The frequencies of the GSTM0/0 genotypes were 0,40 in patients with iron low=1.90 (0.32-11.31); among Fok1 heterozygotes, OR high vs low=1.50 anemia and 0,54 in control group. The data of this study demonstrate that (0.32-11.31). This finding requires confirmation in other studies. the differences in distribution of GSTM1 allele frequencies between patients with iron anemia and control individuals were not significantly P1412. Vitamin-D Receptor Gene Polymorphism Influences (p=0,05). Our findings indicate that the GSTM10/0 genotype was not linked Mortality Risk in Hemodialysis Patients with iron anemia in Bashkortostan. J. Fibla1, M. Marco2, L. Craver2, E. Fernandez2 1Dep. of Basic Medical Sciences University of Lleida; Lleida, Catalonia, P1415.IL-4 promoter polymorphism -590C/T does not associ- Spain; 2Service of Nephrology. Hospital Universitary Arnau de Vilanova; ate with severe malaria in Thailand Lleida, Catalonia, Spain J. Ohashi1, I. Naka1, J. Patarapotikul2, H. Hananantachai2, S. Looa- joan.fibla@cmb.udl.es reesuwan2, K. Tokunaga1 Vitamin-D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms had been proven to have 1The University of Tokyo; Tokyo, Japan; 2Mahidol University; Bangkok, an influence on mineral metabolism and on the course of cancers and Thailand infections. This study is a four-year-survival analysis of 143 hemodialysis juno@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp (HD) patients who were genotyped for polymorphisms located at the 5 and IL-4 is one of important anti-inflammatory cytokines. The -590C/T poly- 3 regions of the VDR gene. The Chi-square test was applied to compare morphism in the promoter of the IL-4 has been reported to be associated genotype distribution among survivors and non-survivors. Survival was with asthma and atopy. Although an exact role of the -590C/T polymor- analysed with Kaplan-Meier according to Bsm-I genotypes. Cox regression phism in the pathogenesis of these diseases is still unclear, this variation analysis was performed, including as variables the 5 polymorphic locus may affect the expression of the IL-4. Recently, the serum level of IL-4 was Fok-I and the two 3 polymorphic loci Bsm-I and PolyA, adjusting for; age, found to be inversely correlated with development of severe malarial time on HD, hours of HD per week, serum calcium, phosphorus, albumin anaemia in Zambia. Thus, we examined a possible association of the - and iPTH, presence of; diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease and cal- 590C/Tpolymorphism with malaria severity in 219 mild malaria, 164 non- citriol treatment. Bsm-I and PolyApolymorphisms were in strong linkage cerebral severe malaria, and 110 cerebral malaria patients living in the disequilibrium. The bb genotype was over-represented among survivors northwest of Thailand. The genotyping was performed by PCR-SSCP (bb 38/83; 45.7%), compared to non-survivors (bb 13/60; 21.6%). Cox method. Our result showed no significant difference in the frequency of the analysis showed a significant influence of Bsm I polymorphism (but nor -590C/Tpolymorphism among three groups. Interestingly, in this popula- Fok I nor Poly-A), age, calcitriol treatment, and diabetes mellitus on mor- tion, the frequency of -590Tallele was higher than that of -590C allele. Fur- tality. The BB and Bb genotypes were independent predictor of mortality ther variation analysis of other cytokine genes, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13, is (Hazard Ratios [HR] 3.7; 95% Confidence Interval [CI]; 1.7-8 and 2.75; currently underway for our patient samples. 95%CI; 1.4-5.4, respectively). Survival means by Kaplan-Meier analysis were; 983 days (95%CI; 785-1181) for BB, 1152 days (95%CI; 1030-1274) P1416. Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Disease Pro- for Bb and 1290 days (95%CI; 1183-1396) for bb; log-rank; p=0.01. Simi- gression among Seropositive Intravenous Drug Users in rela- lar results were obtained when the analysis was performed to the patients tion to Chemokine Receptor (CCR5) and Vitamin-D Receptor who had been on hemodialysis for less than 5 years (n=94), indicating that (VDR) gene Polymorphisms the genotype influence survival rate irrespective of the duration of A. Velasco1, Y. Barber1, C. Rubio2, E. Fernandez3, M. Rubio2, J. Fibla1 hemodialysis previously to enrolment. In conclusion, this study shows that 1Dep. of Basic Medical Sciences. University of Lleida; Lleida, Catalonia, Bsm-I polymorphism of the VDR gene is an independent predictor of mor- Spain; 2Service of Internal Medicine. Hospital Universitary Arnau de tality in hemodialysis patients. Vilanova; Lleida, Catalonia, Spain; 3Service of Nephrology. Hospital Uni- versitary Arnau de Vilanova; Lleida, Catalonia, Spain P1413. Analysis of environmental genes polymorphisms in joan.fibla@cmb.udl.es patients with recurrent early pregnancy miscarriage The D32 insertion-deletion polymorphism of the CCR5 chemokine recep- O. N. Bespalova, T. E. Ivaschenko, O. N. Arjanova, V. S. Baranov tor gene and the Bsm-I RFLPof the Vitamin-D Receptor (VDR) gene has Otts Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology; St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa- been studied in relation to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) tion infection and disease progression in a cohort of seropositive intravenous TIV@ti2629.spb.edu drug users (HIV+/IVDU). No HIV+/IVDU patients homozygous for D32 The genetic polymorphisms of glutathione-S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) and allele were detected, indicating that those individuals are strongly protect- glutathione-S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) genes responsible for xenobiotic ed against HIV-1 infection. CCR5-wtD32 heterozygotes were not associat- conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxification system were studied by ed with slow progression to AIDS or CD4 cell count <200 cell/L. In con- PCR-RFLP in 40 matrimonial couples with histories of pregnants with trast, a bad progression of the disease was associated with VDR-BB geno- REPM in anamnesis. The control group consisted of 66 individuals of type. Ahigher proportion of this genotype was found in patients with CD4 Russian origin, living in St. Petersburg. The analysis of the genes, encod- cell count <200 cells/L(p=0.007). In addition, VDR-BB patients show a ing Phase II detoxification system enzymes, have shown that the frequen- faster progression to both, AIDS CDC 1993 (hazard ratio [HR]; 1.7; 95% cy of GSTM1 gene deletion was significantly higher for group with REPM confidence interval [CI]; 1.02-2.8) and CD4 cell count <200 cell/L(HR; (58% versus 41,0% in control; p=0.05). Proportion of glutathione-S-trans- 2.1; 95%CI; 1.2-3.5). When the analysis was restricted to those patients ferase theta null genotypes (GSTT10/0) increased in the investigated with a VDR-bb genetic background, CCR5-wtD32 heterozygosity confers group (35%) compared to controls (23,5%), but these differenses were not protection to disease progression. CCR5-wtD32 heterozygotes were over- significant. Concordance of both GSTM1 0/0 and GSTT10/0 homozygotes represented in both, CDC 1993 non-progressors (odds ratio [OR], 0.28; was recorded in 26 % of genotypes in the group with REPM and only in 95%CI; 0.08-0.96) and those with CD4 cell count >200 cells/L(OR, 0.26; 9,1% of the control group. The comparable OR in the presence of both null 95%CI; 0.06-1.15). In addition, CCR5-wtD32 heterozygotes show a slow genotypes was 3.56 (95%CI=1,39-9,08). progression to AIDS CDC-1993 (HR; 0.29; 95%CI; 0.08-0.97). Further studies will be required to clarify the role of VDR polymorphisms in HIV-1 P1414.PCR-detection of the Glutathione S-transferase M1 0/0 pathogenesis and their co-operative interaction with chemokine receptor genotype in patients with Iron Anemia in Bashkortostan. polymorphisms so far involved in HIV-1 disease progression. The confir- Z. Soultanaeva1, A. Morozova2, T. Victorova1, E. Khusnutdinova1 mation that certain VDR genotypes confers a bad progression of the dis- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Bashkir ease and that other genotypes allow CCR5-wtD32 heterozygotes to man- medical university; Ufa, Russian Federation ifest a delayed progression of the disease will offer new opportunities for ekkh@anrb.ru the rational design of therapeutic interventions. Polymorphisms at the glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) gene locus have attracted much interest because the homozygous GSTM1 deletion (GSTM1 0/0) seems to modify the risk for different types of cancer, allergyPosters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance 379 P1417.Increased skewing of X inactivation in elderly females P1419.Tree-based linkage and association analyses of com- may be determined by genes linked to the G6PD gene plex diseases K. Orstavik1, M. Kristiansen2, H. Hagen-Larsen3, G. Knudsen1, J. W. Vau- H. Zhang pel4, L. Bathum4, A. K. Naumova5, K. Christensen4 Yale University; New Haven, CT United States 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Hospital; Oslo, Norway; 2Insti- heping.zhang@yale.edu tute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo; Oslo, Norway; 3Department of Tree-based linkage and association analysis methods will be described Medical Genetics, University of Oslo; Oslo, Norway; 4The Danish Twin and applied for complex diseases and traits such as asthma, cancer, and Registry, Section for Epidemiology and the Danish Center for Demograph- Obsessive Compulsive Disorders. The statistical methods are developed ic Research, Odense University; Odense, Denmark; 5Departments of from the recursive partitioning technique as described by Breiman, Fried- Obstetrics and Gynecology and Human Genetics, McGill University Health man, Olshen, and Stone (CART, 1984) and Zhang and Singer (Recursive Center; Montreal, PQ Canada Paritioning in the Health Sciences, 1999). These methods can simultane- k.h.orstavik@ioks.uio ously accommodate a genome wide scan of polymorphic markers and are Elderly females have a higher frequency of skewed X inactivation in useful for identifying multiple candidate genes, gene-gene, and gene-envi- peripheral blood cells. G6PD-linked genes have been implicated in this ronment interactions for diseases and traits of complex inheritance. age-related skewing of X inactivation in Safari cats. In a study of X inacti- vation in 71 elderly monozygotic twin pairs, we found a strong tendency for P1420. Psychological well-being in women with Turner syn- the same cell line of blood cells to be the predominant cell line in twin pairs. drome; Is there a correlation to karyotype? In the present work we tested the possibility that age-related skewing of X U. Wide Boman1, I. Bryman2, A. Mller2, C. Hanson2 inactivation is related to a locus linked to the G6PD gene in humans. We 1Department of Psychology, Gteborg University; Gteborg, Sweden; analyzed X inactivation in 101 dizygotic twin pairs aged 73-93 years. The 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gteborg University; Gte- X inactivation pattern was classified as skewed when 80% or more of the borg, Sweden cells had the same X-chromosome active.The frequency of skewed X inac- ulla.wide-boman@psy.gu.se tivation in the twins (37%) was increased compared to blood donors aged Turner syndrome (TS) occurs in approx. 1 of 2500 female births, and is 19-65 years (7%). The correlation coefficient for the X inactivation pattern caused by a total or partial deletion of one of the sex chromosomes in all was 0.23 (P=0.02) for the dizygotic twin pairs and 0.52 (P<0.01) for the or in some cells. Main clinical features are short stature and accelerated monozygotic twin pairs, confirming a genetic influence on X inactivation rate of atresia of ovarian follicles causing gonadal insufficiency, incomplete phenotype in elderly females. Analysis of markers in the G6PD region (F8C puberty and impaired fertility. Intelligence is usually in the normal range, and DXS15) showed a significant tendency for twins who had inherited dif- although impairments in spatial processing are common. An increased risk ferent maternal alleles in these markers to be discordant for X inactivation for emotional and social difficulties has been reported, but also a consid- phenotype (one twin having a skewed and the other twin having a non- erable variability. The aim of the present study was to investigate psycho- skewed pattern). We conclude that skewing of X inactivation in elderly logical well-being in women with TS compared with reference data, and to females may be influenced by a locus linked to the G6PD region, most investigate whether there was a relation between karyotype and well- probably through a selection mechanism. being. Method; 63 women with TS (mean age 31.5 years) completed the Psychological General Well-being Index (PGWB), covering the states of P1418.The Use of Pharmacogenetics to Optimize Drug Devel- anxiety, depressed mood, positive well-being, self-control, vitality and gen- opment and Therapy eral health. The scores were compared with a female reference group. To D. M. Grant examine the possible relation to karyotype, the participants with one copy Orchid BioSciences Inc; Princeton, NJ United States of the p-arm of the X chromosome according to karyotype (45,X and stru- dgrant@orchid.com cutural abnormalities) (n=52) were compared to those with two copies of The completed sequence of the human genome provides the starting the p-arm (45,X/46,XX) (n=11). Results; The TS group rated their psycho- material for genome-wide discovery of DNAsequence variants among indi- logical well-being at a similar level as the reference group. There was no viduals in human populations and their correlation with drug response, tox- significant difference in psychological well-being according to karyotype icity and disease predisposition. Pharmacogenetic correlation studies are group, however, there was a tendency for the group with two copies of the expected to be valuable in target discovery and validation, in preclinical p-arm to report higher levels of anxiety. Conclusion; This study did not find and clinical phases of drug development, and for designing the post-mar- evidence for impaired psychological well-being in women with TS. The psy- keting genetic diagnostic tests for individualizing drug dosing in the future. chological well-being did not differ according to karyotype group, however, Such studies require a range of technical capabilities both in sample geno- this questions should be investigated in studies with larger sample size. typing and data handling, along with access to phenotypically well-defined clinical populations exhibiting variable drug response. Many methods are P1421.Familial occurrence of ring chromosome 15 becoming available for the scoring of single nucleotide polymorphisms O. Bushueva1, N. Nikitina1, G. Pavlov2, E. Nikolaeva1, M. Devaikina1 (SNPs), the most common form of genetic variation, in pharmacogenetic 1Medico-Genetic Centre; Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation; 2Ural Medical correlation studies. However, most of these methods are not practical for Academy; Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation large-scale studies, and thus have limited ability to meet industry demands gvp@online.ural.ru for i) accuracy; ii) reliability; iii) operational simplicity; iv) reproducibility; v) Ring chromosome 15 was detected in a 31-year-old woman and her son. automatability; vi) low cost; and vii) flexible formatting. Orchid BioSciences The mother had short stature (150 cm), slight mental retardation, triangu- has developed a proprietary SNP genotyping technology, based on the lar face and dislocation of both hip joints. She married at the age of 27 and principle of single-base primer extension, which is amenable to a variety of became pregnant 3 years later without examination and treatment. Her son manual and automated platforms so as to enable a wide spectrum of phar- was born at 40 weeks of gestation by c-section. His weight was 2400 g, his macogenetic study designs ranging from large-scale gene mapping and length was 47 cm. Developmental abnormality was first suspected at 12 new drug target discovery programs through to highly focused, hypothesis- months. He had short stature; his weight was 6100 g, length - 65 cm, based clinical pharmacogenetic correlation studies. Orchid is currently occipitofrontal circumference - 43 cm. Muscular hypotonia was obvious using its technology to conduct pharmacogenetic association studies in and early milestones of development were retarded. The boy sat at 8 collaboration with academic thought leaders across a broad range of ther- months, crawled by 12 months, walked unaided by 18 months, and spoke apeutic areas, through our rapidly expanding Clinical Genetics Network his first words at the age of 18 months. At the age of 5 his height was 88 (CGN) program. Progress in selected trials underway to investigate dis- cm, weight 9380 g, OFC - 47,6 cm. Dysmorphic features included a trian- ease predisposition and drug efficacy variability in more than 2200 patients gular face,a big mouth hypotelorism, thin hair, white coffee spots on the in therapeutic areas that include cardiovascular, inflammatory and CNS body, hypogenitalism and a hypoplastic penis. Speech and mental devel- disorders will be presented. opment was retarded. Chromosome analysis of the mother and her child revealed ring chromosome 15, the break points in the ring chromosome being located at the same sites. The inheritance of the ring chromosome has been reported rather infrequently. This occurrence is the third report (both the first and the second were from Japan), and the present case is the first to be published in Russia.380 Posters: Analysis of Disorders and Traits with Complex Inheritance P1422. Methylation imprints on human chromosome 15 are imprinting analysis, have already been excluded from playing a major role established around or after fertilization in the etiology of SRS. To estimate the frequency of duplications in 7p11.1- K. Buiting1, O. El-Maarri2, E. G. Peery3, P. M. Kroisel4, B. Balaban5, K. p13 we analysed 32 SRS patients by quantitative PCR. Amultiplex PCR Wagner4, B. Urman5, J. Heyd2, C. Lich1, C. I. Brannan3, J. Walter2, B. with the CFTR gene as control and an internal standard as reference for Horsthemke1 the amount of DNAwas performed. We tested the genes EGFR, GRB10, 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Universittsklinikum Essen; Essen, Germany; IGFBP1 and IGFBP3 and one microsatellite within the possibly duplicated 2Max-Planck-Institut fr Molekulare Genetik; Berlin, Germany; 3Depart- region, but we did not detect any rearrangement. Additionally we have ment of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida College started to investigate SRS patients and patients with idiopathic of Medicine; Gainesville, FLUnited States; 4Institut fr Medizinische Biolo- IUGR/PNGR by FISH. We are using 3 YACS hybridising to the regions gie und Humangenetik, Universitt Graz; Graz, Austria; 5Assisted Repro- 7p11.2, 7p13 and 7p13-14. These probes were shown to be duplicated in ductive Technology Unit, Amerikan Hastanasi; Istanbul, Turkey previous studies. So far, no triple-signals were observed, thus confirming karin.buiting@uni-essen.de the results obtained by the quantitative approach. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurogenetic disorder, which results from the lack of transcripts expressed from the paternal copy of the imprint- P1425. A molecular, cytogenetic, pathology, endocrine and ed chromosomal region 15q11-q13. In some patients, this lack is associat- genetic view of hermaphroditism, the SRY gene and female ed with a deletion of the SNURF-SNRPN exon 1 region inherited from the gender; Astudy of five atypical patients paternal grandmother and the presence of a maternal imprint on the pater- M. J. Sutcliffe1, A. Root1, R. Haire2, F. Faccio2, D. P. Dumont3, A. Lacson1, nal chromosome. Assuming that imprints are reset in the germline, we and K. Washington3, W. Chamizo3, P. Ferre3, M. M. Haag4, O. T. Mueller1, B. others have suggested that this region constitutes part of the 15q imprint- B. Bercu1, F. Diamond1, D. Shulman1, R. Sutphen1, J. D. Ranells2, B. G. ing centre (IC) and is important for the maternal to paternal imprint switch Kousseff2 in the male germ line. To investigate the effect of an IC deletion on the 1All Childrens Hospital/Univ. of South Florida; St. Petersburg, FLUnited imprinting process in the male germline, we analyzed sperm samples from States; 2Univ. of South Florida; Tampa, FLUnited States; 3All Childrens two males carrying such a deletion on their maternal chromosome. On Hospital; St. Petersburg, FLUnited States; 4Shodair Childrens Hosspital; examination of six differentially methylated sites at the MKRN3, NDN, u1D, Helena, MT United States u1B, PW71/u1A, and YL48E loci, which are located upstream and down- sutcliff@allkids.org stream of the deletion, we found that spermatozoa DNAfrom these two True hermaphroditism is defined as the presence of both ovarian and tes- males had a normal paternal methylation pattern. Similar findings were ticular tissue in one individual. Gonadal histology usually demonstrates a made in a mouse model harboring a microdeletion of the Snurf-Snrpn exon range between undifferentiated gonads with ovarian and testicular features 1 region. These findings indicate that the incorrect maternal methylation to ovarian stroma with oocytes and seminiferous tubules with spermatogo- imprint in IC deletion patients is established de novo after fertilisation. Fur- nia. The SRYmale determining gene may be present or absent, the kary- thermore, we found that CpG-rich regions in the SNURF-SNRPN and NDN otype may be XX, XY or mosaic and genitalia may be female, male or genes, which in somatic tissues are methylated on the maternal allele, are ambiguous. We present a series of five atypical patients. hypomethylated in unfertilized human oocytes. These results suggest that SRY Gonadal the normal maternal methylation imprints in 15q11-q13 also are estab- Patient Karyotype Gene Genitalia Ductal Organization Tissue lished around or after fertilisation. 45,X/ copy 103 female bilat. fallopian tubes ovarian 46,idic(Y)(q11.21) x2 P1423.AmtDNAmutation, 14453A->G, in the NADH dehydro- 46,XX/ 46,XY/ copy bilat fallopian 101 female ovarian genase subunit 6 associated with a severe congenital case of 47,XYY x2 tubes/uterus MELAS syndrome lt copy lt epididymal tube rt testicular/ K. Ravn1, F. Wibrand2, F. Juul Hansen1, N. Horn2, M. Schwartz1 105 46,XY ambig x1 fallopian tube gc* rt 1Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark; 2John F. Kennedy institute; ovarian Glostrup, Denmark lt fallopian tube rt lt ovarian/ K_Ravn@yahoo.com 102 46,XX none ambig fallopian/epididymal gc rt ovo- We report a novel point mutation in the mitochondrial encoded ND6 sub- tubes testis/gc unit of the NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) in a patient with bilat bilat ovo- 104 46,XX none ambig fallopian/epididymal MELAS syndrome. The mutation is a missense mutation, changing the testes/gc tubes amino acid alanine to valine in a highly conserved region of the ND6 sub- unit. The mutation was heteroplasmic and found in both muscle and blood, *gc = germ cell Sequencing of the SRY gene, where present, failed to but was not detected in the patients mother. Amarked reduction of com- demonstrate any mutation. The karyotype and internal ductal/gonadal and plex I activity was found in the patients muscle. This is first case of a muta- external genitalia differentiation of our patients will be reviewed in the con- tion in the ND6 subunit causing MELAS. Our data confirm the genetic het- text of current knowledge of the genes upstream and downstream of the erogeneity in mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and SRYmale determining switch. stroke-like episodes syndrome, and confirms that MELAS can be caused by mutations in polypeptide-coding mtDNAgenes. P1426.Russell-Silver Syndrome; Establishment of a possible critical region on 7p14 and characterization of putative candi- P1424. Silver-Russell syndrome; quantitative PCR and FISH date genes. approaches to detect rearrangements in 7p11.2-p13 K. Nakabayashi1, B. A. Fernandez1, R. Edge1, I. Teshima1, C. Shuman1, S. Mergenthaler1, A. Sharp2, C. Joyce2, M. Ranke3, K. Temple4, V. K. Mitsuya2, M. Meguro2, M. Oshimura2, R. Weksberg1, S. W. Scherer1 Kalscheuer5, H. Wollmann3, T. Eggermann1 1Department of Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON 1Institute of Human Genetics; Aachen, Germany; 2Wessex Regional Canada; 2Department of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Faculity of Medi- Genetics Laboratory; Salisbury, United Kingdom; 3University Childrens cine, Tottori University; Yonago, Japan Hospital; Tbingen, Germany; 4Southampton University Hospitals; kazuhiko@genet.sickkids.on.ca Southampton, United Kingdom; 5Max Planck- Institute of Molecular Genet- Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS) is a form of congenital dwarfism charac- ics; Berlin, Germany terized by severe growth retardation and variable dysmorphic features. smergenthaler@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de RSS is considered to be an imprinting disease, because 10% of sporadic Silver-Russell syndrome is characterised by intrauterine and postnatal patients demonstrate maternal uniparental disomy (mUPD) of chromo- growth retardation (IUGR/PNGR), typical craniofacial abnormalities com- some 7. Although 3 genes on chromosome 7 (MEST, gamma2COPand bined with asymmetry of head and limbs, and other less frequent abnor- GRB10) are shown to be imprinted in human or mouse, several lines of malities. The majority of the 400 cases occurred sporadically, but some evidence exclude their involvement in RSS, suggesting the existence of familial cases indicate a genetic origin of the disease. Few cytogenetic additional imprinted gene(s) on chromosome 7 which contribute to the dis- aberrations have been published; five cases involved chromosome 7, ease. Two RSS patients were identified with de novo cytogenetic abnor- which is also subject to maternal uniparental disomy (matUPD) in 10% of malities involving the short arm of chromosome 7. One had a partial dupli- all SRS cases. The finding of matUPD7 indicates the involvement of at cation [46, XX, dup(7)(p12p14)] and the second contained a paracentric least one imprinted gene on this chromosome. Three recently published inversion [46, XY, inv(7)(p14p21)]. Fluorescence in situ hybridization SRS patients with cytogenetic duplications focussed the interest on (FISH) mapping revealed that the rearrangement breakpoints on 7p14 in 7p11.2-p13; this chromosomal segment harbours the putative candidate the two patients were located within an interval of less than 500kb. Seven genes EGFR, GRB10, IGFBP1 and IGFBP3, which, by mutation and candidate genes identified in the vicinity of the breakpoints were subjectedPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 381 to allelic expression analysis using mouse A9 somatic cell hybrids contain- the gap junction protein connexin 26 (beta-2, GJB2) whose expression ing paternal or maternal human chromosome 7, in which the imprinting of was shown in several tissues and in the cochlea. The 30delG mutation is MESTwas maintained. All seven genes showed biallelic expression in A9 the most frequent mutation in the CX26 gene. It represents a deletion of a hybrids, although the results dont exclude the possibility of tissue-specific guanosine (G) in a sequence of six G extending from position 30 to 35 of imprinting of the genes. The exon-intron structure of the positional candi- the CX26 cDNA. The deletion creates a frameshift resulting in a premature date genes (CDC2Land others) were determined and being subjected to stop codon and a non-functional intracellular domain in the protein. The mutation screening in RSS patients. 30delG mutation can be detected at the molecular level using PCR fol- lowed by BsiYl-digestion. We now screened 100 control individuals and P1427.Family-Based Tests of Association in the Presence of 250 patients with non-syndromic sporadic deafness for this mutation to Linkage determine their distribution in the German and Hungarian populations. The S. Lake1, D. Blacker2,1, N. M. Laird1 frequency of the 30delG mutation in the German pool of sporadic cases 1Harvard School of Public Health; Boston, MAUnited States; 2Massachu- was 0.11 wheras in controls it was 0.04. While studying 24 small-sized setts General Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States Hungarian families, this frequency was 0.38. slake@hsph.harvard.edu DNA from individuals showing a heterozygous status for 30delG was Linkage analysis may not provide the necessary resolution for identifica- sequenced. This study revealed several new patient-related mutations and tion of the genes underlying phenotypic variation. This is espicially true for new gene variants resulting in e.g. amino acid substitutions (A->G; basic studies that focus on complex diseases. One positional genomic strategy to acidic; G->A; nonpolar to polar; A->C; acidic to nonpolar). Moreover, one involves application of association methodology to areas of identified link- deletion and one insertion was noted. In summary, more than 20 new allel- age. Detection of association in the presence of linkage localizes the ic changes were detected and for most of them, patterns of inheritance gene(s) of interest to more-refined regions in the genome than is possible were documented. through linkage analysis alone. This strategy introduces a statistical com- plexity when family-based association tests are used; the marker geno- P1430. Establishing Denaturing High Performance Liquid types among siblings are correlated in linked regions. Ignoring this corre- Chromatography (DHPLC) for Mutation Detection in the lation will compromise the size of the statistical hypothesis test, thus cloud- Elastin Gene ing the interpretation of test results. We present a method for computing C. Kraus1, A. Rauch1, M. Hofbeck2, H. Singer3, A. Reis1 the expectation of a wide range of association test statistics under the null 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- hypothesis that there is linkage but no association. To standardize the test Nuremberg; Erlangen, Germany; 2University Department of Pediatrics; statistic an empirical variance-covariance estimator that is robust to the Tbingen, Germany; 3Department of Pediatrics; Erlangen, Germany sibling marker-genotype correlation is used. For example, we analyze a cokraus@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de deletion in the A2M gene at the 5 splice site of exon ii of the bait region Loss of function mutations in the Elastin gene (ELN) have been demon- in Alzheimer disease (AD) discordant sibships. Since the A2M gene lies in strated to be responsible for nonsyndromic supravalvular aortic stenosis a chromosomal region (chromosome 12p) that consistently has been (SVAS). SVAS is an obstructive vascular disorder that causes hemody- linked to AD, association test should be conducted under the null hypoth- namically significant narrowing of large arteries. Although the aorta is the esis that there is linkage but no association. most frequently diseased, any artery can be affected, including the pul- monary, carotid and coronary arteries. The onset and severity of the vas- P1428. Molecular diagnostics of hereditary angioneurotic cular disease in SVAS is variable. If untreated, this disorder can lead to edema in Hungary heart failure, myocardial infarction and death. SVAS occurs with an inci- L. Kalmar1, A. Bors1, H. Farkas2, B. Fandl1, L. Varga1, H. Andrikovics1, G. dence of 1 in 20 000 life births. It can be inherited as an isolated autoso- Fust2, A. Tordai1 mal dominant trait or as one symptom of Williams-Beuren syndrome, a 1Institute of Haematology and Immunology; Budapest, Hungary; 2Semmel- complex developmental disorder characterized by cardiovascular, neu- weis University Kutvolgyi Clinical Center; Budapest, Hungary robehavioral, facial, connective tissue, and metabolic abnormalities. In lkalmar@biomembrane.hu nonsyndromic SVAS patients up to now 14 different mutations have been Hereditary angioneurotic edema (HANE) is an autosomal dominant disor- reported in the Elastin gene. As mutations are distributed all over the gene, der characterised by episodic local subcutaneous and submucosal edema mutation analysis is time consuming and cost intensive. Therefore we affecting the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. It is caused by established the DHPLC method for mutational screening of all 34 coding the deficiency of activated C1 esterase inhibitor protein (C1-INH, type I exons and flanking introns. In order to reduce false positive heteroduplex deficiency; reduced serum level, type II deficiency; reduced activity) whose formations PCR conditions had to be optimized for DHPLC. Temperature function is preventing unnecessary activation of the complement system. and buffer gradient conditions were elaborated for each exon to optimize The aim of the present study is to determine the disease-causing muta- elution profiles. DHPLC analysis were performed in five unrelated SVAS tions among Hungarian HANE patients. The estimated number of affected patients and available family members. Fragments with normal (wild type) HANE-families in Hungary is approximately 40-50, out of which 30 families sequence were used as controls. We identified the same disease causing (type I;25, type II;5) are managed in a single center in Budapest. To detect mutation (exon 10; K176X) in two non consanguineous patients by DHPLC large deletions and insertions, which supposedly occur exclusively in type and sequencing. In addition elution profiles with heteroduplex formation I HANE patients with an approximate frequency of 20%, we use Southern- were observed in 8 out of 34 exons analyzed. Whether these heteroduplex blotting analysis with BclI and BglII digestions. In the absence of large pattern are due to a mutation or a polymorphism have to be proved by structural changes, we employ single strand conformational polymorphism sequencing. (SSCP) analysis covering the whole coding region and splicing sites of the C1-INH gene by 15 primer-pairs (overlapping PCR-products shorter than P1431. The Distribution of Huntington Disease Gene (IT-15) 200 bp), with silver staining detection. The determinations are currently in Polymorphic Features on Normal and Mutant Alleles progress, so far large deletions were detected by Southern-blotting in 3/19 H. G. Karabulut1, T. Tuncali2, A. Tukun1, H. Ilgin Ruhi1, I. Bokesoy1 HANE type I families. The SSCP analyses completed so far showed 1Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics; altered patterns in exon 8 in eight HANE patients, in seven type II patients Ankara, Turkey; 2Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of we identified the disease causing mutation (Arg444Cys) by sequencing. In Medical Biology; Ankara, Turkey the remaining type I patient a Val458Met amino acid change was found. karabul@dialup.ankara.edu.tr Our program provides definite molecular diagnosis and opens the possi- The underlying mutation causing Huntington Disease is the expansion of a bility for prenatal diagnostics. CAG trinucleotide repeat in the first exon of IT-15 gene beyond a certain repeat number. IT-15 has also some other polymorphic features that may P1429.Mutation analysis of the CX26 gene in sporadic cases be associated with CAG repeat number. In this study, the distribution of with moderate to profound deafness polymorphic features identified in the first exon and 5 promoter region of S. Kupka1,T. Tth2,S. Aberle3, N. Blin3, I. Sziklai2, H. Zenner1, M. Pfister1 the gene was investigated on normal and mutant alleles seperately. Poly- 1HNO, Univ.-Klinikum; Tbingen, Germany; 2DEOEC Fl-Orr-Ggeklinika; morphic features included in the study are 6 and 20 base-pairs (bp) Debrecen, Hungary; 3Molekulare Genetik, Univ. Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany repeats (GGGGGC and GGCCCCGCCTCCGCCGGCGC namely) and susankupka@yahoo.de G?Aand C?Tpoint mutations located on 5 promoter region and, CAG and Non-syndromic neurosensory recessive deafness (NSRD) is one of the CCG repeats in the first exon of the gene. PCR and DNAsequencing was most common human sensory disorders. Mutations in the connexin 26 performed following genomic DNAisolation from peripheral blood samples gene have been established as a major cause of inherited and sporadic of patients after obtaining their informed consent. The method of choice non-syndromic deafness in different populations. The CX26 gene encodes enabled a clear investigation of these polymorphic features both in wild382 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders type and mutant alleles seperately. CAG repeat number was found to be in IVS4+1G>T. Because it was impossible to directly study the effect of this the range of 17-25 and 41-51 on normal and mutant alleles respectively. mutation on mRNA splicing in patient hepatocytes, and illegitimate RT- Only two alleles of CCG repeats, 7 and 10 repeats, were observed and 10 PCR from leukocyte RNAwas unsuccessful, we used a transfected cell repeats of CCG was only seen in mutant alleles. 6 and 20 bp repeat num- approach. COS-7 cells expressing the control FGAgenomic construct pro- bers were 1 and 2 respectively for all normal and mutant alleles except for duced only correctly-spliced mRNAmolecules, whereas cells expressing two normal alleles one with 2 repeats of 6 bp and one with 3 repeats of 20 the IVS4 mutant construct produced only abnormal transcripts which were bp. The nucleotides seen in G->Aand C->Tpositions were G and C respec- individually cloned for identification. Multiple cryptic donor splice sites situ- tively in all normal and mutant alleles. To our knowledge, this is the first ated in exon 4 and intron 4 were found to be utilized. One of these, situat- report on HD alleles investigating 5 promoter region polymorphic features ed 4 bp downstream of the normal site was used in 85% of transcripts relative to CAG repeat number on normal and mutant alleles seperately. resulting in a 4 bp insertion-frameshift leading to premature truncation of FGA. Our results confirm the validity of this approach to study mRNA P1432.Anovel test for the detection of truncating mutations splice-site mutations and demonstrate that the common FGAIVS4+1G>T M. M. Matin1, A. Dalton2, D. P. Hornby1 variant is a null mutation leading to afibrinogenemia. Cloning the RT-PCR 1The Transgenomic Research Laboratory, Krebs Institute for Biomolecular products allows the identification of rare aberrant transcripts that would Sciences; Sheffield, United Kingdom; 2North Trent Molecular Genetics have been missed by simply sequencing the total product. Two other muta- Laboratory, Childrens Hospital; Sheffield, United Kingdom tions affecting donor sites in FGA; IVS1+3G>Aand IVS3+1_+4delGTAA, MBP95MM@sheffield.ac.uk and one acceptor site mutation in FGG; IVS2-3C>G have been identified Screening for mutations in the genome of individuals with a family history in patients with congenital afibrinogenemia. The respective genomic con- of diseases such as breast or ovarian cancer is a contentious issue since structs are currently being expressed in COS-7 cells to assess their effect there is little prospect of fixing such genetic defects in the near future. In on mRNAsplicing. the vast majority of cases, those mutations, which significantly increase the risk of cancer susceptibility are truncating mutations, i.e. the protein encod- P1435.Mucolipidosis type 4; Mutations in a novel gene. ed by the mutant gene is smaller in size than normal. We have established G. Bach1, R. Bargal1, N. Avidan2, E. Ben Asher3, D. Lancet2, A. Raas- that engineered forms of DNAmethyltransferase genes can be used in Rothschild1, M. Zeigler1 conjunction with certain strains of Escherichia coli for the direct selection 1Hadassah University Hospital; Jerusalem, Israel; 2Weizman institute; of recombinant molecules. We have tested a number of DNAmethyltrans- Rehovot, Israel; 3Weizman Insitute; Rehovot, Israel ferase genes for their ability to accommodate DNAfragments of up to 1000 Bach@hadassah.org.il base pairs without loss of phenotype and yet to be susceptible to inactiva- Mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV) is a recessive, neurodegenerative, lysosomal tion when a truncating mutation arises within the DNAfragment. This prop- storage disorder manifested with psychomotor retardation and ophthalmo- erty was employed to construct a plasmid vector, pSPRX, for the detection logical abnormalities, including cornea opacities, retina degeneration and of truncating mutations using M.SPRX a modified version of the gene strabismus. The disease is found in relatively high frequency among encoding the cytosine-C5-specific DNA methyltransferase M.SPRI. Ashkenazi Jews. MLIV is one of the few lysosomal storage disorders in M.SPRX, which has non-methyltransferase polypeptide sequence in place which neither the basic metabolic defect nor the relevant gene had been of TRD M, can accommodate an in frame insertion of up to 300 amino identified hitherto. We undertook positional cloning which led to the identi- acids without any loss of activity, and yet insertion of fragments containing fication of a novel gene on human chromosome 19p13.2-13.3. The gene - truncating mutations, reduce its activity. MCOLN1 is expressed in all the human tissues examined and encodes a putative protein - Mucolipin1 that was found to be a member of a new fam- P1433. Four novel mutations in ryanodine receptor gene ily - the mucolipins. The putative protein of 580 amino acids is a calcium (RYR1) found in patients with human stress syndrome and channel containing 6 transmembrane domains and a serine lipase and malignant hyperthermia nuclear localization signal motives. MLIV-causing mutations were identified T. Krieger1, M. Steinfath2, W. Wappler2, S. Singh1 in MCOLN1, two of which were found in 95% of the MLIV alleles in the 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; Jewish Askenazi families (72% for the first mutation and 23% for the sec- 2Clinic for Anaesthesia, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany ond). The 2 mutations correlated with specific haplotypes in this region. singh@uke.uni-hamburg.de Homozygotes for each of these mutations as well as compound heterozy- Malignant hyperthermia(MH) is a rare autosomal dominant pharmacoge- gotes showed all similar clinical phenotype. Six other MLIV-causing muta- netic trait which can manifest itself in persons with genetic predisposition tions in the MCOLN1 gene were also identified mostly among non Jewish in an acute life threatening form during general anaesthesia. Porcine MLIV patients. The identification of the gene involved with MLIV finally per- stress syndrome has similar symptoms like the MH and has been traced mits accurate patients diagnosis, including prenatal diagnosis and het- back to a point mutation in ryanodine receptor(RYR1)gene. Mutation erozygotes identification. Heterozygote frequency was found to be 1/100 in analysis in human RYR1 gene has shown uptil now about 25 mutations the Ashkenazi population. Since 2 mutations accounts for 95% of the MLIV which could be associated with MH predisposition. Human stress syn- alleles in the Ashkenazi population it will enable population screening in drome (HSS) is a very rare condition which is triggered by a very warm this ethnic group for the ascertainment of high risk couples before the birth environment or excessive bodily stress leading to well known crisis similar of the first affected child. The lysosomal storage in MLIV stems from abnor- to MH. In a large collective of MH and some HSS patients, we performed mal endocytosis process from late endosomes to lysosomes. The charac- mutation analysis of 14 selected exons of RYR1 gene in DNAfrom blood terization of the protein involved with this process will permit a deeper by employing the techniques of SSCP and fluorescence based direct understanding for this process and the defect in this sequencing. Apart from already known mutations, we found four novel mutations A1435G, G6385A, A6566G, C7258T, two of them in patients P1436.Mutations in the AAAS gene encoding a novel protein expressing HSS. These results further confirm our previous suggestion with a peroxisome targeting signal 1 (PTS1) cause triple A that MH and HSS seem to be part of the same large syndrome. In order to syndrome further confirm these observations a screen in cDNAfrom muscle from a K. Handschug1, S. Sperling2, H. Lee3, S. Hennig2, F. Oberender1, C. bigger collective of patients, especially HSS patients, is being attempted in Hilscher1, H. Petzold1, S. K. Yoon3, A. J. L. Clark4, A. Huebner1 order to examine all the exons of RYR1 gene. 1Childrens Hospital, Technical University; Dresden, Germany; 2Max- Planck-Institute of Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 3Research Insti- P1434. SpliceXpress; expression and analysis of splice site tute of Molecular Genetics, Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Sci- mutations in the fibrinogen alpha and gamma genes account- ences; Seoul, Republic of Korea; 4Departments of Endocrinology, St ing for congenital afibrinogenemia. Bartholomews and the Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry; C. Attanasio1, P. de Moerloose2, S. Antonarakis1, M. Morris1, M. Neerman- London, United Kingdom Arbez1 Katrin.Handschug@mailbox.tu-dresden.de 1Division of Medical Genetics, University Medical School and University The triple Asyndrome (MIM*231550) is a rare autosomal recessive disor- Hospital; Geneva, Switzerland; 2Division of Angiology and Hemostasis, der characterized by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) resistant adre- University Hospital; Geneva, Switzerland nal failure, achalasia and alacrima as well as a variety of neurological fea- Attanas5@etu.unige.ch tures. Haplotype analysis of 47 triple Afamilies allowed us to refine the crit- Congenital afibrinogenemia (MIM # 202400) is a rare, autosomal recessive ical region from 6 cM to a genetic segment of 0 cM between KRT8 and disorder characterized by the complete absence of circulating fibrinogen. D12S1651. After construction of a high resolution BAC/PAC contig of this Our recent studies on the molecular basis of the disease showed that the region we identified a novel gene, designated AAAS (Achalasia-Addisoni- most common genetic defect is a donor splice mutation in FGAintron 4, anism-Alacrima-Syndrome gene) encoding a protein of 546 amino acidsPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 383 which is mutated in all affected individuals. We found 19 different mutations FOXC2-gene. FOXC2 is a member of the forkhead/winged-helix family of scattered over the coding sequence including 3 splice mutations. Most transcription factors, whose members are involved in diverse development mutations lead to a truncated protein suggesting loss of function. The pro- pathways. The gene produces a 2.2-kb transcript encoded by a 1.5-kb sin- tein shows high similarities (over 90 %) to putative proteins from Sus scro- gle exon that is highly GC rich. To test the hypothesis whether FOXC2- fa, Bos taurus, Rattus norvegicus and Mus musculus suggesting a con- mutations cause lymphedema distichiasis in general, we studied a family served structure and function in mammals. RNA blotting experiments with LD in two generations presenting a variable phenotype. By SSCP- revealed ubiquitous expression with a higher level in neuroendocrine and analysis and subsequent sequencing, we identified an insertion of guanin gastrointestinal structures which are predominantly affected in triple Asyn- within a stretch of five guanins beginning at position 867 of the FOXC2- drome. The predicted protein belongs to the WD-repeat family of regulato- gene in the two clinical affected children. This frame-shift mutation results ry proteins. At the C-terminal end it contains the tripeptide Ser-His-Leu, a in a stop codon, leading to a truncated form of the FOXC2-protein. The specific peroxisome targeting signal 1 (PTS1) raising the possibility that mutations described by Fang et al. also resulted in stop-codons and were the AAAS gene product may function as a peroxisomal protein. localized at positions 297 and 1093. Our results confirm the hypothesis that an inactivating mutation of one allel of the FOXC2-gene is causing LD. P1437. Demethylation, reactivation, and destabilization of Also further studies have to confirm that there is no evidence for hetero- human fragile X full mutation alleles in mouse embryocarci- geneity in LD. Because of the variable clinical features, a mutational analy- noma (EC) cells sis of FOXC2-gene may give better insights in the pathogenesis of the dis- D. Whrle, U. Salat, H. Hameister, W. Vogel, P. Steinbach ease, e.g. the identification of a phenotype-genotype correlation. Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Ulm; Ulm, Germany peter.steinbach@medizin.uni-ulm.de P1440.FOXC2; Confirming its role in Lymphedema-Distachia- The major cause of fragile X syndrome is mutational expansion of the CGG sis Syndrome. repeat in gene FMR1, hypermethylation, and transcriptional silencing. M. A. Kimak1, E. C. Lawrence1, K. L. Levinson1, D. N. Finegold2, R. E. Fer- Most fragile X embryos develop somatic mosaicism of disease causing rell1 full expansions of different lengths. Homogeneity of the mosaic patterns 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh; Pittsburgh, PA among multiple tissues indicates that these unstable expansions aquire United States; 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh; Pitts- mitotic stability in early fetal life. As mitotic stability is found strictly associ- burgh, PAUnited States ated with hypermethylation in adult tissues, current theory fixes the time of height@pop.pitt.edu instability to developmental stages when fully expanded CGG repeats exist Lymphedema-Distachiasis syndrome (LD {MIM153400}) is a diverse, heri- in an unmethylated state. Murine EC cells (PC13) were used as a model table condition whose primary components, edematous limbs and an extra system of pluripotent embryonic cells. Hypermethylated and unmethylated row of eyelashes, are often seen amid a spectrum of other features includ- full expansions on human chromosomes were transferred from murine A9 ing craniofacial, cardiovascular, and vertebral abnormalities. FOXC2, a hybrids into EC cells by microcell fusion. As demonstrated for the first time, member of the winged-helix forkhead transcription factor family, contains even full expansion alleles that were fully methylated and stable in the a highly conserved 110 bp DNAbinding domain which has been implicat- donors fibroblasts and in A9 as well, became demethylated, reactivated, ed in such developmental processes as determining embryonic cell fate, and destabilized in undifferentiated EC hybrids. When destabilized expan- initiating and maintaining tissue differentiation, and tumorigenesis later in sions were reintroduced from EC cells into A9, instability was reversed to life. Recent identification of FOXC2 mutations in 2 LD families (AJHG 2000 stability. Our results strongly support that fully expanded alleles are initial- Dec; 67(6)1382-88) has placed this gene in a favorable position to explain ly unstable and unmethylated in the human embryo, and gain stability upon the phenotypic complexity found in LD. Here we report identification of five genetic or epigenetic change of the embryonic cells. additional FOXC2 mutations in six lymphedema families, four of which exhibit distachiasis. Of the two not reporting distachiasis, one family P1438.Mutations in the transcription factor FOXC2 in families demonstrates an additional feature consistent with the LD syndrome, with lymphoedema distichiasis. namely cleft palate. Onset of lymphedema was pubertal in nearly all cases. R. Bell1, G. Brice1, A. H. Child1, S. Mansour1, V. A. Murday1, J. R. O. Direct sequencing of FOXC2 revealed both single nucleotide and inser- Collin2, P. S. Mortimer1, K. Burnand3, S. Jeffery1 tion/deletion mutations occurring in or near the forkhead domain. All muta- 1St Georges Medical School; London, United Kingdom; 2Moorfields Eye tions observed are predicted to cause early termination of the FOXC2 pro- Hospital; London, United Kingdom; 3St Thomas Hospital; London, United tein. We speculate that the clinical heterogeneity seen in Lymphedema- Kingdom Distachiasis syndrome is the result of haploinsufficiency of this develop- rbell@sghms.ac.uk mental gene and further investigation into the FOXC2 expression pattern Primary lymphoedema is chronic tissue oedema, most frequently of one or may elucidate its role in lymphatic development and its interaction with both lower limbs, resulting from an intrinsic fault in lymph conducting path- other developmental genes. ways. There is a strong genetic component, with 35% of patients showing a positive family history, and there are 3 three main autosomal dominant P1441. Phenotypic heterogeneity in lymphedema families forms of the disorder; Milroys disease (congenital), and Lymphoedema- with FOXC2 mutations. distichiasis (LD) and Meiges disease, where the onset is at or after puber- K. L. Levinson1, R. E. Ferrell1, M. A. Kimak1, E. C. Lawrence1, J. W. Dun- ty. In LD, features associated with the tissue swelling include eyelashes lap1, D. N. Finegold2 arising inappropriately from the meibomian glands (distichiasis), heart 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh; Pittsburgh, PA anomalies and cleft palate. We established linkage of LD to 16q24.3 (Man- United States; 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh; Pitts- gion et al, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 1999;65;427-432), and the gene mutated in burgh, PAUnited States LD has very recently been established as FOXC2, a member of the fork- klevinso@helix.hgen.pitt.edu head/winged helix family of transcription factors. (Fang et al, Am. J. Hum. Lymphedema-Distichiasis is a syndrome which includes ocular abnormali- Genet. 2000;67;1382-1388, R. Bell, unpublished data). Fang et al report- ties, pubertal onset lymphedema, congenital heart defects, and cleft palate ed prematurely terminating mutations in FOXC2 in two families with LD, (OMIM 153400). Other lymphedema syndromes include Yellow Nail Syn- and we have analysed the 10 LD families on our database for mutations in drome (OMIM 153300) and Lymphedema-Ptosis (OMIM 153000). We this gene. We have found 4 deletions and 5 insertions, scattered through- report on the phenotype of six families in our study as well as two pub- out the gene, all of which produce frameshifts that would lead to premature lished families, all with mutations in the FOXC2 gene on 16q24. The six termination of the protein. These data support the proposition that FOXC2 caucasian families from our study were ascertained through our Lym- mutations in LD act in a haploinsufficient manner. phedema Family Study website (www.pitt.edu/~genetics/lymph) or GeneTests, Inc. (www.genetests.org). Included in these eight families were P1439.Mutation in the FOXC2 gene causing lymphedema dis- 42 affected individuals and/or mutation carriers. Two were aborted fetuses tichiasis in a German family with hydrops, and two mutation carriers were completely normal. Lym- N. Tilgen, B. Halliger-Keller, W. Kress phedema, with an average onset age of 15, was present in 31 individuals. Institute of Human Genetics; Wrzburg, Germany Among the 9 individuals without lymphedema, 7 were between the ages of nikola.tilgen@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de 6 and 14, and presumably presymptomatic. Distichiasis was present in 21 Lymphedema distichiasis (LD; MIM #153400) is a rare autosomal domi- individuals from six families. Tetralogy of Fallot, cleft palate, ptosis, cystic nant disorder with variable penetrance, presenting mainly with lymphede- hygroma, and fetal hydrops were observed in at least one member of these ma of the limbs and a double row of eyelashes. Recently Fang et al. (Am. families. Yellow nails was present in one family with lymphedema, distichi- J .Hum. Gen, 67; 1382-1388, 2000) described two unrelated families suf- asis, and ptosis. Phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity and variable expres- fering from LD and carrying inactivating mutations in one allele of the sion characterize families with mutations in FOXC2. The occurrence of384 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders phenotypic features associated with three syndromes, previously classified lung or placenta by Northern blot analysis. MIPD1 has a coiled-coil domain as distinct genetic entities, suggests the need for reclassification of the in the C-terminus but no homology to any known genes. Mutation analysis lymphedema syndromes. Five families with lymphedema and distichiasis, for two patients with mirror-image polydactyly and a whole mount in situ but no detectable mutations in the FOXC2 coding sequence, indicate a hybridization in the developing limb bud in mouse embryos are now in high likelihood of further locus heterogeneity. progress. P1442.Amissense mutation that causes Primary Congenital P1445. Genotype/phenotype correlation of NPHS1 and NPHS2 Lymphoedema by interfering with VEGFR-3 signalling mutations advocate a functional interrelationship in renal A. L. Evans1, M. J. Karkkainen2, G. Brice1, A. Crosby1, P. Comeglio1, P. glomerular filtration. Mortimer1, K. Burnand3, M. Sarfarazi4, A. Child1 A. B. Koziell1, S. Hussain1, U. Lenkkeri2, K. Tryggvason3, P. Scambler1 1St Georges Hospital Medical School; London, United Kingdom; 2Univer- 1Institute of Child Health; London, United Kingdom; 2Biocenter; Oulu, Fin- sity of Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; 3St. Thomas Hospital; London, United land; 3Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, Sweden Kingdom; 4University of Connecticut Health Center; Farmington, CT Unit- A.Koziell@ich.ucl.ac.uk ed States Mutations of novel podocyte genes NPHS1 and NPHS2 are typically asso- aevans@sghms.ac.uk ciated with Finnish type congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNF) and autoso- Primary lymphoedema is a chronic tissue swelling, most frequently of the mal recessive focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) respectively. lower limbs, resulting from deficient lymphatic drainage. We have previ- We examined genotype/phenotype correlation of NPHS1/NPHS2 muta- ously reported a locus for primary congenital lymphoedema, (PCL), where tions to a) characterise accurately the mutation phenotype and b) further onset is at birth, to the most telomeric portion of chromosome 5q35.3. identify their role in the pathogenesis of glomerular protein leak. Methods. Mutations have been reported in the vascular endothelial growth factor-3 47 patients and 50 normal controls were analysed. NPHS1 and NPHS2 receptor (VEGFR-3) gene, which lies within this region. We have analysed exons were PCR amplified and products sequenced on an ABI 377. Phe- an additional 5 families with PCLand shown them to be consistent with notypic diagnosis was based on clinical and family history and/or renal linkage to 5q35.3. Furthermore, we describe a G to Atransition in VEGFR- biopsy. 38/47 patients had CNF, 4/47 congenital FSGS and 5/47 early 3, which results in Q for R substitution at amino acid 1041. This substitu- onset (1 year) FSGS. All presented with severe nephrotic syndrome, but tion affects a residue in a highly conserved region of the catalytic loop in disease progression was uncharacteristically mild in 9 CNF patients. the kinase domain of VEGFR-3 and by in vitro studies, has been shown to Results. 30/38 CNF patients had NPHS1 mutations, and 2/30 carried a interfere with the receptor tyrosyl phosphorylation. Thus defective VEGFR- specific additional NPHS2 mutation, R229Q, a putative hypomorphic 3 signalling seems to be one cause of PCLin families linked to 5q35.3. allele. 2 of 8 CNF patients lacking NPHS1 mutations had NPHS2 muta- tions. One NPHS1 mutation, R1160X, previously connected with severe P1443. ARSACS; Mutation detection and studies towards disease, was consistently associated with the milder CNF phenotype. All understanding the function of Sacsin. patients with congenital FSGS had concomitant mutations in NPHS1 and A. M. Richter1, J. Mercier1, J. C. Engert2, C. LeBlanc1, T. J. Hudson2 NPHS2. Mutations were absent in early onset FSGS. Conclusions. Geno- 1Centre de Recherche, Hpital Sainte-Justine, Universit de Montral; type/phenotype correlation detected overlap between NPHS1 and NPHS2 Montral, PQ Canada; 2Montreal Genome Centre, McGill University Health mutations, with co-existence of mutations in both genes in congenital Centre; Montral, PQ Canada FSGS and rarely, CNF. In addition, the association of R1160X with mild andrea.richter@umontreal.ca and severe CNF indicates genetic/metabolic interference, unconnected Our overall aim is to understand the molecular pathogenesis of autosomal with NPHS2 mutations. Our findings advocate a functional interrelationship recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS/SACS MIM# between NPHS1 and NPHS2 within the podocyte, further supporting their 270550) a unique, early-onset disease. Although rare elsewhere, a founder integral role in the pathogenesis of proteinuria. effect increased disease frequency in the population of northeastern Que- bec in Canada. We mapped the gene to chromosome 13q11 (Richter et al, P1446. Fine mapping of deletion breakpoints in Williams- AJHG 64;768, 1999) . We identified the 11.7 kb single exon sacsin gene Beuren syndrome patients and detected two mutations g.6594delT(DT) and the rare g.5254C>Tnon- M. Bays, O. de Luis, L. F. Magano, L. A. Prez Jurado sense mutation (Engert et al, Nature Genetics 24; 120, 2000). Analyses of Genetics Unit, Dept. of Experimental Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra; the 437 kD predicted sacsin protein with sequence comparison tools did Barcelona, Spain not reveal extensive similarity to known proteins, although the presence of monica.bayes@cexs.upf.es heat-shock domains suggest a role in chaperone-mediated protein folding. Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a genetic disorder resulting from a To facilitate molecular diagnosis and gene carrier detection, we developed heterozygous deletion of contiguous genes at 7q11.23. Large blocks of an ASO based mutation detection method. The analysis of 164 independ- region-specific low-copy repeat elements (LCRs A,B and C) predispose to ent ARSACS alleles revealed that 152 (92.7%) carried the DTand 6 (3.7 a common ~1,6 Mb deletion through unequal crossing-over, mostly %) the C>Tmutation. For 6 ARSACS alleles (3.7%), we have yet to iden- between the centromeric and medial LCR blocks B. These blocks share tify the mutation. This unknown mutation(s) is/are always carried in the >99.5% sequence identity along ~120 Kb and contain three genes at the heterozygous form with the frequent, DT mutation. The identification of medial location (GTF2I, NCF1 and GTF2IL), with the corresponding these rare alleles is now underway. Sacsin was identified entirely using a pseudogenes at the centromeric side, as well as a high density of SINE sequence-based approach. We cloned sacsin fragments in expression (44%). Athird block B with pseudogenes lies more telomeric. In this study, vectors and produced anti-sacsin antibodies to specific fragments. The we have defined the deletion breakpoints in 35 WBS patients using copy- cloning of full length sacsin to obtain Abs to the complete protein is under- specific nucleotide differences. Most patients (33/35) exhibited the typical way. The use of these different Ab species to detect the presence and cel- 1,6 Mb deletion caused by recombination between the centromeric and lular distribution of sacsin protein in control and ARSACS patient cells will medial blocks B. Junction fragments were mapped within GTF2I/P1 or be described. Understanding the function of sacsin is the first step in the GTF2I-NCF1 intergenic in 19 cases (58%), NCF1/P1 in 9 (27%), NCF1- development of possible treatment options and may have relevance to the GTF2ILintergenic in 2 (6%), and GTF2IL/P1 in 3 (9%). Sequencing across understanding of other progressive neurodegenerative diseases. the junction fragment in two cases revealed the presence of Alu repeats. Only 2 patients had a larger deletion likely due to recombination between P1444.Anew gene is disrupted by the t(2;14) translocation in blocks A. No correlation was found between the different deletions and the a patient with mirror-image polydactyly clinical phenotype. Our data indicate that; 1- hemizygousity at NCF1 K. Yoshiura, S. Kondo, K. Komatsu, N. Matsumoto, N. Niikawa and/or GTF2ILdoes not affect the WBS phenotype; 2- unequal homolo- Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine; gous recombination causing WBS is a precise mechanism that preferen- Nagasaki, Japan tially occurs in LCR regions of extremely high sequence identity and rich in kyoshi@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp repeat elements, but without specific hot spots within them. We previously reported that the 14q13 translocation breakpoint in a patient with mirror-image polydactyly lies between D14S75 and D14S306 within a P1447. Mutation analysis of the MECP2 gene in Rett syn- complete BAC/PAC contig (Genomics, 1997). Anovel gene, named mirror- drome females from UK and Italy. image polydactyly gene 1 (MIPD1) was found to be disrupted by the M. DEsposito breakpoint. The MIPD1 gene consists of 17 exons and spans a 450-kb International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR; Naples, Italy genomic region. All exon-intron boundaries were determined using genom- desposit@iigbna.iigb.na.cnr.it ic sequences in this contig map. The expression is detectable in the adult Rett syndrome is an X linked dominant neurological disorder, which heart, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas but not in the adult brain appears to be the commonest genetic cause of profound combined intel-Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 385 lectual and physical disability in Caucasian females. Recently, this syn- of MECP2 gene should be expected an essential and useful tool to confirm drome has been associated with mutations of the MECP2 gene, a tran- the clinical diagnosis for RTTpatients. scriptional repressor of still unknown target genes. We present the results of a MECP2 mutation analysis of Italian and British RTT females, the P1450. Analysis of MECP2 gene mutations in Turkish Rett majority of which show the classical phenotype. An overall mutation fre- Syndrome Patients quency of roughly 70 % was detected, and several new mutations identi- C. Akyerli1, A. Sayi1, R. S. Kocoglu1, M. Cimbis2, M. Topcu2, T. Ozcelik1,3 fied. We were able to trace a hot spot map for MECP2 mutations, analyz- 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University; ing our data and the published results for different populations. The popu- Ankara, Turkey; 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University lations analyzed show six most common mutations which account for the Medical School; Ankara, Turkey; 3Bilgen, Bilkent University; Ankara, 62% of the cases. Using this strategy, we established the high occurrence Turkey of COOH terminal deletions, in the patients analyzed. In this region of the akyerli@bilkent.edu.tr MeCP2 protein, database comparisons identified a potential new structur- Rett Syndrome (RTT) is a progressive X-linked dominant neurodevelop- al domain, common to other regulatory genes, all significantly expressed in mental disorder, affecting 1/10,000-15,000 females. The disease-causing brain. The combined approach of mutational and bioinformatic analysis let gene was identified as MECP2on chromosome Xq28, and mutations have us to add a number of observations. Such analysis could become the basis been found in ~80% of patients diagnosed with RTT. We started mutation- for a genotype-phenotype correlation. However, this was not feasible here, al screening on MECP2, exon 2 and 3, in 52 RTTpatients. As a first step, as the majority of cases in our study population have classical RTT. we screened for six known mutations; R106W, P152R, T158M, R306C, R168X, F155S, and one polymorphism; E397K. We found R106W in three P1448.Genotype-phenotype correlation of MECP2 mutations patients, P152R in two patients, T158M in four patients, and R306C in four in Rett syndrome patients. Mutations R168X and F155S were not detected in our patients. I. Kondo1, T. Fukuda1, R. Morishita1, T. Matsuishi2, Y. Yamashita3, K. Only one patient had E397K polymorphism, who also bears R306C muta- Kuwajima4, H. Nitta5, I. Ohmori6, I. Horiuchi6 tion. In exon 3 of MECP2, there are several known deletion type of muta- 1Ehime University School of Medicine; Ehime, Japan; 2Kurume University tions. By PCR analysis, two patients were found to have ~ 26 bp deletion School of Medicine; Hukuoka, Japan; 3Kurume University School of Medi- in exon 3. In order to confirm this mutation, we are performing sequencing cine; Fukuoka, Japan; 4Ibaraki Pref. Handicapped Childrens Center; analysis at the moment. As a result of this initial screening, MECP2muta- Ibaraki, Japan; 5Niigata Pref. Hamagumi Rehabilit. Center for Handi- tions were identified in ~ 30 % of the Turkish patients diagnosed with RTT. capped Children; Niigata, Japan; 6Asahigawa Jidoin; Okayama, Japan We will further analyze MECP2by direct DNAsequencing in patients not ikondo@m.ehime-u.ac.jp found to have a mutation by restriction endonuclease analysis. Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting exclu- sively females with regression loss of speech and purposeful hand use P1451.Mutations in the a3 subunit of the vacuolar H+-ATPase after 6 months of almost normal development. Since DNAmutations in the cause infantile malignant osteopetrosis methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene (MECP2) were detected in patients C. Kubisch1, U. Kornak2, A. Schulz3, W. Friedrich3, S. Uhlhaas1, B. Kre- with RTTin 1999, many different mutations in MECP2 have been reported mens4, T. Voit4, C. Hasan5, U. Bode5, T. J. Jentsch2 not only in patients with classic RTT, but also in patients with non-specific 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Universitt Bonn; Bonn, Germany; 2Zentrum fr mental retardation.However, genotype-phenotype correlation of MECP2 Molekulare Neurobiologie Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany; 3Universitt- mutations has not been established. In this study, we have screened DNA skinderklinik, Universitt Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 4Klinik und Poliklinik fr mutations MECP2 in 100 Japanese sporadic patients with clinical diagno- Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universitt-Gesamthochschule Essen; Essen, sis of RTTby child neurologists. We identified 35 different causative muta- Germany; 5Zentrum fr Kinderheilkunde, Universitt Bonn; Bonn, Ger- tions in 85 patients (85% of patients examined) ; 13 missense mutations in many 39 patients, 6 nonsense mutations in 30 patients and 15 frameshift muta- kornaj@zmnh.uni-hamburg.de tions in 15 patisnts and one splicing anomaly in one patient with RTT. The Infantile malignant osteopetrosis is a rare and fatal disease that usually common mutations of MECP2 were T158M and R168X in our patients, begins during the first postnatal weeks. Leading signs are a massive detected in 12 and 9 classic RTTpatients, respectively. On the other hand, increase in bone density, absence of marrow cavities in the long bones and R133C and R294X were predominantly detected in patients with preserved anemia due to insufficient extramedullary blood production, that further speech vatiant form of RTT, detected in 4 in 6 patients with R133C and 3 causes hepatosplenomegaly. The only currently available cure is bone in 6 patients with R294X. Skewed X- inactivation was not obserbed in marrow transplantation. As the osteoclast is thought to be the only cell these patients. Although effect of X-inactivation on phenotypes have been capable of degrading bone, it was likely that the cause of the disease was represented, the types of MECP2 mutations may also effect on pheno- a defect in osteoclast function. These cells degrade bone material in a types of RTT. tightly sealed extracellular compartment that is acidified by a V-type H+- ATPase. Recently, a new isoform of the membrane-spanning a-subunit of P1449. Diagnostic MECP2 mutational analysis in Korean this H+-pump was cloned, shown to be expressed in osteoclasts and its patients with Rett syndrome gene was mapped close to a locus for infantile osteopetrosis. Further, C. Kim1, I. Kim1, K. Kwak1, S. Kim1, B. Son2, T. Hwang3, S. Park3, C. mutations in the corresponding mouse gene were found to cause an Kang1, S. Kim1, B. Chung1 osteopetrotic phenotype. In 9 out of 12 patients with infantile malignant 1Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Pusan National Univer- osteopetrosis, we now demonstrate mutations in OC116/TCIRG1, the sity; Pusan, Republic of Korea; 2Department of Pediatrics, St. Benedict gene encoding the a3 subunit of the V-ATPase from osteoclasts. On the Hospital; Pusan, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Pediatrics, College of other hand, a patient from a consanguineous family was heterozygous at Medicine, Inje University; Pusan, Republic of Korea the OC116/TCIRG1-locus, suggesting that a mutation in a different gene kimcm@hyowon.cc.pusan.ac.kr underlies osteopetrosis in that pedigree. Analysis of further samples is cur- Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1 in rently being carried out. Our work shows that mutations in the gene encod- 10,000 to 15,000 female births worldwide. Mutations in the MECP2 ing the a3 subunit of the proton pump are a rather common cause of infan- (methyl-CpG-binding protein 2) gene, mapped on chromosome Xq28, tile malignant osteopetrosis and suggests that this disease is genetically cause RTT. MeCP2 contains both a methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) heterogeneous. and a transcriptional repression domain (TRD), and participates in tran- scriptional silencing via DNAmethylation. We analyzed three exons of the P1452.Molecular genetics of TRAPS ( TNF receptor-associat- MECP2 gene from the peripheral blood of 30 Korean patients with RTTby ed periodic syndrome), a new hereditary periodic fever syn- PCR and direct sequencing. We detected mutations of MECP2 in 20 cases drome (66.7%) of the 30 RTT patients. The mutations consisted of 12 types I. Aksentijevich, D. L. Kastner including 9 missense and 3 nonsense mutations. Of these, three (L100V, NIH; Bethesda, MD United States G161E and T311M) mutations were newly identified, and five (T158M, aksentii@exchange.nih.gov R168X, R255X, R270X, R306C) mutations were frequently generated. Mutations in the extracellular domains of the 55 kDa TNF receptor Mutations involved MBD and TRD were showed 8 cases (40%) and 7 (TNFRSF1A) define a dominantly inherited periodic fever syndrome cases (35%) of 20 current mutations, respectively. Therefore these muta- TRAPS that is characterized by prolonged attacks of recurrent fevers, ster- tions found in the functional domains may critically affect the function of ile peritonitis, arthralgia, myalgia, rash, and/or conjunctivitis (MIM142680). MECP2. We found that most MECP2 mutations were confined in the exon TRAPS can be distinguished from familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) 3 (19 of 20 mutations). So it is suggested that the sequence analysis of based on ethnic background, duration of attacks, and poor response to exon 3 should be done at first to screen mutation in MECP2. The analysis colchicine. We have previously described 6 disease-associated386 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders TNFRSF1Amutations (C30R, C33Y,T50M, C52F,C88R, and C88Y), 5 of likely to result in a non-functional protein. Our data thus suggest that a which disrupt conserved extracellular cysteines. In a survey of additional complete loss of function of the MKKS product, and thus an inability to fold patients with unexplained periodic fevers (150), we have identified 6 new a range of target proteins, is responsible for the clinical manifestations of TNFRSF1Amutations in 28 patients ; H22Y, C33G, P46L, S86P, R92Q, BBS. Furthermore in contrast to adult tissues, where MKKS expression c.193-14 G> A, and one mutation ( C30S) that has been recently reported. was widespread at stable levels, we have found the abundance of MKKS This brings the total number of TRAPS mutations to date to 14, all of them mRNAto vary significantly during early development, with strong expres- missense substitutions with 7 involving cysteine residues. We also report sion correlating to sites of disease such as the heart, branchial arches and reduced penetrance for several of the mutations; C33Y, T50M, P46L, the developing limb bud, suggesting that the onset Bardet-Biedl syndrome R92Q, and c.193-14 G> A. The c.193-14 G> A, R92Q, and T50M muta- may be as early as the fifth week of human development. tions occurred at CpG hotspots and were observed in patients of diverse ethnic descent. Haplotype analysis showed evidence for a common intra- P1455.The common breakpoint of NF1 microdeletions inter- genic (TNFRSF1A) founder for R92Q even among patients of very distinct rupts a new gene background (9/9 shared a microsatellite/ SNP haplotype that is very E. Legius, T. Deraedt, H. Brems, P. Marynen uncommon in the general population). However, there were independent Centre for Human Genetics; Leuven, Belgium founders for the other two mutations. Our analysis thus far does not Eric.Legius@med.kuleuven.ac.be explain the skewed ethnic distribution of TRAPS patients (Irish / Scottish) We performed molecular studies in 38 NF1 microdeletion patients. Twen- on the basis of a common mutation or founder chromosome. ty-two out of 27 microdeletions where the parental origin could be studied were of maternal origin (81%) and 5 were of paternal origin. Thirty-seven P1453. Analysis of mutations in a large Bardet-Biedl cohort of the 38 microdeletions have a 1.5 Mb size with breakpoints in flanking reveals minor involvement of BBS6 and evidence for possible paralogous sequences (NF1-REPs).These paralogous sequences are digenic inheritance. >100 kb long and represent duplicated sequences in a direct orientation P. L. Beales1, N. Katsanis2, R. A. Lewis2, S. J. Ansley2, N. Elcioglu3, J. with 98% homology. At least 5 expressed sequences are present in the Raza4, M. O. Woods5, J. S. Green5, P. S. Parfrey5, W. S. Davidson6, P. J. flanking paralogous sequences. Additional paralogous sequences are Scambler1, J. R. Lupski2 present on chromosome 17 and on other chromosomes. The same paral- 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College Lon- ogous sequences are also present in Gorilla and Bonobo, but not in mice. don; London, United Kingdom; 2Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX Further molecular analysis of the 37 cases with breakpoints in the flanking United States; 3Department of Pediatric Genetics, University Hospital; paralogous sequences showed that 19 microdeletion breakpoints clus- Istanbul, Turkey; 4National Institute of Child Health; Karachi, Pakistan; tered in a 2 kb region. There was no specific structure present at the break- 5Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland; St. Johns, NF points responsible for the meiotic recombination process. Conversion Canada; 6Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fras- events in the breakpoint region were documented in at least two cases. er University; Burnaby, BC Canada These data show that about 50% of NF1 microdeletions originate from an pbeales@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk unequal recombination between paralogous sequences on the homolo- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder charac- gous chromosomes 17 during the first meiotic division. This recombina- terised by obesity, post-axial polydactyly, retinal dystrophy, hypogonadism, tional process interrupts a gene in the flanking NF1-REPs and deletes 4 cognitive deficit and renal disease. There exists substantial genetic and expressed sequences located in the telomeric NF1-REP. Aside from the phenotypic heterogeneity, which until now has hindered efforts to position- NF1 gene with its three embedded genes and the expressed sequences in ally clone the six known BBS loci. Our collection of 163 pedigrees of the paralogous regions at least 13 other expressed sequences are local- diverse ethnic origin has been evaluated for mutations in the recently dis- ized in the microdeletion region. We are currently investigating the role of covered BBS6 gene (MKKS) on 20p12 and for potential assignment to any these deleted genes for the specific phenotype in these microdeletion of the other known BBS loci. Through haplotype analysis of all pedigrees, patients. we report substantially reduced critical intervals for BBS2, 3 and 5. Fur- thermore, we identified nine missense alterations, each potentially patho- P1456. Evidence for a tumor-modifying gene in neurofibro- genic in MKKS from eight pedigrees, each of which segregate with the dis- matosis type 1. ease. In only one of these pedigrees were we able to identify both muta- K. G. Stephens1, M. O. Dorschner1, K. A. Leppig2, V. P. Sybert1 tions. However, three of the remaining pedigrees in which alterations were 1University of Washington; Seattle, WA United States; 2Group Health found, were also compatible with linkage to a separate BBS locus. More- Cooperative; Seattle, WAUnited States over, through autozygosity mapping of a further cohort of consanguineous millie@u.washington.edu kindreds from Turkey, Iraq and Pakistan, we noted that a single Pakistani We present clinical, molecular, and mapping evidence for a novel gene that pedigree mapped to two separate BBS loci. These data suggest that potentiates the formation of dermal neurofibromas in patients with neurofi- although BBS6 is a minor contributor to the syndrome, some BBS6 alleles bromatosis type 1 (NF1). Patients carrying a l.5 Mb contiguous gene dele- may act in conjunction with mutations at other BBS loci to cause or modi- tion that includes NF1 are remarkable for an early age at onset and a fy the BBS phenotype. heavy burden of dermal neurofibromas relative to age. Using molecular mapping techniques and sequencing, we found that the NF1 gene is P1454. Mutations in MKKS cause obesity, retinal dystrophy flanked by 80kb DNAelements (NF1REPs), which share >97% nucleotide and renal malformations associated with Bardet-Biedl syn- identity and facilitate the homologous recombination event that generates drome. the deletion. Unexpectedly, the deletion breakpoints of the majority of N. Katsanis1, P. L. Beales2, M. O. Woods3, R. A. Lewis1, J. S. Green3, P. patients were clustered in a 6 kb recombination hotspot within the S. Parfrey3, S. J. Ansley1, W. S. Davidson4,3, J. R. Lupski1 NF1REPs. Therefore, NF1 microdeletions occur predominantly at the 1Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX United States; 2Institute of Child same site and delete the same set of genes. We hypothesize that the Health; London, United Kingdom; 3Memorial University of Newfoundland; severe tumor phenotype is due to the deletion of both NF1 and a novel St. Johns, Canada; 4Simon Frasier University; Vancouver, BC Canada neurofibroma-potentiating locus (NPL). The location of this putative tumor katsanis@bcm.tmc.edu modifier has been narrowed to <700 kb by the identification of patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder predom- novel shorter deletions. Our hypothesis is strengthened by a patient with inantly characterized by obesity, retinal dystrophy, polydactyly, learning dif- somatic mosaicism for an NF1 microdeletion, who had rapid onset of der- ficulties, hypogenitalism and renal malformations, with secondary features mal neurofibromas in her early 20s. Therefore, the clinical manifestations that include diabetes mellitus, endocrinological dysfunction and behavioral of the mosaic individual were ameliorated compared to those of the abnormalities. Despite an initial expectation of genetic homogeneity due to germline NF1 microdeletion patients; a result predicted by our hypothesis. relative clinical uniformity, five BBS loci have been reported, with evidence Currently, we are investigating 5 functional genes within the 700 kb critical for additional loci in the human genome. We performed a genome screen region as candidates for the NPLlocus. Our data implicate for the first time with BBS families from Newfoundland that were excluded from BBS1-5 a locus that functions to modify neurofibromagenesis in humans. and identified linkage with D20S189. Fine-mapping reduced the critical interval to 1.9 cM between D20S851 and D20S189, encompassing a chap- P1457. Establishment of an in vivo fusion protein assay in eronin-like gene, in which mutations were reported recently to be associ- yeast for the detection of mutations in the NF1 gene ated with McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKKS). Given both the mapping C. Gottesmann1, P. Zwirn1, M. Krainer2, M. Edelhuser1, C. Fonatsch1, R. position and clinical similarities of these two syndromes, we screened Wieser1, K. Wimmer1 MKKS and identified mutations in five Newfoundland and two European- 1Institut fr Medizinische Biologie, Universitt Wien; Wien, Austria; 2Klinik American BBS pedigrees. The majority are frameshift alleles which are fr Innere Medizin I, Universittsklinik; Wien, AustriaPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 387 a9003816@unet.univie.ac.at or below the 10 %tile), the affected males did not exhibit any of the hall- Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF 1) is one of the most common inherited disorders. mark features of AS; widows peak, prominent forehead, The NF1 gene, mapped to chromosome 17q11.2, spans approximately hypertelorism,downslanting palpebral fissures, joint hyperextensibility, 350 kb of genomic DNAand contains 60 exons. The condition appears to shawl scrotum or foot deformations . Furthermore, all three males had be fully penetrant but has highly variable expression. For the patients, only severe MR that is not a feature of AS. Utilization of several programs for identification of the pathogenic germline mutation allows for presympto- secondary sequence analysis revealed that the substitution of a leucine for matic and/or prenatal testing in offspring. However, mutation detection in proline at position 312 appears to lengthen a coil region two-fold by remov- the NF1 gene is laborious and complex due to the size of the gene, the ing a beta turn. FGD1 is now like RSK2 and MECP2 in that mutations in it existence of pseudogenes and the lack of mutational hotspots. Since the give rise to both syndromic and nonsyndromic XLMR conditions. vast majority of pathogenic lesions in NF1 patients lead to truncated pro- tein the protein truncation test (PTT) is one of the most widely used muta- P1460.Mutation Spectrum in Papillon-Lefvre syndrome. tion detection technique. Recently, an alternative strategy has been devel- C. A. Hewitt1, C. Toomes1, C. L. Wu1, J. Wood1, D. McCormick2, J. oped for the detection of truncating mutations in large genes. This method James1, P. Sloan1, M. Dixon1, A. P. Read1, N. S. Thakker1 exploits the high efficiency of homologous recombination in yeast to fuse 1Manchester University; Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Queens University the test sequence in-frame to a reporter gene. The method permits the Belfast; Belfast, United Kingdom analysis of a large number of samples in a minimum of steps and simpli- Chelsee.Hewitt@man.ac.uk fies sequencing by the separation of wild type and mutant alleles. We have Papillon-Lefvre syndrome (PLS) is a rare autosomal recessive condition adapted this method for the analysis of the NF1 gene in 10 fragments. By characterised by palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and severe periodontitis that analysing 13 different mutations we have shown that the sensitivity of the results in premature tooth loss. We recently identified the gene that is test is comparable to that of the PTT. Further, we have demonstrated that mutated in this condition (Toomes et al., Nat. Genet. 23, 421-424, 1999). the use of the translation inhibitor puromycin increases the sensitivity of the This gene, CTSC, encodes the oligomeric lysosomal protease cathepsin C test due to reduction of nonsense-mediated mRNAdecay. Thus, this assay (also known as dipeptidyl aminopeptidase I) which plays an essential role offers a rapid and reliable alternative method for genetic diagnosis in NF1 in the activation of granule serine proteases expressed in bone marrow- patients. derived effector cells of both myeloid and lymphoid series. These serine proteases are implicated in a wide variety of immune and inflammatory P1458. Molecular study of new candidate genes in non-syn- processes and a lack of functional CTSC in PLS may be associated with a dromic X-linked mental retardation patients with disease- reduced host response against bacteria in dental plaque. We have per- associated balanced chromosome rearrangements formed mutation analyses on 17 PLS families and identified 20 mutations. V. Kalscheuer1,2, A. Schrer1, H. G. Nothwang1, S. Kbarth1, J. Wirth1, M. Affected individuals in two of the families were compound heterozygotes Platzer3, C. Menzel1, O. Hagens1, M. Ross4, J. Chelly2, J. P. Fryns2, C. and one of these two families had three different mutations. Of the genet- Moraine2, B. Hamel2, U. Trautmann5, M. Zenker5, G. Barbi6, N. Tom- ic changes, 13 were misense mutations, 3 were nonsense mutations, 2 merup7, H. H. Ropers2 splice site mutations, 1 frameshift insertion and 1 frameshift deletion. 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2European There was no obvious correlation with the phenotype. In 5 families that MRX Consortium; ., France; 3Institute for Molecular Biotechnology; Jena, were available for further analysis, a functional assay showed almost total Germany; 4The Sanger Centre, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus; Hinx- loss of CTSC activity in PLS patients, and reduced activity in obligate car- ton, United Kingdom; 5Institute for Human Genetics, University of Erlan- riers. gen-Nuernberg; Erlangen, Germany; 6Department of Medical Genetics, University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 7Department of Medical Genetics, P1461.Cathepsin B as a positional candidate on 8p22-23 for IMBG, University of Copenhagen; Copenhagen, Denmark keratolytic winter erythema kalscheuer@molgen.mpg.de S. Arndt1, S. Appel2, A. Bergheim1, D. McCormick3, N. S. Thakker4, W. Severe mental retardation is found in 0.5% of the newborn population and Hide5, A. Reis2, H. C. Hennies2, M. Ramsay1 roughly 2/3 of these cases are due to monogenic or chromosomal disor- 1SAIMR and University of the Witwatersrand; Johannesburg, South Africa; ders. In 1/3 of the affected males, X-chromosomal gene defects are 2Max-Delbrck Centre; Berlin, Germany; 3Queens University of Belfast; involved, and cryptic subtelomeric or interstitial deletions may be an equal- Belfast, United Kingdom; 4University of Manchester; Manchester, United ly important cause of mental retardation. In an attempt to study X-linked Kingdom; 5SANBI; Cape Town, South Africa mental retardation in a systematic manner, we have set out to collect and silkea@mail.saimr.wits.ac.za characterize 24 mentally retarded patients with balanced X;autosome Keratolytic winter erythema (KWE) is an autosomal dominant disorder of translocations. By employing FISH probes from a near-complete X-chro- unknown etiology, characterized by cyclical erythema, hyperkeratosis, as mosomal YAC contig (manuscript in prep.), all but two of the X-chromoso- well as recurrent and intermittent peeling of the palms and soles, especially mal breakpoints could be mapped to an interval of 500 kb or less. For during winter. KWE has been localized to chromosome 8p22-23 and hap- many of these, gene identification is in progress. Here we report on two lotype analysis in South African families placed the candidate gene in a patients, a familial inv(Xp22.2;q28) in a boy and a de novo 6cM interval between D8S550 and D8S552. Positional candidates in the t(X;8)(p11.2;p22.3) in a girl. Each of the three X-chromosomal breakpoints 6cM region were identified through cDNAdirect selection, exon trapping was found to disrupt an interesting candidate gene. Mutation analysis in and database searches. This region contains several known genes, includ- the >200 unrelated patients of the European MRX consortium is in ing cathepsin B (CTSB). This gene is a compelling candidate since an progress. autosomal recessive disorder characterized by palmoplantar hyperkerato- sis and periodontitis is caused by mutations in the cathepsin C gene P1459. Evidence That AMissense Mutation (P312L) in FGD1 (CTSC) on 11q14. CTSB mutation analysis was done on genomic DNA Results in Nonsyndromic XLMR. and by RT-PCR on patient lymphocytes. Several polymorphisms were C. E. Schwartz1, R. R. Lebel2, M. M. May1, H. A. Lubs3, R. E. Stevenson1 identified in the coding region, including two amino acid substitution muta- 1Greenwood Genetic Center; Greenwood, SC United States; 2Genetic Ser- tions, V26L and S53G, and one synonymous mutation, T140T (nt420 vices; Glen Ellyn, ILUnited States; 3University of Miami School of Medi- C?A). Several additional polymorphisms were observed in the introns. cine; Miami, FLUnited States Each of the variant alleles in the coding region was found in both affected schwartz@ggc.org and unaffected individuals and therefore CTSB is unlikely to be the KWE The Aarskog syndrome (AS, MIM #305400) is an X-linked condition char- gene. The CTSB promoter region is presently being examined for func- acterized by facial, genital and skeletal anomalies. It is caused by muta- tionally significant mutations. tions in the FGD1 gene located in Xp11.21. Since many X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) conditions localize to a broad region encompassing P1462. Transgressive palmoplantar keratoderma; evidence Xp11.2, we began a mutational analysis of XLMR families linked to Xp11.2 for genetic and clinical heterogeneity as well as males from small, unstudied XLMR families. In one affected H. C. Hennies1, G. G. Lestringant2, P. M. Frossard2, K. M. Eckl1, A. Reis3 male in the families, a shift in exon 4 of FGD1 was detected by SSCP. 1Max-Delbrck-Centrum; Berlin, Germany; 2Tawam Hospital and Faculty Sequence analysis revealed a C1665T change, which gave rise to an of Medicine and Health Sciences; Al Ain, United Arab Emirates; 3Friedrich- amino acid substitution, P312L. The base change was confirmed by StyI Alexander-Universitt; Erlangen, Germany digestion of the altered allele. Analysis of the family indicated the C1665T hennies@mdc-berlin.de alteration segregated with XLMR in the family. The C1665Talteration was Transgressive hyperkeratosis is a characteristic that may occur in various not detected in 250 normal X chromosomes. The phenotype of the affect- forms of palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). It consists of hyperkeratosis ed males is non-syndromic. Except for a tendency towards short stature (at spreading from the palms and soles onto the dorsa of the fingers, the toes,388 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders the hands and the feet, the flexor aspects of the wrists and the heels. In mapped to chromosome 1. GJA8, the gene for gap- junction protein alpha- particular, transgressive PPK is a feature of autosomal recessively inherit- 8, which encodes a connexin protein (Cx 50), has been recognized as the ed disorders such as Naxos disease (PPK with cardiomyopathy) and Papil- disease  causing gene in CZP1. We have investigated CZP1 family with lon-Lefvre syndrome (PPK with periodontopathia). In contrast, Mal de three affected members in three generations. We used microsatellite mark- Meleda (MDM; OMIM #248300), or keratosis palmoplantaris transgrediens ers D1S2696 and D1S252 to confirm linkage of the disease with CZP1 of Siemens, is a transgressive and progressive PPK without associated locus in this family. Maximum lod score was 0.90 at a recombination frac- involvement of other organs than skin. A locus for MDM has been tion of 0.0 The coding region of the GJA8 gene was screened for mutation described recently on chromosome 8q24-qter between the markers at by SSCPanalysis. The both affected patients showed the same altered D8S1751 and D8S2334. Here we present five patients from three consan- SSCPpaterns. Sequencing analysis revealed a Tto G transition resulting guineous Arab families with autosomal recessive transgressive PPK and a in Ile to Met substitution at the conserved amino acid position 247 and dis- prominent erythroderma. By homozygosity mapping and linkage analysis appearance of HinfI site. Restriction analysis confirmed presence of this with microsatellites, we have excluded the MDM gene region from linkage mutation in both affected individuals of the family. in these families. Furthermore, several further candidate genes for hyper- keratosis, including type-I and II keratin genes, the plakoglobin gene, and P1465.AUnique Spectrum of Alterations in the Cx-26 Gene in the genes of the epidermal differentiation complex, were ruled out. Our Deaf Probands from Mongolia findings reveal that non-syndromic transgressive PPK is genetically het- A. Pandya1, M. Tekin1, R. Erdenetungalag2, X. Xia1, B. Dangaasuren2, J. erogeneous, and a genome-wide linkage scan is necessary to identify the Radnaabazar2, S. H. Blanton3, W. E. Nance1 new locus for the disorder in these families. Moreover, we have also seen 1Virginia Commonwealth University; Richmond, VAUnited States; 2Mater- the erythroderma characteristic of the patients described here in an MDM nal and Child Health Research Center; Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia; 3University patient mapping to chromosome 8q24-qter. Hence there are currently no of Virginia; Charlottsville, VAUnited States conclusive diagnostic criteria clearly correlating with the genetic etiology of apandya@hsc.vcu.edu MDM. Mutations in the connexin-26 (Cx 26) gene account for 20-30% of all prelin- gual deafness, in many populations. Certain mutations such as 35delG, P1463. Genetic Heterogeneity in Erythrokeratodermia Vari- 167delTand 235delC are rather frequent in probands of Western Euro- abilis; Pathogenic Mutations in the connexin gene GJB4 pean, Ashkenazi Jewish and Oriental population respectively. Screening (Cx30.3) for Cx 26 mutations in a sample of 136 deaf Mongolian probands yielded G. Richard1, K. Butt1, N. Brown1, J. J. DiGiovanna2,3, V. Sybert4, J. Van only three 35delG heterozygotes. Two probands were homozygous for the der Schroeff5, E. Bijlsma6, L. F. Eichenfield7, J. D. Hendrix8, E. Siegfried9, 235delC mutation and three additional heterozygotes were detected, 2 for S. J. Bale10,11, J. Uitto1 the 235delC mutation and one for a novel 2 bp deletion at nt 100. Thus the 1Thomas Jefferson University; Philadelphia, PAUnited States; 2NCI, NIH; overall frequency of Cx-26 deafness is quite low ranging from 1.5% to Bethesda, MD United States; 3Brown University; Providence, RI United 5.8% if all of the apparent heterozygotes are cryptic homozygotes. Alarge States; 4University of Washington; Seattle, WAUnited States; 5Bronovo number of deaf probands carried the V27I substitution, 22% being het- Hospital; Den Haag, The Netherlands; 6University of Amsterdam; Amster- erozygous and 4.4% being homozygous for this change. Interestingly, dam, The Netherlands; 7Childrens Hospital and Health Care Center; San when present the E114G substitution was always noted in cis with the V27I Diego, CAUnited States; 8University School of Medicine; Charlottesville, background in 11.6% of the deaf probands. Although this sequence VAUnited States; 9St. Louis University School of Medicine; St. Louis, MO change was observed in the normal population, its high frequency in the United States; 10GeneDx; Rockville, MD United States; 11NIAMS, NIH; deaf probands as well as homozygosity for both polymorphisms in a deaf Bethesda, MD United States individual has prompted us to perform in vitro functional analysis to gabriele.richard@mail.tju.edu address its clinical relevance. The low frequency of Cx 26 mutations in a Erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV) is an autosomal dominant genoder- population where assortative mating amongst the deaf is rare supports the matosis characterized by persistent plaque-like or generalized hyperker- hypothesis that marriages amongst the deaf may affect the frequency of atosis and transient red patches of variable size, shape and location. Cx 26 deafness in certain populations. Recently, we demonstrated that EKV is caused by mutations in GJB3 encoding the gap junction protein connexin-31 (Cx31) on 1p35.1. Howev- P1466. High Frequency of GJB2 Gene Mutations in Polish er, two-thirds of all families had no detectable mutations in GJB3 or the co- Patients with Prelingual Non-syndromic Deafness localized connexin genes GJB5 and GJA4 despite convincing evidence for W. Wiszniewski, E. Szyrwinska-Nowakowska, T. Mazurczak, J. Bal locus homogeneity. We report here the identification of 4 distinct mutations Institute of Mother and Child; Warsaw, Poland in another connexin gene GJB4 (Cx30.3) at this cluster in 4 extended EKV wojtekw@klif.amwaw.edu.pl families and a sporadic case. All heterozygous missense mutations com- Partial or complete hearing loss is often of congenital origin. Among isolat- pletely co-segregated with the disease and altered highly conserved ed forms of deafness, the autosomal recessive forms (DFNB) are marked- residues. One of them, G12D, lies in the N-terminus and may interfere with ly prevalent (80%). It is estimated that about one hundred different genes the gating polarity of Cx channels. Other mutations (T85P, F137L, F189Y) are involved in the non-syndromic form of deafness. Among those genes, affected the transmembrane domains of Cx30.3, thus potentially hindering one particular  GJB2 is responsible for a high proportion of cases. Muta- regulation of voltage gating and kinetics of channel closure. All GJB4 muta- tions in GJB2 gene were observed in 50% of families affected with pro- tions resulted in localized hyperkeratosis, while identical mutations in found prelingual autosomal recessive deafness in many European coun- GJB3 (G12D and F137L) were associated with severe, generalized skin tries. Herein we report analysis of 104 unrelated Polish patients with pro- involvement. Nevertheless, we observed considerable intrafamilial vari- found prelingual deafness for mutation in GJB2 gene. Mutations were ability in 2 multiplex families, suggesting the influence of other genetic and found in 43/104 (41%) of subjects. Among mutated alleles, 35delG was environmental factors. Sequence analysis further revealed 3 missense prevalent and present in 90% ones. In 9 alleles mutations different than substitutions and a common 4-bp frameshift deletion within the GJB4 cod- 35delG were found; M34T, Q47X, R184P and 313del14 (found in 6 ing region, which might represent either non-consequential polymorphisms patients). The subsequent results proved mutations in GJB2 gene are or recessive mutations, and as such, could contribute to the phenotype. responsible to high degree for hereditary non-syndromic deafness in Our results demonstrate genetic heterogeneity in EKV, and emphasize that Poland with strong prevalence of 35delG. We have also found high carrier intercellular communication mediated by Cx31 and Cx30.3 is crucial for frequency (1/50) for 35delG mutation in Polish population. epidermal differentiation. P1467. Pre- and postlingual sensorineural deafness in sibs P1464. A novel mutation in the human connexin 50 gene homozygous for the 35delG mutation in the connexin 26 gene (GJA8) underlies autosomal dominant zonular pulverulent (GJB2) cataract. A. T. Maciel-Guerra, C. A. Oliveira, E. L. Sartorato A. Polyakov1, I. Shagina1, O. Khlebnikova2, O. Evgrafov1 State University of Campinas; Campinas - SP, Brazil 1Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; gilguer@bestway.com.br 2Institute of eye deseases; Moscow, Russian Federation Mutations in the connexin 26 gene (GJB2) are responsible for the majority dnalab@online.ru of nonsyndromic recessive deafness in many world populations, and are Inherited cataract is a genetically heterogeneous lens disease that most also a major cause of apparently sporadic congenital deafness. Three often presents as a congenital, autosomal dominant Mendelian trait show- mutations are particularly common in specific populations; 35delG in Cau- ing considerable inter- and intrafamilial clinical variation and high pene- casoids, 167delT in Ashkenazi Jews, and 235delC in Orientals. GJB2 trance. CZP1, autosomal dominant zonular pulverulent cataract, was mutations are usually associated with prelingual hearing loss, thoughPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 389 severity may range from mild to profound even within the same family. We transition at nucleotide 193 causing a tyrosine to histidine aminoacid had the opportunity to examine a sibship composed of four sisters, two of change in the first extracelular domain of the Cx32 protein was found in the them (20 and 17 years old) with prelingual sensorineural deafness and the mother and son of this family. This mutation was not yet reported. Detailed other two (18 and 16 years old)with normal speech development and mod- clinical and electrophysiological data from this two mutation carrier will be erate sensorineural hearing loss which was detected only a few years ago. presented. Supported by IGAMH CR and IPNr. 111300003 Mutation analysis of the GJB2 gene revealed that all four girls were homozygous for the 35delG mutation, while both parents were heterozy- P1470. Analysis Of Mutations In The Gjb2 Gene In Spanish gotes. Though this may be a rare finding, screening programs for genetic And Cuban Families deafness in newborns should consider the possibility that the deaf pheno- A. Alvarez1, A. Uriarte1, M. Villamar1, I. Del Castillo1, I. Menendez2, L. type associated with mutations in the connexin 26 gene may not develop Romero1, F. Moreno1 until later in life. 1Hospital Ramon y Cajal; Madrid, Spain; 2Willam Soler; La Habana, Cuba mvillamar@hrc.insalud.es P1468. Molecular basis of Greek DFNB1 deafness; Novel The GJB2 gene codes for the gap junction protein connexin 26 (Cx 26). mutations and polymorphisms in the GJB2 gene Mutations in this gene may cause autosomal recessive or dominant non- T. Antoniadi1, I. Konstantopoulou2, A. Pampanos3, K. Gronskov4, D. Yan- syndromic hearing loss. Agroup of 123 families with autosomal recesive noukakos2, K. Brondum-Nielsen4, J. Economides5, P. Leotsakos5, N. Voyi- deafness and 91 patients without familial history of deafness from Spain atzis6, T. Iliadis7, P. Neou8, M. Tsakanikos9, M. Grigoriadou3, A. Skevas10, and Cuba, were analyzed for mutation in GJB2. In 39 familial cases and 28 M. B. Petersen3 sporadic cases we found two GJB2 mutant alleles which indicates that 1Department of Genetic and Molecular Biology, MITERAMaternity & Sur- 31.3% of deafness cases are due to mutations in GJB2. In 12 familial and gical Center; Athens, Greece; 2Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, I/R-RP, 8 sporadic cases only one mutation was found. The mutation 35delG National Center for Scientific Research Demokritos; Athens, Greece; accounts for 74% of the mutated alleles. In 37 cases, the patient was 3Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health; Athens, Greece; 4John homozygous for the 35delG mutation and, in 22 cases was heterozygous F. Kennedy Institute; Glostrup, Denmark; 5ENT Department, Aghia Sophia for the mutation. Nineteen other different connexin 26 mutations were iden- Childrens Hospital; Athens, Greece; 6Department of Pediatrics, Aristotle tified. Five of these appear in two or more patients, E47X (5), W77R (5), University of Thessaloniki; Thessaloniki, Greece; 7ENT Department, Aris- W24X (3), R143W (3) and R184P(2). totle University of Thessaloniki; Thessaloniki, Greece; 8Department of Pediatrics, P&A Kyriakou Childrens Hospital; Athens, Greece; 9ENT P1471.GJB2 Gene Mutations And Genetic Counseling In Neu- Department, P&A Kyriakou Childrens Hospital; Athens, Greece; 10ENT rosensory Non Syndromic Deafness Department, University of Ioannina; Ioannina, Greece A. Caleffi1, R. Bertorelli1, E. Mora2, S. Santucci3, R. Balli4, A. Forabosco1, thantoniadi@yahoo.com D. A. Coviello1,5 Hearing impairment affects 1/1000 children and at least 50% of these 1Servizio di Genetica Medica, Policlinico di Modena; Modena, Italy; 2Clini- cases are inherited. The inherited forms of deafness are classified in syn- ca ORL, DISCAT, Universit di Genova; Genoa, Italy; 3Genetica Medica, dromic (30%) and non-syndromic deafness (70%). Among the non-syn- Sezione Salute Donna, AUSL Modena; Modena, Italy; 4Divisione ORL, dromic cases the major proportion is due to autosomal recessive inheri- Universit e Policlinico di Modena; Modena, Italy; 5Molecular Genetic Lab- tance (70%); 20% of the cases are due to autosomal dominant inheritance, oratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy 5% are X-linked and mitochondrial inheritance is responsible for about 1%. coviello@unige.it To date, 30 loci (DFNB1 to DFNB30) have been described for autosomal Non Syndromic Recessive Deafness (NSRD) is present in 1/500 of gener- recessive inheritance. The DFNB1 locus accounts for approximately 80% al population. The mode of transmission is autosomal recessive and the of autosomal recessive deafness in Mediterranean families, due to muta- gene more often involved is GJB2. This gene encodes the connexin 26 tions in the GJB2 gene. The GJB2 gene encodes the gap-junction protein (Cx26) protein, a component of cell junctions, the links that allow small connexin-26 and except the major 35delG mutation, more than 60 molecules to pass from one cell to the next. More then 30 different muta- sequence alterations have been reported so far. This study presents the tions of this gene are described but one is particularly common, the 30delG analysis of 18 families for the presence of GJB2 mutations other than the (also known as 35delG), a deletion of one base in a sequence of six gua- 35delG mutation. All probands were either heterozygotes or negative for nine residues that starts at position 30. Previous studies identified the the 35delG mutation. Sequencing of these patients revealed 2 novel muta- 30delG mutation in 63% of NSRD patients from south Italy and in 69% of tions; 509del14 and 486insT(both in heterozygosity with the 35delG). A patients from mixed population. In the present study we perform a screen- common novel polymorphism, 681+84C>T, was also detected in 11 ing for mutations in the GJB2 gene in 114 NSRD patients and in 111 con- patients. The previously reported K224Q mutation was identified as the trol subjects from the general population to assess the mutations frequen- sole mutation in one patient. The L90Pmutation was identified in 2 patients cy in a sample of patients from north Italy. The analysis has been per- and the W24X mutation in another 2 patients (all in heterozygosity with the formed by direct sequencing of PCR products, using the automatic 35delG). The characterization of the spectrum of the GJB2 mutations in sequencer ABI377. We identified mutations of GJB2 gene in 38/228 chro- Greek patients with non-syndromic sensorineural recessive deafness will mosomes analysed; 47.4% (18/38) showed 30delG mutation, while the reveal the molecular basis of the disease and provide the necessary infor- remaining showed 14 different mutations in10 subjects 52.6% (20/38 chro- mation for genetic counseling. mosomes). We identified one subject heterozygous for the 30delG muta- tion in the normal control population representing 1% (2/192 chromo- P1469.Anew connexin 32 missense mutation (Tyr65His) in a somes). In conclusion our findings confirm that the 30delG mutation of the Czech Charcot-Marie-Tooth type X1 disease family. GJB2 gene is the most common cause of NSRD, but many other mutations P. Seeman1, R. Mazanec2, M. Ctvrteckova2, D. Smilkova3 are also present indicating that the complete sequence is needed for an 1Charles University Prague, 2nd School of Medicine; Praha 5, Czech appropriate molecular diagnosis. Genetic counselling for NSRD has been Republic; 2Charles University Prague, 2nd School of Medicine, Dept of so far considerably impaired by the difficulty in distinguishing genetic and Neurology; Prague, Czech Republic; 3Dept of Rehabilitation; Kladno, non genetic deafness. Molecular analysis extended on a larger patient Czech Republic population shall clarify the role of specific gene mutations in the pathogen- pavel.seeman@lfmotol.cuni.cz esis of the disease and will be of considerable help in genetic counselling, Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disorders is group of clinicaly and geneticaly prognosis and treatment of deafness. heterogeneus inherited peripheral neuropathies. The most common type is by far the autosomal dominant CMT1Acaused by a 1,5 Mb duplication in P1472. Assess the prevalence /spectrum of connexin 26 17p11.2-12 comprising the PMP22 gene. CMTtype X is the second most mutations and their phenotype in children with congenital common type of CMT. This type is inherited as a gonosomal dominant trait. sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) Hemizygous males are earlier and more severly afected then the het- B. Wu1, V. Lip2, M. Kenna1, G. Cox2, B. Korf3 erozygous females. No male to male transmision can be found in the 1Childrens Hospital and Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA United CMTX pedigrees. Connexin 32 mutations are the most common cause of States; 2Childrens Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States; 3Partners Center CMTX. We report a Czech family with a severe type of CMT1 disease. A for Human Genetics and Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA United disorder with gait disturbancies, moderate footdrop and distal muscle States weakness and foot deformities is present in at least 3 generations in this wu_b@tch.harvard.edu family. EMG showed signs of demyelination confirming type 1 of CMTdis- Congenital SNHL has an incidence in children of 1-2/1000 for bilateral ease. After exclusion of the CMT1A duplication at 17p, we directly severe-to-profound losses (>50 dB) and up to 4/1000 if mild/moderate and sequenced the whole coding region of connexin 32 gene (Cx32). ATto C unilateral loss are included. Up to 60% of congenital SNHLcan be attrib-390 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders uted to genetic causes. Of those, autosomal recessive non-syndromic a truncation of the TMPRSS3 protein after the Transmembrane Domain. In hearing loss accounts for approximately 80% and mutations in the con- another Spanish patient, an amino acid substitution (A426T) has been nexin 26 (GJB2) gene are the most common known cause. We have ana- identified in heterozygosity in an exon coding for the protease domain. lyzed a total of 152 unrelated families /patients with congenital SNHL, A426 is well conserved in serine proteases. These two changes have not either recessive or sporadic, from a large pediatrics medical center. Most been found in any other patient of our sample. These results indicate that probands were age 1 week to 18 years, had no obvious etiology for the mutations in TMPRSS3 do not substantially contribute to the non-syn- congenital SNHL, and were tested using a highly sensitive, unambiguous dromic deafness in the Caucasian population. three-step PCR-based sequencing assay to detect all mutations in the entire coding region of Cx26 gene. Of the 304 unrelated Cx26 alleles ana- P1475. Novel Mutations of TMPRSS3 in two Unrelated lyzed from 152 probands, 39% (60/152) had Cx26 mutations; 25 patients Tunisian Families with Non-Syndromic Autosomal Recessive with biallelic mutations (9 homozygotes and 16 compound heterozygotes), Deafness, DFNB8/10. and 35 with a single mutation. Four different homozygous mutations were S. Masmoudi1, S. Antonarakis2, M. Grati1, M. Pappasavvas2, A. Ghorbel3, found; 35delG/35delG (3.4%), M34T/M34T (1.4%), 167delT/167delT A. Elgaied-Boulila1, C. Rossier2, M. Drira3, H. Ayadi1, M. Guipponi2 (0.7%) and V37I/V37I (0.7%). Six different compound heterozygous muta- 1Laboratoire de Gntique Molculaire Humaine, Facult de Mdecine, tions were detected; 35delG/167delT (3.4%), 35delG/M34T (2.7%), Sfax; Sfax, Tunisia; 2Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva 35delG/G12V (1.4%), 35delG/E47X (1.4%), 35delG/N206S (1.4%), Medical School; Geneva, Switzerland; 3Service dO.R.L., C.H.U. H. Bour- T8M/V153I (0.7%). Overall, mutations detected in this study are the 11 pre- guiba, Sfax; Sfax, Tunisia viously reported in the literature; 35delG, 167delT, E47X, M34T, G12V, Saber.Masmoudi@fss.rnu.tn V37I, L90P, V84L, R127H, R143W, and 310del14, and the 3 novel muta- Tow loci for non-syndromic recessive deafness located on chromosome tions newly reported here; N206S, T8M, and E129K. None of these new 21q22.3 have previously been reported, DFNB8 and DFNB10. Recently, mutations were found in 100 normal controls. Hearing loss in these The TMPRSS3 gene, which encodes a novel transmembrane serine pro- patients with biallelic Cx26 mutations ranged from unilateral high frequen- tease, was found to be mutated in the families used to describe both the cy to bilateral profound, except those with homozygous or compound het- DFNB10 and DFNB8 loci(Nat. Genet. Jan. 2001. Our study included 2 erozygous for M34T. These patients had mild hearing loss. unrelated consanguineous Tunisian families with congenital autosomal recessive form of sensorineural deafness; The audiometric tests showed a P1473. Contribution of GJB2 Mutations for Nonsyndromic loss of hearing greater than 70 dB, in all affected individuals. Using DNA Deafness in Portuguese Families polymorphic markers we found linkage to the DFNB8/10 locus in these two C. S. R. Rodrigues1, H. Vieira1, M. Vitorino1, A. Mena1, H. Caria1, I. Gal- families. Mutation screening of all 12 exons and the intron-exon junctions hardo2, A. ONeill3, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1 of the TMPRSS3 gene revealed two novel TMPRSS3 mutations. These 1Centre of Genetics and Molecular Biology; Lisbon, Portugal; 2Centre of missense mutations were found in exon 8 and 12, which encode part of the ORL Research, University of Lisbon; Lisbon, Portugal; 3Hospital Egas serine protease domain and affected highly conserved amino acid (W251C Moniz; Lisbon, Portugal and P404L). Cosegregation of both mutations with the disease phenotype catrodrigues@hotmail.com was demonstrated by PCR-restriction analysis. Both mutations were not The GJB2 gene encodes the connexin 26 (Cx26) component of gap junc- found in 200 control Tunisian chromosomes. The detection of naturally tions. Mutations in this gene have been found to be responsible for half of occurring missense mutations in families with DFNB8/10 identifies impor- the severe-to-profound autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deafness tant amino acids for the function of TMPR (NSRD). One single mutation, 35delG, has been shown to be the most prevalent mutation in this gene and one of the most frequent mutations P1476.ABCD syndrome is caused by a homozygous mutation identified so far. The present study is based in a preliminary analysis of the in the EDNRB gene. portuguese population, previously reported, where 10 NSRD families and J. B. G. M. Verheij1, J. Kunze2, J. Osinga1, A. J. van Essen1, R. M. W. Hof- a sample of normal hearing individuals were screened for the 35delG stra1 mutation. Analysis of the entire coding region was carried out in both the 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital; Groningen, The heterozygous and 35delG negative families, revealing the presence, in one Netherlands; 2Klinikum Rudolf Virchow, Free University of Berlin; Berlin, of the families, of a novel splicing mutation, IVS1-23G-T, in compound het- Germany erozygosity with M34Tmutation. In the negative cases or those presenting J.Verheij@medgen.azg.nl a single coding sequence mutation we have searched for mutations in the In 1995 Gross and colleagues described a new autosomal recessive syn- Cx26 non-coding exon (exon 1) and flanking donor splicing site. Asimilar drome, named ABCD syndrome, characterised by Albinism, Black lock, study has now been carried out in a total of 52 NSRD families. The results Cell migration disorder of the neurocytes of the gut (Hirschsprung disease- obtained will be presented and discussed in comparison with other euro- HSCR) and Deafness. This phenotype clearly overlaps with the features of pean populations. the Shah-Waardenburg syndrome, comprising sensorineural deafness, hypopigmentation of skin, hair and irides and HSCR. We therefore P1474. Screening for mutations in TMPRSS3 in non-syn- screened DNAof the index patient of the ABCD syndrome family for muta- dromic recessive childhood deafness tions in the endotheline B receptor (EDNRB) gene, a gene known to be M. Wattenhofer1, H. S. Scott1, S. Alwan1, C. Rossier1, S. E. Antonarakis1, involved in Shah-Waardenburg syndrome. Ahomozygous nonsense muta- R. Rabionet2, B. Montserrat2, M. Arbones2, X. Estivill2, A. Pampanos3, M. tion in exon 3 (Arg201stop) of the EDNRB gene was found. This means B. Petersen3, M. V. Di Iorio4, A. Pasquadibisceglie4, M. DAmelio4, P. Gas- that ABCD syndrome is not a separate entity, but a severe expression of parini4 Shah-Waardenburg syndrome. 1Medical Genetics, Geneva University, Medical School; Geneva, Switzer- land; 2Medical and Molecular Genetics Center, Institut de Recerca Onco- P1477. Mutation of CDH23, encoding a new member of the logica; Barcelona, Spain; 3Institute of Child Health; Athens, Greece; 4Med- cadherin gene family, causes Usher syndrome type 1D. ical Genetics Service, IRCCS-CSS; Rotondo, Italy H. J. Bolz1, B. von Brederlow1, A. Ramrez2, E. C. Bryda3, K. Kutsche1, H. marie.wattenhofer@medecine.unige.ch Nothwang4, M. Seeliger5, M. del C.-Salced Cabrera6, M. Caballer Vila6, 50% of early-onset deafness cases are genetic and 50% of the recessive O. Pelaez Molina6, A. Gal1, C. Kubisch2 case are due to mutations in the GJB2 gene. The TMPRSS3 gene 1Institut fr Humangenetik, Universittsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf; encodes a novel transmembrane serine protease. It is mutated in the fam- Hamburg, Germany; 2Institut fr Humangenetik, Universtt Bonn; Bonn, ilies used to describe both the DFNB10 and DFNB8 loci on chromosome Germany; 3Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular 21 (Nat.Genet. Jan01). To determine if TMPRSS3 mutations are an impor- Genetics, Marshall University; Huntington, WV United States; 4MPI fr tant contributor to the etiology of childhood deafness, we performed SSCP Molekulare Genetik; Berlin, Germany; 5Abteilung II, Augenklinik der Uni- screening of all 13 exons and intron-exon junctions and sequencing of versitt Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany; 6Centro Internacional de Retinosis DNAs of non-syndromic recessive deaf patients negative for GJB2 gene Pigmentaria, Camilo Cienfuegos; La Habana, Cuba mutations. Atotal of 391 such unrelated patients (100 from Spain, 198 from bolz@uke.uni-hamburg.de Italy, and 93 from Greece) were enrolled in the study. The analysis has so Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is an autosomal recessive disorder char- far been completed in DNAsamples from 293 patients. Several common acterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, exonic polymorphisms were found (V53I, G111S, V151V, I253V) as well as and visual impairment due to early onset retinitis pigmentosa (RP). So far, a series of intronic changes. In only 2 patients there were changes that are only two USH1 genes have been identified. We identified a Cuban pedi- likely to be associated with the phenotype. Adeletion of nucleotide 207C in gree linked to the locus for Usher syndrome type 1D within the q2 region exon 4 has been found in homozygosity in one Spanish patient resulting in of chromosome 10. Affected individuals present with congenital deafnessPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 391 and a highly variable degree of retinal degeneration. Using a positional P1480. ORF15, coding for a glutamic acid rich domain, con- candidate approach, we identified a new member of the cadherin gene tains the majority of RPGR mutations superfamily, CDH23. It encodes a large protein with a single transmem- I. Bader1, O. Brandau2, E. Apfelstedt-Sylla3, H. Achatz4, B. Lorenz5, M. brane domain and 27 cadherin repeats. In the Cuban family, we detected Hergersberg6, B. Wissinger3, B. Wittwer7, T. Meitinger1, A. Meindl4 two different mutations; a severe course of the retinal disease was 1GSFresearch centre, Ingolstdter Landstr.1; D-85764 Neuherberg, Fax.; observed in individuals homozygous for what is probably a truncating ++49-89-3187-3297, Germany; 2Department of Experimental Pathology, splice-site mutation (c.4488G>C), whereas mild RPis present in individu- Lund University; Lund, Sweden; 3Department of Ophthalmogenetics, Uni- als carrying a homozygous missense mutation R1746Q. Avariable expres- versity of Tbingen; Tbingen, Germany; 4Department of Medical Genet- sion of the retinal phenotype was seen in patients with a combination of ics at the University of Munich, Goethestr. 29; 80336 Munich, Germany; both mutations. In addition, we identified two mutations in a German USH1 5Department of Ophthalmogenetics, University of Regensburg; Regens- patient, DM1281 and IVS51+5G>A(the latter resulting in skipping of exon burg, Germany; 6Institute of Human Genetics; Zurich, Switzerland; 7Insti- 51). Our data show that different mutations in CDH23 result in USH1D with tute of Human Genetics; Mnster, Germany a variable retinal phenotype. The identification of this putative cell adhe- ingrid@pedgen.med.uni-muenchen.de sion molecule, the first cadherin mutated in a monogenic sensory disorder, Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) describes a group of diseases characterized by opens an exciting new field for genetic and physiological studies of the progressive retinal degeneration. X-linked forms (xlRP) account for 15 % inner ear and retina. of all hereditary RP cases and result in particulary severe phenotypes. Linkage data predict 60-80 % of all xlRPcases to be associated with the P1478.Alarge deletion of the USH2AGene in a Spanish fam- RP3 and 10-20 % with the RP2 locus. The recent identification of a novel ily with Usher Syndrome type II 3terminal RPGR exon (ORF15) which harbours a mutational hotspot M. Baiget1, S. Bernal1, M. Calaf1, E. Del Rio1, D. Valverde2 raised the question of the total proportion of RPGR mutations in patients 1Hospital Sant Pau; Barcelona, Spain; 2Universidad de Vigo; Vigo, Spain with xlRP. Mutation analysis of the novel RPGR exon, which extends exon mbaiget@hsp.santpau.es 15 for 1554 nucleotides, and codes for a glutamic-acid-rich domain, turned Usher syndrome type II is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized out to be technically challenging because of an extremely purine-rich and by stable hearing impairment from childhood and progressive retinitis pig- highly repetitive stretch of 800 bp. Several strategies were persued to mentosa. Mutations in the USH2Agene, located on 1q41, were shown to obtain reliable sequences including subcloning of PCR products, solid be responsible for Usher syndrome type II. All reported mutations are scat- phase or direct sequencing of PCR products. Good results were obtained tered throughout the gene and are small point mutations causing nonsense with sequencing a 1,6 kb fragment containing the purine-rich region. Sev- (11) or missense (10) changes or splice site changes (1) or small insertions eral additives had to be used for PCR amplification and sequencing. We (3) or deletions (6) causing frameshift mutations. One of these mutations, screened 64 unrelated xlRPpatients for mutations in the complete coding 2299delG occurs at high frequency among Usher 2Apatients. Here we regions of RPGR and RP2. Only three patients (4 %) had mutations in the report a Spanish family with Usher 2Asyndrome and a large deletion of the RP2 gene, RPGR mutations were detected in 32 patients (52 %) with 22 USH2Agene. It is the first gross deletion of the USH2Agene encompass- mutations (36 %) clustering in the novel exon ORF15. Among a subgroup ing exons 9 to 14. Intragenic deletion was initially suspected as a cause of of 30 index-patients with pedigrees demonstrating clear X-linkage (sever- the disease in the two affected siblings because a non-successful PCR al affected males in at least two generations connected by carrier females) amplification of the USH2A exon 13 containing the frequent 2299delG 50 % had mutations in the novel exon ORF15. mutation. This simple PCR-based approach was further used to localize the approximate breakpoints of the deleted region. Our two patients are P1481. Molecular analysis of the EYA1 gene and exploring under 20 years old and have a clinical picture typical of Usher type II. genetic heterogeneity in families with Branchio-Oto-Renal Although it is difficult to predict the phenotypic consequences of the Syndrome severely truncated USH2Agene, the deletion might bring about other phe- S. Kumar1, H. A. Marres2, C. W. R. Cremers2, W. J. Kimberling1 notypic changes with older age. 1Boys Town National Research Hospital; Omaha, NE United States; 2Uni- versity Hospital Nijmegen; Nijmegen, The Netherlands P1479. The complete form of X-linked congenital stationary kumar@boystown.org night blindness is caused by mutations in a gene encoding a Branchio-oto renal syndrome (BOR) is a human developmental disorder leucine-rich repeat protein characterized by hearing loss, preauricular pits, structural defects of the A. Meindl1, C. M. Pusch2, C. M. Zeitz3, O. Brandau4, K. Pesch2, S. Feil3, external, middle and/or inner ear and renal anomalies. It is inherited as an J. Ramser1, J. Maurer5, H. Hellebrand1, A. Hardcastle6, B. Wissinger2, W. autosomal dominant pattern and affect at least 2% of profoundly deaf chil- Berger3 dren and have estimated prevalence of 1 in 40,000. The phenotypic 1Ludwig-Maximilians University; Muenchen, Germany; 2Universitts- expression of the branchial arch as well as audiologic and renal develop- Augenklinik; Tuebingen, Germany; 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular ment can be quite variable, even within the same family. The first BOR Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 4University; Lund, Sweden; 5Ressource Cen- gene has been localized to chromosome 8q13 and has been shown to be ter; Berlin, Germany; 6Institute of Ophthalmology; London, United Kingdom caused by mutations in the EYA1 gene. Recently, a second genetic locus alfons@pedgen.med-uni-muenchen.de (BGS2) associated with BOR syndrome has been localized to chromo- X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (XLCSNB) is characterized some 1q. We have performed mutation analysis on more than sixty BOR by impaired scotopic vision with associated ocular symptoms like myopia, families by heteroduplex followed by sequence analysis of sixteen EYA1 hyperopia, nystagmus, and reduced visual acuity. Genetic mapping in fam- exons. To date, using this approach, we have identified fourteen novel ilies with XLCSNB revealed two different loci on the proximal short arm of mutations. About 65% of our large data set of BOR families do not show the X chromosome. These two genetic subtypes can also be distinguished mutations in the EYA1 gene. This further complicates the issue and sug- on the basis of ERG responses and psychophysical testing in a complete gests that either most of the mutations lie in the untranslated region or (CSNB1) and an incomplete form (CSNB2). Recently we have been shown several genes are involved in the branchiogenic disorder. Genetic linkage that CSNB2 is caused by mutations in the CACNA1F gene (Strom et al., analysis was performed on several multigenerational BOR type families Nature Genetics 1998). The CSNB1locus has been mapped to a 5 cM link- with 8q and 1q markers to explore the possibility of further genetic hetero- age interval in Xp11.4. Construction and analysis of a contig between the geneity. Our current results indicate that two large BOR type families did markers DXS993and DXS228led to the identification of a novel gene that not show linkage with 8q and 1q markers suggesting the involvement of is mutated in CSNB1patients. It is partially deleted in three families and third gene. Agenome-wide search is being performed for the localization mutation analysis in further 22 families detected another 14 different muta- of third locus. Also, a candidate gene analysis is underway to identify tions. The gene, designated NYX, codes for a 481 amino acid protein (nyc- genes in the critical region of BGS2 locus on chromosome 1q. The pres- talopin) and is expressed at low levels in various tissues including retina, ent results, together with mutation screening and genetic linkage study, brain, testis and muscle. The predicted polypeptide is a GPI-anchored demonstrate further genetic heterogeneity. These results provide the basis extracellular protein with 11 typical and two cysteine-rich leucine-rich for a molecular-genetic testing that will help the clinical evaluation and repeats (LRRs). This motif is important for protein-protein interactions and genetic counseling of members of BOR families. Further characterization members of the LRR superfamily are involved in cell adhesion and axon of EYA1 mutation and identification of other BOR genes will significantly guidance. Currently, antibodies against NYX are raised to determine the help in defining the spectrum of defects associated with branchial and precise localization within the retinal tissues and to identify interacting pro- hearing anomalies. teins.392 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders P1482.ANovel Nonsense Mutation in the RP1 Gene Causing GCD, Avellino CD (ACD) with R124H mutation was detected in 94% and Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa in a Lithuanian Groenouw type I with R555W mutation in 6%, therefore, in Japan, ACD Family has been referred as GCD. Among 27 families with LCD, LCD type I (LCDI) D. Kasperaviciute1, D. Ambrasiene1, J. V. Arciuliene2, V. Kucinskas1 with R124C mutation was detected in 48%, atypical LCDI with L518P 1Human Genetics Center, Vilnius University; Vilnius, Lithuania; 2Laborato- mutation was in one family (3.7%), and LCD with deep stromal opacities ry of Visual Rehabilitation, Kaunas Medical University; Kaunas, Lithuania (type IV) with L527R mutation was in 33%. No mutation was found in 4 dalia.kasperaviciute@gf.vu.lt families with LCD. Among 4 families with RBCD, a R555Q mutation was Retinitis pigmentosa represents a genetically heterogeneous group of dis- detected in 6 patients. Conclusions. We conclude that codons R124 and orders characterised by night blindness, visual field loss and retinal pig- R555 of the TGFBI gene are also hot spots in Japanese patients with GCD, mentary changes. Mutations in the RP1 gene have recently been shown to LCD and RBCD, where 94.4% of GCD was ACD with R124H mutation, and account for 4  7 % autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) the remaining few percents (3.7%) were Groenouw I with R555W mutation. cases. Ten different mutations have been reported so far, they seem to The L527R is the second common mutation in Japanese LCD. cluster in the 5 end of exon 4. The purpose of this study was to determine mutations in RP1 responsible for adRPin Lithuanian families. 22 patients P1485. Analysis of I-GlcNAc6ST gene (CHST5) in macular from unrelated adRPfamilies were screened for mutations in a segment of corneal dystrophy the RP1 gene from nucleotide 1038 to 1720 using heteroduplex analysis N. Hasegawa1, S. Mita2, K. Fujiki3, A. Murakami3, K. Nakayasu3, O. and single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Direct sequencing Habuchi2, A. Kanai3 revealed a nonsense mutation K792X (c.2374A>T) in one patient. This 1Japan Red Cross Medical Center; Tokyo, Japan; 2Aichi University of Edu- novel mutant allele, if expressed, would encode a severely truncated RP1 cation; Kariya, Japan; 3Juntendo University School of Medicine; Tokyo, protein lacking approximately 63 % of its original length. All affected mem- Japan bers of the family available for investigation had this mutation. The condi- hasenobu@tkg.att.ne.jp tion has a late onset at 40-45 years of age and slow progression. We also Macular corneal dystrophy type I (MCD) is an autosomal recessive inheri- found this mutation in 3 asymptomatic subjects of the same family under tance disorder, which is caused by deficient enzyme activity of GlcNAc-6- the age of 18. Based on this study, mutations in the RP1 gene appear to sulfotransferase (GlcNAc6ST), a sulfotransferase needed in synthesizing cause 4 % of adRPcases in Lithuania. That frequency does not signifi- corneal keratan sulfate. This disease manifests as corneal opacity, leading cantly differ from frequency in other populations, however, mutations fre- severe visual impairment. Previous linkage study revealed that MCD is quent in other populations (R677X and 2280-2284del) were not found in mapped to chromosome on 16q21. The carbohydrate sulfotransferase Lithuania. gene (CHST5), encoding intestine GlcNAc6ST has cloned on 16q21 as same chromosomal location as MCD. We screened CHST5 in nine P1483. A missense mutation in the gene responsible for patients with MCD and ninety-five unrelated healthy controls. Genomic Usher syndrome type II is associated with nonsyndromic DNAwas isolated from peripheral leukocytes, and 1658-bp genomic frag- recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa in Spanish patients ment of CHST5 amplified by PCR was directly sequenced. No responsible S. Bernal1, C. Ayuso2, G. Antiolo3, S. Borrego3, I. Marcos3, M. Calaf1, E. mutations which cosegregate with disease were found in CHST5 gene. Del Rio1, M. Baiget1 Two polymorphisms of R163Q and T297M were identified. The R163Q was 1Hospital Sant Pau; Barcelona, Spain; 2Fundacin Jimenez Diaz; Madrid, observed significantly higher frequency (p<<0.001) in the patients than that Spain; 3Hospital Virgen del Rocio; Sevilla, Spain in the controls. The significant linkage disequilibirium of R163Q polymor- mbaiget@hsp.santpau.es phism indicates that the most critical gene should be located very near to Several candidate genes involved in the visual transduction cascade have CHST5. Recently Akama et al. reported a couple mutations in cornea spe- been studied in autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (ARRP)Spanish cific GlcNAc6ST (CHST6) in MCD patients. CHST6 is located approxi- families. Disease-causing mutations habe been only identified in the beta mately 30kb downstream of CHST5. Our results are consistent with their subunit of the rod cGMP-phosphodiesterase gene and in the ATP-binding findings and we postulates that the polymorphism of CHST5 may have rel- cassette receptor gene. They account respectively for 8% and 6% of Span- evant effects on the sulfotransferase activitiy together with a variation of ish ARRPfamilies. These data indicates that other than these genes may responsible gene. be involved in the remaining families, emphasising the genetic hetero- geneity of the disease and reinforcing the hypothesis that in ARRPthere is P1486. Cloning of a retinal gene encoding RFamide-related no a major gene but several genes may account individually for a small peptides; a candidate for cystoid macular dystrophy on chro- number of cases. Arecent report(1) indicates that a missense mutation mosome 7p (Cys 759Phe) in the gene responsible of Usher syndrome type II (USH2A H. L. Schulz1, M. van Driel2, F. P. M. Cremers2, H. Sthr1, B. H. F. Weber1 gene) is present in 4,5% of patients from North America with non-syn- 1Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Department of Human Genet- dromic ARRPwith a frequency of this allele of 0.027. We have analized the ics; Nijmegen, The Netherlands presence of this mutation in a set of ARRPSpanish families from all over dhgpg@hotmail.com the country that were collected by members of the Spanish Multicentric To date, the cause of more than 60 Mendelian syndromic and non-syn- Group fro the Study of RP. The Cys759Phe mutation was found in het- dromic retinal dystrophies is still unknown. Towards the goal to identifiy erozygous form in 4 out of 130 unrelated patients (allelic frequency; 0.015). novel candidates for retinal disease genes, we are performing systematic This finding demonstrates the involvement of the USH2Alocus in reces- expression profiling of established UniGene ESTclusters showing a high sive non-syndromic RPin Spanish poulation. As previously described (1) level of representation in retinal cDNAlibraries. Cluster Hs.60473 is an this mutation was found to be always associated with an isocoding change assembly of two retina 3 read ESTs and was confirmed to be exclusively at codon His772 (CAT-CAC). expressed in retinal tissue by RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis. The screening of retinal cDNAlibraries and 5 RACE experiments yielded more P1484. TGFBI Gene Mutations in Japanese Corneal Dystro- than 15 overlapping cDNAfragments that were assembled into a 1190 bp phies full length cDNAcontaining an ORF of 196 amino acids, termed C7orf9. K. Fujiki1, K. Nakayasu1, T. Yamaguchi2, N. T. Ha1, A. Murakami1, S. Analysis of the deduced protein sequence revealed the presence of two Endo3, N. Ishida3, T. Yajima4, A. Kanai1 conserved RFamide-related peptides. RFamides are a family of small 1Juntendo University School of Medicine; Tokyo, Japan; 2St. Lukes Inter- bioreactive peptides known to be expressed in vertebrate and invertebrate national Hospital; Tokyo, Japan; 3Ishida Eye Hospital; Jyouetsu, Japan; nervous systems including the sensory retina. The C7orf9 gene contains 4Japanese Red Cross Medical Center; Tokyo, Japan three exons localized to the D7S2493-D7S529 interval on chromosome fujiki@med.juntendo.ac.jp 7p15-p21, a region harbouring the gene for dominant cystoid macular dys- Purpose. To investigate mutations of TGFBI (IGH3, keratoepithelin) gene trophy (CYMD). Due to its chromosomal location and retina-specific in Japanese patients with autosomal dominant corneal dystrophies (CD). expression, C7orf9 represents an excellent candidate for the CYMD gene. Methods. After an appropriate informed consent was obtained from each Apossible involvement of C7orf9 in disease is currently being assessed by subject, genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of 159 mutation analysis in affected patients of a large Dutch CYMD family previ- patients and 22 unaffected relatives from 120 families with granular CD ously linked to chromosome 7p. (GCD), lattice CD (LCD), or Reis-Bcklers CD (RBCD). Fifty normal vol- unteers served as controls. Each exon was amplified by polymerase chain P1487.Molecular study of RS gene in three Spanish families reaction and directly sequenced. Results. Six different heterozygous mis- affected with juvenile retinoschisis sense mutations were detected in codons R124, L518, L527 and R555 of C. Ayuso1, A. Gimenez1, B. Garcia-Sandoval1, J. Bueno1, M. Trujillo1, D. the TGFBI gene in 147 patients from 116 families. Among 89 families with Cantalapiedra1, J. Fernandez-Toral2, M. Baiget3, C. Ramos1Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 393 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz; Madrid, Spain; 2HOSPITAL GENERAL nism. The large number of exons, the existence of exon deletions which ASTURIAS; OVIEDO, Spain; 3HOSPITAL SAN PABLO; BARCELONA, escape nonquantitative PCR detection and non-allelic heterogeneity pose Spain difficulties to the molecular diagnosis of patients with this disorder. cayuso@fjd.es X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (XLRS, OMIM *312700) is a progressive P1490.Investigation of an extended Tasmanian pedigree with hereditary retinopathy consisting of intraretinal splitting due to degenera- a novel PAX6 mutation tion. The RS gene resposible for the disease is located on Xp22.2 22.1 M. M. Sale1, J. E. Craig2, J. C. Charlesworth1, L. M. FitzGerald1, I. M. Han- and has 6 exons. The encoded 224 amino acid protein is exclusively son3, J. L. Dickinson1, S. J. Matthews3, V. van Heyningen3, D. A. Mackey2 expressed in retina and contains a highly conserved motif implicated in 1Menzies Centre for Population Health Research, University of Tasmania; cell-cell interaction and possibly active in cell adhesion processes. We Hobart, Tasmania, Australia; 2Centre for Eye Research Australia, Universi- analysed the entire coding region of RS gene, by PCR amplification fol- ty of Melbourne; Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 3MRC Human Genetics lowed by direct sequencing (ABIprism 310 Perkin Elmer) in 3 unrelated Unit, Western General Hospital; Edinburgh, United Kingdom Spanish families affected with juvenile retinoschisis. Complete ophthalmo- Michele.Sale@utas.edu.au logical studies and Electroretinograms were recorded according to the Two distinct phenotypes - aniridia and primary open-angle glaucoma standard testing protocols. We detected three missense changes; (POAG) - segregate within a large Tasmanian pedigree. We have identified Gln154Arg Arg 213Gln, and Glu215Gln.There was co-segregation with the a novel PAX6 mutation associated with highly variable phenotype within disease within each family. The mutations were located in exons 5 and 6 one branch of this pedigree, and wished to investigate its role (if any) in rel- emphasizing the critical functional significance of the discoidin domain of atives with POAG. Eleven individuals in the aniridia branch of the pedigree the XLRS1 protein. The identification of the responsible mutations for the were subjected to detailed phenotypic analysis, including anterior segment disease coupled with complete familiar analysis allowed us to detect carri- and fundus photography, automated perimetry and IOP measurement. er women and therefore provide better genetic counselling in these fami- Mutation analysis revealed a novel PAX6 1410delC mutation in 9 affected lies. individuals, not present in 9 unaffected relatives or spouses. One family member believed to be mildly affected by the family, with visual acuity 6/9 P1488. Generation of a mouse model for X-linked juvenile and 6/7.5, was found not to carry the mutation. Clinical features in muta- retinoschisis tion carriers ranged from total aniridia to minimal anterior segment findings. A. Gehrig1, N. Hemmrich1, R. S. Molday2, H. Schrewe3, B. H. F. Weber1 Other findings included keratitis, cataract, glaucoma, optic disc anomalies 1Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Department of Biochemistry; and foveal hypoplasia. POAG individuals in two additional branches of the Vancouver, BC Canada; 3School of Biosciences; Birmingham, United King- extended pedigree had IOPmeasured, Humphrey visual fields and stereo dom disc photographs taken, and clinical history documented. The PAX6 muta- gehrig@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de tion was not detected in 7 individuals with POAG. Other genetic or envi- X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (RS) is an early-onset vitreoretinal disorder ronmental factors involved in anterior segment development may interact characterized by schisis, or splitting, of the nerve fiber and ganglion cell with the PAX6 gene to determine the severity of the phenotype in the layers of the retina. RS is clinically variable with symptoms ranging from aniridia branch, and may also account for the slightly reduced vision in a slightly reduced visual acuity to more significant complications such as reti- non-mutation carrier. Optic nerve anomalies were particularly common, nal detachment or vitreous hemorrhage. The gene underlying RS was and the same genes may modify the aniridia phenotype as well as con- identified by positional cloning and is composed of 6 exons encoding a 224 tribute to POAG. amino acid precursor protein, termed retinoschisin, with a 23 amino acid hydrophobic leader sequence. Most of the protein consists of a discoidin- P1491. Autosomal recessive colobomatous micro/anoph- like domain which is common to a family of proteins implicated in cell thalmia in a consanguineous Irish traveller family - further adhesion. By immunohistochemistry, we show that retinoschisin is exclu- genetic heterogeneity sively present in the membrane fraction of retinal tissue homogenates. A. J. Green1,2, M. Ni Chroinin1, P. Tormey3, S. Ennis1,4 Moreover, retinoschisin antibodies specifically label rod and cone photore- 1National centre for Medical Genetics; Dublin 12, Ireland; 2Dept. of Medical ceptors and most bipolar cells. The protein appears to be active as a disul- Genetics, University College Dublin; Dublin, Ireland; 3Dept. Ophthalmolo- fide-linked oligomeric complex. To further analyze the role of retinoschisin gy, Waterford Regional Hospital; Waterford, Ireland; 4Dept. of Medical in retinal cell biology, we have generated a knock-out mouse by targeting Genetics, University College Dublin; Dublin, Ireland exon 3 of the murine Rs1h gene resulting in a true null allele. In addition, andrew.green@ucd.ie a lacZ reporter was introduced in-frame and has allowed us to establish We describe 9 members of a consanguineous Irish traveller family, with the developmental pattern of gene expression, thus linking absent Rsh1 severe visual impairment due to anophthalmia, microphthalmia or colobo- transcription to early retinal pathology. Our current model assumes that the matous microphthalmia. Two members have complete bilateral anoph- retinoschisin complex binds to the surface of photoreceptors and bipolar thalmia, five had unilateral anophthalmia and contralateral colobomatous cells where it may function as a cellular adhesion protein stabilizing the cel- microphthalmia, and two had microphthalmia. There was no history of lular organization of the retina. chemical exposure, no other associated malformations, and chromosomal analysis in two affected individuals was normal. There is pseudodominant P1489.Mutation screen in patients with Autosomal Dominant inheritance in one family, with an affected son born to an affected father in Optic Atrophy a consanguineous marriage. Only a small number of families with autoso- K. Hoertnagel1, G. Rudolph2, T. M. Strom1, T. Meitinger1 mal recessive colobomatous micro/anophthalmia have been described 1GSFForschungszentrum fr Umwelt und Gesundheit; Mnchen / Neuher- before. Several reports have been of families with a consistent expression berg, Germany; 2Augenklinik der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitt; of exclusively bilateral anophthalmia in homozygotes, in contrast to the Mnchen, Germany family we describe with a more varied expression in homozygotes. This is konstanze@pedgen.med.uni-muenchen.de the first description of this condition in the Irish traveller population, and Optic atrophy type1 (OPA1) is a dominantly inherited optic neuropathy with represents a further disease allele for this population. Apreviously known an onset in early childhood and is characterized by progressive loss of 14q32 locus for autosomal recessive anophthalmia, and the recently visual acuity. The predominant locus for the disease has been localized to described CHX10 gene on chromosome 14, known to cause autosomal 3q28-q29, a second locus has been mapped to chromosome 18q12.2- recessive anophthalmia, have been excluded in this family suggesting at q12.3. Symptoms similar to those found in Leber hereditary optic neu- least a third locus for this condition. Homozygosity mapping for autosomal ropathy LHON are suggestive of a mitochondrial disease. Recently, the recessive anophthalmia is currently under way. OPA1 gene on 3q28 has been identified as a dynamin related GTPase homologous to the yeast Mgm1 gene, which encodes a mitochondrial pro- P1492. Two Thai families with Norrie Disease (ND); Associa- tein that plays a role for the distribution and morphology of mitochondria. tion of two novel missense mutations with severe ND pheno- We established the gene structure of the human Mgm1 homologue using type, epileptic seizures, and a manifesting female carrier the working draft sequence available from the public sequencing centres. K. Yamada1, N. Kurotaki2, J. Takano2, T. Kayashima2, N. Niikawa2, T. Eight patients from non-related families were screened for mutations by Kishino2 amplifying and sequencing all 28 coding exons. Only in a single patient we 1Departments of Human Genetics and Ophthalmology, Nagasaki Universi- detected a missense mutation 377A>C which changes an asparagine to ty School of Medicine; Nagasaki, Japan; 2Department of Human Genetics, an alanine. This mutation could not be found in 100 control chromosomes. Nagasaki University School of Medicine; Nagasaki, Japan A dosis Southern blot analysis revealed deletions in at least two more f1198@cc.nagasaki-u.ac.jp patients suggesting haploinsufficiency as the causative disease mecha- Two Thai families with Norrie disease (ND), including 10 affected males394 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders and one manifesting female in three generations, are described. All affect- P1495.In search of mutations in ABCA4 underlying Stargardt ed males in each family had severely defective eye development with com- disease (STGD) as a tool to charter the gene flow in southern plete loss of vision. In addition, three male patients (one from a family 1 Africa (SA) and two from the other family) suffered from epilepsy, and one female car- A. V. September, R. Ramesar, J. Greenberg rier from one family manifested blindness with phthisis bulbi in her right University of Cape Town; Cape Town, South Africa eye. Mutation analysis of the ND gene (NDP) revealed two different novel AS@ANAT.UCT.AC.ZA missense mutations (L16Pand S75P) that co-segregated with ND in each Mutations in the ATP-binding cassette transporter gene (ABCA4) are family, suggesting that the newly appearing proline at codon 16 or codon responsible for a wide spectrum of inherited retinal disease phenotypes. 75 alters the conformation of the ND protein and contributes to the severe These include STGD1, fundus flavimaculatus, recessive retinitis pigmen- phenotype of ND in each family. It has been suggested that epileptic tosa, recessive cone rod dystrophy and susceptibility to age-related mac- seizures or growth retardation that is associated with ND is the conse- ular degeneration. Apanel of 80 unrelated individuals affected with STGD quence of loss of contiguous genes, because most such patients had dele- were selected. Acomprehensive investigation of ABCA4 was undertaken tions extending beyond the Norrie locus. Our finding that the three affect- using single stranded conformational polymorphism and heteroduplex ed males in the two families with the missense mutations have epilepsy analysis in conjunction with direct sequencing to identify mutations under- does not support a contiguous gene effect, but favor the pleiotropism of lying disease in this cohort. The objectives of this study was to investigate NDP, as far as at least the epileptic manifestation is concerned. The female possible correlations between (a) genotype and phenotype, and (b) geno- carrier with unilateral blindness may be due to non-random X-inactivation. type and ethnic origins of the subjects. The SApopulation is genetically interesting in that it is comprised of large groups of people, with well- P1493. Analysis of the phosphatidylinositol transfer protein defined ethnic origins. In many instances purity of certain groups has gene (PITPN) on chromosome 17p, in a South African family been maintained by political and legally entrenched policies of the with retinal degeneration. apartheid era. This phenomenon facilitates a study of gene flow over R. G. Goliath, L. J. Greenberg, R. Ramesar many generations. Several novel mutations have thus far been identified in Department of Human Genetics, University of Cape Town; Cape Town, this study. More important, a number of compound heterozygote mutations South Africa have been identified which may facilitate determining the level of admixture RG@ANAT.UCT.AC.ZA in the cohort. The genetic findings from the population under investigation Phosphatidylinositol transfer protein (PITPN) is involved with the regulation is extremely valuable in determining the effects of the various different of membrane transport within photoreceptor cells and is essential for cell mutations and the combinations of these mutations in ABCA4 on the wide survival and recovery from light stimulation. Amutation identified in the spectrum of disease phenotypes and may aid the understanding the recur- Drosophila rdgB gene causes photoreceptor degeneration. It is, therefore, rence risk of STGD disease in families with known ABCA4 mutations. conceivable that defects in the PITPN gene (PITPN) could be involved in human retinal disease. Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP), P1496.Anovel molecular basis for the development of Axen- a form of retinal degeneration, was localised to the same chromosomal feld-Rieger malformations region as PITPN (chromosome 17p), making this gene a good candidate K. Kozlowski1, M. Priston2, E. Hon2,3, M. A. Walter1 for the disease phenotype. To date, no genomic DNAsequence of human 1University of Alberta; Edmonton, AB Canada; 2Toronto Western Hospital; PITPN has been published. This study involved investigation of PITPN Toronto, ON Canada; 3University of Toronto; Toronto, ON Canada through defining exon-intron boundaries for SSCPanalysis of the coding kk1@ualberta.ca the splice consensus regions. Performing electronic database compar- Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations are characterized by aberration of the isons elucidated the genomic structure of PITPN. The cDNAsequence was anterior chamber of the eye and are associated with early-onset glaucoma. found to be homologous to a large genomic sequence file (AC006405). Mutation of the transcription factor PITX2 has been shown to underlie AR. AC006405 contained all except the first 236bp at the 5 end and 68bp at Here we characterize a novel mutation of the PITX2 homeodomain. AV45L the 3 end of the cDNAsequence. Eight exons were distinguishable for missense mutation of PITX2 found in a patient with AR malformation was SSCP analysis using oligonucleotide primers derived from the intronic introduced into the PITX2 cDNAby site-directed mutagenesis. Recombi- sequences flanking the exonic fragments for PCR amplification. To date, nant wildtype (wt) and mutant (mt) PITX2 proteins were expressed in COS- no disease-causing mutations have been identified in this analysis. The 7 cells and subcellualr localization was examined by immunofluorescence. inability to detect a pathogenic alteration could be due to the method Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) were used to compare the employed in the mutation screen. PITPN, however, remains a candidate DNAbinding abilities of wt and mt PITX2 proteins. Activation of a luciferase for the other forms of retinal disease localised to chromosome 17p. Hense, reporter gene was used to test the transactivation activity of wt and mt these findings will assist in future investigations into disorders involving PITX2 proteins in HeLa cells. The V45Lprotein correctly localized to the retinal dysfunction linked to chromosome17p. cell nucleus, but had a 2 to 7 fold decrease in DNAbinding activity versus wt PITX2. Surprisingly, however, the V45L was able to transactivate a P1494. Glaucoma phenotype in Australian pedigrees with reporter gene at greater than 200% of wt levels. We have previously shown Myocilin Thr377Met mutation that a R46W missense mutation of PITX2 found in a patient retained 38% D. A. Mackey1, J. E. Craig1, D. H. Healey1, J. H. Fingert2, E. M. Stone2 of wt PITX2 transactivation activity (Kozlowski and Walter, Hum Mol Genet 1Centre for Eye Research Australia; EAST MELBOURNE, Australia; 2Uni- 9; 2131-9, 2000). Our current results with the V45Lmutation indicate that versity of Iowa; IOWA, United States an alteration resulting in >200% of wt PITX2 transactivation activity is also D.Mackey@utas.edu.au associated with human disease. These findings demonstrate the existence INTRODUCTION; Mutations in the Myocilin gene account for 3% of pri- of both upper and lower thresholds of PITX2 activity necessary for correct mary open angle glaucoma with the Gln368STOPmutation being the most eye development and function. frequently observed. The next most frequently identified mutation to date in Australia is the Thr377Met mutation. We present detailed phenotype P1497. Duchenne And Becker Muscular Distrophies In analysis in 4 glaucoma pedigrees with this mutation. METHODS; Four Chilean Patients; Frequency And Distribution Of Deletions In families were identified with the Thr377Met mutation from over 2,000 glau- The Dystrophin Gene coma samples from South Eastern Australia tested from the GISTproject. P. Rocco1, L. Herrera2, K. Kleinsteuber3, M. A. Avaria3, M. P. Carvallo1 Clinical notes, visual fields and stereo disc photographs were obtained on 1Departamento de Biologia Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas, P. all subjects. RESULTS; All index cases had a positive family history of Universidad Catolica de Chile; Santiago, Chile; 2ICBM, Facultad de Medi- glaucoma. One large family originated from the UK and 3 smaller families cina, Universidad de Chile; Santiago, Chile; 3Servicio de Neurosiquiatria were of Greek or Macedonian extraction. The median age of diagnosis was Infantil, Hospital Clinico San Borja Arriaran; Santiago, Chile in the 4th decade and maximum recorded IOPwas over 30mmHg in most procco@genes.bio.puc.cl diagnosed glaucoma cases. Half these cases required trabeculectomy. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/DMB) are X-linked dis- CONCLUSION;The Thr377Met mutation has been identified in two ethnic orders that result from heterogeneous mutations in the dystrophin gene. subgroups with a consistent glaucoma phenotype associated with elevat- Several studies performed in groups of patients from different ethnic ori- ed intraocular pressure with variable age of onset typically in early adult- gins showed that the frequency of the DMD/DMB cases due to deletions of hood often requiring filtration surgery. one or more exons varies between 0.23 and 0.86. The remaining cases are due to point mutations or duplications within the gene. DNAisolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes of 51 patients with DMD/DMB from Chile were analysed by multiplex PCR (Chamberlain and Beggs). Deletions were detected in 24 patients (47%), 22 with a diagnostic of DMD and 2 withPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 395 DMB phenotype. The deletions were mainly clustered in the central part of P1500.Genotype - phenotype correlation in Becker muscular the gene (exons 43-52) in a 79 %. The proportion of deletions in our dystrophy patients with proximal dystrophin gene deletions DMD/DMB patients differ from those reported for European and North I. Novakovic1, S. Apostolski2, S. Todorovic3, L. Lukovic1, V. Bunjevacki1, American populations (55-65%), and is closer to the frequency of deletions D. Bojic4, L. Mestroni5, J. Milasin6 found in the Mexican population (53 %). The status of the dystrophin pro- 1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Medicine; Belgrade, tein was studied through Western blot in patients not showing deletions in Yugoslavia; 2Institute of Neurology; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 3Clinic for Pedi- the dystrophin gene. Monoclonal antibodies directed to the amino, rod and atric Neurology and Psychiatry; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; 4Institute of Cardio- carboxi domains of the dystrophin were used. Atotal of 8 patients showed vascular Diseases Dedinje; Belgarde, Yugoslavia; 5ICGEB; Trieste, Italy; a complete lack of dystrophin, suggesting the presence of mutations lead- 6Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Stomatology; Bel- ing into stop codons. Financed by Fundacion Andes, CHILE grade, Yugoslavia llukovic@eunet.yu P1498. DGGE-based mutation scan of the whole dystrophin According to the frame shift hypothesis Becker muscular dystrophy is gene in DMD/BMD patients associated with in-frame mutations in the dystrophin gene. The most fre- A. J. van Essen1, I. M. Mulder1, R. H. A. Vossen2, M. Kraak1, M. Villerius2, quent type of mutations are intragenic deletions, mainly clustered in two P. Elfferich1, G. J. B. van Ommen2, A. H. van der Hout1, I. Ginjaar2, C. H. regions; distal (exons 45-53), and proximal (exons 3-13). BMD phenotype, C. Buys1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, J. T. den Dunnen2 including skeletal myopathy and cardiac disorders, shows considerable 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Groningen; Gronin- clinical diversity. Generally, proximal deletions are associated with worse gen, The Netherlands; 2Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Lei- prognosis, while in distal deletions BMD has typical benign clinical course. den University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands The aim of this study is to analyze genotype - phenotype correlation in a a.j.van.essen@medgen.azg.nl group of six BMD patients with deletions affecting proximal part of dys- Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy are caused by mutations in the trophin gene, encompassing exons 3-13. Dystrophin gene deletions were dystrophin gene. Large deletions and duplications in the dystrophin gene detected by standard multiplex PCR method. Clinical evaluation included in DMD and BMD are detected in about two thirds of patients. This enables detail neurological and cardiological examination. Four patients had dele- accurate carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in those families. When tions in the region from muscle promoter to exon 8, encoding for N-termi- such large mutations are absent, carrier detection relies on linkage analy- nal distrophin domain. Early onset (9.4+/-4.8 y.) and faster progression of sis and determination of creatine kinase activities in female family mem- disease characterized this group. For example, one patient (del. of exons bers. Still, detection of small mutations is very important for optimal carrier 6-8) was wheelchair bound since age 30, with severe cardiomyopathy, and detection in all families. Previously used techniques for tracing microle- another (del. of exons 3-6) at age 15 y. had severe muscular dystrophy. In sions focussed on exons in the two deletion hot spots of the dystrophin two patients single exon 13 missing was detected, of dystrophins rod gene. However, microlesions do not cluster in hot spots. Therefore, we domain. These patients had later presentation (16-20 y.) with moderate designed a comprehensive DGGE -based mutation scanning method of muscular dystrophy at middle-ages. Our study suggests that proximal the dystrophin gene, with a set of 95 DGGE-amplicons covering all exons gene deletions in BMD have various phenotypic effects depend on corre- of the dystrophin gene including intron/exon boundaries. To reduce the sponding domain of protein dystrophin. workload, we used multiplex combinations of up to 6 exons. The system was validated by confirming 24 previously detected point mutations. We P1501.Electroretinogram Findings In Duchenne/becker Mus- have screened 48 DMD patients, 34 BMD patients and 50 high-risk carri- cular Dystrophy And Correlation With Genotype ers. We identified 20 pathogenic mutations and 4 possible pathogenic D. Eral1, A. Ulgenalp1, H. Oner2, M. Soylev2, E. Bora1, O. Giray3, F. mutations in the DMD group. In 34 BMD patients we found 4 pathogenic Afrashi4, S. Kose4 mutations and 2 possible pathogenic mutations. Reasons for the low muta- 1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Genetic Unit; Izmir, tion yield may be missed deep intronic mutations, inversions, small dupli- Turkey; 2Dokuz Eylul University Faculty of Medicine Dept. of Opthalmolo- cations, possible promoter mutations and wrong diagnosis. Especially in gy; Izmir, Turkey; 3Dokuz Eylul University Facuty of Medicine; Izmir, isolated BMD patients, where dystrophin analysis of muscle biopsies was Turkey; 4Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Ophthalmology; not possible, misdiagnosis might play an important role. Izmir, Turkey ayferulg@yahoo.com P1499.Restoration of the mdx-mouse phenotype upon trans- Purpose;To correlate the electroretinogram(ERG)findings in patients with fer of the entire human DMD-gene; analysis of the muscular Duchenne/Becker muscular dystropy (D/BMD) with the genotype and aval- expression profile using DNA-chips uate the ERG findings in obligate carriers. Materials and Methods;Fifteen J. T. den Dunnen, E. M. de Meijer, R. Turk, E. Mank, E. Sterrenburg, J. M. deletion positive patients with DMD,two deletion positive patients with Boer, G. J. B. van Ommen BMD and six obligate carriers in two families having positive DMD history Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, were evaluated with DNAanalysis,ophtalmologic and ERG findings. Find- The Netherlands ings;No pathology was detectedin the ophthalmic examination of the ddunnen@lumc.nl patients.In three out of 17 patients with D/BMD,ERG was normal(in two Starting from overlapping YACs, we have previously reconstructed the full patients with DMD,and in one patient with BMD).In 14 patients ERG was 2.5 Mb human Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) gene in yeast and electronegative in scotopic conditions.In these cases in photopic condi- subsequently set out to transfer it to murine ES cells. Given its Mb-size, we tions b wave was recorded subnormal whereas a wave being magnified. chose for yeast spheroplast / mammalian cell fusion. Of the several tens of B/Aamplitude ratio was less than 2 in all DMD cases except two cases with DMD-gene-positive clones, two contained all DMD-exons without normal ERG and in one patient with BMD.Mutational alterations observed detectable gross mishaps in the gene. Transgenic mice containing the in this three cases were exceptionally at 5 hot spot;not like the others with- human DMD-gene (hDMD) were generated and subjected to detailed phe- in central region. In two patients Flicker ERG was found subnormal.In obli- notypic and expression analysis. RT-PCR, Western blot analysis and gate carriers ERG findings were normal. Conclusion;ERG findings in immuno-histochemical studies, using human-specific vs. human/mouse D/BMD patients may show some correlations with molecular crossreacting antibodiess showed that the human DMD-gene had the analysis,whereas it is not useful in obligate carriers. expected tissue specific expression of the various dystrophin isoforms. Moreover, the similar level of human and mouse muscle isoforms suggests P1502.Acase report of a female carrier of Becker muscular that the transcription and translation levels are also properly regulated. To dystrophy with manifesting disease answer the question, whether the product(s) of the full human DMD gene S. A. Kocheva1, A. J. Dimovski1, S. Vlaski-Jekic2, G. D. Efremov1 can functionally complement a murine DMD mutation, the mice were 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; Skopje, The former Yugoslav crossed with mdx-mice. Phenotypical and immuno-histochemical analysis Republic of Macedonia; 2Clinic for Neurology, Faculty of Medicine; Skopje, showed that the mdx-phenotype was restored to normal. Finally, analysis The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia of global expression patterns using DNA-chip and micro-array technology svanko@yahoo.com was used to investigate the differences in muscle samples of normal, Duchene/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) is an X-linked recessive hDMD, mdx and human DMD-complemented mdx-animals. We will pres- muscular dystrophy caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene located at ent data comparing normal and diseased mouse and human tissue which Xp21. BMD is a milder form of the disease which is characterized with later should give a wealth of novel insights into more global deleterious effects onset and slower progression into adulthood. Most of the patients with this of DMD mutations. These data should help to understand the phenotypical form of the disease have in frame deletions of part(s) of the dystrophin differences of dystrophin deficiency in man and mouse and thus potential- gene. Female carriers are rarely symptomatic and are mainly carriers of ly lead to secundary interventions to reduce disease severity in patients. DMD associated mutations. On the other hand, only a few female carriers396 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders of BMD with symptomatic disease have been described so far. In this P1505. Analysis of dysferlin mRNA in peripheral blood lym- report we present a female carrier of a typical BMD with a manifesting dis- phocytes (PBL) of LGMD2B/Miyoshi Myopathy patients and ease. The patient is a 45 years old female who has two sons with a mild controls; detection of mutations and polymorphisms. Evi- form of Becker muscular dystrophy. She presented with pseudohypertro- dence of physiological PBLspecific exon skipping phy of the calves, mildly elevated serum CPK levels and myopathic elec- J. Mela1,2, E. Ricci2, F. Mangiola1, A. Damiani1, P. Tonali2, L. Felicetti2, G. tromyogram. DNAanalysis using the multiplex PCR approach showed that Galluzzi1,2 the two sons have in-frame deletion of exons 46, 47 and 48. Quantitative 1UILDM Center for Neuromuscular Diseases; Rome, Italy; 2Institute of PCR analysis using fluorescently labeled PCR products and automated Neurology, Catholic University; Rome, Italy fragment analysis on ABIPrism 310 Genetic Analyzer confirmed that the giuly@biocell.irmkant.rm.cnr.it mother is also a carrier of this deletion. The reason for the expression of Mutations in dysferlin gene (DYSF) are responsible for both autosomal the disease in this patient is still unknown. The possibility of unequal X- recessive LGMD2B and Miyoshi Myopathy (MM). DYSF gene maps to chromosome lionization is currently under investigation. chromosome 2p13, spans more than 150 kb and contains 55 exons. The 230 kDa protein product is located on the muscle fiber membrane; its func- P1503.Protein Analysis In Autosomal Recessive Limb-girdle tion is still unknown. Dysferlin RNA expression is strongly detected in Muscular Dystrophies (AR-lgmd) skeletal muscle, hearth and placenta; lower expression is found in brain, M. Vainzof, E. S. Moreira, F. de Paula, R. C. M. Pavanello, M. Passos- kidney and lung. The entire coding sequence has been identified as a 6.9 Bueno, M. Zatz kb mRNA. With the aim of investigating dysferlin expression in additional Center for the Study of the Human Genome, IB- University of Sao Paulo; tissues, we analyzed dysferlin transcripts in peripheral blood lymphocytes Sao Paulo, Brazil (PBL) by RT-PCR in eight normal controls and in four families with one or mvainzof@usp.br more subjects showing a mild distal myopathy, compatible with MM. Using Nine forms of AR-LGMDs, a heterogeneous group of muscular progressive 14 overlapping nested sets of primers and PBLtotal RNAas template, we disorders, have been identified. Four genes, which code for the sarcogly- amplified the entire dysferlin coding sequence. In PBLmRNAs of both nor- can glycoproteins from the DGC cause the more severe forms, the mal and MM individuals, we observed the same sequences as compared sarcoglicanopathies (LGMD2C, 2D, 2E and 2F). The five milder forms are with muscle transcripts, except for the deletion of 42 bp corresponding to LGMD2A, LGMD2B, LGMD2G, LGMD2H and LGMD2I and the known pro- the skipping of exon 17. This finding suggests the presence of a PBLspe- tein products are calpain 3 (2A), dysferlin (2B) and telethonin (2G). cific splice site. In order to identify small mutations, we performed Het- Through imunohistochemistry and western blot analysis, we studied the eroduplex analysis of the amplified cDNAfragments; until now we found a expression of the 7 known LGMD proteins in 218 muscle biopsies from patient homozygous for Arg959Trp missense mutation and detected sev- patients with clinical diagnosis of LGMD (195 families). Atotal or partial eral polymorphisms. Dysferlin transcripts analysis in PBLseems to be a deficiency of the following proteins was observed; sarcoglycan (a-, b-, g-, useful method to screen patients for mutation detection and to study the d-sarcoglycans) in 29 families, calpain 3 in 60 families, dysferlin in 25 fam- organization of dysferlin gene and its expression in different tissues. ilies and telethonin, in 4 families. In patients with known pathogenic muta- tions it was possible to observe that; the primary deficiency of one of the P1506.PFGE analysis of 4q35 rearrangements in Italian fami- SG protein leaded to the secondary deficiency of the whole complex in the lies with Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD); majority of the SG patients, but SGs were normal in the 2A, 2B and 2G implications for the molecular mechanism of the disease forms. Calpain 3 showed total or partial deficiency in LGMD2Apatients but G. Galluzzi1,2, L. Colantoni1,2, M. Rossi2, B. Merico2, F. Mangiola1, P. a secondary deficiency was also observed in two LGMD2B families. Tonali2, E. Ricci2, L. Felicetti2,3 Patients with LGMD2B and 2G showed total deficiency of the respective 1UILDM Center for Neuromuscular Diseases; Rome, Italy; 2Institute of proteins, but no secondary deficiencies of dysferlin or telethonin were Neurology, Catholic University; Rome, Italy; 3Institute of Cell Biolgy, CNR; observed in patients not linked to these genes. Through protein analysis it Rome, Italy was possible to classify ~60% of the LGMD families, suggesting which giuly@biocell.irmkant.rm.cnr.it gene should be primary screened for identification of mutations. Financial In 95% of FSHD families the genetic defect is a deletion of a variable num- support; CEPID-FAPESP, PRONEX, CNPq, ABDIM ber of KpnI repeats in 4q35 region. Molecular diagnosis is based on the detection by probe p13E-11 of short EcoRI, BlnI-resistant fragments (10- P1504.Recurrent Basque and Brazilian Mutation in LGMD2A 35 kb). Sequence homology between 4qter and 10qter loci facilitates inter- (Calpainopathy) Brazilian Families. chromosomal exchanges resulting in the reshuffling of 4q-type BlnI-resist- F. Paula1, R. Viegas1, A. Kai1, E. Moreira1, M. Passos-Bueno1, M. Vain- ant and 10q-type BlnI-sensitive repeats from one chromosome to the other. zof1, V. Nigro2, M. Zatz1 In order to verify whether the occurrence of interchromosomal exchanges 1Universidade de So Paulo; So Paulo, Brazil; 2Universitadegli studi di could play a pathogenic role in association with the 4q35 specific Napoli; Napoli, Italy rearrangement, we analyzed the segregation of BlnI-resistant and BlnI- flapvit@yahoo.com.br sensitive alleles in 50 FSHD Italian families. DNAextraction and subse- The Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy included an heterogeneous group of quent restriction steps with EcoRI, BlnI and Tru9I were performed directly genetic disease characterized by weakness on proximal muscles. The in agarose blocks. The alleles were separated by PFGE and identified with most prevalent of them is the autosomal recessive form LGMD 2A, with a p13E-11 and KpnI cloned sequences as probes. Both in affected and nor- clinical course ranging from severe to mild. The LGMD 2Agene, which mal individuals, we observed all kinds of interchromosomal exchanges (tri- codes for calpain-3, has 24 exons. About 97 pathogenic distinct mutations somy, tetrasomy, monosomy, nullisomy and partial translocations). We have been identified along the gene; 70% of them are private mutations, were able to establish that; the small 4q35 fragment causing FSHD is but a few of them seem to be more prevalent in some populations. We are rarely involved in interchromosomal exchanges; high MW alleles are more screening mutations in the CANP-3 gene in 24 LGMD 2ABrazilian families frequently implicated in subtelomeric translocations; in most monosomic (including 68 patients), classified through linkage or with calpain deficien- patients, the translocated allele was inherited from the parent not trans- cy in muscle. Up to now, pathogenic mutations were found in 21 families, mitting the disease; in 4 out of 8 sporadic cases, both parents carried sub- 6 of them in just one allele. Four novel changes where identified; two non- telomeric translocations. PFGE analysis of 4q35 rearrangements in FSHD sense (R748X and 509-510insA, exons 21 and 5) and two missense greatly improves the accuracy of molecular diagnosis and reveals the (K211E and M248R, exons 4 and 5) which were not found in 50 normal extent of interchromosomal exchanges, suggesting that the instability of controls. Interestingly, although the Brazilian population is highly misci- subtelomeric regions could play a significant role in the molecular mecha- genated, 2 recurrent mutations were found (corresponding to 45% of the nism of the disease. sample); six families had the same 2362AGTCATCTmutation (prevalent in the Basque population) while five the same R110X change (identified P1507. Physical and transcriptional map of the Hereditary only in Brazilian patients). Haplotype analyzes in 10 of these families sug- Inclusion Body Myopathy locus on chromosome 9p12-13 gest a common origin for these two mutations. No direct correlation was I. Eisenberg1, H. Hochner1, M. Shemesh1, T. Levi2, T. Poticha1, M. found between the type of mutation, calpain expression in muscle and Sadeh3, Z. Argov4, C. Jackson5, S. Mitrani-Rosenbaum1 severity of the clinical course, particularly due to high intrafamilial variabil- 1The Unit for Molecular Biology, Hadassah Hospital, The Hebrew Univer- ity. Financial support; CEPID-FAPESP, PRONEX-CNPq, IAEA, Telethon- sity-Hadassah Medical School; Jerusalem, Israel; 2Department of Genet- Italy. ics, Harvard Medical School; Boston, United States; 3Department of Neu- rology, Wolfson Hospital; Holon, Israel; 4Department of Neurology, Hadas- sah Hospital, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School; Jerusalem, Israel; 5Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital andPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 397 Brown University; Providence, United States of alternative splicing in muscle tissue, we postulate that the severe form eisenb@md2.huji.ac.il of Myotubular Myopathy in this boy is caused by the described new unusu- Hereditary Inclusion Body Myopathy (HIBM) is a group of neuromuscular al splice mutation in the Myotubularin gene. disorders characterized by adult-onset, slowly progressive distal and prox- imal muscle weakness and typical muscle pathology. Previously, we have P1510. The Molecular analysis of trinucleotide expansion in mapped the gene responsible for a recessive form of HIBM to chromo- Myotonic Dystrophy in Iranian Patients some 9p1 and narrowed the interval to one single YAC clone of 1Mb in K. Kahrizi, S. M. E. Mousavi, S. S. Hosseini Amini, H. Najmabadi size. As a further step towards the identification of the HIBM gene, we have University of Welfare and Rehabilitation; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran constructed a detailed physical and transcriptional map of this region. A maryamneishabury@yahoo.co.uk high resolution BAC contig that includes the HIBM critical region, flanked Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is the most common form of adult muscle dys- by marker D9S1804 and D9S1859, was constructed. This contig allowed trophies with an estimated prevalence of about 1 in 8000. DM has poly- the precise localization of twenty five genes and ESTs to the proximal systemic manifestations, including muscle weakness and myotonia. It has region of chromosome 9. The expression pattern of those mapped genes pattern of Trinucleotide (CTG) repeats, in 3 untranslated region of the ser- and ESTs was established by Northern blot analysis. In the process of ine-Theronine protein kinase gene located on chromosome 19q13.3. Due refining the HIBM interval, thirteen new polymorphic markers were identi- to similarity in clinical picture with the other dystrophic patients and the lack fied, of which 11 are CA-repeats, and 2 are single nucleotide polymor- of diagnosis methods, we decided to establish moleculr analysis for DM phisms. Certainly, this map provides an important integration of physical gene. Acombination of PCR and southern analysis technique was used. and transcriptional information corresponding to chromosome 9p12-13, PCR products were visualised by silver staining. DNAprobe was labeled which is expected to facilitate the cloning and identification not only of the by digoxigenin and southern analysis was performed. 60 cases were HIBM gene, but also other disease genes which map to this region. examined. DM gene mutation was detected in 30% of the cases. P1508. Candidate gene characterization and exploration in P1511.Identification and characterization of candidate genes the Xq28 critical interval toward the identification of the X for the juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) at human linked Myopathy wih Excessive Autophagy (XMEA) gene chromosome 2q33-q34 N. Lvy1, P. Aubourg1, D. Figarella-Branger2, L. Villard1, V. Des Portes3, B. S. Hadano1, Y. Yanagisawa2, N. Miyamoto2, J. Showguchi-Miyata1, R. Chabrol4, C. Navarro5, B. Minassian6, H. Kallimo7, J. F. Pellissier2, M. Singaraja3, S. W. Scherer4, G. A. Rouleau5, M. R. Hayden3, J. Ikeda1 Fontes1, .. and the ENMC European Consortium on XMEA8 1The Institute of Medical Sciences, Tokai University; Kanagawa, Japan; 1INSERM U491-Facult de Mdecine de la Timone; Marseille, France; 2NeuroGenes, ICORP/JST; Kanagawa, Japan; 3CMMT, University of 2Laboratoire de Biopathologie nerveuse et musculaire; Marseille, France; British Columbia; Vancouver, BC Canada; 4The Hospital of Sick Children; 3Service de Neuropdiatrie-Hop. St Vincent de Paul; Paris, France; 4Ser- Toronto, ON Canada; 5Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill Uni- vice de Neuropediatrie-Hopital Timone; Marseille, France; 5Servicio versity; Montreal, PQ Canada deAnatomia patologica-Hospital de Meixoeiro; Vigo, Spain; 6Division of shinji@nga.med.u-tokai.ac.jp Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, Canada; 7Department Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative of pathology-Turku university Hospital; Turku, Finland; 8European Neuro- disease that manifests as selective upper and lower motor neuron degen- muscular Center; Nardeen, The Netherlands eration. The autosomal recessive form of juvenile ALS (ALS2) has previ- nicolevy@pacwan.fr ously been mapped to the 1.7 cM interval flanked by D2S116 and X-linked myopathy with excessive autophagy (XMEA) is an unusual neu- D2S2237 spanning approximately 3 Mb region on human chromosome romuscular disorder which we recently assigned to chromosome Xq28 by 2q33-q34. To understand the molecular mechanism for the pathogenesis genetic linkage analysis. Biological and pathological studies evidence high of ALS2, identification of the gene and mutation that links to ALS2 is essen- levels of Creatine Kinase associated to an excessive number of autophag- tial. To identify the transcribed DNAsequences mapped within the candi- ic vacuoles. By a collaborative network of neurologists, neuropathologists date region, we searched the public databases in GDB, Gene map 99 of and geneticists, we have collected and phenotypically explored 12 XMEA the Human genome and UniGene at NCBI. Further, genomic DNA families. According to the pathological homogeneity observed after muscle sequences derived from public database were used as quarries to detect biopsy and immunohistochemistry experiments performed in affected ESTs. So far, 42 putative non-overlapping transcriptional units were males, this disorder appears to segregate as a monogenic trait. We thus assigned to this interval. Those units contained 27 full-length transcription- embarked in a positional cloning project by choosing a candidate gene al units. Fifteen of 27 genes were known (KIAA0005, CLK1, ORC2L, approach. To date, more than 20 genes have been either direcly evaluat- NDUFB3, CFLAR, CASP10, CASP8, FZD7, NOP5, UBL1, BMPR2, AIP-1, ed for potential disease causing mutations or their structure and expres- CD28, CTLA4, and AILIM) and 12 genes were novel (CALS-109, sion pattern has been first characterized before searching for mutations. In ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, ALS2CR3, CALS-69, CALS-117, CALS-370, CALS- order to improve such approaches we now use large scale mutation 124, CALS-139, CALS-135, CALS-79, and CALS-156). Complete genom- screening apparatus as well as region specific expression microarray to ic organizations of 23 genes out of 27 full-length transcripts were defined characterize a specific muscle expression pattern correlated to this pathol- by the computational analysis of cDNAand genomic DNAsequences. In ogy. We will present phenotypic, immunohistochemical, and genetics data addition, a total of 396 exons was detected in 42 transcriptional units. We related to XMEA. analyzed the expression of transcripts by RT-PCR on total RNAextracted from normal human brain, spinal cord and lymphocyte. So far, 32 of 42 P1509.Functional importance of an Ato G transition on posi- units have been analyzed for expression, and 31 of 32 units were tion -4 of the acceptor splice site in intron 3 of the MTM1 gene expressed at least in the brain or spinal cord. Three single nucleotide poly- B. Halliger-Keller1, R. Bittner2, W. Kress1 morphisms (SNPs) that were associated with ALS2 were also identified in 1Institute of Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Institute of Anatomy; the intronic regions of CALS-139 and CALS-156. Further analyses of the Vienna, Austria candidate genes represented by these units in the ALS2 patients are being Halliger-Keller@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de performed to explore the genetic defect of ALS2. In a boy suffering from severe congenital hypotonia and generalized mus- cle weakness the muscle histology favoured the diagnosis of a severe form P1512. Molecular Investigations in Hereditary Spastic Para- of Myotubular Myopathy. The muscle biopsy showed small rounded mus- plegias. An Italian study. cle fibres with centrally located nuclei surrounded by a halo. Congenital F. M. Santorelli1, C. Patrono1, A. Tessa1, A. Filla2, A. Federico3, A. Nuti4, Myotonic Dystrophy was excluded by detecting a CTG repeat number in G. Siciliano5, A. Malandrini3, C. Casali6 the normal range on chromosome 19. All 15 exons of the Myotubularin 1Bambino Ges; Rome, Italy; 2Inst. Neurology; Napoli, Italy; 3Inst. Neurol- (MTM1; MIM #310400) gene were checked by SSC analysis for sequence ogy; Siena, Italy; 4Neurology; Viareggio, Italy; 5Inst. Neurology; Pisa, Italy; variations. Exon 4 showed an aberrant pattern of bands. Direct sequenc- 6Inst. Neurology; Rome, Italy ing revealed a transition of A(194 - 4)G at the splice acceptor site of intron fms3@na.flashnet.it 3. We could not find this sequence variation in more than hundred control Hereditary spastic paraplegias are characterized by progressive weakness chromosomes. After isolation of RNAfrom the patients fibroblasts a region and spasticity of the lower limbs due to degeneration of corticospinal between exon 3 and 5 was amplified by RT-PCR. Afragment of normal axons. Genetic heterogeneity is suggested by different modes of trans- length containing exon 4 and a short one lacking exactly exon 4 could be mission (autosomal dominant, recessive, and X-linked). Recently two produced in about equal amounts. This was confirmed by direct sequenc- genes, responsible for an autosomal recessive (SPG7) and a dominant ing of the two bands. The RNAlacking exon 4 is out of frame and would (SPG4) form have been cloned. MtDNAdeleteions have been found in one lead to a non-functional protein. Although we do not have the exact amount AD family. We investigated 14 AD and 9 AR HSPfamilies. Clinical features,398 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders neuroimaging findings and neurophysiological data have been reviewed. of Pathology, University Gttingen; Gttingen, Germany Molecular chatacterization included SPG4 and SPG7 genes, and mtDNA. Schmidt.Thorsten@gmx.de Both pure and complicated forms have been recognized in our series. Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 (SCA3) or Machado-Joseph-Disease (MJD) Optic neuropathy, retinopathy, dementia, ataxia, and deafness were found is an autosomal dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder cause by in the complicated forms. MRI disclosed a thin corpus callosum in two the expansion of a polyglutamine tract in the ataxin-3 protein. A neu- recessive patients who were not linked to chromosome 15q. We did not ropathological hallmark of SCA3 are intracellular aggregates forming neu- detect SPG7 mutations in AR-HSP families. Conversely, we found four ronal intranuclear inclusions (NII). To characterize cellular responses to SPG4 mutations in pure AD-HSP. Our data reinforce the notion of the the nuclear aggregates in more detail, we analysed nuclear inclusions in ample variability in the presentation of HSPand confirm the relative rarity human postmortem brain of patients affected by SCA3 and controls of the SPG7-associated form. Also, we confirm that SPG4 mutations are immunohistochemically using a panel of antibodies directed against chap- frequent in pure dominant HSPbut account for about 30% of the forms. erones and proteasome subunits. About 20% of the nuclear inclusions in Thorough clinical and molecular studies are needed to address genotype- pontine neurons stained positively for the chaperone Hsp90?, whereas no phenotype correlations in HSP. staining by antibodies to Hsp27, Hsp60, and Hsp/Hsc70 was observed. Most nuclear inclusions in SCA3 are ubiquitin-positive (75%) suggesting P1513.Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian Atrophy in Chinese degradation by ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathways. Surprisingly B. Soong1, I. Lee2 only a minority of the inclusions were immunopositive with antibodies 1National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine; Taipei, Taiwan Repub- directed against subunits of the 20S proteolytic core of proteasomes, lic of China; 2Taipei-Veterans General Hospital; Taipei, Taiwan Republic of whereas most inclusions were stained by antibodies directed against the China 19S regulatory subunits thought to recognize, bind and unfold ubiquitinat- bwsoong@vghtpe.gov.tw ed proteins. In addition, most NII were immunoreactive with 11S subunits Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) is a neurodegenerative dis- antibodies. Acomparison with normal control brains indicates more intense order with characteristic neuropathologic findings of combined degenera- cytoplasmatic staining and less intense nuclear signals in SCA3 neurons tion of both the dentatorubral and pallidoluysian systems of the central suggesting a redistribution of proteasomes. The high proportion of NII nervous system. The clinical symptoms are diverse with varying combina- stained with proteosome subunits 11S and 19S stands in marked contrast tions of myoclonus, epilepsy, ataxia, choreoathetosis, and dementia. The to the small percentage of NII immunostained with the 20S antibodies prevalence of DRPLAin Japan was estimated as two to four per million, a used. These results suggest that most neurons containing NII recruit pro- rate that is similar to that of Huntington disease in Japan. Outside Japan, teasome subunits to NII possible in an attempt to refold mutant ataxin-3 DRPLAremains rare with previous reports of only eight Caucasian kin- and to dissolve nuclear aggregates. dreds, including one African American family with Haw River syndrome. The reason for different racial prevalence of DRPLAis unclear. Amolecu- P1516. Molecular Analysis Of Iranian Patients With Hunting- lar defect in patients with DRPLA, identified in 1994, lies in the expansion tons Disease of an unstable (CAG)n repeat in the DRPLAgene on chromosome 12p. F. Hormozian1,2, M. Houshmand1, R. Ghiasvand3, M. Sanati1 Despite the demonstration of a common molecular defect in DRPLA 1National Research Centre of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology; patients, clinical and neuropathological differences have been reported Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran; 2Azad University of Tehran; Tehran, among DRPLA patients, even within a family. There are also different Islamic Republic of Iran; 3Organization for Welfare & Rehabilitation of ranges of normal CAG repeat lengths in different ethnic groups. Herein we Tehran; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran describe the clinical, radiological and genetic features in the first reported fabi_123@yahoo.com Chinese DRPLA family, and compare the distribution of CAG repeat HD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease of midlife onset,inherited lengths at the DRPLAlocus in normal Chinese with that of other ethnic in an autosomal dominant manner.The clinical picture is characterized by groups.Our study indicated that although the DRPLAallele size is distrib- involuntary movement , psychiatric changes,intellectual and cognetive uted similarly in Chinese and Japanese, DRPLAin Chinese is rare. So far, decline and weight loss. The symptoms apear to be caused by marked only one intermediate-sized allele containing more than 30 CAG repeats neuronal death, most notably in the caudate nucleus and putamen. The has been reported in Chinese. The ethnic prevalence of DRPLAseems to responsible mutation is an expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat,locat- be better correlated with the prevalence of the intermediate-sized alleles in ed at 4p16.3 gene named IT15. The repeat is polymorphic and varying individual populations. between 8 and 36 units in normal chromosomes,but is expanded to at least 37 copies on HD. Here we have studied the number of CAG repeats in 25 P1514. Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in SCA1; Evidence individuals from 7 Iranian families affected with HD. The number of (CAG)n for intermediate alleles repeats in HD chromosomes varied from 41 to 58 ,while the range for the C. Zhlke1, A. Dalski1, Y. Hellenbroich1, K. Brk2, E. Schwinger1 normal chromosomes was from 12 to 24 repeats.In three of these cases 1Institut fr Humangenetik; LBECK, Germany; 2Klinik fr Neurologie; the transmission was paternal and anticipation was obsereved in one fam- Tbingen, Germany ily. zuehlke@medinf.mu-luebeck.de Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1 [OMIM 164400]) is an autosomal P1517.Homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia; Multiple dominantly inherited progressive neurodegenerative disease that primerily founder mutations underlie phenotypic variation in the South affects cerebellar Purkinje cells, spinocerebellar tracts and pontine nuclei. African population The disease results from the expansion of a polyglutamine stretch within S. Jansen1, M. Callis1, R. Thiart2, M. J. Kotze2 the SCA1 protein (ataxin 1). The underlying mutation has been shown to 1University of the Free State; Bloemfontein, South Africa; 2University of be an unstable CAG trinucleotide repeat present within the coding region Stellenbosch; Stellenbosch, South Africa of the gene. Normal alleles range from 6 to 39 units. They are charac- gnmgmc@med.uovs.ac.za terised by interruptions of 1 to 3 CATtrinucleotides that are thought to be Objective. Predominance of three low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) involved in the stability of the trinucleotide stretch. Cerebeller ataxia has gene mutations in South African Afrikaner patients with familial hypercho- been reported in patients carrying 40 to 81 trinucleotides. Interestingly, lesterolaemia (FH) significantly enhances the diagnostic prospects of the these pathologic alleles miss any CAT interruptions. We analysed the disease in this population. We studied the degree of genetic heterogeneity repeat length and composition of 16 individuals with alleles between 36 in Afrikaner FH homozygotes in relation to phenotypic expression of the and 41 triplets for genotype-phenotype correlations and have found the 39 disease. Methods. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based methods were trinucleotide-allele to be either interrupted by CATrepeats or formed by a used to screen FH homozygotes without (or with only one copy of) the pure CAG stretch. Preliminary correlation studies yield evidence for the three founder-related mutations, D154N, D206E and V408M, for disease- existence of intermediate alleles in SCA1. related LDLR gene mutations. Afrikaner FH homozygotes with these muta- tions known to cause a receptor-defective or -negative phenotype, were P1515.Recruitment of Chaperones and Proteasome subunits grouped according to genotype for comparative analysis. Results. Muta- into neuronal intranuclear inclusion bodies in SCA3 tions W66G, D200G (heterozygous state) and S285L(homozygous state) T. Schmidt1, K. S. Lindenberg2, A. Krebs2, L. Schls3, F. Laccone4, J. were identified in three of the four Afrikaner FH homozygotes subjected to Herms5, O. Riess1, B. G. Landwehrmeyer2 mutation analysis. Significantly higher mean total- (P<0.008) and LDL-cho- 1Medical Genetics, University Rostock; Rostock, Germany; 2Department of lesterol (P<0.015) levels were demonstrated in 24 FH homozygotes with at Neurology, University Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 3Department of Neurology, St. least one copy of the receptor-negative mutation V408M, compared with Josefs Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum; Bochum, Germany; 4Institute of 23 patients with receptor-defective LDLR gene mutations D154N and/or Human Genetics, University Gttingen; Gttingen, Germany; 5Department D206E. Conclusions. Mutations D200G and S258Lmay represent minorPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 399 founder events, since these mutations emanating from Europe have previ- P1520. Corneal dystrophy and perceptive deafness (Harboy- ously been detected in eight Afrikaner FH heterozygotes. Inclusion of these an syndrome) ; report of a new family and homozygosity mutations in routine DNAscreening would facilitate an improved diagnos- mapping tic service for FH in the genetically homogeneous Afrikaner population. M. J. Abramowicz1, J. Albuquerque-Silva2, A. Zanen1 1Hopital Erasme, Free University of Brussels (ULB); Brussels, Belgium; P1518.Genetic Studies of Oculodentodigital Dysplasia 2Free University of Brussels (ULB); Brussels, Belgium S. A. Boyadjiev1, R. E. Shapiro2, A. Wandstrat3, A. B. Chowdry1, J. W. marcabra@ulb.ac.be Choi1, M. LaBuda4, M. Lovett5, C. Burgess6, M. Schalling7, E. W. Jabs1 Asyndrome of congenital corneal dystrophy and teenage-onset perceptive 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD deafness has been reported in three sibships, one of which with consan- United States; 2Department of Neurology, University of Vermont; Burling- guineous parents, consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. It is ton, VT United States; 3Department of Immunology, University of Texas, referred to as Harboyan syndrome (MIM 217400). The corneal disorder in SW Med. Ctr.; Dallas, TX United States; 4Department of Pediatrics, Johns Harboyan syndrome is a congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD United States; 5Washington Univ. (CHED). We report a previously undescribed family with Harboyan syn- School of Medicine; St. Louis, MO United States; 6CuraGen Corporation; drome. The proband is the sixth of a sibship of nine, where four girls and New Haven, CT United States; 7Neurogenetics Unit, Karolinska Hospital; one boy are affected. The parents are second cousins and unaffected. Stockholm, Sweden Genome-wide homozygosity mapping using 358 microsatellite markers sboyd@mail.jhmi.edu showed 8 markers from 8 chromosome regions that were homozygous in Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD, MIM 164200) is an autosomal domi- DNApooled from the patients while heterozygous in DNApooled from the nant condition of dysmorphogenesis and neurodegeneration. The physical parents and unaffected siblings. Further study of individual DNAsamples characteristics include eye defects, craniofacial anomalies, dental anom- with closely spaced markers tentatively identified a segment at 20pter-p13 alies, hand and foot malformations and neurologic deficits. The clinical and for which the affected sibling are homozygous by descent for a haplotype radiological findings appear to define a slowly progressive leukodystrophy present in both parents. This preliminary result indicates the presence of a and the possibility of genetic anticipation. We have refined the location of gene at 20pter-p13 whose mutation causes both corneal dystrophy and the ODDD gene on chromosome 6q22 between markers D6S266 and hearing loss. Of note, a gene for nonsyndromic autosomal recessive D6S1639, an interval of less than 3 cM. In an effort to clone the ODDD CHED, CHED2 (MIM 217700), was recently mapped to 20pter-p13. This gene we have developed a YAC based physical map of the 6q22 region. suggests that Harboyan syndrome and CHED2 may be allelic, with some We have characterized 37 YAC clones that form a complete contig of the mutations associated with hearing loss. Interestingly, no locus was previ- candidate region with at least two-fold redundancy for each marker. We ously reported on 20p for recessive hearing loss, in spite of the unparal- have identified the known genes assigned to the candidate region and leled genetic heterogeneity thereof. have refined their map positions. Several genes were considered as pos- sible ODDD candidates and were analyzed by sequencing and Southern P1521. The elucidation of the molecular genetic causes of Blot analysis. No mutations were identified in HSF2, HEY2, PLN, Mbius syndrome. COL10A1 and GRIK2 genes. More genes are in process of being evaluat- B. van der Zwaag1, H. van Bokhoven1, H. Verzijl1, B. van den Helm1, H. ed as candidates. Repeat extension detection analysis did not detect large Kremer1, A. Hellemons2, P. Burbach2, H. Brunner1, G. Padberg1 CAG repeat expansions as a cause for ODDD. Direct cDNAselection was 1UMC Nijmegen; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2Rudolf Magnus Institute; performed using eight YAC clones from the ODDD region and 800 non- Utrecht, The Netherlands repetitive clones were isolated. We have analyzed 270 clones by sequenc- A.vanderzwaag@czzorlnm.azn.nl ing and computational methods and found many to have large open read- Mbius syndrome (MBS, MIM 157900) consists of a congenital paralysis ing frames and no homologies to known genes and/or ESTs. We are in the of the VIIth (facial) cranial nerve, frequently accompanied by dysfunction of process of further characterizing these clones that represent putative novel other cranial nerves. In addition, orofacial and limb malformations, defects genes. of the musculoskeletal system, and mental retardation are seen in MBS patients. In our hospital two new loci were revealed for MBS, indicating P1519.The origin of the Slovak alkaptonuria (AKU) mutations genetic heterogeneity for this syndrome. The MBS2 locus was linked to A. Zatkova1, D. Beltran Valero de Bernabe2, H. Polakova1, E. Ferakova3, chromosome 3q21-q22, between markers D3S1589 and ACPP, spanning V. Ferak3, L. Kadasi1, S. Rodriguez de Cordoba2 4.9 cM. The MBS3 locus was linked to chromosome 10q21.3-q22.1, 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics; Bratislava, Slovakia; between markers D10S581 and D10S502, spanning 3.7 cM. Several inter- 2Unidad de Patologia Molecular and Unidad de Investigacion, Fundacion esting candidate genes were selected, based on expression pattern and/or Jimenez Diaz; Madrid, Spain; 3Department of Molecular Biology, Come- known function and analysed by SSCP or direct sequencing. CRBP1, nius University; Bratislava, Slovakia SOX14, EGR-2 and hPGT have been screened, but no mutations were zatkova@fns.uniba.sk found in these genes that could account for the Mbius phenotype. For a Alkaptonuria (AKU) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the defi- positional candidate gene approach (partial) YAC contigs have been con- ciency of homogentisate 1,2 dioxygenase (HGO) activity. The disease is structed for both loci and several interesting ESTs and genes have been characterized by homogentisic aciduria, ochronosis and ochronotic arthri- mapped to these contigs, prior to further examination. RNAin situ hybridi- tis. AKU shows a very low prevalence (1;100,000-250,000) in most ethnic sation in mouse embryos was performed to determine the spatio-temporal groups. In Slovakia, however, the incidence of this disorder raises up to expression pattern of positional candidate genes from the 3q21-q22 criti- 1;19000, that is difficult to explain by a classical founder effect since ten cal region. The in situ hybridisation for one paticularly promising candidate different AKU mutations have been identified in this relatively small coun- gene revealed expression in the ganglia as well as in other cell types. This try. We have determined the allelic associations of eleven HGO intragenic expression pattern is compatible with MBS as the affected facial nerve polymorphisms for 44 AKU chromosomes from 20 Slovak pedigrees. emanates from the VIIth ganglion. Mutation analysis is being performed on These data were compared to the HGO haplotypes for all AKU chromo- this gene, as well as on several other candidates to proof their involvement somes carrying corresponding mutations characterized thus far from non- in MBS. Slovak patients. The results show that the mutations P230S, V 300G, R58fs and IVS1-1G->Aare shared by different populations and were prob- P1522.Molecular analysis of the Duane Syndrome region on ably introduced to Slovakia with the founder populations that spread chromosome 8q throughout Europe. However, these mutations represent only 16% of the A. Pizzuti1, G. Calabrese2, M. Bozzali3, L. Telvi4, A. Ion4, L. Stuppia2, G. Slovak AKU chromosomes. On the other hand, six of the ten Slovak muta- Palka2, B. Dallapiccola1 tions, including the prevalent G152fs, G161R, G270R and P370fs, most 1Universit di Roma; Roma, Italy; 2Universit di Chieti; Chieti, Italy; likely originated at a single and very small geographical location in the 3Ospedale Policlinico; Milano, Italy; 4Hopital S. Vincent De Paul; Paris, northwestern part of Slovakia. Based on the evidence that all six Slovak France AKU mutations are associated to HGO mutational hot spots, we suggest antpizzuti@libero.it that an increased mutation rate at the HGO gene is responsible for the Duane syndrome (DS) is characterized by primary strabism, globe retrac- clustering of AKU mutations in such a small geographical region. tion and narrowing of palpebral fissure, associated to variable sight impair- ment. DS is mostly sporadic. However, some familial cases have been reported with linkage to chromosome 2. DS has also been related to a con- tigous gene syndrome with deletions on chromosome 8q12-13. We previ- ously identified a 3 cM smallest region of overlap (SRO) for DS between markers D8S533 and D8S1767 in a DS patient with a microdeletion. Then400 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders we investigated a DS patient with gonadal dysgenesis, heterozygous for a Mutations occur throughout the gene coding region, with three clusters translocation involving chromosome 8q13. STS and FISH analysis emerging; in the mitochondrial leader, the conserved GTP-binding domain revealed the break-point position within the previously identified SRO, cov- and the -COOH terminus. Aframeshift in exon 28 resulting in 22 novel ter- ered by YAC 820e6. Two cosmid subclones from YAC 820e6 were found minal amino acids is present in 14 unrelated Danish families and appears spanning the breakpoint on chromosome 8q. In the breakpoint-surround- to represent a founder allele. Mutation clustering in the mitochondrial ing region a combination of sequencing, data base search and hybridiza- leader and GTPase domain of OPA1 corroborate their functional signifi- tion experiments identified sequences similar to a few ESTs, none of which cance. No specific function has yet been ascribed to the -COOH terminus related to known genes. Most of them have been better characterized as of OPA1, although bioinformatic analysis indicates a role in protein-protein well as the structure and position of the related genes. We positioned the interaction. A mutation cluster in this region highlights its physiological chromosomal break in the second intron of one of these genes, which is importance and may account for the higher Danish prevalence of ADOA. therefore interrupted by the translocation. Expression of the interrupted Preliminary data implicate other genetic or environmental factors in the gene is almost ubiquitous, with high levels in muscle, as defined by North- ADOAphenotype. ern blot analysis. However its real function and the possible mechanisms involved in the disease process remain unsettled P1525.Large fragile X premutation alleles may often contain two AGG interruptions P1523.DNARepair Foci in Fanconi anaemia cells S. L. Nolin, G. E. Houck, A. D. Gargano, W. T. Brown M. Digweed, I. Demuth, K. Sperling NYS Institute for Basic Research; Staten Island, NYUnited States Institut fr Humangenetik; Berlin, Germany snolin@mindspring.com martin.digweed@charite.de Fragile X syndrome, a common cause of inherited mental retardation, is The characteristic sensitivity of Fanconi anaemia cells is towards crosslink- associated with a CGG repeat expansion within the FMR1 (fragile X men- ing agents, however, there have been several reports of a deficiency in FA tal retardation 1) gene. In the normal population, AGG triplets are usually cells in the repair of double strand breaks (DSBs), lesions more usually present at regular intervals within the repeat region, most commonly at associated with ionising radiation. Some reports have indicated subtle dif- positions 10 and 20. AGG interruptions are thought to stabilize the region ferences in DSB repair kinetics whilst other analyses suggest a compro- by preventing slippage during DNAreplication. In families with fragile X, mise in the fidelity of DSB-repair. Similarly, Nijmegen breakage syndrome however, a different pattern of AGG interruptions has been observed. Sev- (NBS) is characterised by radiosensitivity but there are also numerous eral groups have used a variety of techniques to analyze the repeat organ- reports of increased sensitivity towards the lesions made by crosslinkers. ization in fragile X premutation males and observed either a single or no These observations suggest an overlap in the repair mechanisms for AGG interruption in the 5 end of the repeat and long tracts of uninterrupt- crosslinks and for DSBs. The gene responsible for NBS was recently ed CGG repeats in the 3 end. We have developed a procedure for cloned and its protein product, nibrin, has been extensively analysed. Nib- sequencing the repeat that allowed us to examine the alleles in 8 premu- rin is found in the cell as a nuclear complex with the proteins hMre11 and tation males with repeats ranging from 95 to 150. In contrast to the results hRad50. It is phosphorylated by ATM, the gene mutated in Ataxia teleang- of earlier studies, sequence analysis revealed that although one male had iectasia, in response to ionising radiation and mediates the relocalisation no AGG and another had one AGG, five had two AGG interruptions in the of the repair complex to discrete nuclear foci (ionising radiation induced 5 end of the repeat. This suggests that two AGG interruptions may be a foci, IRIF) visible by immunostaining with antibodies to hMre11, nibrin or common finding in males with large premutation alleles. If this proves to be hRad50. IRIF are the sites of DSB repair by non-homologous end joining the case in males, two AGG interruptions may also be observed in some which requires the nuclease activity of hMre11/hRad50. We have exam- premutation females, particularly in those whose offspring seem less like- ined the occurrence of IRIF stained for Mre11, Rad50 and/or nibrin in FA ly to undergo expansion to a full mutation. primary fibroblasts and find no gross disturbances of this pathway in any of the 7 FAcomplementation groups. Transformation of primary fibroblasts P1526. Southern Blot Analysis Of Fragile X Syndrome In by SV40 T-Antigen leads to a significant reduction in IRIF in all cells test- Chilean Families. ed, possibly due to the interaction of T-antigen with one or more members A. Alliende1, A. Valiente1, B. Curotto1, C. Rojas1, T. Aravena2, L. Santa of the complex. This effect is particularly strong in cells from one of the FA Mara1, F. Corts1 complementation groups, FA-D2, and leads to almost complete abrogation 1INTAUniversity of Chile; Santiago, Chile; 2Clinical Hospital University of of IRIF formation. This suggests, that the hMre11/hRad50/nibrin pathway Chile; Santiago, Chile in these cells is far more readily disturbed by T-antigen than it is in control malliend@uec.inta.uchile.cl cells or cells from complementation groups FA-E and FA-G. Since nibrin is Fragile X syndrome is the most common inheritable disease that accounts normally phosphorylated after irradiation in FA-D2 cells, the disturbance in for mental retardation in 1;4000 males and 1;6000 females worldwide. The foci formation must lie downstream of this event. These findings are dis- disease is caused by the expansion of a CGG repeat in the first exon of the cussed in reference to the cellular DSB repair machinery and its involve- FMR1 gene and the subsequent hypermethylation of the FMR1 promoter. ment in the processing of intermediates formed during crosslink repair. By means of Southern blot analysis of EcoRI/EagI digested gDNA we determined the length of the CGG repeat segment and the methylation sta- P1524. OPA1 Gene Mutations Cluster in Functional Protein tus of the FMR1 gene in 115 probands (105 males and 10 females) with Domains in ADOApatients and Reveal a Founder Allele in the mental retardation of unknown origin, 12 obligate carriers and 27 sibs. All Danish Population. 115 probands included in this analysis scored above 16 points according D. L. Thiselton1, C. Alexander1, S. Brooks1, T. Rosenberg2, D. Mackey3, to Butler check list. 23 of them (20%) beared either full mutations (20), S. Andreasson4, N. Van Regemorter5, A. T. Moore6, S. S. Bhattacharya1, mosaic (2) or partially methylated full mutation (1). The high percentage of M. Votruba7 full mutations may result from an ascertainment bias, or an unusual high 1Institute of Ophthalmology; London, United Kingdom; 2National Eye Clin- frequency of the disease in the Chilean population. In 12 carrier mothers ic; Hellerup, Denmark; 3Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital; Melbourne, with premutated allele (CGG)89-165 and full mutation, the recurrence risk Australia; 4University Hospital; Lund, Sweden; 5Hopital Erasme; Brussels, of having an offspring with full mutation was 10/20 (50%) and 6/7 (86%), Belgium; 6Addenbrookes Hospital; Cambridge, United Kingdom; 7Institute respectively. This is a relative lower risk of expansion even for large pre- of Ophthalmology and Moorfields Eye Hospital; London, United Kingdom mutations. The absence of carriers with intermediate number of repeats is dthiselt@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk indicative of underdiagnosis and points out to the need for a fragile X Autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA) is a hereditary optic neuropa- screening program in schools for children with learning disabilities in Chile. thy with estimated prevalence 1;12,000 (Denmark) to 1;50,000 (USA). The predominant genetic locus (OPA1; MIM 165500) resides at 3q28-29. The P1527.Identification and characterization of a candidate gene OPA1 gene has recently been shown to encode a dynamin-related for cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM2) GTPase targetted to mitochondria. We have screened a large panel of J. S. Herbrick1, D. Verlaan2, M. Li1, J. Grover1, G. Rouleau2, S. W. Scher- ADOAfamilies to seek disease-related changes in OPA1 and genotype- er1 phenotype correlations. Coding exons of OPA1 and splice sites were 1The Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada; 2Montreal General screened in >100 ADOApatients of diverse ethnic origin by SSCP, het- Hospital Research Institute; Montreal, PQ Canada eroduplex analysis and direct sequencing. Clinical data on visual acuity, joanne@genet.sickkids.on.ca colour vision, visual fields and optic disc appearance was collated. Puta- Stroke is a leading cause of death and neurological disability in adults. tive mutations were tested for familial segregation by SSCP/restriction Cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM) is a disease characterized by enzyme site alteration and in 100 control chromosomes. To date we have hemorrhaegic lesions which affect the brain leading to stroke. CCM, an found 13 novel disease mutations and 19 new polymorphisms in OPA1. autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance, is relatively commonPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 401 presenting in 0.5% of the general population. To date, three genetic loci for 11 were not found in any sporadic tumors. Methylation pattern anomalies CCM have been identified. CCM1 is caused by mutations in the KRIT1 of the EXT genes promoter region were not found in exostoses and gene at 7q21 and it encodes a binding protein for Krev-1/rap1a, a putative tumors. tumor suppressor. CCM2 and CCM3 have been localized to chromosomes 7p13-p15 and 3q25.2-27, respectively, but the causative genes are still P1530.Childhood-onset Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) with unknown. ACCM patient was identified having a familial inversion on chro- homozygous deletion of SMNc gene mosome 7 [46, XY, inv(7)(p15, q36)]. Using fluorescence in situ hybridiza- M. Mukherjee1, S. Srivastava1, I. Panigrahi1, S. Pradhan2, B. Mittal1 tion (FISH) mapping, the p15 breakpoint of the inversion could be localized 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Med- within a yeast artificial chromosome clone that mapped to the critical region ical Sciences; Lucknow, India; 2Dept. of Neurology, SGPGIMS; Lucknow, at 7p13-p15 defined by family studies. Further FISH mapping led to the India identification of a bacterial artificial chromosome clone spanning the 7p15 monisha30@yahoo.com inversion breakpoint. Through genomic DNAsequence analysis and cDNA Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a group of autosomal recessive neuro- characterization a gene was found that was directly interrupted by the muscular disorders characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn inversion. The gene was determined to be expressed as a major transcript cells of the spinal cord, leading to symmetrical muscle weakness and atro- of 2.3 kb in all tissues examined and additional alternative spliced tran- phy. Deletions of the SMNt gene located at chromosome 5q13 have attrib- scripts have also been characterized. We are currently screening DNA uted in more than 90 % of the SMApatients. In the present study, we report from CCM2 families as well as sporadic patients for mutations to prove this an unusual case of childhood-onset SMAwith a homozygous deletion of new gene is involved in the pathogenesis of cerebral cavernous malfor- SMNc gene. The patient was a 5-year-old boy with delayed motor mile- mation. stones, hypotonia, muscle wasting and weakness, clinically presenting a SMA phenotype. Molecular studies using Polymerase Chain Reaction- P1528. Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum ; evidence for the exis- Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and Single tence of a pseudogene highly homologous to the ABCC6 Stranded Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP) analysis with exons 7 and gene. 8 of the SMN gene showed the presence of SMNt but complete absence D. P. Germain of SMNc gene in the patient. The sequence analysis of the critical region Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou; Paris, France (exon 7) of the SMN gene did not show any microdeletion, duplication or dominique.germain@hop.egp.ap-hop-paris.fr point mutation in SMNt and also confirmed the homozygous deletion of the Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an inherited disorder of connective SMNc gene copies. Densitometric analysis of exons 7 and 8 also revealed tissue, affecting essentially but not exclusively the elastic network, and the presence of normal copies of the SMNt gene in the patient. The results resulting in skin lesions, decreased vision, and vascular symptoms, with of our study suggest that young onset SMAmay result from centromeric highly variable phenotypic expression. We have recently identified muta- deletion of the SMN gene in certain subtypes of SMA. This further adds to tions in the ABCC6 gene, which encodes a transmembrane protein mem- the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of spinal muscular atrophy. ber of the ATPbinding cassette subfamily C, as the genetic defect respon- sible for PXE. The ABCC6 gene consists of 31 exons, spanning 75 kb of P1531. Gene Conversion Events in Adult-Onset Spinal Mus- DNAon chromosome 16p13.1. Here, we report on the finding of a pseudo- cular Atrophy gene that is highly homologous to ABCC6. During a mutational screening R. Mazzei1, A. Gambardella1,2, F. L. Conforti1, A. M. F. Patitucci1, A. Mag- of the ABCC6 gene, we identified sequence changes which, although pre- ariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, D. Pirritano2, A. Labate2, F. Bono2, M. Muglia1 dicted to be truncating mutations, were detected not only in PXE patients 1Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, National Research but also in controls. Among them, a single nucleotide insertion inducing a Council; Mangone (CS), Italy; 2Institute of Neurology, School of Medicine; frameshift, and a nonsense mutation were consistently detected at the het- Catanzaro, Italy erozygous state in our seven PXE patients and all controls (n = 82). This mazzei@imseb.cs.cnr.it indicates that the PCR products were being amplified from four rather than Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a frequent autosomal recessive neu- from two genomic copies. Molecular studies at the mRNAlevel demon- rodegenerative disorder leading to proximal paralysis with muscle atrophy. strated that these changes emanate from at least one non-expressed The gene involved in SMA, located on the chromosome 5q13, was cloned pseudogene, highly homologous to the ABCC6 gene. Our results empha- and named the survival motor neuron (SMN) gene. SMN gene is present size that, due to these homologies with both exonic and intronic sequences in telomeric (SMNT) and centromeric (SMNC) copies. Most patients with of ABCC6, extreme care must be taken not to confuse variants in the SMAcarry homozygous deletions of exons 7 and/or 8 of the SMN gene. pseudogene with mutations in the active gene, when genotyping patients. Recent studies demonstrated that the loss of the SMNt occurs by two dif- ferent mechanisms; deletion or conversion of SMNt to SMNc. Although two P1529. Molecular pathology of EXT genes on patients with studies, found a roughly equal distribution of conversion event in all types multiple hereditary exostoses and sporadic chondrosarcoma. of SMA, recently it has been reported that the conversion event usually N. P. Bochkov1, M. Nemtsova2, G. Chesnokova2, V. Strelnikov2, D. Zale- occurs in patients with milder SMAphenotype. Until now, however, it still tayev2 remains unknown if a sequence conversion event may also be associated 1Moscow Medical Academy; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Research with SMAtype IV, which represents the mildest form within the spectrum of Centre for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation the SMAphenotype. We present the molecular analysis of three patients nik.bochkov@mtu-net.ru with adult onset SMA, who carried an apparent homozygous deletion of Hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT) is an autosomal dominant disorder SMNt exon 7 but not of exon 8. By a simple PCR-based assay, we demon- with an incidence of 1;50000. EXTis characterized by the presence of car- strated that in each case the apparent isolated deletion of SMNt exon 7 tilage-capped exostoses located in the juxtaepiphyseal regions of the long was a gene conversion event of SMNt to SMNc. In conclusion, our results bones. EXTis a genetically heterogeneous - genes were cloned on chro- provide first evidence that a conversion event may be also associated with mosomes 8q24.1 (EXT1) and 11p12 (EXT2). The aim was to investigate adult-onset SMAphenotype, and further support the notion that a gene the rate and spectrum of EXTgenes molecular anomalies on patients with conversion event may be correlated with a milder SMAphenotype and a EXT. Mutations and polymorphisms screened by combination of SSCPand later onset of disease. heteroduplex analyses. Structural anomalies were analyzed by blot- hybridization with specific DNA-probes. Among 36 families studied, 25 had P1532.Deletion analysis of the SMN and NAIPgenes in spinal sporadic and 11 had familial forms of EXT. Point mutations and structural muscular atrophy (SMA) patients from Ukraine. anomalies were detected in 28 cases (78%); 20 cases (56%) in EXT1 and O. Ekshyyan, L. A. Livshits 8 (22%) in EXT2; 23 cases (64%) are point mutations and 5 (14%) are Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Science structural anomalies, four of them in EXT2 . EXT1 mutations; C79T, of Ukraine; Kiev, Ukraine 388delAG, 456delC, 742insTT, 876-877insT, C894A, 943delGA, G967A, ekshyyan@excite.com G1022C, G1036A, T1037C, A1285G, 1633-39delC, 2055+5insT, 2056- We have studied the deletions of the SMN (exons 7, 8) and NAIP(exon 5) 30insC, C2056T. EXT1 polymorphisms; C1065T, A1296G, C2170G. EXT2 genes in 61 SMApatients. Homozygous deletions of either one or both mutations; 75delC, C514T, C827T, G871A. Patients with G1022C, G1036A exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 have been demonstrated in 98,4% of SMA and A1285G had secondary chondrosarcoma and loss of heterozygosity patients. Of 61 patients, 17 showed a homozygous deletion of NAIPexon (LOH) for markers mapped to chromosome 8 in tumors. Three patients 5 and SMN1 exons 7 and 8; 36 showed a homozygous deletion of SMN1 from nine with sporadic chondrosarcoma have shown structural anomalies exons 7 and 8; and 8 have chimeric SMN2/SMN1 gene. Homozygous of EXT1 (1 case) and EXT2 (2 cases). LOH for chromosome 8 markers deletions of exon 5 of NAIPgene have been demonstrated in 53,3% of found in 4 tumors. Point mutations of EXTgenes and LOH for chromosome SMAtype I and 5% of SMAtype II patients. Chimeric SMN2/SMN1 gene402 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders has been demonstrated in 3,3% of SMAtype I, 10% of SMAtype II and McAndrew has enabled us to determine the SMN1 and SMN2 copy num- 45,5% of SMAtype III patients. Prenatal diagnosis has been performed in ber. From 35 non-deletion SMApatients analysed, we have found six indi- 20 SMA families by means of analysis of deletion of SMN1 and NAIP viduals with only one copy of SMN1. Moreover, we have studied several genes and STR-polymorphisms. SMN1/SMN2 ratio was analyzed by the patients suffering from different type of SMA who were compound het- densitometry analysis (ALFexpress /Amersham-Pharmacia-Biotech/ and erozygous carrying the same mutation in the SMN1 gene. We have ascer- Ultroscan XL/LKB/) of PCR products of exon 7 of SMN genes digested by tained the SMN1 and SMN2 copy number in six independent patients car- DraI. This ratio ranged from 0.4 to 2.7 for SMAcarriers (n=59) and from 0.9 rying the 430del4 mutation and in a type II patient carrying the 800ins11 to 3.8 for control individuals (n=97). For all ratios from 0.4 to 1 and from 1.5 mutation in their SMN1 gene. The type I patient retained two copies of to 3.8 the significant differences between SMA carriers and individuals SMN2 gene, while type II and III patients had three or four SMN2 copies. from control group have been observed. We suggest that such approach Our results corroborate the influence of SMN2 gene on the clinical pheno- will be useful for population screening of SMAcarriers. type. P1533. A simple and rapid assay of gene-conversion in 8th P1536.Deletion analysis of SMN 1, SMN 2 and NAIPgenes in exon of SMN gene SMApatients from North-West region of Russia. I. Shagina, A. Polyakov, O. Evgrafov A. S. Glotov, T. E. Ivaschenko, A. V. Kiselev, V. S. Baranov Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation OttsInstituteofObstetrics&Gynecology;St.-Petersburg,RussianFedera- stver@online.ru tion Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a frequent autosomal recessive neuro- anglotov@yahoo.com muscular disorder leading to weakness and atrophy of voluntary mus- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most common fatal autoso- cles.The survival motor-neuron gene (SMN), a SMA-determining gene, is mal recessive disease after cystic fibrosis, with the frequency 1;10000 present in two highly homologous copies (telSMN and cenSMN). The newborn. The results of deletion analysis in 23 SMAfamilies from the North mutations in telSMN are responsible for SMA. The large majority of SMA  West region of Russia are reported. The deletions in the SMN 1 gene patients show homozygous deletions of either exon 7 or both exons 7 and were the major mutations in these families. Different types of deletions 8 in this gene. The homozygous deletion of exons 7 and 8 of telSMN gene were found in 22 of 23 patients with SMA(96%). Homozygous deletions of was detected in 85 % of the Russian SMA patients. 37 ( 12 %) SMA exon 7 and 8 in SMN 1 were identified in 65 % of our patients, while the patients show absence of exon 7 telSMN gene but retention of exon 8. This NAIPgene (exon 5) was deleted in 22% (5/23) of them. Homozygous dele- picture is caused by either large deletion up to exon 8 or gene-conversion tion of exon 7 of SMN 1 was detected in one SMApatient (4.3%) only. event, resulting in existence of chimeric gene. We suggest a simple and Analysis of deletions of SMN 1, SMN 2 and NAIPgenes have shown that rapid assay of identification chimeric gene. This method allows to carry patients from the North-West region of Russia have 7 types of deletion out analysis using one-step PCR with telSMN/cenSMN specific primers. damage. The most frequent deletion in SMA patients was the deletion Chimeric gene was revealed in patients with mild form of the desease. exons 7 and 8 in SMN 1 gene. P1534. Role of SMN and NAIP deletions in phenotypical P1537. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for spinal expression of spinal muscular atrophy in Hungarian families muscular atrophy V. Karcagi1, V. Tarnawa1, L. Timar1, A. Herczegfalvi2 E. H. Cho1, S. Y. Park1, C. K. Lim2, H. M. Ryu3, I. S. Kang3 1National Center for Public Health; Budapest, Hungary; 2Heim P. Childrens 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Repub- Hospital; Budapest, Hungary lic of Korea; 2Reproductive Biology and Infertility, Samsung Cheil Hospital; karcagi.okk@antsz.hu Seoul, Republic of Korea; 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disorder with Samsung Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea three major clinical phenotypes (SMAtype I, II and III). The disease is genelab@samsung.co.kr caused by deletion, conversion or in rare cases, by point mutations in the Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common severe autosomal recessive telomeric survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene. There is a centromeric copy disease. Homozygous deletion of exon 7 in the telSMN gene is found in 90 of the SMN gene, SMN2 whose copy number influences clinical severity, - 98% of SMApatients. Couples having children with SMAface a 25% risk indicating that SMN2 gene is the main modulator in the clinical phenotype. of having affected offspring with spontaneous conception. PGD is an alter- Another important neighbouring gene coding for neuronal apoptosis native method to prenatal diagnosis for couples who have a high risk of an inhibitory protein (NAIP) might also play a role in influencing the pheno- inherited disease in their offspring. Two couples with SMAaffected children type. In this study, we present the genetic analysis of 108 SMAfamilies were enrolled in PGD-IVF program. We performed PCR using a mismatch aimed to find genotype-phenotype correlations. In addition to the 122 index primer to detect exon 7 deletion of telSMN. To determine the efficiency of patients, carrier parents and sibs, 195 individuals, were also included in the PCR at single cell level, we tested 55 blastomeres. The PCR efficiency study. Homozygous deletions in exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 and in exon 5 of was 69%. In PGD-IVF cycle, 67% (4/6) and 64% (7/11) of blastomeres NAIPt genes were recorded and correlated with the type of clinical severi- were found to be unaffected and four embryos were replaced back to the ty. In addition, lack of SMN2 gene was also recorded, although the exact uterus in each patient. One patient failed to get pregnant and the other is copy number could not be established. Results were compared with now at 34 weeks of uneventful ongoing pregnancy. Genetic status of the healthy controls. In our data deletion of exon 5 of NAIPt occured more fre- fetus was confirmed by prenatal diagnosis with amniotic fluid cells per- quently in SMAI (63%), than in SMAII (9.3%) and III (4,5%) patients. The formed at 16 weeks of gestation. This study shows that PGD is feasible for same findings were reported in other SMApopulations, however the differ- couples having a child with a deletion of homozygous exon 7 in telSMN. ence between clinical types was much higher in our patients. In conclusion, the size of the deletion in 5q13 might be in closer correlation with the P1538. Update on the myotubularin gene family and MTM1 severity of the disease in the Hungarian SMApatients. mutations in X-linked myotubular myopathy. V. Biancalana1, J. Laporte2, O. Caron1, F. Blondeau2, A. Buj-Bello2, N. P1535.Quantitative Analysis Of Smn Gene Copies In Spanish Romero3, J. L. Mandel2,1 Sma Patients; Identification Of Compound Heterozygous And 1Faculty of Medicine; Strasbourg, France; 2IGBMC; Illkirch, France; Genotype-phenotype Correlation 3Hopitl Piti-Salptrire; Paris, France Y. Martin1, A. Valero1, I. Cusco2, E. F. Tizzano2, C. Hernandez-Chico1 bianca@faust.u-strasbg.fr 1Hospital Ramon y Cajal; Madrid, Spain; 2Hospital Sant Pau; Barcelona, X-linked myotubular myopathy is characterized by neonatal hypotonia, Spain muscle weakness and respiratory distress in affected males, leading often ymsantodomingo@yahoo.es to early death. It is caused by mutations in the MTM1 gene (myotubularin). Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive neuro- The myotubularin family counts at least 10 members in humans, 6 in muscular disorder with a variable phenotype caused by mutations in the drosophila and a single one in yeast. It can be subdivided in four sub- survival motor neuron gene (SMN1) and phenotypically modulated by groups, already present in C. elegans, and three groups have predicted SMN2 copies. In our sample the SMN1 gene is absent in 84.2% of SMA phosphoinositide binding domains. MTMR2, a close homologue of MTM1, patients so according to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium 99.3 % of all SMA was recently found mutated in a recessive form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth cases must carry at least one SMN1 deleted chromosome. In order to iden- neuropathy. These proteins share the consensus active site of tyrosine and tify the compound heterozygous in our group of nondeleted SMApatients dual-specificity protein phosphatases, and of the lipid phosphatase PTEN. and to study the correlation between the SMN2 copy number and the Recent results indicate that myotubularin is primarily a lipid phosphatase, severity of SMAdisease, we have developed a PCR-quantitative assay acting on phosphatidylinositol 3-monophosphate (PI3P), and may be using fluorescent primers. This assay based on the method described by involved in the regulation of PI3-kinase pathway. We have recently foundPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 403 mutations in 14 patients, including 7 novel ones. We identified the most to identify individuals carrying translocated alleles from the homologous distal point mutation, a nonsense associated to a very severe phenotype. region of 10q26. Missense N180K was found in a 65 years old grandfather (the oldest known patient with an MTM1 mutation), previously suspected to have auto- P1541. The genetic study of nine Portuguese patients with somal centronuclear myopathy, and in his two grandsons also mildly affect- Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD). ed. P226Twas found in a 12 years old boy, who had respiratory distress L. F. Lopes1,2, E. M. Vieira1, T. Evangelista3, P. M. Jorge1, M. R. Santos1 at birth, but attends now regular school and walks unaided. The later two 1Instituto de Gentica Mdica Jacinto Magalhes; Porto, Portugal; 2Uni- cases confirms that some missense mutations are associated with mild versidade da Madeira; Funchal, Portugal; 3Servio de Neurologia do Hos- muscular phenotype and very prolonged survival. We present a summary pital de Santa Maria; Lisboa, Portugal of the 140 different mutations identified up to now in 211 families. ondagen@portugalmail.pt Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD) is a late onset autosomal P1539.Frataxin deficiency enhances apoptosis in cells differ- dominant (AD) disease, characterized by dysphagia, ptosis and proximal entiating into neuroectoderm limb weakness. OPMD is caused by an expansion of a GCG trinucleotide M. Pandolfo1, K. Ohshima2, M. Santos1 stretch in the first exon of the PABP2 gene, which usually contains six GCG 1Centre Hospitalier de lUniversit de Montral; Montral, PQ Canada; copies ([GCG]6), whereas the mutated gene contains 8 to 13 copies. The 2National Cancer Center Research Institute; Tokio, Japan [GCG]7allele, found in 2% of the population, may act as a recessive muta- massimo.pandolfo@umontreal.ca tion or as a modifier of the dominant genotype. Deficiency of the mitochondrial matrix protein frataxin is the cause of Nine Portuguese patients with OPMD (comprising six families) and 110 Friedreich ataxia, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by neu- randomly selected controls were studied by DNAanalysis. Fluorochrome- rodegeneration and cardiomyopathy. Frataxin is thought to prevent toxic tagged primers were designed to amplify a fragment encompassing the iron accumulation in mitochondria. Accordingly, progressive atrophy of GCG repeats. Amplicons were subjected to capillary electrophoresis and neurons and cardiomyocytes in Friedreich ataxia may result from mito- sized with the ABI GeneScan program (Applied Biosystems). Allele sizes chondrial dysfunction caused by iron-mediated free radical damage. How- were confirmed by sequencing several samples from homozygous and ever, the disease is likely to involve a specific developmental cell loss, par- heterozygous individuals. ticularly affecting sensory neurons, in addition to the more obvious degen- The diagnosis of OPMD was confirmed in the five families, all of which pre- erative process. The early embryonic lethality of frataxin -/- mice also sug- sented mutations in heterozygosity in accordance with the observed AD gests a role of this protein during development. To study the role of fratax- pattern of inheritance. The [GCG]9 expansion was found in four fami- in during differentiation, we utilized the multipotent P19 mouse embryonic liesand [GCG]10in the fifth. The [GCG]9allele was previously found to be carcinoma cells. Frataxin expression is induced two to three-fold when P19 the most prevalent amongst French-Canadian patients. In order to test the cells differentiate into neurons, cardiomyocytes or endodermal cells, an one founder theory, studies with linked markers are in progress to deter- increase that can only be partially explained by an increase in mitochondr- mine the haplotype background of the [GCG]9allele. Two individuals het- ial mass, particularly in the case of neural differentiation. Stable transfec- erozygous for [GCG]6and [GCG]7alleles were also detected in the con- tion of undifferentiated P19 cells with a frataxin antisense construct does trol population, corroborating the described polymorphic nature of the lat- not inhibit their proliferation as precursor cells, but severely and specifical- ter in this allelic combination. ly compromises neuronal differentiation. Apoptotic cell death, that normal- ly occurs in a few cells when this differentiation pathway is induced, is P1542. Analysis of FRDA patients with interrupted GAA greatly enhanced by frataxin deficiency. Induction of cardiomyocyte or expansions in the frataxin gene by fluorescent Triplet Primed endodermal differentiation, which is not normally accompanied by PCR. detectable apoptosis, is not affected by low frataxin. Hence, frataxin defi- M. Cosse1, M. Schmitt1, E. Meikatt1, J. L. Mandel2, M. Koenig2 ciency does not lead to apoptosis by itself, but appears to increase the vul- 1Faculty of Medicine; Strasbourg, France; 2IGBMC; Strasbourg, France nerability of differentiating cells to normally occurring apoptosis. This effect cossee@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr may result from an enhanced production of reactive oxygen species, as Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most frequent inherited ataxia, is caused by indicated by increased levels of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase in loss of function of frataxin. In Caucasian population, the most frequent frataxin deficient cells. Our results raise the possibility that the early lethal- mutation is a large GAArepeat expansion in the first intron. In some rare ity of frataxin knockout mice and sensory neuronal loss in Friedreich atax- cases, the expansion is interrupted by other repeat sequences. The pres- ia may be due, at least in part, to higher sensitivity to apoptosis of fratax- ence and size of the GAAexpansions can be determined by Southern-blot in-deficient embryonic cells. Such vulnerability may be due to interference analysis which is reliable but time consuming, or more commonly by long with signaling pathways rather than to a direct damaging effect of free rad- range PCR which is simpler but not reliable for the detection of heterozy- icals. gotes. We are now currently analysing the FRDA(GAA) repeat by the flu- orescent triplet primed PCR (TP-PCR) method initially developped by P1540. First experiences on molecular diagnosis of Warner et al. for myotonic dystrophy (1996). This method is simple and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy(FSHD) reliable to detect all the cases with at least one expansion, which is not the I. Nagy1, H. Piko1, J. Balog1, A. Herczegfalvi2, V. Karcagi1 case for the long range PCR. However artefacts and pitfalls may cause dif- 1National Center for Public Health; Budapest, Hungary; 2Heim P. Childrens ficulties to distinguish homozygous from heterozygous expansions, the Hospital Dept. of Neurology; Budapest, Hungary main exemple being when the GAA expansion is interrupted by other ildi10@freemail.hu repeat sequences. We present a study of patients from Reunion Island FSHD is the third most common hereditary disease of muscle. It is a higly who present interruption of the GAAexpansion by a (GAAAGAA) repeat variable disorder considering the age of onset and the clinical severity, sequence, and some other patients from different origins who present even within the same family. The disease is transmitted in autosomal dom- another type of interruption, a (GAGGAA) hexanucleotide repeat. The inant fashion, the estimated incidence is 1 in 20000, although new sporadic small size of these expansions, and their stability observed during trans- patients have been reported frequently. The FSHD locus has been mapped missions, may suggest that interruptions of the GAArepeat confer meiotic to 4q35 (FSHD1A) and is closely linked to the highly polymorfic locus stability, as it has been observed for other disease causing expansions D4F1104S1. No gene has been detected in this region but a number of such as the fragile X (CGG) repeat. short repetitive sequences (D4Z4) were found. Deletion of D4Z4 leads to FSHD. Amarker p13E-11, that mapped to 4q35, revealed shorter frag- P1543. Polymorphisms distribution of Int13, Int22 and St14 ments in genomic DNAdigested with EcoRI in patients with FSHD com- VNTRs in Mexican population and their application in gene pared to control individuals. The fragment in patients is smaller than 38 kb. diagnosis of haemophilia A. We introduced FSHD molecular diagnosis in our laboratory at the begin- R. G. Martnez1, D. Arenas1, E. Benitez2, F. Salamanca2 ning of 2000 using p13E-11 probe. Since than seven families including 18 1Iztacala UNAM, IMSS; Mexico City, Mexico; 2IMSS; Mexico City, Mexico patients have been examined. Asymptomatic family members have been rafamg@yahoo.com included into the study as well. Out of these cases three patients were The variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) Int13, Int22 and St14 was identified as familiar and two as sporadic FSHD cases. Two additional fam- analysed to find out the polymorphism distribution in normal individuals in ilies are under evaluations. The genetic analysis was based on EcoRI/BlnI the central region of Mexico and evaluate the efficacy of this markers for digestion, Southern-blotting, and hybridisation with p13E-11 probe. This carrier detection of hemophilia A. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method enabled us to distinguish between the FSHD locus on 4q35 and was done in 162 X-chromosomes from unrelated Mexicans and the same the highly homologous region of 10q26. The analysis was extended by method was applied to carrier detection in hemophilia Afamilies. Screen- dosage test using BglII/BlnI double digestion and the same probe in order ing revealed the existence of at least eight different alleles for Int13, four404 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders for Int22 and ten for St14. Their heterozygous rate were 41.3%, 52.6% and results support the hypothesis, that CFTR gene mutations and polymor- 83% respectively. Compared to Caucasians, the Mexican population phism might also affect spermatogenesis/sperm viability and point out the showed a markedly low heterozygous rate for Int13 marker. However Int22 importance of CFTR mutation/polymorphism screening in couples with showed a relatively higher heterozygosity similarity to Turkish and Chinese severe RD. Supported by grants #6250-3, 6411- populations. The St14 marker was the most informative and a new 680 pb 3,000000064203;111300003,ME258,OK192 and LN00A079. allele were detected. Gene diagnosis was performed in 30 suspected haemophilia Acarriers from 6 families. 22 females (73%) were heterozy- P1546.CFTR Mutation Spectrum Identified By DGGE In Dutch gous for at least one of the markers used, only 8 females (26%) were Patients With CF, CBAVD, Or Other CFTR Associated Disor- homozygous. Determination of polymorphisms in Int13, Int22 and St14 ders VNTRs should prove to be a useful tool in the genetic diagnosis of H. Scheffer1, D. de Jong1, G. J. J. Mol1, J. P. H. Tuerlings2, P. M. Hartman3, haemophilia Ain Mexico. J. P. H. Drenth2, C. H. C. Buys1 1University of Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands; 2Univ. Hospital P1544.Molecular Analysis in a Boy with Progeroid Syndrome Nijmegen; Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 3University Hospital Groningen; and Signs of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Groningen, The Netherlands G. Carakushansky1, T. Okajima2, K. Furukawa2, M. Carakushansky3 h.scheffer@medgen.azg.nl 1Federal University of Rio de Janeiro; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2Nagoya Uni- Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mutation versity School of Medicine; Nagoya, Japan; 3Johns Hopkins School of scanning using an optimized denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis Medicine; Baltimore, MD United States (DGGE) system has been performed in clinically well defined cohorts of gercar@ruralrj.com.br patients of Dutch origin with cystic fibrosis (CF), congenital bilateral A distinct nosologic entity that shows manifestations of progeroid syn- absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), oligospermia, or pancreatitis. In drome combined with Ehlers-Danlos (E-D) features (OMIM 130070) has over 98% of (>800) fully analysed, independent alleles of CF patients a been reported in about a half-dozen cases. We have recently studied a 4 mutation has been identified in the coding sequence of the CFTR gene or year-old brazilian boy with features consistent with this diagnosis. The in a flanking intronic sequence, including six novel mutations. In addition, patient exhibited developmental delay, short stature, progeroid facies, in two patients a hemizygous genomic deletion involving part of a CFTR craniofacial disproportion with small face, prominent ears, scanty eyelash- allele has been identified. In approximately 90% of (50) fully analysed, es, late closure of fontanels, bilateral cataracts, loose skin and prominent independent alleles of CBAVD patients a mutation has been identified, veins on both hands, bruisability, surgically repaired bilateral inguinal her- including four novel mutations. Particular mutations including A455E and nia , pectus excavatus, joint hypermobility in digits, bilateral hip dislocation 3272-26A>G that are associated with mild CF were also detected in and waddling gait. CBAVD. Homozygosity for the A455E mutation was shown in a CBAVD The molecular basis of this rare progeroid syndrome with affected proteo- patient. The relative frequency of the IVS8 5Tallele appears to be hardly glycan biosynthesis has been searched by some investigators. The cDNA increased amongst Dutch CBAVD patients (4/50 alleles). In a cohort of of the galactosyltransferase I (XgalT-1) was isolated by two of us (Okajima, clinically strictly defined oligospermia patients (160 alleles studied), an Tand Furakawa, K) and after that we were able to identify and character- increased frequency of CFTR missense or (potential) splicing mutations ize two mutations in the galactosyltransferase I gene of one patient (J Biol was identified, in addition to two deltaF508 alleles, and an IVS8 5Tallele. Chem 274 (41);28841, 1999). The results indicated that mutations in Some mutations have been reported as (potentially) pathogenic, including XGalT-1 were at least one of main molecular basis for progeroid form of E- 296+9A>T(once; opposite to the non-pathogenic mutation R668H), A120T D syndrome. (once), G576Aand R668C on a single allele, P750L(once), L997F (twice), In the boy here reported and in his unaffected parents the genomic S1235R (twice). This results in a frequency of 11/80 oligospermia patients sequence of galactosyltransferase 1 (b4GalT7) was analysed by direct carrying a pathogenic CFTR mutation. Other detected variants most likely sequencing of PCR products obtained from amplification of exon segments do not, or hardly alter the function of the CFTR protein. These mutations with primers located in flanking intron or UTR sequences. However, no include V11I, R75Q (8 times), R297Q, and 1341+12T>A. No truncating mutations could be detected except for a single silent heterozygous muta- mutations have been identified. Asimilar analysis in pancreatitis patients is tion (R73R, CGC to CGT) in exon 2. This finding may imply that other relat- currently ongoing. Acomplete overview of the mutations identified in all ed glycosysltransferases are probably mutated in this patient and that fur- categories of patients studied will be presented. ther study of its pathogenic role in this disease should be undertaken. P1547.Molecular Diagnosis Of Cystic Fibrosis In Ukraine P1545.Frequency of CFTR mutations and polymprphisms in L. Livshits1, M. Nechyporenko2, V. Pampuha2 Czech partners with severe reproductive disorders and in the 1Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics; Kiev, Ukraine; 2Institute of Mol- control population ecular Biology & Genetics National Academy of Science of Ukraine; Kiev, A. Krebsova1, M. Macek1, M. Machatkova1, I. Horka1, M. Koudova1, A. Ukraine Sobek2, P. Potuznikova1, S. Vilimova1, I. Kurucova1, R. Alanova1, M. livshits@imbg.org.ua Macek Jr.1 Fifteen common mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc- 1Institute of biology and Medical Genetics; Prague, Czech Republic; 2FER- tance regulator gene (CFTR) were studied in 305 CF patients from TIMED Olomouc; Olomouc, Czech Republic Ukraine. The most frequent mutation found according to our expectation pavel.roubic@lfmotol.cuni.cz was delF508 (40.8%). Ten further mutations were identified in our sample; In 104 couples with reproductive disorders (RD) and in randomly selected N1303K (2,65%), CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (1.4%), G542X (0,6%), W1282X controls (109 males/105 females) the 19 most common Czech CFTR (0,5%), R334W (0,3%), R553X (0,3%), 1677delTA(0,3%), R347P(0,3%), mutations - delta F508, delta I507, G551D, G542X, N1303K, 1717-1G->A, 1717-1GtoA (0,3%), G551D (0,16%). Mutations R117H, 621+1GtoT, W1282X, R553X, R347P, R334W, 3849+10kbC->T, R117H, 621+1G->T, 1154insTC were not found of patients. We conclude that the 21kb deletion A455E, S549N, R506T, 1898+1G->A, 2143delT, CFTRdele2,3(21kb) and is a frequent mutation in Ukranian population as well as in populations of polymorphisms 1540A/G, IVS8(TG)n, IVS8(T)n were examined. Only the Eastern- and Western-Slavic descent. Screening for this deletion will sig- males with non-obstructive azoospermia were included in this study. The Y nificantly improve the molecular genetic diagnosis of cystic fibrosis in fam- chromosomal microdeletions, chromosomal aberrations and other infertili- ilies from Ukraine. Pilot carrier screening of these mutations was per- ty factors were evaluated. Analyzed males with RD were divided into 3 formed in 126 patients from IVF clinic involved in IVF program. We have groups according to their sperm counts (I.; 0-1x106/ml, II.; 1-20x106/ml, detected CF carrier status in 3 case (delF508). The same mutation analy- III.; >20x106/ml). Significant differences to controls were observed mainly sis program was performed in 98 non fertile (non CBAVD) men involved in in Group I., where the frequency of delta F508 mutation was raised to ICSI program. We have detected CF carrier status in 2 case (delF508). 11.4% (p=0.015) in 100% association with the TG10/T9 haplotype. More- The CFTR gene mutation test for CF carrier partners was recommended. over these patients had an increased prevalence of TG12/T7 Early prenatal diagnosis CVS have been performed by means of direct (15.9%;p=0.015) and a decrease of TG11/T7 (27.3%,p=0.0002) haplo- analysis of mutations in 59 cases. In families, with non identified mutations types. Increased frequency of 1540 A/G AAgenotypes was observed in prenatal diagnosis has been performed by analysis of RFLP markers .( Groups I.-III., with the highest significance (p=0.0004) observed in Group KM19(PstI), CS.7/Hin6I, Xv-2c/TaqI, MetH(MspI), M6D9(MspI), 4bp tan- I. The Ychromosome microdeletions were found in 9.1% of Group I. males dem repeats (3-end of intron 6 of CFTR gene) and polymorphic STR sys- only. In females from RD couples the tendency towards a decrease of tems - IVS8/GT, IVS17(b)/CA (ALFexpress /Amersham-Pharmacia- IVS8(T)9 (4.3%,p=0.05), increase of both the IVS8(TG)12 (15.4%,p=0.03) Biotech). and (TG)12/(T)7 haplotypes (14.9%,p=0.04) were disclosed. The patoge- netic impact of these findings has to be clarified by further studies. ThesePosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 405 P1548.Quantitative transcript analysis as indicator of disease tasies in 8 (2 CF), lobar atelectasia in 5, BPCO in 28, asthma in 14, bron- progression in Cystic Fibrosis Patients chiolitis in 7 (1 CF). All patients presented sweat test in the normal or bor- B. Steiner1, S. Keller1, M. Schneider1, R. Kraemer2, S. Gallati1 derline ranges (<60mEq/l), and also their pancreatic function was normal. 1Molecular Human Genetics; Bern, Switzerland; 2Department of Paedi- In conclusion, in our paediatric cohort, CFTR gene plays a relevant role in atrics; Bern, Switzerland determining lung disease together with behavioural factors. It is noticeable bsteiner@dkf2.unibe.ch the relevant number of Cystic Fibrosis diagnosis among this cohort of The genotype-phenotype relation in Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is known to be patients with sweat test in the borderline or normal range. We suggest per- very complex. Disease severity even varies among CF patients carrying forming a molecular study of CFTR gene in paediatric patients with chron- the same CFTR genotype. Factors that contribute to this variability are top- ic respiratory symptoms also with a normal sweat test. ics of intense study. The rate of exon 9 skipping from CFTR mRNA is believed to be one of these contributing factors. Variations in the TG(m) P1551.Clinical and Molecular Genetics preliminary studies of and T(n) polymorphic repeats at the 3 end of intron 8 of the CFTR gene Cystic Fibrosis in the 5th Region, Chile. are associated with the alternative splicing of exon 9. The most common G. Molina1, R. Cave2, M. Cornejo2, S. Navarro2, M. Deglin3, A. Milinarsky3, mutation delta F508 is linked to the TG10/T9 polymorphism, which was P. Carvallo4, F. Gonzlez1 previously shown to lead only to negotiable amounts of exon 9 skipping. 1Laboratorio de Biologa y Gentica Molecular. Centro de Investigaciones Using the LightCycler system we developed a new sensitive one-step RT- Mdicas. Escuela de Medicina. Universidad de Valparaso; Valparaso, PCR method with high accuracy. In a clinically well-described group (n=10) Chile; 2Laboratorio de Inmunologa. Escuela de Medicina. Universidad de of delta F508 homozygous CF Patients (TG10T9/TG10T9), we performed Valparaso; Valparaso, Chile; 3Departamento de Pediatra. Escuela de quantitative real-time RT-PCR to determine the ratio of the aberrantly Medicina. Universidad de Valparaso; Valparaso, Chile; 4Laboratorio de spliced transcripts (Range between 2 and 23 %) in nasal epithelium and Gentica Molecular Humana. Facultad de Ciencias Biolgicas. Pontificia buccal cells. In addition, we determined the total number of normal and Universidad Catlica de Chile; Santiago, Chile aberrantly spliced transcripts using ribosomal 28S rRNAfor standardiza- Graciela.Molina@uv.cl tion. We found that a decrease of CFTR transcripts (up to 70 fold) and an Background; Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive increase in aberrantly spliced transcripts (up to 10 fold) in early childhood disease in the Caucasian population, caused by several mutations in the is associated with a severe course of CF disease. Therefore quantitative cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene. Mutation frequen- transcript analysis is a valuable indicator of disease progression. cies vary among ethnic groups, being the most common a Phenylalanine 508 deletion (F508). Aim; Detect the presence of the mutations F508, P1549. A simple and rapid assay of the 11 more frequent G542X, N1303K, G551D, R553X and S549N and other mutations in exon mutations in CFTR gene 10, 11 and 21 of CFTR gene, in 5th region patients with a previous clinical A. Chuhrova, I. Shagina, N. Petrova, A. Polyakov diagnosis of CF. Patients and methods; 14 non-related patients were stud- Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation ied, 13 had sweat tests chloride concentrations higher than 60 mEq/Land stver@online.ru frequent respiratory tract infections. 9 were pancreatic insufficient. In order Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) functions as to discard the presence of an immune-deficiency, we determined sera a chloride channel and controls the regulation of other transport pathways. immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM), and total, CD3+ and B lymphocytes. The Mutations in the CFTR gene are the cause of cystic fibrosis. Nowadays it mutations and M470V polymorphism were analysed by PCR amplification, a lot of mutations with different frequency in different populations are restriction enzyme digestion and electrophoresis and single strand confor- known. We have developed two multiplex PCR systems for simple and mation analysis (SSCA). Results; Patients immunological parameters rapid detection of the 11 more frequent mutations in CFTR gene in Russ- were between normal ranges. 5 patients presented F508 mutation and 2 ian population patients. The first one includes 8 pairs of primers which patients had G542X mutation, both found in one of their chromosomes. In allowed reviled the follow mutations; del 21 kb, F508, DI507, 1677delTA, two patients, we detected a different patern in SSCAthat could be due by 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821delT. The second one allows to detect a second mutation in the exon 10. No association between M470V poly- G542X, W1282X and N1303K mutations by PCR/restriction analysis. We morphism and the presence of the mutations were found. Conclusions; For constructed pairs of primers which create the Bse NI recognition site in the first time G542X mutation had been detected in Chilean population. normal allele of each PCR product. The common informativity of both sys- This mutation is prevalent in Spaniards and we can hypothezise that it tems are 71%. could be the origin of the mutation found in chilean CF chromosomes.Aper- tus, Laboratorios Andrmaco P1550.Analysis Of CFTR Gene In Children With Chronic Res- piratory Symptoms P1552. Novel, rare splice site variants of IVS8 in the cystic A. Bassotti1, R. Padoan1, M. Seia2, A. Ambrosioni2, D. A. Coviello2 fibrosis gene 1CF Centre, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy; 2Molecular T. D rk1, D. Glser2, M. Stuhrmann1, E. Buratti3, F. Pagani3, F. Baralle3 Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy 1Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2Laborpraxis Drs. Mehn- coviello@unige.it ert; Neu-Ulm, Germany; 3International Center of Genetic Engineering and Role of CFTR gene is well recognised in the pathogenesis of several lung Biotechnology; Trieste, Italy diseases in adulthood, but few data are available in the paediatric popula- doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de tion with respect to some lung diseases suggestive of CF with normal or Aunique feature of the cystic fibrosis gene (CFTR, ABCC7) is the presence borderline sweat test. In order to verify the pathogenetic role of mutations of a polymorphic polypyrimidine tract within the splice acceptor site of or polymorphism in the CFTR gene, we performed the DNAanalysis in a intron 8 which genetically determines alternative exon 9 splicing. Whereas cohort of 80 patients (aged 4mo-17yr), not related and with no familial his- most individuals carry either 7Tor 9Talleles which allow for over 80% nor- tory for CF. Patients were referred to our Paediatric Department because mal splicing, the 5Tallele induces exon skipping in over 70% of CFTR the presence of chronic (over 3 months) respiratory symptoms (cough, mRNAtranscripts and is commonly associated with partial symptoms of wheezing, or sputum production). The screening of 11/27 exons of the cystic fibrosis. We here report further allelic variants (3T, 6Tand 8T) of the CFTR gene and their intronic flanking regions was performed by Denatur- IVS8 polythymidine tract. While the 6Tand 8Talleles were observed in sin- ing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis and automatic gle carriers with no known clinical phenotypes, the 3Tallele was identified sequencing was performed on the anomalous DGGE patterns. Ten differ- in a male adult who had a pancreatic-sufficient form of cystic fibrosis and ent known mutations (F508del, G542X, I148T, 1717-1G->A, R553X, was a compound heterozygote for the DeltaF508 mutation and the R1066C, S1235R, R117H, 3667ins4 and D110H) were identified at het- TG13T3 haplotype. Transcript analyses in lymphoblastoid cells from this erozygous state in 14/80 unrelated patients (17.5%). Seven compound patient confirmed the loss of exon 9 in about 95% of non-deltaF508 CFTR heterozygotes (M1V/4382delA, F508del/R352Q, F508del/S1252N, mRNA. Introduction of the TG13T3 sequence into a CFTR minigene con- F598del/3849+10kbC->T (3), A120T/F1052V) leading to CF diagnosis struct with subsequent transfection of Hep3B cells and characterisation of were identified in 7/80 (8.75%). In 21/80 (26%) of paediatric patients, with the resulting splicing patterns also revealed exon 9 skipping in the range chronic respiratory symptoms, at least one CFTR gene mutation was pres- of 85-98 %, depending on the addition of distinct splicing factors. We con- ent, showing a significant increase over the expected carrier frequency of clude that the allelic heterogeneity of IVS8 of the CFTR gene is higher than 1/28 (3,5%) in the same population. The clinical, laboratory and radiologi- initially thought and the possibility of additional variants, though rare, cal evaluations identify several causes of respiratory symptoms and some should be considered in the development of tools for the diagnosis of subjects were afterwards diagnosed as cystic fibrosis patients (CF). We CFTR-associated diseases. observed nasal polyposis in 7 patients (1 CF), chronic sinusitis in 6, aller- gic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis in 5, (3 CF), disseminated bronchiec-406 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders P1553. The results of molecular studies in the group Polish P1556.Rare mutations in PKU patients from Lithuania patients suspected to have Angelman syndrome J. Kasnauskiene, L. Cimbalistiene, V. Kucinskas A. Szpecht-Potocka, K. Borg, P. Stankiewicz, E. Obersztyn, J. Bal, T. Human Genetics Center, Vilnius University; Vilnius, Lithuania Mazurczak Jurate.Kasnauskiene@mf.vu.lt National Research Institute of Mother and Child; Warsaw, Poland Phenylketonuria (PKU)is highly heterogeneous at the molecular level. aspotocka@hotmail.com More than 380 different mutations in PAH gene have been described to We present results of studies carried out in a group of 70 patients with ten- date. They are associated with different geographical and ethnic origin of tative clinical diagnosis of Angelman syndrome (AS). Most of the patients individuals with PKU. Six PAH gene mutations identified in PKU patients (66%) were referred from other pediatric centers in Poland. In 38 (54%) from Lithuania represent 80% mutant PAH alleles in PKU patients from cases probant DNAwas only available to limit molecular analysis. Analy- Lithuania. The most common mutations R408W (67%), R158Q (8%) and ses of; DNAmethylation, microsatellite polymorphism for loci within the R261Q (5%) have been detected in previous investigations (Kucinskas et AS/PWS region, gene dosage of SNRPN and UBE3Amutation analysis al., 1997). The present study included PKU patients from Lithuania with performed by SSCPand DNAsequencing are included in our molecular PAH gene alleles not yet identified. DGGE-based screening for PAH gene diagnostic procedure. Cytogenetic analysis and FISH were performed for mutations and subsequent identification of found changes in nucleotide 4 patients. The clinical diagnosis of AS was confirmed only in 7 cases. AS sequence by direct DNAsequencing were performed. On this basis, five diagnosis was excluded in 2 patients (one case of FRAX syndrome & one PAH gene mutations rare in our PKU patients (frequency of a correspon- of Cohen syndrome). The very low ratio of confirmed clinical diagnosis of ding mutation is shown in parenthesis) were identified; G272X (4.04%), AS is absolutely surprising. We cannot exclude the possibility that we E280K (2.02%), A403V (2.02%), R261X (1.01%) and L311X (1.01%). Out missed a molecular defect. However, the greatest probability is that in test- of them, four (E280K, A403V, R261X, and L311P) were new in Lithuania. ed patients the clinical diagnosis of AS was mistaken. It points to how Estimation of PKU phenotype (clinical manifestation and biochemical phe- much still needs to be done to increase practical knowledge of AS among notype) dependence on PAH locus genotype was based on the predict pediatricians and clinical geneticists in Poland. level of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity and the pre-treatment serum level of phenylalanine. Our data confirm PAH locus genotype correlation P1554. Parkinsons disease; Mutation analysis of the syn- with PKU phenotype revealed by other investigators; R408W/G272X - philin-1 gene in German patients severe PKU, R408W/E280K - severe PKU, R408W/R261X - severe PKU, C. Holzmann1, L. Li2, R. Krueger3, O. Riess1 R408W/L311K - severe PKU, R408W/A403V - mild PKU. 1University Rostock, Dept. of Medical Genetics; Rostock, Germany; 2Tongji Medical University, Dept. of Tratitional Chinese Medizine; Wuhan, China; P1557.Mutations and Polymorphisms Analysis of the Pheny- 3Ruhr-University Bochum, Dept. of Neurology; Bochum, Germany lalanine Hydroxylase Gene in High Risk PKU Families from carsten.holzmann@med.uni-rostock.de Ukraine Parkinsons disease is one of the most common neurodegenerative disor- M. Nechyporenko, L. A. Livshits ders affecting about 1% of the population over the age of 50. Recently, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics; Kyiv, Ukraine mutations in the alpha-synuclein gene have been found to be responsible livshits@imbg.org.ua for some rare forms of autosomal dominantly inherited PD. Subsequently, We carried out genetic investigation of 90 patients with clinically diagnosed alpha-synuclein has been identified as a major component of Lewy bodies phenylketonuria in order to identify the following mutations; R408W, also in sporadic patients. The search for interacting proteins of alpha- R158Q, Y414C, Ivs10nt546, Ivs12nt1. The most frequent mutation found synuclein revealed the identification of a protein called synphilin-1, which according to our expectation was R408W ( 56%). The frequency of other was shown to be another component of the Lewy bodies. Therefore we mutations were; R158Q (2,8%), Y414C (1,68%), Ivs10nt546 (1,1%). Muta- analyzed the synphilin-1 gene as a candidate for PD. We screened 416 tion Ivs12nt1 was not found. The allelic variations of the minisatellite sporadic and familiar German Parkinsons disease patients for mutations VNTR-polymorphism in 380 chromosomes were analysed. 7 allelic vari- in the coding region of the human synphilin-1 gene (SNCAIP). We identi- ants and 15 haplotypes were identified. The VNTR-system showed het- fied no disease-causing mutation in the coding region of the SNCAIPgene, erozygosity of 72% in Ukraine. We present an analysis of microsatellite but direct sequencing revealed 1 intronic (Ato G at position -69 5 of the STR-polymorphism by ALFexpress (Amersham-Pharmacia-Biotech). The first translated exon) and 5 exonic basepairsubstitutions (C729Tin exon 3, STR-alleles in 380 chromosomes ranged continuously from 226-254 bp, C1603Tin exon 7, G1896C, C1953Tand G2218C in exon 9). Whereas the we identified 8 allelic variants and 24 haplotypes. The heterozygosity of first three exonic substitutions are silent polymorphisms, the C1953Tleads STR system in Ukraine was 74%. The linkage disequilibrium between to an Arg652Cys exchange and G2218C to an Glu740Gln substitution. As mutation R408W and minihaplotype VNTR3/SRT238 in Ukraine was the G2218C substitution is present in several individuals of our unsffected found. Strong linkage disequilibrium between mutation and minihaplotype control group, we conclude, that the G2218C transversion is rather a poly- has substantiated the hypothesis of a single origin of this mutation. Early morphism than a common cause for PD. The functional implication of the prenatal diagnosis based on examination of CVS has been performed in G2218C transversion is currently being investigated. 20 PKU families by means of direct analysis of mutations and by STR - , VNTR- polymorphisms analysis. P1555.Mutation analysis of phenylketonutia (PKU) in Kuwait E. Samilchuk, I. Al-Suleiman, S. Al-Awadi P1558. Molecular genetic study of phenylketonuria in Kuwait Medical Genetics Center; Ministry of Health, Kuwait Bashkortostan of Russia samilchuk@hotmail.com V. L. Akhmetova1, T. V. Viktorova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1 Mutations underlying PKU in Kuwait (as well as in other Gulf countries) 1Biochemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Bio- were unknown. To identify these mutations we studied DNAsamples from chemistry and Genetics; Ufa, Russian Federation 13 unrelated PKU families comprising all PKU cases diagnosed in Kuwait. ildus@ufacom.ru Six families were of Kuwaiti origin, 5 Bedouins, 1 Egyptian and 1 The autosomal recessive disease phenylketonuria (PKU) is the result of a Lebanese. Most families were consanguineous. DNAsamples were tested deficiency in phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) enzymatic activity due to for several common PAH gene mutations, including IVS10nt546 (IVS10nt- mutations in the PAH gene. The average frequency of classical PKU in 11g->a). Negative samples were studied by heteroduplex analysis in MDE Bashkortostan is 1;10707 newborns. We have carried mutational analysis gel followed by sequencing. Six PAH mutations were identified; in 57 families with PKU from the Bashkortostan. Using SSCPanalysis fol- IVS10nt546 (34.6%), K363fsdelG (15.38%), IVS2nt5 g->c (11.5%), lowed by sequencing of 7 exon of the PAH gene we have identified 4 muta- G352fsdelG (7.6%), P281L(3.8%) and delE2/IVS2nt1 (3.8%). IVS10nt546 tions; R261Q, R252W, P281Land R252P, and one polymorphism V245V. was found in Kuwaiti, Bedouin and Egyptian, K363fsdelG and IVS2nt5g->c The mutation R261Q was observed in 8,2% of the PKU chromosomes. in Kuwaiti and Bedouin, G352fsdelG in Lebanese, delE2/IVS2nt1 in Two mutations R252W and P281Lwere detected in 2,9 and 2,5% of the Kuwaiti and P281Lin Egyptian probands. All IVS10nt546 chromosomes PKU chromosomes respectively. The new mutation R252Pin codon 252 of had an identical haplotype as judged by PCR-RFLPand VNTR markers. exon 7 was found in one PKU family for the first time. The most of the The same was true for K363fsdelG and IVS2nt5g->c (the latter mutation patients investigated are compound heterozygotes for the missense muta- was accompanied by IVS2nt19t->c polymorphism). The methodology used tion R408W and other identified or unknown mutation. The results of the allowed detection of PAH mutations on 20 of 26 PKU chromosomes ana- molecular genetics study of PKU can be used for direct DNAdiagnostics lyzed. More sensitive technique such as SSCPor DDGE has to be used of this disease in Bashkortostan. for analysis of the remaining six PKU chromosomes (their haplotypes allow to anticipate four other PAH mutations).Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 407 P1559. Mutation analysis of thyroid peroxidase gene in Tai- peri-natal nurture and weight gain. Asub-group of (transgenic[tg]) females wanese patients with total iodide organification defect within each litter exhibit an intermediate phenotype manifested through F. Tsai1, J. Wu1, S. Shu2, C. Yang1, C. Tsai1 general growth retardation (PN8; tg 13.20.3g, n=10; non-tg 17.00.6g, 1China Medical College Hospital; Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China; n=6; PN41; tg 104.83.9g, n=4; non-tg 137.71.7g, n=8 [meansem]), fur 2Taichung Veteran General Hospital; Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China growth retardation associated with (possibly secondary) skin chafing from d0704@hpd.cmch.org.tw PN8/9, and early eyelid-opening (PN11/12 v PN 14/15 in wild-type ani- Total iodide organification defect (TIOD), where the iodide in the thyroid mals). In 3 of 14 mutant rats a curling/ kinking of the tail is seen. The sever- gland can not be oxidized and/or bound to the protein is caused by the ity of this is variable, even within the same litter. Parental care of the defect in the thyroid peroxidase (TPO) gene. Single strand conformation mutant female offspring is maintained normally until weaning, and the polymorphism (SSCP) analysis was used to screen for mutations in the TPO transgenic mutants proceed to exhibit normal sexual maturity and fecundi- gene from five unrelated TIOD patients in Taiwan and five novel mutations ty. Preliminary observations have excluded a change in pituitary growth were detected. Three frameshift mutations were found; a single Tinsertion hormone expression as the underlying cause of growth retardation. Cur- between nucleotide position 2268 and 2269 (c.2268-2269insT) in exon 13 rent research is aimed at determining the genomic location of transgene and two single C deletions at nucleotide positions 843 (c.843delC) and 2413 insertion. (c.2413delC) in exon 8 and 14, respectively. In addition, two single nucleotide substitutions (c.G1477>Aand c.G2386>T) located in exon 9 and P1562.Mutations Of The Androgen Receptor In Two Subjects 13, respectively, were identified. The former is a single nucleotide transition, With Gynecomastia Due To Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome resulting in amino acid substitution (Gly493Ser) in the highly conserved (AIS) region of the TPO polypeptide. The latter is a single nucleotide transversion, L. Machuca Tzili1, J. Zenteno1, F. Vilchis2, B. Chavez2, S. Kofman-Alfaro1 resulting in either amino acid substitution (Asp796Tyr) or alternative splicing. 1Hospital General de Mexico. Facultad de Medicina UNAM; Mexico City, Of those identified TPO mutations, c.2268-2269insT was most prevalent Mexico; 2Department of Reproduction Biology. INCMNSZ.; Mexico City, and was detected as heterozygous in all but one TIOD patients. All five Tai- Mexico wanese TIOD patients investigated were compound heterozygous in the ltzili@yahoo.com TPO gene. The method presented in this study could be used for carrier Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) gene result in an X-linked form of assessment and mutation analysis of newly identified TIOD patients. male pseudohermaphroditism known as AIS. These patients present viril- ization defects that varies from sligthly undervirilized men with or without P1560. Towards molecular genetics cystinuria diagnosis; impaired spermatogenesis (partial AIS) to subjects with aparently female results of SLC7A9 and SLC3A1 mutation testing in unclassi- external genitalia (complete AIS). We report the molecular analysis of the fied patients AR in two males with gynecomastia and normal male external genitalia in C. Schmidt1, A. Albers2, J. Tomiuk3, C. Wagner2, S. Lahme4, A. Hesse5, F. which two mutations in the steroid binding domain (SBD) of the AR were Lang2, K. Zerres1, T. Eggermann1 detected. In subject #1, a point mutation was identified in exon 8; a C to T 1Institute of Human Genetics; Aachen, Germany; 2Institute of Physiology; (GCG to GTG) substitution originating an Ala870Val change. In subject #2, Tbingen, Germany; 3Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics; a previously undescribed mutation was observed in exon 6; an Ato G tran- Tbingen, Germany; 4Department of Urology; Tbingen, Germany; sition (CAG to CGG) originating a Gln802Arg change. Mutations affecting 5Department of Urology; Bonn, Germany amino acid alanine at position 870 of the AR have been previously cschmidt@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de described in four unrelated patients, three of them (mutants for valine Cystinuria is a common inherited disorder of defective renal reabsorption instead of alanine) exhibiting a partial form of AIS characterized by severe of cystine and dibasic amino acids. Mutations in the SLC3A1 gene encod- hypospadias and the other one (alanine to glycine) with a predominatly ing the glycoprotein rBATcause cystinuria type I. Secondly, variants in the female phenotype. In this report we describe a new case of an AR gene SLC7A9 gene have been demonstrated in non-type I cystinuria; its gene mutation altering codon 870 which, in contrast with previous reports, caus- product b0,+ATis a subunit of rBAT. To estimate the role of both genes in es only gynecomastia in a subject with normal male external genitalia and the aetiology of cystinuria, we searched for sequence alterations in normal sperm counts, indicating the phenotypic diversity associated to SLC7A9 and SLC3A1. 30 unclassified were investigated. In 15 unclassi- identical mutations in the AIS. Our findings are in accordance with previ- fied patients, we found point mutations in SLC3A1/rBAT(50%). Screening ous reports indicating that most cases of subjects with gynecomastia due of the SLC7A9 gene revealed 10 mutations in 8 unclassified patients to AIS have mutations within the SBD of the AR. (27%). In addition to previously published mutations in the SLC7A9/b0,+ AT gene, we detected two new mutations (F140S, c747delG). Further- P1563. Molecular analysis of the androgen receptor gene in more, 5 new polymorphic sites were identified in SLC7A9. Three out of patients with androgen insensitivity syndrome in Russia. these, localised in exons 2, 5 and 6, showed statistically significant differ- A. Dergacheva1,2, G. Osipova1, A. Polyakov2, O. Evgrafov2 ences between patients and controls. These variants might be markers of 1Russian Medical Academy of postgraduate education; Moscow, Russian a functional variant in the SLC7A9 gene or in other genes related to cystin- Federation; 2Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian uria. An overall detection rate of 73% (22/30) in unclassified patients is Federation delineated for mutations in both genes. Evidently, mutations in further dnalab@online.ru genes and modulating factors might influence the phenotype in patients The androgen-dependent development of male phenotype and genital lacking mutations in SLC3A1 and SLC7A9. However, the detection rate structures depends on the presence of an intact human androgen receptor does not reach 100% owing to the limitation of the applied methods. The (AR) that mediates androgen action. The human androgen receptor gene presented data show that testing for mutations in the two currently known is located on X-chromosome Xq11-12. Mutations in the AR gene results in cystinuria genes is a meaningful molecular diagnostic approach as a first the X-linked androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS). AIS is characterized by step towards a well-directed individual therapy. Acknowledgement; We complete or partial absence of hormone action on target cells and results thank the International Cystinuria Consortium for providing us with infor- in spectrum of disorders in individuals with karyotype 46XYranging from mation on SLC7A9. normal female phenotype (complete AIS) to undervirilized or infertile males (partial AIS). We analyzed 7 out of 8 exons (2 - 8) of AR gene in 42 patients P1561.Characterization of a Novel Rat Genetic Model; APre- with diagnosis complete or partial forms of AIS and their mothers from 33 sumed Transgene Insertion Mutant Associated with Postnatal families. AR gene have been investigated by PCR-SSCPanalysis, direct Male Lethality and Female Growth Retardation. sequencing and restriction analysis. Nine missense mutations and one J. Slade, T. Wells, D. A. Carter mutation in splice site have been identified in 16 individuals with complete University of Wales, Cardiff; Cardiff, United Kingdom and partial forms AIS. In three families mothers of affected individuals were sladejp@cardiff.ac.uk heterozygous carriers of mutations. Three of the mutations are novel. Two The production of transgenic rodents through the illegitimate recombina- out of these three novel mutations (C559S (TGC->TCC), IVS 6 DS + 2 T- tion of pronuclear-injected DNAcan result in insertional disruption of host >C) were found in patients with complete form of AIS, one of the mutations genes. Insertional mutants have formed both important models of mam- (G568R (GGG->AGG)) was found in patients with partial form of AIS. malian development, and routes to the molecular cloning of obscure loci. Mutation C559S creates a new Mnl 1 restriction site. This mutation has Of five rat (Sprague-Dawley) transgenic lines generated in our laboratory been confirmed by restriction analysis. Seven mutations were previously using a promoter-reporter (egr-1/NGFI-A- d4EGFP) construct, only one reported. They were identified both in patients with complete form of AIS line, of intermediate copy-number, displayed an overt phenotype. The sta- (V866M, A765T, L722F, G724D), and patients with partial form of AIS bly-inherited mutation is characterized by post-natal male lethality occur- (R855H, M780I, D695N). Two indentical missens mutation (R855H) were ring at post-natal (PN) days 5-11, which follows apparently normal littering, found in 2 unrelated families in patients with partial form of AIS. 408 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders P1564. Male infertility; molecular analysis of Y-chromosome P1566. NPC1; Complete genomic sequence, mutation analy- microdeletions in a non-selected population sis and identification of a susceptibility haplotype in Cau- G. Massazza, M. Poma, M. R. Iascone, U. Giussani, D. Chinaglia, A. casian NP-C Patients. Parma P. Bauer1, R. Knoblich1, C. Bauer1, A. Hufen1, J. Kropp1, S. Braun1, K. Ospedali Riuniti; Bergamo, Italy Harzer2, A. Rolfs1 sanatomi@ospedaliriuniti.bergamo.it 1University of Rostock; Rostock, Germany; 2University of Tbingen; Tbin- Among couples with fertility problems, male factors are the aetiology in gen, Germany about 50% of cases. In addition to chromosomal anomalies, microdele- peter.bauer@med.uni-rostock.de tions in the azospermic factor region (AZF) in the long arm of Y-chromo- Niemann-Pick type C (NP-C) disease is a rare, autosomal recessive lipid some have been detected in men with azoospermia or severe oligosper- storage disorder. Its phenotype is clinically characterized by progressive mia. Every year in our Department about 1750 semen analysis are per- neurological deterioration with ataxia, epilepsy and supranuclear gaze formed, 30% of which interests patients affected by varicocele and the palsy. Biochemically a block in the translocation of LDL-derived cholesterol remaining regarding men with fertility impairment. The aims of this study from the lysosomes and Golgi apparatus is considered as the cause of the were; 1) to evaluate oligo-azoospermia incidence on the total number of phenotypic alteration. NPC1 could be established as candidate gene in semen analysed 2) to assess if the only sperm count < 5x106 spermato- about 95% of all NP-C patients, and its cDNAsequence and exon-intron zoa /ml in oligospermia could be a parameter sufficient to justify the chro- boundaries have been characterized. We describe for the first time the mosome-Ymicrodeletion screening 3) to correlate the clinical phenotype of complete genomic sequence of human NPC1 covering 51kb. Mutation infertile men with specific chromosome-Ymicrodeletions In 11 months we analysis in 12 Caucasian NP-C patients revealed 6 novel and 3 known dis- have performed 1615 semen analysis according to WHO guidelines ease-causing alterations. Furthermore, several common polymorphisms in (1992). The patients mean age was 33 years (range 15-62). We found 55 exonic and intronic parts of the gene were identified. To assess the trans- azoospermic (3,4%), 282 oligospermic (17,5%) and 1278 normospermic mission of NPC1 alleles, 12 Caucasian NP-C patients have been haplo- subjects (79,1%). Oligospermic and azoospermic patients showed all the typed for their mutational patterns including the polymorphic exonic loci morphological and functional semen parameters altered compared to H215R (644 a>g), I858V (2572 a>g) and N931N (2793 c>t). Additionally, mean values of normospermic population. Genomic DNAwas extracted the latter SNPs have been haplotyped in 154 alleles of healthy Caucasian from 176 semen samples (45 azoospermic, 131 oligospermic with sperm control subjects. While 71,8% of our NP-C alleles and especially two NP- count < 5x 106/ml) and from lymphocytes of 16 oligospermic men enrolled C patients (4 alleles), lacking a second mutated allele, shared the haplo- in the protocol for assisted reproduction. The samples were analysed for type (644g, 2572g, 2793t), this haplotype accounts for only 46,3 % in the chromosome -Y microdeletion by multiplex-PCR. Initially we amplified a control group. Therefore we consider this haplotype to be associated with panel of 6 Y-specific STS that can identify 90% of possible microdeletions a non-coding, disease-causing mutation. Whenever complete sequencing in AZF a, b, c regions (Simoni et al 1998). ZFYand SRYwere used as of the open reading frame of NPC1 reveals only one potentially disease- internal controls of PCR reactions. Among patients selected according to related heterozygosity in NP-C patients it is recommended to haplotype their sperm count we found 1 azoospermic subject deleted in AZFc locus. these SNPs. The successive histological examination of a testicular biopsy revealed a Sertoli-cell only syndrome. Among the 16 men, enrolled to assisted repro- P1567.Anovel 7.9 kb deletion causing alpha+-thalassemia in duction protocol, the cariotype was 46,XYin 15 subjects and XX, in 1 sub- two independent families from Surinam. ject. Four out fifteen oligospermic men were deleted in AZFb regions C. L. Harteveld1, P. van Delft1, P. W. Wijermans2, M. C. Kappers-Klunne3, (26,6%). Although the number of patients analysed is still low, our findings P. C. Giordano1 support that the research for Y- microdeletions could be indicated in 1Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Community patients with idiopathic infertility and sperm concentration < 5x 106/ml. The Hospital Leyenburg; The Hague, The Netherlands; 3Academic Hospital high frequency of deletion (26,6%) found in our patients candidate for Rotterdam Dijkzigt; Rotterdam, The Netherlands assisted reproduction suggests the recommendation to perform accurate c.l.harteveld@lumc.nl genetic and molecular screening and genetic counselling before their Alpha-Thalassemia is most frequently the result of deletions involving one enrolment in an intracytoplasmic injection/ in vitro fertilization programme. or both alpha-globin genes on the short arm of chromosome 16. These deletions involve homologous or non-homologous recombinations based P1565.Transthyretin Ser-44 Mutation in a Case with Vitreous upon the presence or absence, respectively, of homology between Amyloidosis parental sequences at the site of recombination. One of the most common A. Murakami, K. Fujiki, S. Hasegawa, H. Kawano, A. Kanai mechanisms leading to alpha+-thalassemia involves misalignment Juntendo University School of Medicine; Tokyo, Japan between the two highly homologous 4-kb duplicated units in which the amurak@med.juntendo.ac.jp alpha-globin genes are embedded. Crossing-over between the misaligned Purpose; To report a case of vitreous amyloidosis with a transthyretin homology boxes (X, Yand Z) gives rise to the frequently occurring -alpha (TTR) variant Ser44. Case; A44-year-old Japanese female had a 2-month- 3.7 (Rightward) and -alpha 4.2 (Leftward) deletion. However, several other history of visual disturbance of the both eyes. No history for ocular and alpha+-thalassemia determinants have been described for which the neurological disease existed among relatives. Corrected visual acuity was mechanisms are either still unknown or involve a non-homologous recom- RE; 0.02 and LE; 0.9. Both pupils did not react to light and were about 6 bination event. We report the characterization of a novel 7.9 kb deletion mm in diameters. The vitreous in the both eyes were cloudy, in which fine taking away one of the duplicated alpha-globin genes and causing an fibrilar opacities were observed. Pars plana vitrectomy and biopsy of con- alpha+-thalassemia phenotype in two independent carriers of Surinam- junctiva of the right eye was performed. Methods; Pathological and molec- Indian origin. The molecular characterization of the deletion breakpoint ular genetic studies were performed with the patients informed consent. fragment revealed neither involvement of Alu-repeat sequences nor the The vitreous and conjunctiva specimens were subjected for histopatholog- presence of homologous regions prone to recombination, suggesting a ical examination. DNA was isolated from peripheral blood cells of the non-homologous recombination event. This alpha+-thalassemia deletion patient and sequencing of the TTR gene was performed. Results; The vit- was found to give rise to an atypical HbH-disease characterized by a non- reous and conjunctiva specimens showed typical light microscopic and transfusion dependent moderate microcytic hypochromic anemia, in com- ultrastructural features of amyloidosis. Direct sequencing of exon 2 of the bination with a poly-adenylation signal mutation of the alpha-globin gene TTR gene revealed a single base-pair substitution, which results in an (alpha2 -AA). Characterization of alpha+-thalassemia defects is, in spite of amino acid substitution at position 44, phenylalanine to serine (TTR Ser- the mild phenotype, important for preventing obsolete and deleterious iron 44). TTR Ser-44 variant had been found only in an American patient with therapy in the carrier and severe HbH disease in the progeny. amyloidal peripheral neuropathy, however no ocular symptoms were described. Conclusion; Our studies indicate TTR Ser-44 variant could P1568. Rapid detection of -thalassemia mutations by the cause vitreous amyloidosis. TTR-related amyloidosis should be consid- PCR based methods ered as a possible cause of vitreous opacities even in the absence of the R. Basalic1, L. Neagu2, L. Gavrila1 family history. 1University of Bucharest; Bucharest, Romania; 2Instutite A. Rusescu for Mother and Chil Care; Bucharest, Romania rbasalic@botanic.unibuc.ro The thalassemias are a group of inherited recessive disorders in with a defect in synthesis of globin polipeptide chain of hemoglobin is present. Reliable diagnosis of the thalassemia syndromes can be achieved only by using modern methods of molecular genetics. New procedures to detectPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 409 beta-thalassemia mutations have been developed. All of them are based an intermediate hemolytic anemia (HbH disease) in the progeny of parents on PCR methodology. their main advantages are simplicity and rapidity. with a combination of this point mutation with one of the frequent alpha The analysis of genomic DNAisolated from the blood of the patient affect- zero deletion defects. ed with beta-thalassemia is carried out by the Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) method. The ARMS-PCR is a simple and rapid P1571.Using multiplex PCR to detect beta-thalassemia muta- method of detecting point mutations, restriction fragment length polymor- tions in a Vietnamese patients phisms (RFLPs) and small nucleotide insertion or deletion. The IVS1-110 N. H. Phuc, N. H. Giang and IVS2-745 point mutations were identified in beta-thalassemia patients. Center of Biotechnology, Vietnam National University; Hanoi, Viet Nam These are the most common mutations in Romanian beta-thalassemic nhgiang@netnam.org.vn populations. Beta-thalassemia is a prevalent genetic disease in Vietnam. From people in all over the world, more than 200 different thalassemia mutations in P1569.Double heterozygosity for hemoglobins C and Lepore- beta-globin gene have been reported so far. The aim of our research is get- Boston-Washington in a patient from Croatia ting distribution of beta-thalassemia mutations in a Vietnamese population. K. G. Bardarova1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, V. Preden-Kerekovic2, G. D. Further more, those data will be served for prenatal diagnosis of tha- Efremov1 lassemia mutations soon. Using multiplex PCR with control and specific 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; Skopje, The former Yugoslav primers for 6 mutations; frameshift codons 41-42(-CTTT), codons 71- Republic of Macedonia; 2Clinical hospital Merkur; Zagreb, Croatia 72(+A), nonsense codon 17(A-T), codon 28(A-G), codon 29(A-G) and IVS dijana@manu.edu.mk II-654(C-T) to screening 195 Vietnamese patients. The result shows that Double heterozygosity for hemoglobin (Hb) C and Hb Lepore is a rare con- the mutation at codons 41-42 is the most common i Vietnam (42,6%). dition which has been described only in a few cases. Hb C is predomi- Whereas mutations 28, 71-72 and IVS II-654 are less frequent (3,6 - 3,1 nantly found in Blacks with the highest frequency in West Africa, while Hb and 2,0%). 49 beta-thalassemia families were performed for those muta- Lepore-Boston-Washington is the most common hybrid Hb found mainly in tions, as well; the Balkan peninsula. Here we present a 25-year old patient from Croatia - 18 cases a child and mother/father had mutation at codons 41-42 with this condition. The presence of two abnormal hemoglobins was - 7 cases had mutation at codon 17 observed on cellulose acetate gel electrophoresis during routine hemato- - 3 cases had mutation at codon 29 logical and hemoglobin investigation. Hb C was characterized by DNA - 1 case hadmutation at codon 28 sequencing, while the presence of Hb Lepore-Boston-Washington was - 3 cases had mutation at codons 71-72 confirmed by PCR amplification of the Lepore hybrid gene using 5delta- - 2 cases had mutation at IVS II-654. and 3 beta-globin gene specific primers, followed by Pvu II restriction - One patient had 2 mutations (71-72 from his mother and IVS II-654 from enzyme digestion. Family studies showed that Hb Lepore was inherited his father). from the patients father who has a Croatian ancestry, while Hb C was inherited from his mother who originates from Hungary. Since Hb C has P1572.Genotype-phenotype correlation in ataxia-telangiecta- been found very rarely in this region, haplotype analysis were performed to sia trace its origin in this family. It is known that Hb C occurs almost exclusively R. Bendix1, A. Osmers1, M. Stuhrmann1, D. Schindler2, M. Stumm3, R. on one haplotype, with a few exceptions due to recombination in the clus- Wegner4, S. Scott5, M. Lavin5, T. Drk1 ter. Hb C in this family was found on haplotype which differs at two poly- 1Medizinische Hochschule; Hannover, Germany; 2Biozentrum, Universitt; morphic sites from the usual Hb C haplotype. Additional two informative Wrzburg, Germany; 3Otto-von-Guericke-Universitt; Magdeburg, Ger- polymorphisms (Taq I/inter-gamma and Hpa I/3beta) confirmed that the many; 4Humboldt-Universitt; Berlin, Germany; 5Royal Brisbane Hospital; beta-C chromosome in this family was not derived from African Black chro- Brisbane, Australia mosomes, but represents a new mutation. doerk.thilo@mh-hannover.de Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive multi-organ disease P1570.Anew Pro->Ser amino acid substitution at position 119 characterised by cerebellar ataxia and the variable presence of other neu- of the Alpha-1 globin chain induces a mild a-thalassemia phe- rological symptoms, immunological deficiencies, telangiectasia and cancer notype in a Moroccan family proneness. In most cases, A-Tis caused by truncating mutations of the P. J. M. Kok1,C. L. Harteveld2, P. van Delft2, R. Plug2, F. G. A. Versteegh1, ATM gene, whose product is involved in the regulation of cellular respons- P. C. Giordano2 es to radiation injury. We have been investigating the correlation between 1Groene Hart Hospital; Gouda, The Netherlands; 2Leiden University Med- type of ATM gene mutations, function of the gene product and clinical phe- ical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands notype in 40 unrelated A-Tpatients. The median age of the patients was P.C.Giordano@lumc.nl 11 years; four of them had been deceased between age 5-20 years from Alpha-thalassemia is generally considered to be an expression defect cancer or infections. Ataxia usually started in early childhood but a milder caused mostly by deletions silencing the expression of one or more alpha course and, thus, delayed diagnosis of A-Twas apparent for a few patients globin genes. Although non-deletion mutation alpha-thalassemia is consid- with splice mutations, amino acid substitutions or in-frame-deletions. Of ered rare, we frequently observe in our laboratory alpha-thalassemia phe- note, one 58 year-old-patient was found to be a compound heterozygote notypes induced by points mutation by various mechanisms. Afamily of for a double missense mutation (D2625E&A2626P) and a new splice recent Moroccan origin living in The Netherlands was studied because of mutation (IVS7+5G>A). Our functional studies in cultured lymphoblasts the persisting microcytic hypochromic anemia observed in a non-iron from A-Tpatients assessed ATM protein levels as well as radiation-induced depleted young son. No abnormal hemoglobin components were visible on phosphorylation of p53 and nibrin. Residual ATM protein was found in a electrophoresis or HPLC but the expression unbalance of beta/alpha = few cell lines with splice, missense or unknown mutations. Residual kinase 1.27 measured in absence of HbH inclusion bodies, indicating the deple- activity was demonstrated in five A-Tcell lines established from patients tion of one alpha gene. No deletion defects were detected by Southern Blot carrying splice or missense mutations but not in those harbouring two trun- analysis or by brake point PCR. Amplification and direct sequencing cating mutations. These results indicate that the clinical variability of A-Tis revealed a normal sequence of both the alpha2 genes and the heterozy- at least in part determined by the type of mutation and, in exceptional gous pattern for a C->Ttransition at position 119 of the alpha1 genes. The cases, the disease course can extend to late adulthood. CCTtriplet at position 119 of the alpha gene codes for a proline which is located at the beginning the H helix of the alpha chain and is therefore a P1573. Identification of SURF1 gene mutations in Polish fundamental residue in the formation of the secondary structure of the patients with Leigh syndrome alpha-globin chain. Over 200 single amino acid substitutions have been D. Abramczuk-Piekutowska, E. Popowska, E. Karczmarewicz, M. Pron- described affecting the homologous alpha1 and alpha2 globin chains, icki, M. Krajewska-Walasek, E. Pronicka mainly inducing detectable abnormal hemoglobin tetramers. The CCT- Childrens Memorial Health Institute; Warsaw, Poland >TCTmutation, changing proline 119 to a serine, is the first mutant ever dorck@czd.waw.pl described at this particular position, suggesting that residue 119 might be Leigh syndrome (LS) is the most common mitochondrial cytopathy of early fundamental for dimers and tetramers formation. Indeed no abnormal age (infancy and childhood) and it may result from several defects of mito- hemoglobin fraction was detectable in the lysate probably indicating the chondrial enzyme complexes. One of the most frequent form of LS (clas- absence of tetramers containing the anomalous chain and an early prote- sical form) is associated with cytochrome c oxidase (COX, complex IV) olytic degradation of the monomer resulting in the unbalanced beta/alpha deficiency and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. No mutations ratio and in the mild alpha-thalassemia phenotype observed in the carriers in any of 13 polypeptide subunits of human COX have been detected in LS of this mutation.In spite of the mild character, this mutation could generate patients. Recently, LS-COX- locus has been mapped to chromosome 9q34410 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders and mutated SURF1 gene has been identified in LS patients. We present Gastroenterology-IKEM; Prague, Czech Republic; 41st Clinic of Pediatrics, the identification of SURF1 gene mutation in 18 Polish patients with clas- Charles Univ. Prague; Prague, Czech Republic; 52nd Clinic of Pediatrics, sical form of Leigh syndrome. Sequence analysis revealed the presence of Charles Univ. Prague; Prague, Czech Republic novel 704T>C transversion (Met235Thr), and two different recurrent dinu- koudova@lfmotol.cuni.cz, cleotide deletions (758delCA, 845delCT). 845delCTwas identified in 75% We have analyzed the entire CFTR coding region by DGGE and screened of all our patients in homozygote or heterozygote state. Besides, one for common PRSS 1 (R122H, N29I), SPINK 1 (N34S) mutations in a total nucleotide 573C>G transversion resulted in silent mutation (Thr191Thr) of 65 chronic pancreatitis (CP) cases (idiopathic CP-iCP/incl. criteria; N was detected. Our study confirms the recent observations that SURF1 Engl J Med 1998, 339;653; 22 children, 32 adults/; hereditary CP- hCP gene is consistently involved in disorders of mitochondrial respiratory chain /EUROPAC incl. criteria; Med Clin North Am 2000, 84;575; 7 children, 4 in patients with typical Leigh syndrome. The study was partially supported adults/ and compared their frequency to 100 random controls /50F, 50M; by KBN-CMHI Project No.S76/2000. age range 18-45 yrs./). In iCPthe frequency of CFTR mutations deltaF508, R117H, L997F was increased only in adults (p=0.01) and was associated P1574.Screening of Brutons tyrosine kinase gene in Russian with an increase of the IVS8(T)9/(TG)10 haplotype (p=0.001) and of the patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia. 125G/C polymorphism (p=0.01), compared to controls. The frequency of S. Tverskaya1, N. Vasserman1, I. Resnick2, A. Polyakov1, O. Evgrafov1 R122H and N29I PRSS 1 mutations was significantly increased in both 1Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; children/adults (3/22) with hCP(p<0.01), but not in all iCPcases (2/108) 2Research Institute for Paediatric Haematology; Moscow, Russian Feder- compared to controls. However, the SPINK 1 N34S mutation was found at ation a considerable frequency also in controls (4/200 chromosomes) - an stver@online.ru observation challenging its previously reported pathogenic potential. Our X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is an immunodeficiency caused by data indicate that mutations in CFTR, PRSS 1 genes are associated with lymphocyte differentiation block. XLA is caused by mutations in all five iCP/hCP, with PRSS 1 alleles being more often observed in early onset domains of the gene encoding Brutons tyrosine kinase (BTK). The gene is CP. In cases with positive screening results genetic counseling and long- localised at Xq21.3-Xq22 and consists of 19 exons. There are no frequent term monitoring for the event. development of other cystic fibrosis-related mutations in this gene. Point mutations are the most common. We have symptoms (in iCP) and the adenocarcinoma of pancreas (in hCP) should developed multiplex systems for simultaneous amplification and SSCP- be provided. Supported by grants;#6250-3, 6411-3, 000000064203; analysis of several exons of the BTK gene. DNAsamples from 26 unrelat- #111300003, ME258, OK192, LN00A079. ed patients with XLAwere analysed by this method. We have found 15 mutations, only two of them are described in BTK database. The novel P1577. Linkage disequilibrium reduces the locus for venous rearrangements mutations from large deletions of some exons up to differ- malformations with glomus cells (VMGLOM) to a single YAC ent missence mutations were detected in different domains of BTK gene. of 1.48 Mbp. Three of them were found in 6th exon. The correlation between genotype A. Irrthum1, P. Brouillard2, L. M. Boon3, B. R. Olsen4, J. B. Mulliken4, O. and clinical features are rather interesting.X-linked agammaglobulinemia Enjolras5, M. Vikkula1 (XLA) is an immunodeficiency caused by lymphocyte differentiation block. 1Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology; Brussels, Belgium; XLAis caused by mutations in all five domains of the gene encoding Bru- 2Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathologygoy; Brussels, Belgium; tons tyrosine kinase (BTK). The gene is localised at Xq21.3-Xq22 and 3Universit catholique de Louvain; Brussels, Belgium; 4Harvard Medical consists of 19 exons. There are no frequent mutations in this gene. Point School; Boston, MAUnited States; 5Hpital Lariboisire; Paris, France mutations are the most common. We have developed multiplex systems vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be for simultaneous amplification and SSCP-analysis of several exons of the Venous malformations with glomus cells (glomuvenous malformations) BTK gene. DNA samples from 26 unrelated patients with XLA were are localized cutaneous lesions of vascular dysmorphogenesis. They are analysed by this method. We have found 15 mutations, only two of them usually sporadic, but sometimes familial. Using five families, we have are described in BTK database. The novel rearrangements mutations from mapped the locus, VMGLOM, to chromosome 1p21-p22. In order to refine large deletions of some exons up to different missence mutations were this locus, spanning 4-6 Mbp, we now studied seven additional families. detected in different domains of BTK gene. Three of them were found in They exhibited linkage to VMGLOM and the combined LOD score for all 6th exon. The correlation between genotype and clinical features are twelve families was 18.41 at q = 0.0 for marker D1S188. We found a dis- rather interesting. tinct haplotype shared by seven families, comprising seven alleles that are rare in the general population (P< 0.01). This indicated that the haplotype P1575. Mutations in steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21) in Rus- is identical by descent in all seven families, and hence the locus could be sia. refined by inferring ancestral crossovers. Using this approach, we posi- N. S. Osinovskaya1, T. E. Ivaschenko2, V. S. Baranov2, V. V. Potin2 tioned the causative gene between two markers on the same non-chimeric 1Inst.of Obst.& Gynecol.; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation; 2Inst.of YAC of 1.48 Mbp. Positional cloning recently lead to the identification of the Obst.&Gynecol.; St.Petersburg, Russian Federation mutated gene, a novel regulator of vascular morphogenesis that we named natosinovskaya@mail.ru glomulin. Mutational analyses verified the common origin of the identified The spectrum of mutations in the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21B) haplotype. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) and the frequency of 11 mutations among 70 patients with different forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) were analyzed by means of PCR analysis. Each of the CAH forms was characterized by specific pattern of P1578. Comparison of whole genome amplifications for diagnostically important mutations. The salt-wasting (SW) form of the dis- genetic diagnosis ease was more frequently associated with gene deletion (39%) and the J. Kim1, J. Kim1, B. Lee1, Y. Kim1, H. Ryu2 668-13C-G mutation in the second intron (23.5%) of CYP21 gene, where- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital; Seoul, Repub- as the majority of simple virilizing (SV) CAH cases were associated with lic of Korea; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samsung Cheil the 1172N mutation in exon 4 (23.5%), gene deletion (16.5%), and the 668- Hospital; Seoul, Republic of Korea 13C-G mutation (16.5%). Mutations in the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene genelab@samsung.co.kr were detected in 70% of the chromosomes from the patients with the SW The purpose of this study was to evaluate the utility of DNApreamplifica- and SV forms of CAH respectivly. We investigated 78 chromosomes from tion for the molecular analyses of a single or few cells. We therefore com- the patients with nonclassic form (NC) of CAH; only in 1.3% mutations pared the efficiency of original primer extension preamplification (PEP), (gene deletion) were found. Neither V281Lnor P30Lmutations common degenerate oligonucleotide primer-PCR (DOP), and modified PEP (M- for the NC CAH patients from other populations were detected in this study. PEP) using each of the 5 amniocytes obtained from 50 pregnant women. This result can be explained either by the fact that NC CAH cases in Rus- As a preliminary experiment for the preimplantation genetic diagnosis sia are associated with other major mutations, or with difficulties in clinical (PGD) in order to avoid the X-linked disorders, DMD and SMA, we have diagnostics of nonclassic form in our patients. amplified X-, Y-centromeric sequences, dystrophin gene exon 46 and SMN gene exon 7 from a small aliquot of each whole gemone amplification P1576. Genetic testing in Czech patients with idiopathic (WGA) products. Comfirmed with chromosome analysis, we determined and hereditary chronic pancreatitis that 25 fetuses had the Ychromosome and the detection rates of PEP, M. Koudova1, R. Keil2, J. Spicak3, J. Martinek3, J. Nevoral4, E. Michkov4, DOPand M-PEPwere 4, 68, and 96% in Y-specific amplification respec- V. Vavrova5, M. Macek1, A. Krebsov1, M. Macek Jr.1 tively. The amplification rates of X-specific region were 66, 96, 100 % in 1CF Center-Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics; Prague, Czech PEP, DOP, M-PEPrespectively, and 14, 52, 66 % of dystrophin gene, and Republic; 2Clinic of Internal Medicine; Prague, Czech Republic; 3Clinic of 4, 46, 74 % of SMN gene. Contaminated DNAsequences and false posi-Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 411 tive for female cells in Y-specific PCR were not detected. This study indi- the mutations in the ligand-binding domain affect conserved amino-acids cates that the efficiency of M-PEPwas significantly greater than the other involved in LDL binding; [6] the functional data available for 183 (29%) methods, and that M-PEPshould be used for the diagnosis of fetal inher- mutations indicate 38% of class 2B (transport defective) and 33% of class ited diseases. 1 mutations (null alleles); [7] finally, the investigation of genotype/pheno- type correlations is difficult since the clinical data is usually incomplete in P1579.DHCR7 gene mutations  post- and prenatal diagnosis mutation reports. Direct access to the database through the web site of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in Polish families should facilitate the input of high quality clinical information and should E. Ciara, E. Popowska, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, D. Abramczuk-Pieku- overcome this shortage. towska, M. Krajewska-Walasek Children Memorial Health Institute; Warsaw, Poland P1582. Analysis of CANP-3 gene by PCR and hybridization dorcik@czd.waw.pl with oligonucleotide microchips in Russian Families with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disorder of LGMD patients. cholesterol biosynthesis, characterized by facial dysmorphisms, mental I. Krakhmaleva1, S. Zakharov1, S. Shishkin1, S. Limborska2, T. Pogoda2, retardation and multiple congenital anomalies. The birth prevalence of N. Shakhovskaya3, S. Artemieva3, I. Lunga1, T. Nasedkina4, D. SLOS is estimated to be 1;20 000 to 1;40 000, possibly the second most Gryadunov4, A. Mirzabekov4, N. Gerasimova5 common recessive metabolic disorder after phenylketonuria. The carrier 1Institute of Human Genetics, Research Center for Medical Genetics frequency is calculated to be 1;100 to 1;50. SLOS is caused by mutations RAMS; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Institute of Molecular Genetics of the D7-sterol reductase (DHCR7) gene. Up to now about forty different RAS; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Childrens Psycho-Neurological Hos- mutations, in all translated exons 4-9, have been described. The majority pital of Moscow Region; Moscow, Russian Federation; 4Engelhardt Insti- (50%) of the mutations are clustered in exon 9. We present mutational tute of Molecular Biology RAS; Moscow, Russian Federation; 5Interregion- analysis of the DHCR7 gene investigated in a new group of Polish patients al Association of assistance to people suffering neuromuscular diseases with SLOS and in two pregnant women at risk. Five different point muta- The Hope; Moscow, Russian Federation tions of a nucleotide substitution type, W151X in exon 6 (on one allele), socrates@orc.ru L157Pin exon 6 (on two alleles), V326Lin exon 9 (on six alleles), V338M CANP-3 gene consisted of 24 exons is one of 11 different genes in which in exon 9 (on one allele) and IVS8-1;g>c in splice acceptor site (on one mutations cause Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD2A) but just allele) were identified. Mutation V338M is a novel one, the other substitu- defects of this gene determine considerable part of recessive LGMD tions are recurrent in Polish and European populations and have been cases. Many missense mutations and microdeletions, detected in CANP-3 described previously. Three mutations were found in one patient. Analysis gene, make difficulties for DNA-diagnosis of LGMD. The combination of of patients parents revealed the presence of two different mutations on PCR-analysis and hybridization of PCR products with oligonucleotide mothers allele. In two families, molecular diagnosis of chorionic villi microarrays may permit to resolve this problem. excluded SLOS in fetuses. These studies were supported in part by KBN, Information about 326 LGMD patients is collected in computer database Project No.4P05E09118 and the Subsidies for Scientists 2000 Programme MYODYS-2.2 that we created by use common diagnostic criteria and of the Foundation for Polish Science. medical documentation about 3900 Russian families with hereditary neu- romuscular disorders. DNAsamples of 43 individuals from LGMD families P1580. Mutations in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome Russian were obtained and PCR products of several parts of CANP-3 gene (Pm, patients. exons 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 , 6, 19, 20, 21 22) were analyzed. 17 and 3 patients with N. Vasserman, N. Demina, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov LGMD are showed polymorphism (SSCP) in exon 4 and exon 21, accord- Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation ingly. By subsequent sequencing two mutations in exon 4 - deletion of 1 bp stver@online.ru (550A) and deletion of 15 bp (598-612) were detected. SSCPanalysis The autosomal recessive Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an inborn and allele-specific PCR revealed 550Aof CANP-3 as common mutation disorder of sterol metabolism with characteristic congenital malformations in our group of Russian families with recessive LGMD (57% homo- and and dimorphisms. All patients suffer from mental retardation. The gene of heterozygous both). In control group (donors from healthy families, n=34) 7-sterol reductase (DHCR7) responsible for the de novo biosynthesis of one person turned out heterozygous for 550DA. Using computer analysis cholesterol have been identified as a SLOS gene by Fitzky B.U. et al of exon 4 sequence we synthesized special set of six pairs of oligonu- (1998). DHCR7 gene is localised on 11q13 and consists of 9 exons. DNA cleotides to detect 6 mutations, identified in exon 4 of CANP-3 gene earli- from 14 unrelated patients with dubious diagnosis SLOS were analyzed for er. The microarray was prepared by immobilization of oligonucleotide mutation in DHCR7 gene for different diagnostics. Four mutations in 2 fam- probes in gel pads using the previously described technology. Hybridiza- ilies were revealed. The prenatal diagnostics without proband DNAwas tion of DNAsamples with this microarray revealed the distinctive discrimi- performed in one family with SLOS. Fetus received chromosome with nation between 550DAhomo- and heterozygous. This approach seems to mutation in 9th exon of DHCR7 gene from his mother and chromosome be successful for the fast detection of the main part of point mutations in without mutation in 6th exon from father. Prognosis for fetus was CANP-3 gene. favourable. Among these 4 mutations one was described by Fitzky B.U. et al (1998), three other were novel. P1583.Male Infertility; Chromosome And Genome Analysis C. Curcio1, M. Travi1, P. Primignani1, F. Sbrocca1, A. Biasi1, M. Seia1, A. P1581.The human LDLreceptor gene (LDLR) database; Mol- Ambrosioni1, S. Guarneri2, P. Ilardi2, D. Diaferia3, G. Ragni3, A. Cant ecular analysis of 625 mutations Rajnoldi1, D. A. Coviello1 L. Villeger, M. Abi-Fadel, S. Rochaud, A. Robin, J. Rabes, C. Junien, C. 1Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Beroud, C. Boileau, M. Varret Italy; 2Cytogenetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, INSERM UR-383, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades; Paris, France Italy; 3Infertility Center, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy villeger@necker.fr coviello@unige.it To date, 711 mutations have been identified in the LDLR gene, encoding Connection between chromosome abnormalities and male infertility are the low-density lipoprotein receptor, in subjects with Familial Hypercholes- well documented. Recent studies have indicated that microdeletions on at terolemia. Although genotype/structure-function correlations have been least 3 regions (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) on the Ychromosome code for sper- substantially investigated, genotype/phenotype correlations have not been matogenesis factors. Moreover, the involvement of CFTR gene defects explored. Thus, we have compiled a database containing standardized have been demonstrated in obstructive azoospermia and, in general data for each LDLR mutation, and developed the software that provides terms, in male infertility. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the con- sorting tools and allows optimized multicriteria research nections between chromosome analysis, Ychromosome microdeletions, [http;//www.umd.necker.fr]. The analysis of the 625 point mutations in the CFTR gene and different male infertility phenotypes. Phenotypes discrimi- UMD-LDLR database gives the following information; [1] 58% of the muta- nation criteria; Azoospermia, Criptozoospermia (<1x106/ml), severe tions are missense, and 17% occur in CpG dinucleotides known to be oligospermia (<5x106 ml). DNAmicrodeletions analysis . Molecular study mutational hot spots; [2] although widely distributed throughout the gene, of AZFa, b, c regions has been performed in 274 infertile men coming to there is an excess of mutations in exons 4 and 6 (ligand-binding repeats), our Centre from different Italian regions or from other Countries; in partic- 7 (EGF-like repeat), and 9 (EGF-precursor-like); [3] there is a deficit of ular 82 subjects with azoospermia, 13 with criptozoospermia and 179 with mutations in exons 10 and 13 (EGF-precursor-like), 15 (O-linked-sugar), severe oligospermia. The PCR study screened for 18 STS markers span- 16 (transmembrane), 17 and 18 (cytoplasmic); [4] 47% of the small dele- ning the euchromatic Yq region. Chromosome study . Kariotype analysis tions occur between repeated sequences and can be explained by the was carried out on 169 infertile men. The remaining cases were tested in slipped-mispairing model described by Krawczak and Cooper; [5] 68% of other laboratories. CFTR Gene analysis-TGm and Tn ( T5, T7, T9) locus.412 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders The Cystic Fibrosis gene mutations study was at first carried out on 139 chain dynein gene causing PCD. Amicrosatellite internal to DNAH11 was azo-oligospermic subjects and subsequently in a second more selected used in 31 families with at least 2 affecteds, to select 6 families with co- group of 41 Congenital Bilateral Aplasia of Vas Deferent (CBAVD) patients. segregation of the same DNAH11 alleles in affecteds. The mutation search CFTR gene mutation was carried out by Polymerase Chain Reaction- in these 6 families showed 52 variants, 30 intronic and 22 exonic (ten of Oligonucleotide Ligation Assay (31 CF mutations simultaneously), DGGE which are silent polymorphisms and 8 are common variants). Studies to analysis and polymophism analysis of IVS 8-(TG)m, Tn tracts. We found differentiate potential disease-causing mutations from polymorphisms are Yq microdeletions in 4 infertile patients (deletion frequency of 1.46%); the in progress, as well as the cloning of the few remaining exons of DNAH11 first deletion involve the AZFb region, the second involves the AZFb and and the completion of the mutation analysis. AZFc regions, the third and fourth involves AZFc region. Patients with AZFb or AZFb,c deletions were azoospermic, patients with AZFc deletion P1586.Asensitive molecular test for Marfan syndrome were criptozoospermic and azoospermic respectively. Constitutional chro- I. Kaitila1, J. Krkk2, L. Lnnqvist3, L. Ala-Kokko2 mosome abnormalities were identified in 12 subjects (frequency 4,38%); 4 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital; Helsinki, cases in azoospermic patients, 3 in criptozoospermic pts and 3 in Finland; 2Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Medical Center; New oligospermic pts. CFTR gene analysis; 41 CBAVD subjects ; 7/41 (17%) Orleans, LA United States; 3Department of Human Molecular Genetics, homozygous/ heterozygous compound; 5/41 (12%) heterozygous + 5T National Public Health Institute; Helsinki, Finland carrier; 12/41(29%) single mutation heterozygous; 7/41 (17%) 5Tcarrier. ilkka.kaitila@hus.fi The frequency of locus Tn in 34 pts CBAVD is;5T=14,7%, 7T=58;8%, Molecular diagnostic confirmation/exclusion of Marfan syndrome (MFS) 9T=26.5%. CFTR gene analysis; 139 azo-oligospermic subjects; 9/139 through FBN1 gene analysis by single stranded confirmation polymor- (6.5%) single mutation heterozygous; 130/139 (93,5%) no known muta- phism (SSCP) is insensitive, time consuming, and expensive. Yet, it would tions. The frequency of locus Tn in 139 azo-oligospermic pts is; 5T=9%, be valuable for atypical cases and possibly affected family members. After 7T=79,5%, 9T=11 sequencing the exon boundaries of the human FBN1 we designed PCR primers to amplify all FBN1 exons and exon boundaries, and screened two P1584. Primary ciliary dyskinesia, an heterogeneous genetic sets of patients and control individuals for FBN1 mutations by conforma- pathology; evaluation of candidate genes tion sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) followed by sequencing. The first G. Pennarun1, A. M. Bridoux1, E. Escudier2, S. Amselem1, B. Duriez1 set consisted of 46 DNAsamples from 12 sporadic and 12 familial cases 1Inserm U468; Creteil, France; 2Service dHistologie, Pitie-Salpetriere; with MFS, 3 sporadic and 2 familial cases with annuloaortic ectasia (AAE), Paris, France 1 case with familial ectopia lentis, and from 16 control individuals. The pennarun@im3.inserm.fr diagnosis was based on clinical evaluation and use of the diagnostic crite- Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a group of heterogeneous inherited dis- ria for MFS (AmJMedGenet, 1996, 62;417-). The molecular analysis was orders, usually transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. The disease performed blindly first with CSGE. Sequence variations observed by phenotype is characterized by various axonemal abnormalities of respira- CSGE were identified by sequencing. The results showed FBN1 mutations tory cilia and sperm tails, leading to bronchiectasis and sinusitis, some- in all patients with MFS, and in the patient with ectopia lentis but no muta- times associated with situs inversus (Kartageners syndrome) and male tions in the patients with AAE or in control individuals. The second set con- sterility. We have isolated the first gene involved in PCD, DNAI1, using a sisted of 18 patients with MFS and previously detected FBN1 mutations. candidate-gene approach. To date, DNAI1 is the only gene known to be CSGE followed by sequencing allowed us to characterize all but one of the involved in PCD; it is highly likely that numerous PCD-causing genes previously detected mutations. Thus, the sensitivity and specificity in these remain to be identified. We have evaluated the possible involvement of two sets were 100 per cent. Thus, CSGE followed by sequencing can be candidate genes in PCD; HP28 and HFH4. Mutation of the Chlamy- offered as a diagnostic test with high detection rate for confirmation/exclu- domonas reinhardtii p28 gene, which encodes a dynein light chain, leads sion of MFS diagnosis. to an absence of inner dynein arms in flagellar axonemes of this unicellu- lar alga. In a mouse model, the targeted disruption of the transcription fac- P1587.Apathogenetic mechanism in classical Ehlers-Danlos tor hfh4 results in complete absence of cilia and randomization of left-right syndrome and resolution of the fibril diameter paradox. asymmetry. We, therefore, considered the human orthologs of p28 and R. J. Wenstrup1, J. B. Florer1, A. Xue1, W. G. Cole2, M. C. Willing3, D. E. hfh4 as good candidates for the PCD phenotypes characterised by similar Birk4 defects. Four PCD independent patients presenting with an absence of 1Childrens Hospital Research Foundation; Cincinnati, OH United States; inner dynein arms, two independent patients having no cilia, and one fam- 2Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada; 3University of Iowa; Iowa ily with three affected brothers having few cilia, were investigated. Molec- City, IA United States; 4Thomas Jefferson University; Philadelphia, PA ular screening of the complete coding regions of the two candidate genes, United States HP28 and HFH4, in our PCD population revealed no mutation. However, wensr0@chmcc.org given the genetic heterogeneity in PCD, this result does not exclude their Approximately one-third to one-half of individuals with classical Ehlers- possible involvement in other PCD patients. Danlos syndrome (types I/II) have detectable abnormalities in the genes encoding the proa1(V) (COL5A1) or proa2(V) (COL5A2) chains of type V P1585. The DNAH11 (axonemal heavy chain dynein type 11) collagen, a quantitatively minor component of type I collagen-rich fibrils. gene is mutated in one form of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Electron micrographs of skin from some patients with EDS were reported (PCD) to have larger diameter collagen fibrils than control. In general, larger L. Bartoloni1, Y. Pan2, J. L. Blouin1, A. K. Maiti1, C. Gehrig1, C. Rossier1, diameter collagen fibrils correlate directly with structural properties (stiff- N. Scamuffa1, G. Sail-Duriaux1, H. Mitchison3, M. Meeks3, C. D. DeLozier- ness and maximum force) and material properties (modulus and maximum Blanchet1, R. M. Gardiner3, W. J. Craigen2, S. E. Antonarakis1 stress) of tissues, yet dermal tissues of classical EDS patients are friable 1Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School; and dermal scars have apparent reduced mechanical strength. To investi- Geneva, Switzerland; 2Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, gate this apparent paradox, we examined matrix deposition and collagen Baylor College of Medicine; Houston, TX United States; 3Department of fibril morphology in long-term cultures of fibroblast cell strains that have a Pediatrics, Royal Free and University College Medical School; London, fourfold difference in the ratio of type V to type I collagen gene expression. United Kingdom Compared to control cells, fibroblasts from 2 patients with OI type I due to lucia.bartoloni@medecine.unige.ch COL1A1 haploinsufficiency deposited 46% of hydroxyproline per mg pro- PCD is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disease. To tein and EDS cells from 2 patients with COL5A1 haploinsufficiency define genes responsible for PCD we analysed the DNAof a patient with deposited 38%. However, the EDS cells synthesized approximately the immotile cilia, situs inversus and respiratory distress. This remarkable same amount of total collagen as controls and had similar secreted ratios patient presents uniparental (paternal) disomy of chromosome 7 of type I/type III collagen as control cells. Average collagen fibril diameter (patUPD7) and homozygosity for CFTR- F508del. We performed mutation from EDS cells was 39.6 12.5 nanometers compared to 32.66.9 nm for analysis in 67 of the exons of the heavy chain dynein DNAH11 gene map- control and 25.1 5.2 nm for OI cells. These data indicate that type V col- ping on chromosome 7 and homologue to Lrd (mutated in the mouse iv/iv lagen may serve a dual function in dermal tissues. In addition to its posit- model of situs inversus). A nonsense mutation (R to X), homozygous ed role as a negative regulator of collagen fibril diameter, type V collagen because of UPD7, was identified in one of the exons coding for the motor may serve as a rate limiting nucleator of collagen fibrillogenesis in dermis. domain of DNAH11. The normal ciliary ultrastructure in this patient is com- Areduced rate of collagen fibril formation in the dermis of classical EDS patible with the nonsense mutation. The truncated protein can be incorpo- patients with COL5A1 haploinsufficiency may override any mechanical rated in the dynein arm even if inactive since it lacks the microtubule-bind- advantage conferred by increased fibril diameter. ing domain. This is the first report of a mutation in an axonemal heavyPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 413 P1588. Identification of the COL4A5 gene mutations in mal members. Highly polymorphic DNAmarkers from 5 different chromo- Slovenian Alport syndrome families somes (1, 6, 14, 17 and 19) previously linked to various LCAloci was geno- M. Slajpah1, A. Vizjak1, A. Hvala1, M. Koselj2, M. Bidovec3, B. Gorinsek1, typed in this family. Hint of linkage was identified with the 17p13.1 region M. Ravnik-Glavac1, D. Ferluga1, D. Glavac1 containing the two known loci of LCA1 and LCA4. Homozygosity in affect- 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty; ed subjects was only observed with D17S1881, D17S578, D17S960 and Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2Department of Nephrology, University Medical Cen- D17S1353 that are tightly linked to the LCA1 locus thus indicating that the ter,; Ljubljana, Slovenia; 3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical phenotype in our family is also linked to the same locus. All affected sub- Center,; Ljubljana, Slovenia jects shared two identical haplotypes for these markers while healthy indi- maja.slajpah@mf.uni-lj.si viduals inherited either two normal chromosomes or one of the two affect- Alport syndrome (AS) is an important hereditary disorder characterized by ed haplotypes. At least 4 different mutations in the Retinal Guanylyl nephritis, sometimes accompanied by impairment or loss of vision and Cyclase (retGC or GUCY2D) have been reported in different LCA1-linked hearing. Alport syndrome can be caused by mutations in COL4A5, one of families. This gene is 1,103 amino acids long and encodes for an extra- the six type IV collagen genes. The most common form of the Alport syn- cellular, transmembrane and a cytoplasmic domain. Mutation screening of drome is an X-linked dominant trait that has been associated with the gene GUCY2D is currently in progress. of the alpha5 chain of type IV collagen (COL4A5). More than 300 different mutations have been identified in COL4A5 gene and they appear random- P1591. Two novel mutations of the TSH b subunit gene in ly along the whole gene. We report the first systematic mutation screening Greek patients with low TSH hypothyroidism. of all 51 exons with boundary intronic sequences of COL4A5 gene by sin- A. Sertedaki1, A. Papadimitriou2, A. Voutetakis1, M. Dracopoulou1, C. gle stranded conformation analysis (SSCA) after amplification of each Dacou-Voutetakis1 exon by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method in forty-two patients 1ADepartment of Paediatrics, Athens University; Athens, Greece; 2Depart- from 16 randomly collected AS suspected families in slovenian population. ment of Paediatrics, Penteli Childrens Hospital; Athens, Greece The nucleotide sequence of all PCR products revealed by the abnormal aserted@cc.uoa.gr mobility shift on PCR-SSCA was determined by the direct sequencing Isolated CH caused by low TSH synthesis is rarely reported. To date, five method using dsDNA cycle sequencing system (Perkin Elmer). PCR- different mutations of the TSH  subunit gene have been identified world- SSCAof the COL4A5 gene of eight unrelated Alport families showed the wide. The G29R mutation in the CAGYC region of exon 2 of the gene was presence of seven different mutations. Seven different mutations were identified in three different Japanese families. The C105T mutation was identified in 8 families by cycle sequencing. Six of them are to the best of identified in two related Brazilian and two unrelated German families, as our knowledge new; G669R (GGT>CGT), G325R (GGA>CGA), R266X well as in one sporadic case from Belgium. Although this mutation appears (CGA>TGA), G811R (GGA>AGA), G319D (GGT>GAT) and 1234+17 T to be common in western populations, has not so far been detected in any del. Intronic mutation 1234+17 Tdel most likely influences the splicing of Greek patient with low TSH hypothyroidism. In our population we have mRNA. As previously described (5) mutation G624D(GGT>GAT) has been identified three different mutations. The first mutation, a G to Ttransversion identified in two families. at nucleotide 94 in exon 2 changing the codon for the 11th aminoacid from glycine to a premature stop codon resulting in a truncated protein, was pre- P1589.Large family with MODYdiabetes and a novel mutation viously reported. Thus far three different Greek families with CH have been in HNF-4a identified carrying this mutation. Two novel mutations were recently identi- C. T. Monney1, P. Cousin1, J. Ruiz2, C. Bonny1, D. F. Schorderet1 fied in exon 3 of the TSH  subunit gene in two siblings and in one spo- 1Division of Medical Genetics; Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Division of radic case. The two siblings were diagnosed at 3 weeks. They both carry Endocrinology; Lausanne, Switzerland a previously undescribed homozygous mutation in exon 3 of the TSH  Carole.Monney@chuv.hospvd.ch subunit gene, namely a C to Ttransition, resulting in a premature stop at Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subtype of non-insulin- codon 49, leading to the formation of a truncated protein. More than half of dependent diabetes characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance and the mature peptide (aminoacids 50 to 118), including the bL3 loop, most early age of onset. Several genes are known to or supposed to induce part of the bsheet, the seat belt and the carboxyl-terminal are absent. It can MODY ; HNF-4a/MODY1, glucokinase/MODY2, HNF-1a/MODY3, therefore be postulated that since functionally important residues for the IPF1/MODY4, TCF2/MODY5, IB1, IB2 and NeuroD genes. We studied a TSH heterodimer formation are missing, no TSH is secreted. The two sib- Swiss family with 12 non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients over 3 gener- lings had different hormonal and clinical profile. The reason for this differ- ations. The average age of diagnosis was 36  15 years and the average ential effect of an identical mutation is not apparent. The parents (both het- BMI 25  3 kg/m2. In addition, 1 individual had an abnormal oral glucose erozygous for the same mutation) denied consaguinity. Nevertheless, they tolerance test and 2 had gestational diabetes only. All candidate genes but both originate from a small village. The second mutation is a Tto C transi- HNF-4a were excluded by linkage analysis, using 2 to 4 flanking markers. tion resulting in a change at codon 85 from cysteine to arginine. The cys- Direct sequencing of the 14 exons of HNF-4a in 3 patients revealed the teine residues of all glycoproteins are highly conserved, it is therefore missense mutation gtc to atc in exon 4, resulting in V121I. This mutation is speculated that this mutation results in conformational changes of the  located in the DNAbinding domain of HNF-4a, a strongly conserved region subunit rendering it incapable to form a functional heterodimer with the a across almost all species. This mutation cosegregates in all the MODY subunit. The rarity of reports on defects of the TSH  subunit gene is unex- affected patients and was never observed in 100 control chromosomes. plained. Is it really a rare genetic defect or does it escape detection? As Identification of this missense mutation allowed for the presymptomatic expected, this form of CH is not detected by neonatal screening using TSH diagnosis in the young generation. This should improve the medical follow- methodology. up of the predisposed individuals. P1592. Molecular and functional analysis of human L1CAM P1590. Clinical and Molecular Study of an Iranian Kindred missense mutations with Leber Congenital Amaurosis U. Finckh, P. Michelson, C. Hartwig, A. Veske M. Karimi-Nejad1, T. Rezaie2, M. Meshkat3, S. Sohbati1, R. Karimi-Nejad1, Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Eppendorf, University H. Najmabadi1, M. Sarfarazi2 Hamburg; Hamburg, Germany 1Karimi-Nejad Pathology & Genetics Center; Tehran, Islamic Republic of finckh@uke.uni-hamburg.de Iran; 2Molecular Ophthalmic Genetics Laboratory, University of Connecti- Mutations in L1CAM lead to X-linked disorders including the symptoms cut Health Center; Farmington, CT United States; 3Department of Oph- hydrocephalus, adducted thumbs, agenesis or hypoplasia of corpus callo- thalmology, University of Medical Sciences; Kerman, Islamic Republic of sum, spastic paraplegia and mental retardation (L1-disease). Approxi- Iran mately 35% of the more than 140 known pathogenic mutations in L1CAM mhkarimi@mavara.com are missense mutations and show some variability in phenotype expres- Alarge Iranian family with 102 members (8 deceased) from the Lore Tribe sion which may depend on type and site of the mutation. Rare coding vari- of Sirjan, Kerman was identified and studied. This kindred composed of 25 ants of unknown biological significance are also known. We established an affected subjects in 16 nuclear families that spans over 11 interconnecting experimental model for quantitative and qualitative analysis of the effects generations. Clinical examination of 12 subjects aged between 8-46 years of L1CAMmissense mutations by transfecting NIH-3T3 cells either with full revealed initial presentation of congenital blindness as early as 1-3 months length L1 encoding wild type (wt) or mutant constructs. Stable expression of life. Infantile nystagmus, keratoconus, leukoma and cataracts developed on the cytoplasmic membrane was confirmed by immunocytochemistry later in life. Clinical presentation in this kindred is compatible with the diag- and FACS analysis. Western blot analysis revealed bands corresponding nosis of Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA). DNAextracted from 41 sub- to fully processed L1 protein from the wt construct and in addition or pre- jects (including 12 affected) and cDNAsynthesized for 6 affected and nor- dominantly aberrant bands in the mutants. Transfected cells were used as414 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders feeder cells for primary neurons prepared from cerebellum of P5 mice. All Prague, Czech Republic mutations introduced so far were associated with a significant reduction of jstek@lf1.cuni.cz neurite outgrowth measured after 23 hrs of co-culturing. The common phe- Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most com- notypic outcome (reduced neurite outgrowth) seems to be a combined mon hereditary renal disease. The disease is caused by mutations of effect of (1) amount of expression of L1 on feeder cell surface, (2) altered PKD1 and PKD2 genes, though in several ADPKD families the PKD1 L1 protein glycosylation or processing, and (3) altered L1neurite-L1feeder and/or PKD2 linkage was not found. DNApresymptomatic diagnosis is per- homophilic interaction due to structural alterations in mutated L1. We con- formed in our referential laboratory, using highly polymorphic microsatellite clude that measurement and statistical analysis of neurite outgrowth in markers for DNAlinkage analysis. According to European recommenda- vitro may be a very sensitive and non-invasive tool in order to predict path- tions CW2 (D16S663), 16AC2.5 (D16S291), CW3D (16S664) and KG8 are ogenic effects of L1CAMmissense mutations. [Supported by DFG, SFB used for linkage to PKD1 gene and D4S231, D4S414, D4S1534 and 444, C3]; correspondence; finckh@uke.uni-hamburg.de D4S1563 for linkage to PKD2 gene. Presymptomatic DNAdiagnosis was performed in 160 unrelated ADPKD families. Linkage analysis gave strong P1593.Functional studies on AIRE protein and gene defective evidence in favor of linkage to PKD1 in 60 (38%) families and linkage to in a monogenic autoimmune disease PKD2 in 8 (5%) families. In 92 (58%) families mutation in either tested T. Meriluoto1, P. Eskelin1, M. Halonen1, J. Korhonen1, M. Kolmer1, H. Kan- genes could not be excluded by linkage analysis. The direct detection of gas1, J. Palvimo2, M. Pelto-Huikko3, L. Peltonen1, I. Ulmanen1 PKD2 mutation is performed in proved PKD2 families using heteroduplex 1National Public Health Institute; Helsinki, Finland; 2University of Helsinki; analysis (HA) and sequencing. Five mutations were identified; four of them Helsinki, Finland; 3University of Tampere; Tampere, Finland have been novel; 1) missense mutation in exon 4, 964 C>T(R320W) 2) Tanja.Meriluoto@ktl.fi frameshift mutation in exon 6, 1339-1345 ins gCAACAg 3) frameshift Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy - candidiasis - ectodermal dystrophy mutation in exon 10, 2046 - 2053 del TACT4) missense mutation in exon [APECED; OMIM 240300] is a monogenic autoimmune disease with auto- 13,sub 2398 A>C (M800L). Establishment of localisation and type of muta- somal recessive inheritance and no association with the HLAregion. We tions and their genotype -phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will have cloned the defective gene AIRE and identified 20 mutations in improve DNAdiagnosis and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of APECED patients. Currently we are searching for patient mutations in the ADPKD patients. promoter region of AIRE gene. In human and mouse tissues AIRE protein Supported by the grant projects IGAMZ ?R NE/5996-3 and GAUK 203 displays mostly in nuclei, while cytoplasmic and nuclear localization can be 469 observed in transfected tissue culture cells. Further, we aim to study the distribution of AIRE in differentiated neurons. In human AIRE protein is P1596. Reciprocal translocation t(4;12)(q26;p12) in a patient expressed in immunologically relevant tissues. Our results indicate that with Andersen syndrome (periodic paralysis and long QT syn- mouse Aire protein is expressed in specific thymal cells as well as in sev- drome) eral other immunological and nonimmunological tissues. We have also S. Pereira1, D. Depetris1, A. Massacrier1, M. Matti1, N. Levy1, P. Cau1, J. shown that AIRE forms homodimers through HSR domain and acts as a Pouget2, P. Szepetowski1 powerful transcriptional coactivator. These functions are defective in cer- 1INSERM U491; Marseille, France; 2CHU la Timone; Marseille, France tain patient mutations found in this domain. Our goal is to identify the pereira@medecine.univ-mrs.fr genes regulated by AIRE and to characterize the transcriptional regulation Alarge number of paroxysmal neuromuscular and cardiac disorders are of the AIRE gene expression. Interestingly, we have identified putative now known to be channelopathies. Of particular interest are the syndromes transcription factors binding to the Aire promoter. in which cardiac and neuromuscular symptoms concur, as they represent powerful tools to identify common pathways involved in cardiac and neu- P1594.Identification of Two Novel Missense Mutations in the romuscular functioning. Andersen syndrome is such a condition in which CSX Gene encoding a Cardiac Specific Transcription Factor cardiac arrythmias (long QT) and periodic paralysis are associated. Spo- I. Gutierrez1, T. Sluysmans2, K. Devriendt3, M. Vikkula1 radic as well as familial cases have been reported but no gene has been 1Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology; Brussels, Belgium; 2Uni- identified so far. Several long QTsyndromes (LQT) have been defined on versit catholique de Louvain; Brussels, Belgium; 3Katholieke Universiteit a genetic basis. To date, six long QTgenes have been localized; five of Leuven; Leuven, Belgium them (LQT1-3, 5-6) are now identified and encode potassium or sodium vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be channels. The LQT4 gene has been mapped to chromosome 4q25-q27 but Non-syndromic cardiac septation defects are common, yet the responsible the critical region extends over 18 cM and the gene remains unknown. One genetic changes remain uncharacterised. However mutations in the patient with Andersen syndrome was detected. Cytogenetic studies CSX/Nkx2-5 gene encoding a cardiac specific homeobox transcription fac- revealed the existence of a de novo reciprocal translocation tor have been reported to cause atrial septal defects (ASD) associated with t(4;12)(q26;p12). Co-localization of the breakpoint at 4q26 with the critical atrioventricular (AV) conduction block. The CSX gene is expressed in car- area defined for LQT4 syndrome at 4q25-q27 strongly suggested that both diac muscle during embryonic, fetal and adult life, and its Drosophila syndromes could be caused by different alterations of the same gene. The ortholog tinman, is essential for the formation of the dorsal vessel. Target- translocation breakpoint thus represented a very powerful tool to identify ed homozygous disruption of Nkx2-5 in mice causes lethality due to failure the disease gene. FISH experiments with YACs and PACs showed that the of heart looping. In man, eleven mutations in the CSX gene have been translocation breakpoint at 4q26 lies in a 120-kb area entirely comprised described in individuals with variable cardiac phenotypes. The majority has within the LQT4 critical region. Work is in progress in order to identify junc- ASD and/or atrioventricular conduction defects. In addition, ventricular tion fragments from cosmid clones encompassing the breakpoint. Molecu- septal defects (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), subvalvular aortic stenosis, lar cloning of the breakpoint should lead to identification of a gene for both ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary atresia, mitral valve abnormalities and the Andersen syndrome and the LQT4 syndrome. Identification of this Ebsteins anomaly are observed. Along our studies on non-syndromic gene will be an important step towards the understanding of both periodic familial cardiopathies, we have collected two families with some members paralysis and long QTsyndromes. As the gene is likely to contribute the presenting ASD and AV-block. In both families we identified a novel CSX QT-interval variability between normal individuals, it could also play a mutation in the homeodomain Variable expressivity in the phenotype was major role in normal cardiac functioning. Once the gene is identified, large- observed in one of the families. In the first generation, pacemakers have scale genetic studies could be performed to test the involvement of the been implanted, in the second, two unaffected carriers and two members gene in various cardiac arrythmias. Moreover, functional studies and the with ASD secundum (ASDII) and TOF were identified. Finally, in the third establishment of cellular and animal models will represent powerful tools generation, members with ASDII, VSD, pulmonary stenosis, atrioventricu- to test various pharmacological and genetic therapeutic approaches, as lar septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) were observed. Thus well as to better understand normal cardiac and muscular functioning. the phenotypes caused by CSX mutations vary from non-expression, severe arrhythmia, to TOF and PDA. Importantly, mutation carriers do not P1597.Alstrom syndrome; report of a family and exclusion of necessarily present AV-block at young age. (vikkula@bchm.ucl.ac.be) rab-1 and rhotekin as candidate genes L. Titomanlio1, M. Sperandeo2,1, D. De Brasi1, M. Sibilio1, A. Pepe1, G. P1595. Molecular genetic analysis of autosomal dominant Andria1, G. Sebastio1 polycystic kidney disease in Czech families 1Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University; Naples, Italy; 2Telethon J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova2, M. Kohoutova2, J. Zidovska1, J. Kapras2, M. Foundation; Rome, Italy Merta2 ltitomanlio@libero.it 1General Teaching Hospital of 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University; Main features of Alstrom syndrome (MIM 203800; AS) include pigmentary Prague, Czech Republic; 21st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University; retinal dystrophy, obesity, non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus andPosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 415 sensorineural hearing loss. The AS locus was assigned to a 14.9 cM region genetic instability, since the expansion size was variable (mean 55.3, on 2p13-p14 by linkage analysis, further restricted to a 6.1-cM interval range 48 to 63), despite a probable single common ancestor. between markers D2S327 and D2S286. We observed two AS brothers, born to non-consanguineous, healthy parents. Pregnancy and delivery P1600.Linkage of benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC) were uneventful in both cases. Patient 1 developed photophobia and bilat- to chromosome 16p12-q12 suggests allelism to the ICCAsyn- eral nystagmus at the age of 2 months. From the age of 3 months he suf- drome fers from bronchial asthma poorly responsive to conventional therapy. At P. Szepetowski1, R. Caraballo2, S. Pavek3, A. Lemainque3, M. Gastaldi1, the age of 3 years a diffuse pigmentary retinopathy was evident in both B. Echenne4, J. Motte5, P. Genton6, R. Cersosimo2, V. Humbertclaude4, N. eyes. Visual Evoked Potentials (VEPs) showed a conductive delay. The Fejerman2, A. P. Monaco7, J. Rochette8, M. G. Lathrop3 electroretinogram (ERG) was strongly altered. Patient 2 presented with 1INSERM U491; Marseille, France; 2Pediatric Hospital Juan Garrahan; photophobia, bilateral nystagmus and dilated cardiomyopathy at the age of Buenos Aires, Argentina; 3Centre National de Gnotypage; Evry, France; 2 years. Adiffuse pigmentary retinopathy was found at the ophtalmological 4Hopital Saint Eloi; Montpellier, France; 5American Memorial Hospital; examination. At present, both patients are obese. Neither alterations in glu- Reims, France; 6Hopital Henri Gastaud; Marseille, France; 7Wellcome cose metabolism nor hearing loss are present. Mitochondrial DNAanalysis Trust Centre; Oxford, United Kingdom; 8Gntique Mdicale; Amiens, for common mutations underlying NARPand Lebers hereditary optic neu- France ropathy was negative. We tested two genes, both located in the AS critical szepetow@medecine.univ-mrs.fr region, Rab-1 and rhotekin, respectively, which appear good candidates for Benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC) is an autosomal dominant AS on the basis of their physiological functions. By direct sequencing of the epileptic disorder characterized by convulsions with onset at age 3-12 coding region of Rab-1 and of the coding region and exon-intron junctions months and a favorable outcome. BFIC had been linked to chromosome of rhotekin, no mutations were found except for one polymorphic change 19q, while the ICCAsyndrome, associating BFIC with paroxysmal dyski- in Rab-1 gene. This change is located downstream the termination codon nesias, had been linked to chromosome 16p12-q12 in several families of the gene. from France. Association of BFIC with paroxysmal dyskinesias seems quite frequent, as many additional families of diverse ethnic background P1598.Homologues of the yeast SNM1 (PSO2) gene and DNA with similar syndrome, have been linked to the chromosome 16 ICCA crosslink sensitivity in mammalian cells region. Moreover, one large pedigree with paroxysmal kinesigenic dyski- I. Demuth, M. Digweed nesias only, has also been linked to the same genomic area. This raised Humboldt-Universitt, Charit, Campus Virchow, Institut fr Human- the possibility that families with pure BFIC could be linked to chromosome genetik; Berlin, Germany 16 as well. Seven families with BFIC inherited as an autosomal dominant ilja.demuth@charite.de trait were collected in Argentina and France. Genotyping was performed DNAinterstrand crosslinks are critical lesions for the mammalian cell since with markers at chromosome 19q and 16p12-q12. While chromosome 19q they affect both strands and block both transcription and replication; their could be excluded, evidence for linkage in the ICCAregion was found, with repair is essential for survival. Although the involvement of nucleotide exci- a maximum two-point LOD score at 3.32 for markers D16S3131 and SPN. sion repair (NER) proteins has been implicated, little is known about the This result definitely proves that human chromosome 16p12-q12 is a major mechanisms of crosslink repair in human cells. One approach to under- genetic locus underlying BFIC and/or paroxysmal dyskinesias in affected standing this cellular process is the identification of crosslink repair genes patients and families. The peculiar phenotype displayed by one homozy- by exploiting mutant mammalian cells with particular sensitivity towards gous patient suggests that the great intra-familial variability of the ICCA agents which cause DNAcrosslinks such as Mitomycin C and photoacti- syndrome could be sustained by modifying genetic factors. vated psoralens. Cells from patients with the autosomal recessive disorder Fanconi anaemia (FA) are particularly sensitive to these agents and are P1601.Nuclear Membrane Delamination With Bleb Formation presumed to have defects in the crosslink repair pathway. Similarly, a In Dilated Cardiomyopathy With Atrio-ventricular Block range of hamster cells is available selected for crosslink sensitivity. These Caused By Novel Lamin A/c Gene Mutations. cells can be assigned to complementation groups on the basis of cell E. Arbustini1, M. Grasso1, A. Pilotto1, M. Diegoli2, M. Concardi1, C. Cam- fusion and thus define separate genes in the crosslink repair pathway. Dis- pana3, A. Negri1, A. Repetto3, C. Serio3, E. Porcu1, L. Tavazzi3 ruption of the yeast gene SNM1 (PSO2) results in hypersensitivity towards 1Cardiovascular Pathology, Molecular Diagnostic and Research Trans- DNA crosslinking agents and homologues of this gene are presumably plantation Laboratories, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo; Pavia, Italy; involved in crosslink repair in mammalian cells too. We have examined the 2Department of Pathology, University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 3Cardiology ability of the yeast SNM1 gene to complement the defect in 4 crosslink Division, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo; Pavia, Italy sensitive hamster cell lines and in human FA-D2 cells in terms of survival e.arbustini@smatteo.pv.it and chromosome damage. One hamster cell mutant was partially but sig- Lamin A/C (LMNA) gene defects have been recently reported as a major nificantly corrected after gene transfer, suggesting that the hamster SNM1 cause of the dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) associated with conduction gene is mutated in these cells. Three human SNM1 homologues have system disease. To assess whether the DCM with conduction system dis- been identified and are being examined for complementation of these ease is associated with LMNAgene defects, we screened the 12 exon of cells. Mutation analysis in FAcells from complementation groups B and D1 the gene in 5 familial DCMs with atrio-ventricular (A-V) block. We identified has so far excluded the involvement of human SNM1 in this disorder. 5 novel LMNAmutations in the five DCM families, and first documented the corresponding ultrastructural morphologic defect in the nuclear membrane P1599. Founder effect in Unverricht-Lundborg disease in La of the cardiac myocytes. Three mutations are missense; A423G in the Reunion island exon 1 of the cDNA(K97E), C702Tin the exon 3 (R190W) and G1083Ain B. MOULARD1, F. Darcel2, C. Buresi1, A. Roubertie3, A. Biraben4, A. the exon 6 (E327K). One is a non-sense mutation G465Tof the cDNA, Malafosse1 E111X, predicting a truncated protein of 110 aminoacids, and one is a 4 bp 1HUG; Chene-Bourg, Switzerland; 2CH St-Pierre; St-Pierre, Reunion; insertion duplicating CTGC at 2869 in the exon 9. In all probands and one 3CHU Montpellier; Montpellier, France; 4CHU Rennes; Rennes, France affected relative, the ultrastructural study of the endomyocardial biopies bruno.moulard@hcuge.ch showed structural defects of the nuclear membranes consisting of focal We present the genetic study of 11 patients affected by the Unverricht- delamination of the inner and outer membranes with bleb formation. These Lundborg disease (ULD) and 3 relatives with isolated seizures, extracted features were absent in 50 EMB from DCM patients without conduction from 8 families and originating from La Reunion island. Ten subjects har- system disease proven by molecular analysis as non-related with LMNA bour the typical ULD mutation, including one with isolated seizures, a gene defects. The ultrastructural changes of the nuclear membrane are homozygous expansion of a dodecamer repeat in the cystatin B (CSTB) specifically associated with LMNAdefects and, combined with the conduc- gene promoter beyond 40 repetitions. Clinically, those cases are very sim- tion system disease, constitute useful markers for successful identification ilar, with the typical photosensible myoclonus, associated with generalised of LMNAgene defects. tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), cerebellar involvement and mild mental deterioration. The mean age at onset is 9.6 years (range 5 to 21), with a P1602.An overview of a clinical and molecular study of holo- mean disease duration of 19.7 years (all patients are alive, range 4 to 39). prosencephaly We observed a founder effect, as the 10 patients with the homozygous V. David1, M. Blayau1, L. Lazaro2, T. Atti-Bittach3, L. Pasquier2, C. expansion present the same haplotype with homozygous alleles for 7 Dubourg1, B. Le Marec1, S. Odent2 markers spanning less than 1 cM of genomic DNA(D21S1890, D21S1885, 1Gntique Molculaire; Rennes, France; 2Gntique Mdicale; Rennes, D21S2040, D21S1259, D21S1912, PFKL, D21S171, from centromere to France; 3Dpartement de Gntique; Paris, France telomere), bounded by GT10 and D21S1446. We also confirmed the sylvie.odent@chu-rennes.fr416 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders Holoprosencephaly (HPE; 1/16.000 live births; 1/250 conceptuses) is a achondroplasia phenotype. These two patients demonstrate that exon 7 in common development defect affecting both the forebrain and the face. FGFR3 is a strong candidate for mutational analysis in individuals with the Clinical expressivity is variable, ranging from a single cerebral ventricule clinical diagnosis of achondroplasia that have been shown to have a nor- and cyclopia to clinically unaffected obligated carriers in familial HPE. The mal FGFR3 transmembrane domain. disease is genetically heterogeneous but additional environmental agents also contribute to the aetiology of HPE. This study includes 59 unrelated P1605.Mutations in the TWIST gene without phenotypic sig- HPE cases (19 familial and 40 clinically sporadic cases). For inclusion in nificance? the study, the proband must have had a typical documented HPE (alobar, W. Kress1, B. Halliger-Keller1, G. Lieb2, H. Collmann3 semilobar or lobar) or a typical face (proboscis, premaxillary agenesis and 1Institute of Human Genetics; Wuerzburg, Germany; 2Childrens Hospital; absence of nose) and normal chromosomes. We included also in the Wuerzburg, Germany; 3Department of Paediatric Neurosurgery; molecular study 9 polymalformed cases and 21 atypical cases. We provide Wuerzburg, Germany clinical data and report 13 novel heterozygous mutations, 7 in Sonic wkress@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de hedgehog (SHH), 4 in ZIC2, and 2 in SIX3. One SHH mutation was asso- In many cases of a classical Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (acrocephalosyn- ciated with colobomatous microphtalmia, another with only a single upper dactyly type III; MIM #101400) the TWISTgene encoding a basic helix- incisor and nasal pyriform aperture stenosis. One SIX3 mutation was asso- loop-helix transcription factor is the mutational target. In addition to the ciated with atelencephaly. We found 6 mutations in familial cases whereas craniofacial features of this autosomal dominant syndrome, there are only 7 mutations were identified in apparently sporadic cases. SHH muta- (often subtle) limb anormalities like cutaneous syndactyly of hands and tions were all maternally inherited whereas the ZIC2 and SIX3 mutations feet, clinodactyly and/or broad halluces with valgus deviation. World-wide were either paternally or maternally inherited. Patients will be now tested and in our own cohort of more than 30 patients many private TWISTmuta- for TGIF. This study confirms the extremely variable phenotypes in HPE tions were found. About 66% were stop, frameshift or large deletion muta- families and the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. tions. Haploinsufficiency appears to be be the pathogenic mechanism involved. In a group of patients with no clear diagnosis, we found three P1603. Molecular Mechanism Accounting For Syndromic probands not giving satisfaction to the clinical criteria but harbouring a Combined Pituitary Hormone Deficiency In APatient Carrying TWISTsequence variation. There was the mother of a boy with trigono- ALhx3 Gene Defect cephaly, being not affected herself, who carried an in-frame deletion M. Sobrier1, I. Netchine1, H. Krude2, A. Grters2, M. Goossens1, S. Amse- 261del21; her son with trigonocephaly do not have the mutation. In a boy lem1 with an isolated sagittal craniosynostosis a Ser201Tyr missense mutation 1U468 INSERM; CRETEIL, France; 2Charit hospital; Berlin, Germany was detected; the unaffected father carried the same mutation. Both marie-laure sobrier@im3.inserm.fr sequence variants were not found in more than three hundred control In humans, combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) has been chromosomes. We conclude that there are rare silent sequence variations linked with rare abnormalities in genes encoding pituitary-specific tran- in the TWSTgene defining functional less important domains. scription factors. Very recently, we have described the first molecular defects of LHX3, a gene encoding a member of the LIM-homeodomain P1606. Phenotype analysis of monozygotic twins with Holt- proteins, the murine counterpart of which having been shown to be neces- Oram syndrome sary for anterior pituitary development. LHX3 consists of seven exons, with T. Huang1, J. G. Seidman2, C. E. Seidman3 exons 2, 3, and 4 and 5 encoding the LIM1, LIM2 and homeo domains, 1Childrens Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States; 2Howard Hughes Medical respectively. One of the patients, born to a consanguineous union, dis- Institute, Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA United States; 3Howard played a complete deficit in all but one (adrenocorticotropin) anterior pitu- Hughes Medical Institute,Brigham and Womens Hospital, Harvard Medical itary hormones and a rigid cervical spine associated with a secondary School; Boston, MAUnited States enlargement of the anterior pituitary, as documented by MRI. Screening of thuang@rascal.med.harvard.edu LHX3 had revealed a homozygous 23-bp deletion involving the last 3 ABSTRACT; Holt-Oram syndrome is characterized by congenital cardiac bases of exon 3 and the adjacent splice-donor site. To evaluate the func- defects and upper limb anomalies. Mutations of the TBX5 gene cause this tional consequences of this small deletion we have studied expression condition. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability is well documented, but etiol- LHX3 transcripts of the mutated allele by means of in vitro transcription. ogy is clear. Here, we report on a set of monozygotic (MZ) twins with Holt This analysis demonstrated the shift of the normal LHX3 splicing pathway Oram syndrome. Monozygosity was confirmed by DNA microsatellite towards an exon-3 deleted transcript. If translated, the exon skipping event analysis. Both twins carried a one-basepair de novo deletion mutation in would result in a frameshift leading to a premature stop codon. The mutant TBX5, which leads to a frameshift and predicts a premature termination of LHX3 protein would lack both the LIM2 and the homeo domains. In vitro TBX5 protein. The twins shared concordant and complex cardiac defects expression of the recombinant mutant protein in CHO cells showed that it including secundum ASD, a large membranous VSD, multiple muscular was unable to transactivate the bTSH promoter. These functional assays, defects, pulmonic narrowing and mild tricuspid regurgitation. However, which are consistent with loss of function of the mutant LHX3 protein, raise their limb defects are discordant. Skeletal X-rays show one twin has the question of the mechanism underlying the secondary occurrence of the absence of thumbs bilaterally, hypoplastic radial bones and hooked clavi- enlarged anterior pituitary documented in the patient. cles and a bifid rib. The other twin has similar anomalies on her right, but a thumb is present on the left, though distal metacarpal and phalanx are P1604. A novel missense FGFR3 mutation associated with hypoplastic. This genotype-phenotype disparity suggests that the genetic achondroplasia background might play a important role in the intrafamilial cardiac pheno- M. Friez, A. Toburen, K. Clarkson, J. Longshore typic variability observed in Holt-Oram syndrome. Factors other than Greenwood Genetic Center; Greenwood, SC United States genetic background such as blood supply or the position of fetus in uterus friez@ggc.org may also contribute to limb anomalies. Here we propose a monoallelic Greater than 99% of individuals clinically diagnosed with achondroplasia expression model to explain the discordance. have been shown to have the same amino acid substitution (G380R) in the transmembrane region of the FGFR3 gene. We present a newborn male P1607.Holt-Oram syndrome; Report of a new mutation in the with physical and radiographic studies consistent with achondroplasia. The TBX5-Gene in 2 German families patient experienced severe episodes of apnea in the perinatal period that C. Gruenauer-Kloevekorn, U. G. Froster continued until 10 months of age. Standard diagnostic techniques did not Institut fr Humangenetik, Leipzig University; Leipzig, Germany detect either reported point mutation responsible for causing the G380R patrick.gruenauerkloevekorn@planet-interkom.de substitution. Fluorescent sequencing of exon 10 encompassing the trans- Introduction; In Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS), a developmental defect membrane region of FGFR3 failed to show any variations from normal. involving upper limb malformalities and cardiac defects, mutations in the Additional regions known to have point mutations in other FGFR3 related TBX5 gene were demonstrated as the underlying molecular defect. We skeletal dysplasias were also analyzed. Analysis demonstrated a novel A report on two unrelated families with HOS presenting with the same stop to Ttransversion at nucleotide 835 in exon 7 of the FGFR3 gene in this mutation in exon 5 of the TBX5 gene wich had not been reported before. patient. This missense mutation substitutes a cysteine for serine at amino Case reports; Three affected and all available unaffected family members acid 279 (S279C) in the extracellular region of the FGFR3 protein. Two of each family were examined. Methods; Primers for amplification and for other mutations (R248C and S249C) that create cysteine residues in this direct sequencing of exon 2 to exon 9 of the TBX5 gene were designed region have been previously associated with cases of Thanatophoric dys- and exons of genomic DNAfrom affected and unaffected family members plasia type I. To date, only one other mutation (Y278C) affecting the extra- were analysed by direct sequencing. To confirm the results PCR products cellular domain of FGFR3 has been reported to be associated with an were restriction digested with CSP6I. Results; In all affected family mem-Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 417 bers a heterozygous single base pair substitution (408C->A) was detected Alagille syndrome (AGS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized converting a tyrosine codon to a stop codon(Tyr136stop).This mutation is by developmental abnormalities of liver, heart, eyes, vertebrae and facial predicted to result in a premature termination of the TBX5 protein. None of features. The minimal estimated frequency is 1; 70 000 live births. AGS 100 unaffected DNAsamples had the 408C->Achange in the TBX5 gene. phenotype is caused by mutations of the JAG1 gene located on chromo- Discussion; With respect to earlier reported truncation mutations in TBX5 some 20p12. The JAG1 gene spans 36 kb and consists of 26 exons, the identified stop mutation presumably has led to a truncated protein encoding a 5,5 kb transcript. The product of the gene is a ligand in the unable to bind and activate target DNA. The spectrum of phenotypes Notch signaling pathway. The purpose of our study was to identify JAG1 reported in patients with stop mutations ranges wide with respect to limb gene mutations in the next group of Polish patients with AGS. We are cur- anomalies as well as cardiac malformalities. In all affected patients report- rently studying seven patients. We have detected five DNA-alternations by ed here, however the cardiac malformation is an ASD while upper limb agarose electrophoresis, SSCP and HA analyses. DNA sequencing malformalities ranged wide. The reported families might help to further revealed presence of two novel mutations in the JAG1 gene. One of them define genotype-phenotype correlation in HOS. was a 7 nucleotide deletion in exon 2 (codons 58 - 60). The other mutation was a substitution G to Ain exon 4 (Cys187Tyr). In both cases identified P1608. Y440X, a SOX9 mutational hotspot in campomelic mutations appeared de novo. Besides, a transversion C to G in exon 22 dysplasia resulting in an amino acid substitution (Pro871Arg), known polymorphism, G. Scherer1, C. Zeschnigk1, E. Levy-Lahad2, J. Paterson3, R. Santos4, E. was identified in a proband and his mother . The study was supported by Seemanov5, N. Tommerup6 KBN - CMHI Project No. S73/99. 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Freiburg, Germany; 2Shaare Zedek Medical Center; Jerusalem, Israel; 3Kennedy-Galton Cen- P1611. JAGGED1 RNAanalysis in patients with Alagille syn- tre; Harrow, United Kingdom; 4Istituto de Gentica Mdica; Porto, Portugal; drome 5Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics; Prag, Czech Republic; 6IMBG, C. Crosnier1, C. Driancourt1, N. Raynaud1, M. Hadchouel2, M. Meunier- Panum Institute; Copenhagen, Denmark Rotival1 scherer@humangenetik.ukl.uni-freiburg.de 1INSERM U347; Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France; 2INSERM U347 and Service Campomelic dysplasia (CD), a skeletal malformation syndrome with XY Hepatologie Pediatrique; Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France sex reversal, usually leads to death in the neonatal period (MIM 114290). crosnier@infobiogen.fr CD is caused by heterozygous de novo mutations in and around the devel- Mutations in the JAGGED1 gene, encoding a ligand of the NOTCH recep- opmental regulatory gene SOX9 that encodes a transcription factor of 509 tors, are responsible for Alagille syndrome (AGS), a polymalformative dis- amino acids with a central DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal transac- order. SSCPand heteroduplex analysis have identified JAGGED1 muta- tivation domain. Some 29 missense, nonsense, frameshift and splice tions in 65% of patients with AGS. More than 200 such mutations have mutations in SOX9 have been described that scatter over the entire cod- been described. We used RT-PCR and sequencing to study JAGGED1 ing region. No significant mutational hotspot has emerged but for the non- transcripts in lymphoblastoid cell lines from 9 patients with AGS without sense mutation Y440X present in three independent cases. We have iden- known mutations. Mutations were identified in 3 of them, resulting in 2 non- tified the Y440X mutation in 5 out of 38 additional, unpublished, CD cases sense mutations and a deletion at an exon-intron boundary. Thus, analysis with proven SOX9 mutations. This mutation thus accounts for about 10% of JAGGED1 transcripts can identify mutations not detected by SSCP. For of SOX9 coding region mutations in CD. The TAC tyrosine codon at posi- 5 other patients, complete sequencing of the RT-products revealed no tion 440 is mutated to either TAG (5 cases) or TAA(3 cases), resulting in mutation, but the presence of heterozygous polymorphisms suggest that loss of an RsaI site allowing for simple diagnosis. As previously shown, the both alleles were equally transcribed. For 2 patients with previously identi- truncated SOX9 protein resulting from the Y440X mutation retains some fied splice mutations, transcript analysis revealed the effects of these transactivation potential, and may be regarded as a milder mutant allele, mutations at the RNAlevel; mutations in the donor sites of introns 21 and as 5 of the 8 patients survived the neonatal period. 25 are responsible for deletion of exons 20 and 24, respectively. These results demonstrate that RNAanalysis is a very useful tool for identifying P1609. Distinct Mutations in the Receptor Tyrosine Kinase mutations which SSCPcannot. It is informative about the stability and the ROR2 Cause Brachydactyly Type B splicing of the transcripts. However, it cannot be used as a routine proce- G. Schwabe1, S. Tinschert2, C. Buschow1, P. Meinecke3, G. Wolff4, G. dure because lymphoblastoid cell lines are not available for every patient Gilessen-Kaesbach5, M. Oldridge6, A. O. M. Wilkie6, R. Kmec7, F. Majew- with AGS. crosnier@infobiogen.fr ski8, S. Mundlos2 1Max-Planck-Institute Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2Institute for P1612. Prevalence of MYBPC3 gene defects in hypertrophic Medical Genetics, Charite; Berlin, Germany; 3Altonaer Kinderkranken- cardiomyopathy. haus; Hamburg, Germany; 4Institute for Human Genetics; Freiburg, Ger- N. Banchieri1, A. Pilotto1, E. Porcu1, L. Scelsi2, F. Cecchi3, I. Olivotto3, D. many; 5Institute for Human Genetics; Essen, Germany; 6Institute of Mole- Vargiu3, A. Negri1, L. Tavazzi2, E. Arbustini1 cular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital; Oxford, United Kingdom; 1Cardiovascular Pathology, Molecular Diagnostic and Research Trans- 7Kinderklinik Universittsklinikum; Mannheim, Germany; 8Institute for plantation Laboratories, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo; Pavia, Italy; 2Car- Human Genetics; Dsseldorf, Germany diology Division, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo; Pavia, Italy; 3Cardiomy- schwabe@molgen.mpg.de opathy Center Careggi Hospital; Firenze, Italy Brachydactyly type B (BDB) is an autosomal dominant skeletal disorder, diagnostica.molecolare@smatteo.pv.it characterized by hypoplasia/aplasia of distal phalanges and nails. Recent- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an autosomal dominant disorder charac- ly heterozygous mutations of the orphan receptor tyrosine kinase ROR2 terized by hypertrophy of the left ventricular walls, particularly of the inter- within a distinct segment directly after the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain ventricular septum. The golden standard for the clinical diagnosis is have been shown to cause BDB. We report four novel and one previously echocardiography which measures septal and free wall thickness. HCM is described mutation in ROR2 (three frame-shifts, one splice mutation, one genetically heterogeneous and 9 disease genes have been identified to nonsense mutation) in six BDB families. The mutations predict truncation data. Of these genes, bMHC had been originally reported as that most fre- of the protein immediately before and after the TK. Patients affected with quently linked to the disease while defects of the MYBPC3 gene (chr distal mutations exhibit a more severe phenotype than those with proximal 11p11.2) seemed originally less frequent. We screened for mutations the mutations. Our analysis includes an individual with homozygous BDB with 35 exons of MYBPC3 using Polymerase Chain Reaction, Denaturing High a mutation before the TK showing extensive hypoplasia of phalanges, Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC, Transgenomic Wave Sys- metacarpals/metatarsals and anonychia. Moreover vertebral anomalies, tems TMHA) and automated sequencing. The aim of the study was to brachymelia of arms, and a ventricular septal defect are present in this assess the prevalence of MYBPC3 mutations in unrelated 85 probands patient and reminiscent of Robinow syndrome which is also caused by affected by echocardiographically proven HCM. We identified 10 different ROR2 mutations. The BDB phenotype and the localization of BDB muta- mutations in 20 of 85 patients (24%). Of these mutations, 8 are novel; tions suggest a mutational effect that cannot be explained by simple hap- Val158Met, Glu165Asp, Glu223Lys, Ser236Gly, Arg723Trp, Gly800Arg, loinsufficiency and is distinct from that in Robinow syndrome. donor splice site G-A (+1, 16638, intron 28), C insertion in exon 30 at 18348 nt position; while 2 had been previously reported in HCM families; P1610.Two novel mutations and one recurrent polymorphism Glu258Lys, Arg502Gln. MYBPC3 gene defects are associated with HCM in the JAG1 gene in Polish patients with Alagille syndrome. in one of 4 patients. The DHPLC method allows fast screening of large D. Jurkiewicz, E. Popowska, J. Rujner, M. Krajewska-Walasek patient populations. The Childrens Memorial Health Institute; Warsaw, Poland dorcik@czd.waw.pl418 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders P1613. DHPLC Analysis of the Three Major Genes (MYH7 e in the KCNE2 gene in 6 samples. This conformer was not found in the con- MYBPC3 AND TNNT2) Causing Familial Hypertrophic trol group. Cadiomyopathy S. Nasti1,2, E. Blair2, M. Oliveira2, A. Caleffi3, R. Bertorelli3, C. Autore4, P. P1615. Novel compound heterozygous mutations in the Spirito5, H. Watkins2, D. A. Coviello1 KvLQT1 gene associated with autosomal recessive Long QT 1Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, syndrome (Jervell Lange-Nielsen syndrome) Italy; 2Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford; M. Qi1,2, L. Ning1,2, A. Moss3, W. Zareba3, J. Robinson3, D. Ryan1 Oxford, United Kingdom; 3Servizio di Genetica Medica, Policlinico di Mod- 1Dept. of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester; ena, Modena; Modena, Italy; 4Dipartimento di Scienze Cardiovascolari e Rochester, NY United States; 2Center for Cardiovascular Research; Respiratorie, Universit la Sapienza Roma; Roma, Italy; 5Divisione di Car- Rochester, NYUnited States; 3Dept. of Medicine, University of Rochester; diologia, E.O. Ospedali Galliera; Genoa, Italy Rochester, NYUnited States coviello@unige.it Ming_Qi@urmc.rochester.edu Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (FHC) is a condition with a preva- The hereditary long QT(LQT) syndrome is a familial cardiac disorder that lence in the general population of about 1/500 and transmitted as autoso- causes syncope, seizures, and sudden death from ventricular arrhythmias, mal dominant trait. The disease is a primary abnormality of the myocardi- specifically torsade de pointes. Both autosomal dominants LQT(Romano- um and is morphologically characterised by a hypertrophied and non-dilat- Ward syndrome) and autosomal recessive LQT(Jervell and Lange-Nielsen ed left ventricle. The clinical course of the disease is heterogeneous; syndrome, JLNS) have been defined. Multiple heterozygous mutations in patients may remain asymptomatic, some develop severe symptoms of several ion channel genes (KvLQT1, HERG, SCN5A, KCNE1, and, heart failure, others die suddenly and unexpectedly often in the absence of KCNE2) have been shown to cause autosomal dominant LQT. Autosomal previous symptoms. Molecular investigations have identified FHC causing recessive LQT, which is associated with deafness, has been shown to mutations in nine cardiac contractile proteins; b-myosin heavy chain (b- occur with homozygous mutations in KvLQT1 or KCNE1 in JLNS families MHC), myosin binding protein-C (MyBP-C), cardiac troponin T(TNNT2), a- in which QTc prolongation was inherited as a dominant trait. Recently, an tropomyosin (a-TM), the two myosin light chain genes, cardiac troponin I Amish JLNS family has been reported with QTc prolongation inherited as (TNNI3), a-cardiac actin (ACTC) and cardiac Titin (TTN). Genotype-phe- an incomplete dominant and deafness inherited as a recessive trait. In vitro notype correlation is crucial to understand the natural history of the disease biochemical and functional studies indicate that the KvLQT1 C-terminus and to assess the potential impact of a genetic diagnosis on the identifica- functions as an assembly domain for KvLQT1 subunits. In this study, a tion and management of patients at high risk of sudden death. Due to the family with clinical evidence of JLNS was analyzed for mutations by use of large size of the major genes involved in the disease, our previous work single-strand conformation polymorphism and DNAsequencing analyses has been done mainly on part of one gene, the b-MHC. The recent avail- for mutation screening in KvLQT1 gene. Novel compound heterozygous ablility of the DHPLC technology has inproved the screening of mutations nonsense mutations R423X / Q435X in the C-terminus of KvLQT1 were that is now more efficient and faster. We analysed the coding sequence of identified in both affected dizygotic twins; both the parents and a sibling the three major genes (b-MHC, MyBP-C and TNNT2) in twelve unrelated each carried only one of the mutant alleles and were asymptomatic with Italian patients with FHC. PCR reactions were performed using specific modestly prolonged QTc intervals (.46, .50 and .45 s., respectively). These primers and conditions. Subsequently, DHPLC analysis (denaturing high- two nonsense mutations lead to premature termination C-terminus with pressure liquid chromatography) was carried out on the WaveTM DNA truncation of the postulated assembly domain. Our results show that novel Fragment Analysis System (Transgenomic, Cheshire, UK). DNAfragment compound heterozygous nonsense mutations in C-terminus of KvLQT1 elution profiles were displayed using the Transgenomic WAVEMAKER-TM cause JLNS. software. Chromatograms were analysed and amplified fragments show- ing alterations were confirmed and identified by automated bi-directional P1616. A deletion in plakoglobin is the cause of arrhythmo- sequencing (MWG Biotech, Germany). Sequence traces were analysed genic right ventricular cardiomyopathy with palmoplantar using the Chromas program. We found three already known mutations ; keratoderma and woolly hair (Naxos disease). Glu258Lys, Arg502Gln, Gln969Stop in myosin binding protein-C (MyBPC) S. Jeffery1, G. McKoy1, A. Crosby1, A. Tsatsopoulou2, A. Anastasakis3, M. and we also found four novel nucleotidic changes leading to four Norman1, A. Coonar1, N. Protonatarios2, W. J. McKenna1 aminoacid changes; Arg17Cys, Val158Met in myosin binding protein-C and 1St Georges Medical School; London, United Kingdom; 2Yannis Protono- Asp1208His, Ala100Thr in b-myosin heavy chain (b-MHC). We are check- tarios Medical Centre of Naxos; Naxos, Greece; 3University of Athens; ing the segregation of these variants in other affected members of the fam- Athens, Greece ilies to know if they are proteic polymorfisms or novel mutations. Our s.jeffery@sghms.ac.uk results confirms that DHPLC analysis is a highly sensitive and specific tool Naxos disease (ND) is an autosomal recessive form of arrhythmogenic for DNAsequence variant detection. right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) which co-segregates with palmo- plantar keratoderma and woolly hair. We mapped the locus for ND to P1614. Molecular Investigation Lqt-syndromes In Russian 17q21, where the gene for plakoglobin is located. Plakoglobin is a key Families. component of desmosomes and adherens junctions, including those in E. Zaklyazminskaya1, T. Kovalevskaya1, S. Chuprova2, A. Polyakov1, O. heart and skin. The human gene sequence was ascertained by RT-PCR, Evgrafov1 and analysis in affected individuals showed that all carried a homozygous 1Research Center for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation; 22- 2 base pair deletion. This mutation produces a frameshift which terminates Federal Child Center of Arrhythmias; Moscow, Russian Federation the protein prematurely, altering the last 5 amino acids in the 13th armadil- dnalab@online.ru lo repeat, and truncating the C-terminal domain by 56 residues. The find- Congenital long QTsyndrome (LQTS) is inherited cardiac disorder char- ing that desmosomal molecules are involved in the pathogenesis of Naxos acterized by a prolonged QTinterval and high risk of sudden death. At least disease suggests that defects in cell junction integrity may be important in five genes, when mutated, produce this phenotype; KCNQ1 (LQT1), ARVC. The recent discovery that recessive mutations in desmoplakin also HERG (LQT2), SCN5A(LQT3), KCNE1 (LQT5), KCNE2 (LQT6). Patients cause cardiomyopathy (Norgett et al, Hum Mol Genet 200;9;2761-2766) from 60 unrelated Russian families were available for DNAanalysis (122 supports this hypothesis. Since the cardiac phenotypes in recessive and patients with Romano-Ward syndrome and 3 patients with Jervell and dominant ARVC are very similar, it could be that other proteins in the cell lange-Nielsen syndrome). All the patients were observed in Federal Child adhesion complex present themselves as good candidates for the more Center of Arrhythmias, Moscow. Diagnoses were confirmed using criteria common form of the disorder. according to Schwartz et al. (1993). DNAfrom all the patients were tested for mutations in 4 genes; KCNQ1 (exons 2, 6, 7), HERG (exons 6, 7), P1617.Sex specific alleles disequilibrium between the ahr(b) KCNE1 and KCNE2 using PCR-SSCPanalysis. We identified the abnor- and ahr(d) alleles in mice mal bands in 8 DNAsamples by SSCP-analysis of KCNQ1. One patient A. L. Pawlak1, E. Strauss1, E. Florek2 has R174H mutation, another two have G314S and in 3 families A341V 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, was revealed. All mutations were reported. PCR-SSCPanalysis of exon 7 Poland; 2Medical University; Poznan, Poland HERG reveals abnormal conformers in 16 cases, 11 of them are the same. pawlakal@man.poznan.pl This anomalous band was observed in control healthy individuals too. Alleles ahrb and ahrd occur in inbred strains of mice C57BLand DBA/2, PCR-SSCPanalysis of KCNE1 gene revealed abnormal conformers in 35 respectively. They are linked with differences in susceptibility to the toxic DNAsamples; moreover 26 of them were equal. We suggested that it was and carcinogenic effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The A141G, frequent polymorphism, which was found in control healthy indi- C57BLahrd ahrd mice strain congenic with the C57BLahrb ahrb has been viduals DNAsamples too. The identical abnormal conformers were found generated in our laboratory after 10 backcrosses, each followed by thePosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 419 selection. Here we describe the transgeneration transmission of the stud- P1620. Lysinuric protein intolerance; mutational analysis ied alleles in cross-breeding between the parent C57BLahrb ahrb and the reveals strong allelic variability. congenic C57BLahrd ahrd strains. The in vivo exposure of animals to the M. P. Sperandeo1,2, V. Fiorito2, A. Pietrosanto2, A. Pepe2, M. T. Bassi3, G. toxic concentrations of cigarette smoke during the period of pairing and the Borsani3, P. Augoustides-Savvopoulou4, P. Robinson5, G. Andria2, G. early pregnancy was shown by us to affect the fertility of ahrd males to Sebastio2 greater extend than that of the ahrb males. The transmission of the ahrb 1Telethon Foundation; Naples, Italy; 2Department of Pediatrics, Federico II and ahrd alleles was assessed by genotyping the STR polymorphism at University; Naples, Italy; 3Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine D12Mit2 locus linked with the ahr gene (the length of PCR products of the (TIGEM); Naples, Italy; 4Aristotele University of Thessaloniki; Thessaloni- D12Mit2 alleles is 132 and 149 nucleotides respectively). It was found that, ki, Greece; 5Royal Hospital for Sick Children; Glasgow, United Kingdom depending on the sex of the progeny, the linkage disequilibrium may occur sebastio@unina.it in favor of the either allele. In the progeny of the heterozygous mothers Twenty-seven patients from 23 families ( 17 Italian, 2 Japan, 1 Moroccan, (ahrb ahrd) the sex ratio was distorted in favor of the males and decreased 1 Greek, 1 Iraqui and 1 Pakistan; 37 independent alleles) affected by lysin- frequency of ahrb allele was noted among the females. Following the cig- uric protein intolerance (MIM 222700, LPI) were studied for SLC7A7 gene arette smoke exposure the allele specific toxic effects on the fertility com- mutations. Thirty-two of 37 independent alleles (86.5 %) were character- bine with the effects on the alleles disequilibrium in progeny. ized. Fourteen mutations were identified by SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of all SLC7A7 exons. Nine mutations (M1L, M50K, T188I, P1618.Carrier diagnosis of haemophilia Ain a family with par- Y457X, 197del543, 455delCTCT, 786insT, IVS6G->T, and del ex4) were tial deletion of the FVIII gene using quantitative real-time found in single families. Only 1625insATCA, W242X, 1425delCTCT, duplex PCR. IVS3+1G->A, and S386R mutations were identified in more than one inde- J. Lavergne1, R. dOiron2, E. Gautier3, J. Costa3 pendent family. Most mutations are located in the SLC7A7 coding region, 1Hpital Bictre Inserm U143; Le Kremlin Bictre, France; 2Hpital Bictre except for two splicing mutations. Genotypes were completely defined in Dpartement dHmatologie; Le Kremlin Bictre, France; 3Hpital Am ri- 30 patients; a single mutant allele was characterized in two patients. For cain de Paris; Neuilly, France two patients, who received the LPI diagnosis on the basis of clinical and lavergne@infobiogen.fr laboratory criteria, no mutation was found in the SLC7A7 coding region In a family without prior haemophilia history, a patient was diagnosed as (after sequencing of exons and intron-exon junctions). Conclusions; 1) having severe haemophilia A(FVIII ;C < 1U/ml). The intron 22 inversion strong allelic variability is observed in non-Finnish LPI patients if compared was negative. Mutation screening of the entire coding and flanking intron- to Finnish LPI patients where a single mutation was found; 2) this allelic ic sequences of FVIII gene was performed. Results only revealed lack of variability is more evident in Southern Italy where 9 different mutations amplification of exon 26, indicating that partial deletion of the FVIII gene were detected; 3) further studies (e.g. characterization of the promoter) are was the molecular defect in this family. His sister had a low FVIIIC level, needed to understand the molecular bases of the LPI-like phenotype seen strongly suggesting she was carrier for haemophilia . However, FVIIIC was in patients without mutations of the SLC7A7 coding region. Aknowledge- normal in other female members and their carrier status could not be eas- ments; Financial supports of PRIN 1998 and Telethon E.652 to G.S.; ily determined. Aspecific FVIII gene dosage by duplex real-time PCR was M.P.S. is supported by Telethon- Italy (grant n.29cp) and is an Assistant developed in order to determine wether one or two copies of exon 26 were Telethon Scientist present. Relative quantitation was expressed as a ratio between the copies number of FVIII exon 26 sequences and copies of a reference autosomal P1621. Absence of IVS4 + 4A ->T Mutation In Two Brazilian gene copies number. Twelve samples from non haemophilia families were Fanconi Anaemia Cases With VACTERL-H Phenotype. tested as controls. Ratios study indicates that two clear non overlapping J. C. Coelho1, S. Gonzalez1, L. C. G. Fonseca1, J. C. Paixo1, A. A. P. populations can be identified ; a ratio of 1.06 +/- 0.06 (n=6) was found for Santa-Rosa1, J. C. Cabral de Almeida1,2, J. C. Llerena Jr1,2 female individuals while it was 0.51 +/- 0.01 (n=6) for males, demonstrat- 1Instituto Fernandes Figueira/FIOCRUZ; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; 2Unidade ing the efficiency of the method. Four independent analysis of relative de Citogenetica Humana (IBCCF/UFRJ); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil female members revealed a mean ratio of 0.46 and 0.57 for the patients llerena@iff.fiocruz.br mother and sister respectively. Therefore, they were both carrier for the Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disease characterised by FVIII exon 26 deletion. Using the same approach, other female members diverse clinic symptoms.This extreme phenotypic heterogeneity is also of the same family were tested and their status easily determined. associated to a genetic heterogeneity. At least seven complementation groups (Ato F) have been identified and their relative prevalence varies P1619.The disease correlates in a case of the doubly mutat- widely among the ethnical backgrounds.The association of vertebral ed allele of MTHFR 677T; 1298C defects,anal atresia,tracheo-esophageal fistula,renal malformation,radial E. Strauss1, A. L. Pawlak1, A. Plawski1, P. Rogala2, R. Slomski1 ray defects,cardiovascular defects,other limb abnormalities,genital malfor- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences; Poznan, mations and hydrocephalus (VACTERL-H) has emerged as a unique syn- Poland; 2Medical University; Poznan, Poland drome frequently associated to FA,particularly to the mutation IVS4 + 4A- ewazm75@poczta.onet.pl >Tin the FANCC gene.Aregional FAregister in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Two variants of the MTHFR gene produced by transitions 677(C>T) and Brazil,was started since 1991 comprising 48 confirmed FApatients.Two FA 1298 (A>C) occur at high frequencies (0.1-0.37 and 033, respectively) in cases were selected based on the severe phenotype described as VAC- the studied populations. In spite of this no case of combination of these two TERL-H. Both patients had a conspicuous increased chromosomal insta- mutations on the same chromosome was found by authors studying this bility in lymphocyte cultures exposed to DEB.Genomic DNAwas extracted subject (van der Put et al., 1998). It may be presumed that the recombina- and a 131bp fragment across the intronic region of the IVS4 + 4A->Tmuta- tion between the polymorphic sites separated by 620 bp distance will not tion was amplified by PCR and then sequenced. Neither patients carried only be a rare event, but also should increase the pathogenicity of the new this mutation.The clinical overlap of FAwith other malformation syndromes allele, with consequent elimination of the cases. Both polymorphic transi- points to the wide clinical spectrum of FAto which the clinician should be tions were studied by PCR-RFLP. The PCR products encompassing aware and promptly confirm the diagnosis by the cytogenetic diagnostic 677(C>T) mutation was 198bp and that including 1298(A>C) - 163bp. The DEB-test or using a known FAmutation panel.However, the genetic het- products were cleaved with HinfI and MboII, respectively. The doubly erogeneity of FAmay impose several obstacles in establishing a diagnos- mutated allele MTHFR cis 677T;1298C found in Polish population, seems tic molecular protocol, since different phenotypes in FAfrom different eth- to confirm that the disruption of the function associated with this recombi- nical backgrounds have been described carrying the same mutation.We nation exceeds the additivity of the defects. In the studied person the dou- demonstrated that the severe clinic phenotype of FA characterised as bly mutated allele of MTHFR is paired with MTHFR 1298C on the second VACTERL-H does not correlate with the IVS4 + 4A->T mutation in two chromosome and associated with the spina bifida at the level between L4 Brazilian FAcases.(Finantial support FAPERJ) and S1. The antigen HLAB27, considered as a factor possibly predispos- ing to spinal defect, was not present in the probant. Among the first degree P1622.Rna Studies In Wilson Disease Patients Carrying Con- relatives of the proband hypertension and stroke were reported to occur at sensus Sequence Splicing Mutations young age. G. Loudianos1, M. Lovicu2, V. Dessi3, M. Tzetis4, E. Kannavakis4, L. Zan- can5, L. Zelante6, C. Galvz-Galvz7, A. Cao2 1Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie ASL8, Cagliari; Cagliari, Italy; 2IRTAM-CNR; Cagliari, Italy; 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Universit Studi di Cagliari; Cagliari, Italy; 4First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, Greece; Athens, Greece; 5Dipartimen-420 Posters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders to di Pediatria-Clinica Pediatrica I, Universit Studi di Padova; Padova, the other two mutations. In total we studied DNAsamples from 24 unrelat- Italy; 6Servizio di Genetica Medica, IRCCS-Ospedale S. Giovanni Roton- ed Spanish and 37 unrelated Argentinian patients by Southern blot, PCR do; S. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 7Servicio de Neurologia, Hospital Militar de and sequencing. The molecular analysis showed three distinct Southern Sevilla; Sevilla, Spain patterns for RecNciI alleles. Two of these patterns correspond to alleles gloudian@mcweb.unica.it generated by either a crossover or a gene conversion event. The third pat- Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by tern, which involves a new genomic rearrangement, is currently being toxic accumulation of copper in the liver and subsequently in the brain and characterised. Other recombinant alleles were also studied. Aparticular other organs. To date more than 150 WD causing mutations have been case of a patient who bears a new complex allele due to a recombination identified. They are mostly missense mutations but also nonsense, inser- in intron 2 of the glucocerebrosidase gene was analysed and the recombi- tion/deletion, and splice site mutations. Herein we report the RNAanalysis nation site was narrowed down to 18 nucleotides. for four WD mutations that occur in the consensus sequence of the donor or the acceptor splice in exons 4, 8, 13 and 14. RT-PCR was performed on P1625. Rare Glucocerebrosidase Gene Mutations Causing patients total RNAextracted from peripheral lymphocytes and on normal Gaucher Disease; Expression And Characterization controls RNA extracted from peripheral lymphocytes or liver biopsies, L. Vilageliu1, M. Montfort1, A. Chabs2, D. Grinberg1 using appropriate primers for a first round PCR reaction followed from 1Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; 2Insti- nested PCR. The 1707+3 insTfound in compound heterozygosity with an tut de Bioqumica Clnica; Barcelona, Spain unknown mutation in a patient of Greek origin resulted to skipping of exon lluisa@porthos.bio.ub.es 4 that contains Cu5 and created a downstream stop codon at aa position The mutational screening of over 50 Spanish Gaucher disease patients 609. The 2866-6 T->G also found in compound heterozygous state with an allowed the identification of 95% of the mutant alleles, some of which were unknown mutation in a patient of Italian origin resulted to defective RNA new. In order to characterize the resulting enzyme, these mutant alleles processing i.e. in frame exon skipping by removing exon 13 that codes for were expressed in an improved baculovirus system. The new method gen- Tm6 the predicted ion channel and exon skipping of both 13 and 14 exon erates recombinant baculovirus relaying on site specific transposition in that codes for part of the large ATPloop where different critical functional- modified E.coli cells and allows selection of recombinant baculovirus. In ly, protein regions reside. The 2122-8 T->G was detected in homozygosity particular, mutations P391L, N392I, and I402T were studied. Mutation in an Italian WD patient. The alterated RNAprocessing due this substitu- P391L was found in a type 1 patient, in heterozygosity with mutation tion resulted to removal exon 8 by exon skipping and activation of a cryp- N370S. Mutation N392I was identified in a type 2 patient in heterozygosity tic splice site thus adding 23 nucleotides to exon 8 that creates a frameshift with mutation L444P. And mutation I402Twas found in homozygosity in and a downstream stop codon at position 722. The 3061-12 T->Adetected type 1 patient. Expression of wild type cDNAresults in an overexpression in a patient of Spanish origin in compound heterozygosity with a missense of acid beta-glucosidase. Enzyme activity (measured with 4MU-beta-glu- mutation results in an in frame skipping of exon 14 removing part of the coside) was about 5 to 6-fold the value of control fibroblasts. Beta-xylosi- large ATPloop where different critical regions for protein function reside. dase was also detected with activity increased over 4-fold. In the studies with mutant cDNAs, the mutant proteins were characterised by enzyme P1623. Identification Of New Genetic Variants In The Gene activity and western blot. Preliminary studies with mutant cDNAs show Responsible For Gitelmans Syndrome reduced residual beta-glucosidase activity and recognition by policlonal L. M. Syrn1, L. Cesareo2, S. Tedeschi2, A. Cant Rajnoldi2, D. A. Coviel- acid beta-glucosidase antibodies, consistent with the expected results on lo2, G. Colussi3, R. Bellantuono4, M. Procaccio1, A. Edefonti1, A. Bettinel- the basis of the type of the amino acid change. li1, G. Casari5 1Pediatric Clinic I, University of Milan; Milan, Italy; 2Molecular Genetic Lab- P1626. Funtional Stuides of Batten Disease via Identifying oratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy; 3Niguarda-C Gran- Two Novel Battenin-Interactive Proteins. da Hospital; Milan, Italy; 4Bari Hospital; Bari, Italy; 5Telethon Institute of N. Zhong Genetics and Medicine; Milan, Italy New York State Institute for Basic Research; Staten Island, NY United coviello@unige.it States The SLC12A3 gene encodes the thiazide-sensitive NaCl-cotransporter omrddzhong@aol.com (NCCT) expressed in the apical membrane of the distal convoluted tubule Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) is a group of neurodegenerative of the kidneys. NCCTconsists of 1021 aminoacids organized in 12 trans- disorders characterized by pathological finding of lysosomal storage of membrane domains with the amino- and carboxy-terminals located intra- autofluorescent lipofuscins. Five genes designated CLN1, CLN2, CLN3, cellularly. Inactivating mutations of this gene give rise to Gitelmans Syn- CLN5, and CLN8 associating with infantile (INCL), classical late-infantile drome (GS), inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. We have searched (LINCL), juvenile (JNCL), Finnish LINCL(fLINCL), and progressive epilep- for mutations in the SLC12A3 gene in a group of italian patients with typi- sy with mental retardation (EPMR), respectively, have been cloned and cal clinical features of GS (hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagne- characterized although genes CLN4, CLN6, and CLN7 associating with semia, and hypocalciuria). All coding regions (26 exons) with their intron- ANCL(adult NCL), pLINCL(Potugal variant form of LINCL), and tLINCL exon boundaries were analysed using the PCR and SSCP techniques. (Turkish variant form of LINCL) have not been identified. CLN1 and CLN2 Samples with abnormal migration pattern were sequenced bidirectionally. are characterized to encode lysosomal enzymes. CLN3, CLN5, and CLN8 In 21 patients we identified 19 different mutations that were evenly distrib- encode membrane proteins with unknown function. Presently, pathogenic uted along the gene without any hot-spot for mutations. Sixteen of these mechanism underlying NCLs is yet unknown. We previously hypothesized are novel variants, including missense- and splice site-mutations, one that a common pathogenic pathway exists, which consists of various CLN deletion, and one deletion-insertion; R158Q, T163M, A166E, W172R, gene-encoded proteins and is involved in the development of each indi- G374V, G463E, A464T, R642G, S615W, S615L, R852S, R958G, C985Y, vidual NCL. We recently identified two novel proteins, the slow and fast 531-2A->G, fs 697->X724, fs 707->X735. It remains to be determined Battenin-interactive proteins (BIPs and BIPf) which interact with CLN3- whether some of these missense variants (as S615L and S615W) are encoded protein Battenin. Both BIPs and BIPf are highly hydrophobic with responsible for a loss-of-function of NCCT. unknown function. We have characterized that BIPs ang BIPf interact with each other, as well as with CLN8-encoded protein. More interestingly, BIPf P1624.Characterization Of Glucocerebrosidase Recombinant showed a stronger interaction with Battenim, the most common mutant Alleles Causing Gaucher Disease protein resulted from a 1.02-kb deletion in CLN3 gene, compared to with A. Diaz1, B. Cormand1, L. Vilageliu1, A. Chabs2, D. Grinberg1 Battenin. In addition, BIPf strongly interacts with mitochondrial ATPase 1Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain; 2Insti- subunit C that pathologically accumulates in all NCLs except infantile NCL tut de Bioqumica Clinica; Barcelona, Spain and BIPs interacts weakly with CLN1 and CLN2 encoded proteins. Our adiaz@porthos.bio.ub.es data have suggested a novel trans-membrane protein complex in which Gaucher Disease (GD), the most prevalent sphingolipid storage disorder in BIPproteins appear to play important roles involved in the pathogenesis of humans, is caused by a recessively inherited deficiency of the enzyme glu- NCLs. cocerebrosidase. More than 100 mutations have been described in the glu- cocerebrosidase gene causing GD. Some of them are complex alleles, P1627.The First Study In The Italian Population Of Mutations bearing several mutations present in the highly homologous pseudogene, In Clcnkb Gene Responsible For Bartters Syndrome Type Iii due to crossover or gene conversion events between the gene and the L. Cesareo1, M. Syrn1, S. Tedeschi1, A. Cant Rajnoldi1, D. A. Coviello1, pseudogene. The most frequent complex allele in GD is RecNciI, defined M. Procaccio2, A. Edefonti2, G. Casari3, A. Bettinelli2 by the presence of mutations L444P, A456P and V460V. We analysed 1Molecular Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, patients who carried the L444Pmutation and checked for the presence of Italy; 2Pediatric ClinicII, University of Milan; Milan, Italy; 3Telethon InstitutePosters: Molecular Basis of Mendelian Disorders 421 of Genetics and Medicine; Milan, Italy sense mutation in exon 4 (N400D).Conclusions; Crigler Najjar type II syn- coviello@unige.it drome may be due to a combination of both polymorphism within the pro- Bartters Syndrome (BS) is clinically characterized by hypokalemic meta- moter and missense mutation in the coding sequence of the BGTGENE. bolic alkalosis and renal salt wasting. It is divided into three clinical sub- types, I, II, and III, where nephrocalcinosis is present in types I and II, but P1630.FSHD-diagnosis;EcoRI-fragments shortened by about typically absent in the third type. Subtype III results from a defective reab- 20 kb after additional cleavage with BlnI sorption of chloride across the basolateral membrane in the thick ascend- S. Jakubiczka1, S. Vielhaber2, V. Hackel3, P. Wieacker1, T. Bettecken4 ing limb of Henle in the renal tubules; it is caused by mutations in the CLC- 1Institut fr Humangenetik; Magdeburg, Germany; 2Klinik fr Neurologie II; NKB gene which encodes a protein of 687 aminoacids and contains 12 Magdeburg, Germany; 3Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik; Halle/Saale, transmembrane domains, like other members of the chloride channel fam- Germany; 4Institut fr Humangenetik, GSFForschungszentrum; Neuher- ily. We screened a group of 10 italian patients for mutations of CLCNKB berg, Germany gene. The coding regions (19 exons) were analysed using PCR-SSCP sibylle.jakubiczka@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de technique, followed by bidirectional sequencing when an abnormal migra- Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD, MIM 158900) is one of tion pattern was observed. Five patients, presenting a severe hypokalemia the most frequent forms of muscular dystrophies. In about 98% of families (S-K; 2.4-2.9 mM) and early onset of the clinical manifestation (<5 years), autosomal-dominant FSHD is mapping to 4q35 and associated with a dele- were found to carry variant alleles. The genetic variants included; one 3 tion of a variable number of 3.3 kb KpnI tandem repeat units (D4Z4). This splice site mutation in IVS 7, one insertion of 5 bp in exon 12, two deletions deletion can normally be detected on Southern-blots hybridized with probe of exon 6 (breakpoints are underway), and one alteration of an aminoacid p13E-11 (D4S104S) through EcoRI-fragments smaller than 38 kb. Cross- in exon 12 (I419V). This latter alteration has been reported as a polymor- hybridization of a homologous locus on 10q26 may complicate the inter- phism. These are the first genetic alterations described of the CLCNKB pretation of results. This problem can be overcome in most cases by addi- gene in the Italian population. tional cleavage with BlnI, which will shorten 4q-type EcoRI-fragments by about 3 kb while 10q-type EcoRI-fragments, containing an internal BlnI- P1628. DGGE Analysis of the Tissue Non-Specific Alkaline site, are becoming very small. It has been reported that a subtelomeric Phosphatase Gene in 60 Patients/Carriers with Hypophos- interchange between 4q35 and 10q26 occurs in 21% of normal individuals. phatasia In about 8% of individuals, the interchange occurs within the repeat S. R. Mumm1,2, J. Jones1, P. Finnegan1, P. S. Henthorn3, M. C. Eddy2, M. regions, resulting in hybrid repeat arrays being composed of both 4q-type N. Podgornik2, M. P. Whyte1,2 and 10q-type-units. These data were ascertained by pulsed field experi- 1Washington University School of Medicine; St. Louis, MO United States; ments. Here, we report on two patients were probably such an interchange 2Shriners Hospital for Children; St. Louis, MO United States; 3University of had occurred and became evident after routine continuous electrophore- Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PAUnited States sis. In both unrelated individuals probe p13E-11 (D4F104S1) is detecting smumm@im.wustl.edu large EcoRI-fragments (> 40 kb) which are shortened, after additional Hypophosphatasia is a heritable form of rickets/osteomalacia for which cleavage with BlnI, by more than 20 kb instead of the expected 3 kb. Cur- there is no established medical treatment. This inborn error of metabolism rently, we interpret these findings as hybrid arrays resulting from an 4q-10q manifests an extraordinary range of clinical severity spanning death in interchromosomal exchange with breakpoints in the tandem repeat region utero to premature loss of teeth. To delineate the molecular pathology causing the extreme clinical variability and various patterns of inheritance P1631. Detection of C1 Inhibitor Gene Mutations in Czech of hypophosphatasia, we initiated comprehensive mutational analysis of Patients with Hereditary Angioedema by Denaturing Gradient the tissue non-specific isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) gene in Gel Electrophoresis our large patient population. Genomic DNAfrom more than 120 probands, T. Freiberger1, L. Kolarova1, P. Kuklinek2, J. Litzman2, M. Vyskocilova1 spanning the entire clinical spectrum, is being studied. Using a subset of 1Department of Immunogenetics, Research Institute of Child Health; Brno, 10 patients and single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP), we Czech Republic; 2Department of Clinical Immunology and Allergology, Uni- detected approximately 70% of the potential mutations (assuming two versity Hospital at St. Ann; Brno, Czech Republic mutations for each case of autosomal recessive inheritance and one muta- tfreiber@med.muni.cz tion for rare cases of dominant inheritance). This success rate is in accord Introduction; Hereditary angioedema (HAE)(McKusick 106100) is charac- with published efficiencies for SSCP. To increase the efficiency of mutation terised by recurrent attacks of skin and mucous membrane oedemas. The detection, we have developed the technique of denaturing gradient gel most serious manifestation is the oedema of larynx mucosa, which endan- electrophoresis (DGGE) for the ALPLgene. DGGE primers and conditions gers the patients life. The genetic basis of HAE is the deficiency of C1 have been developed for all the coding exons (2-12) and adjacent splice inhibitor (C1 INH). HAE is an autosomal dominant trait, its frequency is sites; the amplified products incorporate a GC clamp on one end. For the 1;10000 - 1;50000 in the general population. Mutations can be detected in same subset of 10 patients, we have detected 100% of expected mutations all regions of the gene. Material and methods; DNAwas isolated from 22 using DGGE. Hence, our preliminary results demonstrate that DGGE unrelated patients with HAE. A denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis will be significantly more efficient than SSCP. To date, at least 65 (DGGE) was introduced to detect mutations in the C1 INH gene. The het- different mutations (in about 70 patients) have been identified as causative eroduplexes were visualized in the UV light in ethidiumbromide stained for hypophosphatasia. For our group of 60 individuals studied thus far, polyacrylamide gels. The exons with proved presence of heteroduplexes including patients and carriers, we have identified approximately 20 previ- underwent sequencing analysis to identify the particular mutations. The ously unreported mutations, further demonstrating the vast genotypic vari- method of DNAsequencing with radioactively labeled 33P-dATPwas used. ability of the disease. Characterization of the ALPLmutations in our large If restriction enzyme specific for mutated, resp. non-mutated allele existed, patient population will elucidate the molecular pathology and inheritance the mutation was verified by restriction analysis. patterns, and should improve prognostication for hypophosphatasia. Results; Novel mutations S48X, 8493-8494delCC, 16720delAand V432G were identified in Czech patients with HAE. All of them are supposed to be P1629.Genetic lesions of UGT1A1 causing Crigler-Najjar type pathogenic, the former three mutations result in truncated protein and the II syndrome latter one is located to the same codon as V432E, which was proved to P. Labrune1, J. Francoual1, P. Trioche1, A. Myara2, L. Capel1, A. Linden- cause HAE of type II. Previously described mutations R444C and R444H baum1 were found in patients with clinical type II of HAE. 1hopital Antoine Bclre; Clamart, France; 2hpital Saint Joseph; paris, Conclusion; DGGE is an efficient method for screening of mutations in C1 France inhibitor gene. Additional analyses of the individual mutations may allow philippe.labrune@abc.ap-hop-paris.fr more detailed structure-function relationships to be ascertained. Patient and methods; this 5-year-old girl, born to second-cousins parents This study was supported by grant No. 5558-3 of IGAMZ CR. was referred for isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia appeared since birth. Except jaundice, physical examination proved normal. Bilrubin serum P1632. Evaluation of Real-Time PCR for Rapid Detection of concentration was 176 mol/l, entirely unconjugated. Hepatic bilirubin UGT Deletions or Duplications Associated with Human Disease activity was 15% of controls and serum HPLC of bilirubin conjugates sug- D. J. Cockburn1, P. Maguire1, C. Greno1, D. E. Barton1,2 gested decreased glucuronidation. After 3 weeks of treatment with pheno- 1National Centre for Medical Genetics; Dublin, Ireland; 2Dept of Medical barbital, serum bilirubin concentration had decreased to 60mol/l.Genom- Genetics, University College Dublin; Dublin, Ireland ic DNAwas extracted and the promoter and the 5 exons of the BGTgene djcockburn@netscape.net were PCR-amplified then directly sequenced. Results; the child was Deletion or duplication within human genes is associated with a number of homozygous for a TA8 polymorphism within the promoter and for a mis- diseases. Most notable from the perspective of the diagnostic laboratory422 Posters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders are dystrophin gene rearrangements in Duchenne and Becker muscular identified a transition T->C at position 884 causing the amino acid change dystrophy and PMP22 deletions or duplications seen in hereditary neu- Val295Ala. The mutation was present in one allele of the probands moth- ropathy with liability to pressure palsies and hereditary motor and sensory er but not in the grandmother indicating a de novo mutation. neuropathy respectively. We are evaluating the application of real-time PCR to the detection of such rearrangements. The technique employs P1635. Novel retinoic acid-sensitive genes isolated by an dual-labelled probes, such as Scorpions, which monitor the accumulation induction gene trap approach of PCR products. By using probes with differently labelled fluorophores, M. Schlicker1, D. Barthelmes1, K. Recker1, W. Wurst2, I. Hansmann1 amplification profiles from two amplicons in multiplex reactions can be 1Institut fr Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Martin-Luther-Uni- compared, revealing any quantitative differences that exist. We have versitt; Halle, Germany; 2Molekulare Neurogenetik, GSF; Neuherberg, demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach in a test system compar- Germany ing dystrophin exons 8 and 45. This could be extended to multiple dys- mike.schlicker@medizin.uni-halle.de trophin exons in a cost-effective manner by use of generic probes. We In man and mammals prenatal exposure to the teratogens retinoic acid have also examined PMP22 gene dosage and preliminary results are (RA) and/or retinoids (RX) results in characteristic congenital anomalies encouraging. We conclude that real-time PCR offers the potential for rapid including cardiac and craniofacial malformations. Incidence and pattern of gel-free analysis, suitable for diagnostic quantitative applications. the malformations apparently depends on dose and stage of exposure. Based on a retinoic acid-induced gene trap approach (Forrester et al., P1633.Screening Mutations in Angelman Syndrome Gene 1996) we set up a strategy to identify RA/RX downstream genes of mouse C. Camprub1, M. D. Coll1, I. Lorente2, E. Gabau2, J. Artigas2, C. Brun2, M. and human development that are possible candidate genes involved in the Guitart2 generation of congenital malformations. By RACE- PCR of trapped ES 1Universitat Autnoma de Barcelona; Bellaterra, Spain; 2Corporaci Parc clones we identified two novel genes that are expressed in early brain Taul; Sabadell, Spain and/or heart. In northern analyses a cDNA fragment of the 1st gene Cristina.Camprubi@uab.es (EScD-1) identifies a brain-specific 6 kb transcript in embryonic head (10d Introduction; Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurobehavioral disorder char- p.c.) and adult brain. The 2nd gene (EScD-2) is expressed in fetal brain acterized by mental retardation, absence of speech, seizures, motor dis- (2.5 kb) and heart (1.4 kb). By screening of mouse and human Marathon- function and a happy disposition. This syndrome is caused by genetic cDNAlibraries and analyzing homologous ESTs we identified about 2 kb of abnormalities affecting the maternal copy of chromosome region 15q11- the respective cDNAsequences including the polyA-tails. The mouse and q13. Adeletion of this region is found in about 70% of patients, paternal human sequences share homologies of 96 % (EScD-1) and 98 % (EScD- uniparental disomy (2-3%), imprinting defects (3-5%), and mutations in 2). Searches for human homology revealed that the human gene EScD-2 UBE3Agene (4-8%). Most of the reported mutations produce truncating is represented within human BAC and cosmid sequences mapping to protein defects and the long exon 9 or exon 16 that contains the catalytic chromosome 16p13.3. Breakpoints within that chromosome segment are site are involved. Subjects and methods; We have studied 23 patients with known to be associated with cardiac anomalies. Using EscD-1 cDNA a clinical diagnosis of AS with a biparental inheritance and a normal methy- primers we isolated a human BAC clone and localized the respective gene lation pattern. Exons 15 and 16 were analyzed by SSCPtechnique. PCR on chromosome segment 7q32 by FISH. The detailed analysis of the products from exon 16 were cleaved with MspI enzyme before elec- expression patterns of EScD-1 and EScD-2 by whole mount in situ trophoresis. Products were separated on 1XMDE gel solution at room hybridization and the study of the mouse gene trap phenotypes will give temperature without glycerol and visualized by silver nitrate (02%) stain- information about the involvement of the two genes in early human devel- ing. Exon 9 has been sequenced directly. PCR products were sequenced opment and specific disorders of brain and/or heart. (Supported by DFG). on an ABI373Aautomated DNAsequencer. Results and Discusion; We have found two mutations in exon 16. The first mutation is a 4 nucleotide P1636.Simultaneous analysis of >80 loci for deletions/dupli- deletion (3093del4) reported previously in one case by Fang et al. (1999). cations; an alternative to quantitative Southern blotting. The second mutation (not described before)is a 14 nucleotide deletion S. J. White, M. Kalf, M. P. Villerius, G. J. van Ommen, M. H. Breuning, J. (3167del14) that predicted to affect the polyAaddition. This one is present T. den Dunnen in a patient affected by a severe clinical; spatic tetraplegia (no prehension Leiden University Medical Center; Leiden, The Netherlands and unable to sit) and a severe hypoplasia of corpus callosum. As report- s.white@lumc.nl ed in other cases, mutation of the UBE3Agene are associated with typical Currently most genetic diagnostic protocols are PCR-based and do not features of AS, therefore in addition to the mutation the hypoplasia of cor- readily yield quantitative data. As a consequence, potential deletions and pus callosum could explain this severe phenotype. duplications of the regions analyzed often go undetected unless specific methods are applied. Southern blotting is the most commonly used method P1634. A New Mutation Of Ed1 Gene In X-linked Anhidrotic but is time consuming and laborious, and the results are not always easy Ectodermal Dysplasia to interpret. We have applied a new method, called Multiplex Amplifiable R. Bertorelli1, A. Caleffi1, S. Mauro2, S. Manieri2, A. Forabosco1, D. A. Probe Hybridization (MAPH). This technique allows the analysis of many Coviello1,3 regions simultaneously using a series of probes constructed in such a way 1Servizio di Genetica Medica, A.O. Policlinico di Modena; Modena, Italy; that all can be PCR amplified with only one primer pair. Following 2Divisione di Pediatria, P.O. Nard, AUSLLecce 1; Lecce, Italy; 3Molecu- hybridization to immobilized DNAthe probes are reamplified and separat- lar Genetic Laboratory, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento; Milan, Italy ed by gel electrophoresis. Alternatively, using fluorescently labeled primers coviello@unige.it it is possible to separate the different products on the ABI3700, a 96-cap- Ectodermal Dysplasias (EDs) are a group of more then 50 distinguishable illary sequencer. This allows up to 96 samples to be analyzed concurrent- hereditary disorders with impaired development of ectodermal structure. ly. By comparing peak areas of products between controls and patients we The molecular basis for EDs is largely unknown. One of the most common are able to detect both deletions and duplications. Microarray analysis has types of ED is X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) and the also been performed, circumventing the size limitations imposed by elec- identification of the gene ED1, mutated in this condition, is one of the entry trophoretic separation. We have applied this technique to the diagnosis of point to study the pathogenesis of the disease. EDAis a clinical syndrome several genetic disorders, including Duchenne/Becker Muscular Dystro- characterised by loss of hair, sweat glands, and teeth. ED1 gene encodes phy, Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy and mental retardation of unknown a protein product named ectodysplasin. EDAgene undergoes extensive etiology. In the muscular dystrophies individual exons were examined, alternative splicing and produces several transcripts; the original shortest whereas in the mentally retarded cases probes specific for the subtelom- EDA-O form encodes a 135 amino acid product that localise to the outer eric regions of each chromosome were prepared. We are investigating the cell membrane. The longest ED1 transcript encodes a 391 amino acid possibility of combining different probe sets and detecting products using form, EDA-Athat includes a positively charged domain, 19 repeats of Gly- different fluorescent labels, further increasing the resolving power of the X-Y, similar to the group of membrane-associated collagenous type II pro- technique. teins. In addition to the collagen domain, the C-terminal domain of the EDA-Aprotein contains a domain of homology to the member of the tumor P1637. Developing of non-viral system for transfer foreign necrosis factor (TNT) ligand family. More than 36 mutations of the ED1 DNA gene have been identified so far. In the present study we characterise a M. A. Bogdanova1, N. Sinogeeva1, B. N. Akifiev1, E. Zamiralova1, A. new ED1 mutation in a patient with clinical manifestation of EDA; sparse Perevozchikov1, V. Baranov2, M. Shavlovsky1 and dry hair, incomplete teething and pointed incisors teeth, dry skin, short 1Experimental Medicine; St-Petersburg, Russian Federation; 2Gynaecolo- stature (10-25 percentile), and learning disability. We amplified and gy and Midwifery; St-Petersburg, Russian Federation sequenced all the exons of ED1 gene using the ABI-377 sequencer and we sinonat@mail.ruPosters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders 423 For non-viral gene therapy we managed to optimize the synthesis of tissue ganglioside GM2 metabolism in recipient cells. The data obtained demon- specificity protein conjugates combining capacity of internalization and a strate that B1-type phenotype can be efficiently correct in cultured cells by high level of expression of the gene. Selection of the chemical method of retroviral-mediated gene transfer. This work was supported by grants modification of the components has a significant effect on the success of PRAXIS/PSAU/C/SAU/60/96 and PRAXIS XXI/BIC/14717/97 from Fun- the gene therapy experiment for it influences on the activity of the incom- da o para a Cincia e Tecnologia, Portugal. ing components and size complex of DNA-conjugate. Proteins with high affinity for hepatocyte receptors (asyaloorosomucoid), hepatocyte and P1640. In vitro correction of CF epithelial cells using SFHR myocyte receptors (lactoferrin(Lf)), cancer cells (transferrin(Tf), a-fetopro- techniques tein (a-Ft)) etc. were isolated and purified. We mixed plasmid DNAwith F. Sangiuolo1, E. Bruscia1, E. Bonifazi1, D. Gruenert2, B. Dallapiccola3, G. native Lf and with conjugates which contained protein ligands mentioned Novelli1 above and compounds tightly bound to DNA. At the same time, we devel- 1Tor Vergata University; Rome, Italy; 2University of Vermont; Burlington, PA oped a new method of modification of hydrocortisone 21-hemisuccinate for United States; 3La Sapienza University; Rome, Italy carrying foreign DNA. This carrier was chosen due to its ability to penetrate novelli@med.uniroma2.it easily into target-cells and into their nuclei, very low background concen- Targeting of genomic sequences by replacement with homologous DNA tration in the blood plasma, high rate of absorption it from the bloodstream. segments can be used to modify specific genes within chromosomal DNA. We tested synthetic conjugates and complexes with DNAby laser spec- We used the small fragment homologous replacement (SFHR) strategy to troscopy, immunochemical, physicochemical and enzymatic methods. The correct transformed human airway epithelial cells from cystic fibrosis (CF) efficiency of gene delivery (human apolipoprotein A-I (apo A-1), human dis- individuals homozygous for the F508 mutation (CFBE41o-). The trans- trofin cDNA(pDMD1) and reporter genes; lacZ, gfp) was tested in vitro and fection was made using liposomes (GenePorter, Gene Therapy Systems, in vivo on laboratory animals. Some conjugates we tested using a model USA) combined with different concentrations of purified double strand DNA mouse line (mdx) with Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy. The tissue fragments. Lipoplexes were then added to cells and incubated for 5 hours specificity of gene delivery was demonstrated. The dynamics of gene a 37C. Replacement at the appropriate genomic locus (exon 10) by expression (7-21 days after injection) was evaluated in accord with the pro- exogenous DNA and expression of the modified CFTR mRNA were tocols of the synthesis of protein conjugates. assayed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. Different conditions that modulate SFHR-mediated correction were evaluated, P1638. Expression of dystrophin, beta-galactosidase and including the type modification introduced into the genomic DNA(ie, dele- luciferase genes in the organs of transfected mice. tion or insertion), the fragment to lipid charge ratio and stability of the mod- M. Shokenova, L. Lukasheva ification as a function of time after transfection. PCR analysis was per- Research Centre for Medical Genetics; Moscow, Russian Federation formed on exon 10 genomic CFTR DNA and on mRNA extracted from shokenova@mail.ru transfected cells after 5 days of transfection duration. Acorrected genotype Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a severe sub-lethal disease which (F508/wild-type) was obtained as demonstrated by genomic and RNA results in early lost of ability to walk at the age of 12 years approximately, analysis, transfecting 5x106 CF cells with a liposome to DNAfragment and premature death at the age of 20-25 years. In spite of some progress charge ratio equal to 6;1. To confirm the results, we transfected wild-type in therapy of this disease, it is still impossible to improve quality and dura- cell lines (16HBE14o-) with a DNAfragment carrying the F508 mutation. tion of life considerably. The most promising approach is gene therapy. We Heterozygous mutant cells were obtained when a charge ratio of 2.2;1 was are studying optimization of a transfection of mouse skeletal muscles (mdx used, corresponding to 12000 ng of DNAfragment. Kinetics of transfection mice  a biological model of DMD) by looking for effective vectors and experiment was also performed in order to optimize the transfection proto- ways for plasmid DNAdelivery. For this purpose we have compared an col of correction. Corrected alleles are efficiently transcribed up to 120 gene expression following intramuscular injection of these genes in the hours from transfection, as demonstrated by genomic DNAamplification. complex with different vectors. (1) Synthetic olygopeptide K8 and JTS-1  To gain further insights about the pathway(s) involved in the delivery of number of transfected myofibres was increased compared to naked plas- therapeutic DNAfragments, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was mid DNAfrom 1.1% up to 12% for Lac-Z gene and from 1.2% up to 7% for used to monitor lipoplexes within the cells after transfection of gold-labelled dystrophin gene. (2) Using of an adenovirus EDS-76 and polylysine reli- DNAfragment. At 72 hrs after transfection, large endosomes containing able has not increased an expression of a luciferase gene in muscles of lipoplexes were detected perinuclear. This study demonstrate that SFHR mice. Areceptor-mediated transfection using insulin ligand associated with technique is able to target and modify specific CFTR alleles in normal and polylysine (3), birds adenovirus EDS-76 (4) or adenovirus Ad5neo (5) F508 human airway epithelial cells, by deletion and insertion of 3-bp, have not resulted in increase of luciferase gene expression compared to respectively. Acknowlegments; This work was supported by Ministero della naked plasmid pCMV-Luc. Following intravenous injection of naked plas- Sanit and Regione Lazio Fondo Sanitario Nazionale per la Prevenzione e mid pCMV-Lac-Z the expression of beta-galactosidase was studied in a dif- la Cura della Fibrosi Cistica (Legge 23 dicembre 1993, n.548). ferent mouse organs (skeletal muscles, heart, lung, liver and spleen). In addition, the optimum concentration of plasmid and duration of marker P1641.Myoblast transplantation for cell-mediated gene thera- gene expression were determined. py (Protocol single muscle treatment) to DMD patients in Russia. P1639. Gene therapy approach for GM2-Gangliosidosis B1 S. Shishkin1, S. Terekhov1, T. Krokhina1, A. Podobedova2, N. variant Shakhovskaya2, V. Tarasov3, G. Lyannaya3, I. Krakhmaleva1, S. Zakharov1, M. G. R. Ribeiro1, C. A. F. Teixeira2, M. Sena-Esteves3, L. Lopes1, M. C. S. Limborska4, T. Pogoda4, P. Kutyina5, E. Zotikov5, N. Gerasimova6 S. Miranda1 1Institute of Human Genetics, Research Center for Medical Genetics 1Unidade de Neurobiologia Gentica, IBMC; Unidade de Enzimologia, RAMS; Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Childrens Psycho-Neurological IGMJM; Porto, Portugal; 2Unidade de Neurobiologia Gentica, IBMC; Hospital of Moscow Region; Moscow, Russian Federation; 3Childrens Porto, Portugal; 3Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General Orthopedic-Surgical Hospital of Moscow Region; Moscow, Russian Feder- Hospital; Boston, MAUnited States ation; 4Moscow Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS; Moscow, Russian gribeiro@ibmc.up.pt Federation; 5Research Center for Hematology RAMS; Moscow, Russian The hexosaminidase deficiency leads to autosomal recessively inherited Federation; 6Interregional Association of assistance to people suffering lysosomal storage disorders characterised by the accumulation of ganglio- neuromuscular diseases The Hope; Moscow, Russian Federation side GM2. Mutations in the alpha-chain of lysosomal hexosaminidase socrates@orc.ru underlay two distinct biochemical phenotypes known as variant B and B1 Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) with lack of dystrophin causes a pro- of GM2 gangliosidosis. The work reports the transduction of human B1- gressive degeneration of skeletal muscles. Several years ago special type fibroblasts (producing catalytically inactive alpha-chains) with a retro- approach for DMD gene correction using transplantation of myoblast cell viral vector encoding the human hexosaminidase alpha-chain cDNA. In cultures into patients muscles is developed. These cultures are prepared transduced cells the HexA(alpha-beta dimer) activity with both synthetic from muscular biopsy samples of healthy donors in which contained and physiological substrates was comparable to control enzyme activity mononuclear satellite cells. Satellite cells are myogenic precursor cells that and the newly synthesised enzyme was correctly processed and targeted are activated during muscle growth and regeneration. There are some data to the lysosomes. The high levels of recombinant enzyme corrected the that donors myoblast can fuse with recipients myofibrils and expression of metabolic defect, enabling the cells to efficiently degrade the accumulated donors genome contained normal DMD gene repair hereditary gene product in lysosomes. Transfer of the human transgene product to B1-type defect. deficient fibroblasts led to an increase of activity against the alpha-chain In Russia we begin clinical trail of myoblast transplantation to volunteers - specific synthetic substrate that might be sufficient to restore the normal DMD patients by protocol single muscle treatment and using own tech-424 Posters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders nique for preparation of myoblast cell cultures. All donors were previously P1644.Chimeric Rna/dna Oligonucleotide-based Gene Thera- screened for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B, C and herpes py For Fabry Disease. infection. For the selection of donor - recipient pairs it was analyzed sev- L. Lai, Y. H. Lien eral HLA antigen, blood groups and Rh, Every recipient received University of Arizona; Tucson, AZ United States cyclosporine (3-5 mg/kg body weight per day) two weeks before trans- llai@u.arizona.edu plantation and one month after transplantation for immunosuppresion. Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive disease, caused by a defective Suspension (10 ml) contained 50-90 millions of myoblast cells was trans- lysosomal enzyme, a-galactosidase A (a-GalA), characterized by skin planted ( 10-12 intramuscular injections) into m. tibialis anterior of one leg. lesions and involvement of heart, central nerve system, blood vessels, and Injection of equal volume of physiological salt solution into other leg (m. tib- kidneys. We have identified a family of patients with Fabry disease. RT- ialis anterior, control) was administered in a similar manner. There were no PCR sequencing of the peripheral lymphocyte RNAfrom all female carri- any side effects in all recipients during 6 months - 1 year clinical trail. Biop- ers and a male patient reveals a C to Tmutation, resulting in an amino acid sy specimens of four DMD boys (age 6 - 10) 6 months after myoblast trans- substitution of Pro-40 by Ser. The serum a-GalAactivity from the male plantation were examined to detect donors DNAand dystrophin expres- patient was undetectable and the lymphocyte a-GalAactivity was less than sion. It was revealed donors DNAin two cases and dystrophin expression 10 % of the normal value. Recently, a novel strategy to correct a point (immunohistochemical labeling with Novocastra lab. dystrophin antibodies mutation using chimeric RNA/DNAoligonucleotides has been reported. To kit) in one case. Dystrophin and donors DNAwere absent in the sham- test whether it is feasible to correct this mutation by chimeric RNA/DNA injected muscles. oligonucleotides, we transfected the chimeric RNA/DNAoligonucleotides with the correct sequence into cultured peripheral lymphocytes and EB P1642. Effects of nonsense suppressor tRNAs genes trans- Virus transformed lymphoblasts from the male patient. The cells were fection in vitro and in vivo. transfected with a mixture of chimeric RNA/DNA oligonucleotides and A. V. Kiselev1, O. V. Ostapenko1, A. N. Baranov1, E. A. Lesina1, L. L. Effectene (Qiagen) and harvested 5-7 days later for preparation of genom- Kisselev2, V. S. Baranov1 ic DNAand cell extract. The conversion of mutant Tto C was confirmed by 1Otts Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology; St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa- allele specific PCR assay on the genomic DNA. The treatment increased tion; 2Engelhardts Institute of Molecular Biology; Moscow, Russian Federation the a-GalAenzymatic activity from baseline 9.20.7% and 8.51.6% (of the kisanet@mail.ru normal value) to 15.02.1% and 20.94.9%, in cultured peripheral lym- It is estimated that as many as 20% of Duchenne muscular dystrophy phocytes and EB Virus transformed lymphoblasts, respectively. In conclu- patients have nonsense mutations in dystrophin gene. Nonsense suppres- sion, a point mutation in the a-GalAgene was identified in a family with sor tRNAs have been suggested as potential agents for human somatic Fabry disease. This point mutation can be corrected with chimeric gene therapy. To investigate effects of suppressor tRNAgene transfection RNA/DNAoligonucleotides, as demonstrated by allele specific PCR assay in vivo we used mdx mice which have an ochre mutation in 23 exon of dys- and increased level of a-GalAenzymatic activity in the treated cells. Poten- trophin gene. After in vivo transfection of genetic construction containing tially, this gene therapy strategy can be used to treat Fabry disease in this suppressor tRNAgene (pcDNA3 sup tRNAochre) by means of lactoferrine family. the number of dystrophin positive (NDPM) myofibers was 2,5 % which is greater than background level of revertant myofibers (1%). NDPM after P1645.Apotential treatment for spinal muscular atrophy control transfection of genetic construction containing dystrophin gene full- J. G. Chang1, H. M. Hsieh-Li2, Y. J. Jong3, N. M. Wang1, C. H. Tsai1, H. Li2 length cDNA (pTG 11025) was 3,8%. In order to study possible toxic 1China Medical College Hospital; Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China; effects of suppressor tRNA in vitro we have made a co-transfection of 2Academia Sinica; Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China; 3Kaohsiung Medical HeLa cells using two plasmids - pcDNA3 sup tRNA(ochre or amber) and University; Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China pCMV LacZ by means of non-viral vehicle VSST-525. High concentration d6781@www.cmch.org.tw of suppressor tRNAconstruction led to tenfold decrease of number trans- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease char- fected cells in comparison with control transfection of pCMV LacZ only. acterized by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord lead- Further increase in concentration resulted in complete absence of trans- ing to muscular paralysis with muscular atrophy. No effective treatment of fected cells. On the contrary decreasing concentration led to augmentation this disorder is presently available. Studies of the correlation between dis- of the number beta-galactosidase positive cells. Thus over-dose of sup- ease severity and the amount of SMN protein have indicated an inverse pressor tRNAs in the cell have clear toxic effects in vitro. Our results sug- relationship. We report here that compound A effectively increases the gest existence of concentration threshold for the level of suppressor tRNA amount of exon 7-containing SMN protein in SMAlymphoid cell lines by in the cell to gain therapeutic effect of suppression without toxicity. changing the alternating splicing pattern of exon 7 in the SMN2 gene. In vivo, compound A treatment of SMA-like mice resulted in increased P1643.In vivo gene tranfer in the GM2 gangliosidosis variant expression of SMN protein in motor neurons of the spinal cord. Further- 0 (Sandhoff disease) animal model using AAV vectors more, SMA clinical symptoms of the mice significantly improved. Oral C. Bourgoin1, P. Montanucci2, C. Emiliani2, L. Poenaru1, C. Caillaud1 administration of compound Ato intercrosses of heterozygous pregnant 1INSERM U129, Laboratoire de Gntique; Paris, France; 2Department of knockout-transgenic SMA-like mice decreased the birth rate of severe Cellular and Molecular Biology; Perugia, Italy types SMA-like mice, and SMAsymptoms were ameliorated for all three bourgoin@cochin.inserm.fr types of SMA-like mice. These results suggest that compound Amay be an Sandhoff disease is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease effective drug for treatment of human SMApatients. characterized by the intralysosomal accumulation of GM2 ganglioside. It is due to mutations in the hexosaminidases beta-chain gene, resulting in a P1646. In vitro assessment of endogenous and therapeutic Hex A and B deficiency. This disease predominantly affects the central inhibitors of urinary cystine precipitation nervous system. Its evolution is dramatic and it still does not have any effi- P. R. Goodyer, P. Parvex cient treatment. In order to test the feasibility of gene transfer methods in McGill University; Montreal, PQ Canada this model, specific AAV vectors were constructed. They contain the HEXA Paul.Goodyer@muhc.mcgill.ca and HEXB cDNAs under the control of the CAG promoter. HeLa cells Children with fully recessive (Type I/I) cystinuria have a high risk of stone infected with AAV-HEXA or AAV-HEXB showed a high level of hex- formation in the first decade of life. However, among 9 such children with osaminidases activity, demonstrating the functionality of both recombinant proven rBATmutations followed from birth, onset of nephrolithiasis did not vectors. AAV-HEXB was then injected in the murine model of Sandhoff dis- occur until age 7-10 years, despite maximal urinary cystine excretion in the ease. Intramuscular injections led to a huge restoration of Hex Aand B first years. To assess inhibitors of urinary cystine precipitation, we devel- activities in the injected muscle, but no secretion was observed. AAV- oped an assay in which radiolabelled cystine (4mM) was dissolved in urine HEXB was also injected intracerebrally in hexb -/- neonates. Histological at 37 degrees C. after alkalinization to pH10 with NaOH. Samples were staining showed a high enzyme activity in widely diffuse areas and total then brought to pH5 with HCl, centrifuged and the %cpm precipitating was hexosaminidases activity in the whole brain was restored to about the nor- calculated. The assay was also used to compare inhibition of urinary cys- mal level. However, when hexosaminidases activity was assayed after Hex tine precipitation by endogenous macromolecules and by several standard Aand B separation by DEAE cellulose chromatography, a massive restora- and novel therapeutic agents. Percent cystine precipitation varied widely tion of Hex B activity was obtained, even though Hex Alevel only reached among normal children (74+/-34%), whereas variability of repeated deter- 20% of normal. The coadministration of HEXAand HEXB vectors will prob- minations on a single individual was modest (64+/-3%). Cystine precipita- ably permit to reach therapeutic levels of both hexosaminidases Aand B, tion (%control) was strongly inhibited by D-penicillamine (8+/-9%) and especially in the central nervous system, which is the mainly affected DMSA(6+/-3%)at concentrations corresponding to predicted urinary levels organ in this pathology. following oral doses of 2g/day and 2.1g/day, respectively. Thiola was mod-Posters: Development, Differentiation and Morphogenetics 425 erately effective (37+/-21%)whereas captopril was a weak inhibitor (77+/- Our aim is to elucidate the function of genes encoding for RNA-binding 21%). To assess the ontogeny of endogenous inhibitors, urine samples proteins in normal and abnormal development of neuronal structures in were dialyzed against PBS to normalize osmolarity. Cystine precipitation mammals. We have recently characterized a novel mouse cDNAwhich we was greater in urine from children from children 6-10 years (86+/-5%), than called Etr2 and which is closely related to the elav-type gene family. We in children 0-5 years (58+/-11%) p<0.025. In conclusion, non-dialyzable demonstrate that Etr2 is expressed in the developing central nervous sys- inhibitors of urinary cystine precipitation probably account for protection tem in the mouse (telencephalon, rhombencephalon, spinal cord). With from nephrolithiasis in very young cystinuria children. DMSAis compara- ongoing differentiation Etr2 expression becomes restricted to the cerebel- ble to D-penicillamine as an in vitro inhibitor of cystine precipitation and lum where it persists in the adult organism. To further analyze the possible may potentially be a therapeutic agent for cystinuria. function of Etr2 in neural development, we applied transient expression of Etr2 in a heterologous system by microinjection of synthetic Etr2 mRNA P1647.Neural tube defects (NTD) in human embryos; expres- into Xenopus embryos at the two-cell stage. Our results suggest that over- sion of the SHH, GLI3 and JAG1 genes expression/misexpression of Etr2 in Xenopus alters the expression profile I. Kirillova1,2, I. Novikova2, L. Galaganova2, J. Auge1, S. Audollent1, D. of neuronal markers and/or developmental fate of neuronal precursor cells Esnault1, C. Crosnier1, F. Encha-Razavi1, T. Attie-Bitach1, M. Vekemans1 along the closing neural tube. To support these findings we are studying 1Hospital Necker and INSERM U397; Paris, France; 2Institute for Heredi- the effect of Etr2 transfection on neural differentiation in rat PC12 cells. We tary Diseases; Minsk, Belarus are also on the way to isolate the Xenopus orthologue of Etr2 for structur- ikiril@bcsmi.minsk.by al and functional comparison. We predict Etr2 and the respective human Five human embryos with NTD  craniorachischisis (CRS) and spina bifi- homologue as candidate genes for developmental defects of the central da (SB)- were revealed among 40,582 first trimester abortuses screened nervous system. for malformations. Expression of SHH, GLI3 and JAG1 genes and their relations to one another in the central nervous system were analyzed and P1650. Microarray Analysis of Temporal Gene Expression in compared to the age-control pattern. Expression of the genes of both the the Developing Retina. SHH and NOTCH signaling pathways was disorganized in NTD embryos. C. J. Zeiss Broad, double or multiplied SHH signal was revealed in the floor plate in Yale University School of Medicine; New Haven, United States subtotal CRS and SB, a decreased floor plate SHH expression was noted caroline.zeiss@yale.edu in total CRS. Two signals were revealed in the site of the split cervical por- Numerous mutations which initiate abnormal retinal development have tion of the notochord (primary site of neural tube closure). Additional been identified, however subsequent cellular events causing retinal pathol- domains of GLI3 expression were noticed between the two floor plates in ogy are poorly understood. PURPOSE; To identify groups of co-ordinately total CRS and SB. GLI3 was abnormally expressed in the floor plate in expressed genes during normal retinal development in the mouse. METH- subtotal CRS. In the completely flat portions of the open neural tube pat- ODS; Retinas were collected from normal mice at post-natal (PN) days 5, tern of GLI3 expression characteristic of the neural plate persisted, but in 8, 12 and 15. For each time-point, Cy-3 labeled probes were prepared by the concave segments where the elevation of neural folds has already RT-PCR of 1g of total retinal RNA. Probes were hybridized to microarrays occurred GLI3 domain was located in the lateral parts corresponding to the containing 4600 murine genes. Each gene is arrayed in duplicate, creating dorsal side of the neural tube. Additional domains of JAG1 expression a chip with 9200 spots. The ratio of expression for each gene between sub- were revealed in the neural tube of NTD embryos. Abnormal pattern of sequent time points was compared. For each time point, genes which were genes expression may reflect partial or complete duplication of the axial expressed beyond 2 standard deviations from the mean on both spots of structures in NTD. the array were selected for further analysis. This subset was subjected to cluster and k-means analysis so that the expression pattern for each gene P1648.Expression and Role of p27kip1 in Neuronal Differen- over the four time points could be assessed. RESULTS; Over the four time tiation of Embryonal Carcinoma Cells points, 369 genes had significant changes in expression. At each time J. Furuyama1, S. A. Tamura2, K. Sasaki3, J. Senoh1, T. Hashimoto-Tamao- point, gene expression could be divided into 4-6 general patterns using k- ki1 means analysis. CONCLUSIONS; Alteration in gene expression during 1Dept. Genet., Hyogo Coll. Med.; Nishinomiya, Japan; 22nd Dept. Int. retinal development is complex and dynamic. Patterning and cell cycle Med., Hyogo Coll. Med.; Nishinomiya, Japan; 35th Dept. Int. Med., Hyogo genes are predominantly expressed between PN5-8. Thereafter, they are Coll. Med.; Nishinomiya, Japan superseded by genes controlling housekeeping and neuron-specific meta- tomokots@hyo-med.ac.jp bolic processes. Confirmation of the expression pattern of selected genes We examined the expression and the regulation of the p27kip1 cdk by northern blotting and in-situ hybridization is in progress. inhibitor in P19 mouse embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells following treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) to induce neuronal differentiation. The P1651. Cholesterogenic enzymes are expressed in neural levels of p27 mRNAand protein increased within 24 h of treatment with crest derivatives and limb buds; implications for the patho- ATRA, reaching a plateau 4-5 days later prior to neurite formation. Induc- genesis of CHILD-syndrome and Conradi-Hnermann-Happle tion of muscle differentiation from P19 cells by treatment with dimethyl sul- syndrome foxide caused only transient increases in p27 levels. In a mutant P19 cell D. Laubner, R. Breitling, J. Adamski line, RAC65, treatment with ATRAinduced neither p27 accumulation nor GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health; Neuherberg, neuronal differentiation. In contrast, treatment of RAC65 cells with 9-cis Germany retinoic acid induced both p27 expression and neuronal differentiation. laubner@gsf.de Correlation between p27 expression and neuronal differentiation was also Disruption of post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis by specific inhibitors observed in NT2/D1 human EC cells. Luciferase reporter assays showed (AY9944, BM15,776) or mutations in cholesterogenic enzymes leads to that p27 promoter activity increased in ATRA-treated cells, consistent with characteristic embryonic malformations including craniofacial dysmor- the elevation of p27 mRNAlevels. Inhibition of p27 expression by anti- phisms, postaxial polydactyly, shortened limbs, chondrodysplasia, and sense p27 oligonucleotides resulted in blockade of neuronal differentiation. sensorimotor impairment. Mutations in the following enzymes have been These results strongly suggest that the expression of p27 is indispensable associated with human syndromes; 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase = for neuronal differentiation of EC cells. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, C3-sterol dehydrogenase = CHILD syn- drome, sterol-delta8-delta7 isomerase = Conradi-Hnermann-Happle syn- P1649. Functional Characterization of Etr2, a Novel Gene drome. Mouse models for all three syndromes have been described Encoding for an RNA-binding Protein, in Neural Development recently (bare patches and tattered mutants, and 7DHCR-k.o. mice). The M. Meins1, K. Kiemann1, M. Slter2, J. Missbach1, T. Pieler2, F. Laccone1 pathogenic mechanisms are not known, but some symptoms significantly 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Ger- resemble the phenotype of Hedgehog signaling mutants. The Hedgehog many; 2Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Center of Biochem- family of proteins plays a key role in embryonic morphogenesis of both ver- istry and Molecular Cell Biology, University of Goettingen; Goettingen, Ger- tebrates and invertebrates. The family members are post-translationally many modified by covalent attachment of a cholesterol moiety and their function mmeins@gwdg.de can be inhibited by certain plant alkaloids (cyclopamine, jervine) which Post-transcriptional processes like mRNAstabilization, post-transcriptional show a structural similarity to cholesterol. To elucidate the disruptive mech- modification and mRNAtransport influence mRNAtranslation and protein anism we investigated the expression of cholesterogenic enzymes in the levels and have been suggested to play an important role in developmen- mouse at various developmental stages by mRNA in situ hybridisation. tal gene regulation. RNA-binding proteins are involved in all these mecha- Both proximal (7-DHCR, bare patches, tattered) and distal enzymes nisms, but their contribution to cell differentiation is still poorly understood. (HMG-CoA reductase, IPP isomerase) share a characteristic pattern of426 Posters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders expression; In addition to a weak ubiquitous expression, a strong well- P1654. Wt1 Gene Expression In Cd34+lin- Hematopoietic defined staining occurs in dorsal root ganglia. Further foci of cholestero- Cells From Patients With Acute Myeloid Leukemia And Its In genesis are observed in cranial ganglia, pharyngeal pouches and limb Vitro Modulation By Cytokines. buds. These results corroborate a specific function of cholesterol biosyn- M. Hernndez1, J. Montesinos2, P. Flores2, D. Arenas2, H. Mayani2, F. thesis in developmental pathways. Salamanca2, R. Pealoza2 1IMSS, UNAM; Mxico City, Mexico; 2IMSS; Mxico City, Mexico P1652.Characterization of the limb phenotype in the Ulnaless ehdezc@yahoo.com mutant, a mouse model of HoxD gene deregulation The WT1 protein has been implicated in the control of proliferation and dif- D. Corzo,, C. Tabin ferentiation of hematopoietic cells. An inverse correlation has been Harvard Medical School; Boston, MAUnited States observed between WT1 expression and the cell maturation stage, thus, a corzo_d@a1.tch.harvard.edu higt WT1 expression has been found in CD34+ cells, whereas mature Background. Hox genes control patterning of many different embryonic blood cells show no WT1 activity. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clon- structures including the axial and appendicular skeleton. In the developing al hematologic neoplasia that arises from the transformation of a limbs Hox genes are expressed within specific bone elements. Loss-of- hematopoietic stem cell, resulting in altered proliferation and differentia- function mutations indicate that mice with targeted deletions of specific tion. High levels of WT1 have been reported in bone marrow cells from Hox genes are missing the bone element in which that Hox gene would be AML patients. To date, however, WT1 expression in cultures of AML normally expressed. Ulnaless is a semi-dominant mutation and a model for CD34+ cells supplemented with growth factors has not been assessed. In deregulation of posterior HoxD gene expression. The Ulnaless limb phe- the present study, we have determined the expression of WT1 in notype in the zeugopod is allelic to the phenotype in Hoxa-11; Hoxd-11 CD34+Lin- cells from normal and AMLorigin and evaluated its expression double mutant mice. This phenotype is characterized by severe reduction in cultures supplemented with recombinant cytokines (G-CSF and GM- in the size of ulna and radius. Methods. Wild type and mutant Ulnaless CSF). CD34+Lin- cells, both from umbilical cord blood (normal control) and embryos at different development stages were obtained and their limb phe- leukemic marrow were obtained by immune-based negative selection; notype compared. Limbs were processed to obtained skeletal preparations WT1 transcripts were determined by RT-PCR and confirmed by DNA and histological sections. mRNAexpression of several genes was studied sequencing; hematopoietic cell maturation was determined by morpholog- by in situ hybridization. Results. On skeletal preparations, a reduction in ic analysis. Our results show higher levels of WT1 in leukemic CD34+Lin- the size of the mutant humerus, radius and ulna, as well as an abnormal cells than in their normal counterparts. When leukemic cells were cultured shape of the radius and ulna is evident, as early as 13.5 dpc. Histology with G-CSF and GM-CSF for 10-20 days, large numbers of mature blood sections showed a delay in the differentiation of the mutant humerus, cells were produced; interestingly, WT1 expression remained higt. These radius, and ulna of 3, 5 , and 7 days of delay, respectively, when compared findings suggest that WT1 expression does not interfere with cytokine- to wild type littermates. Delay in differentiation in Ulnaless mutant radius induced myeloid terminal maturation of AMLcells in vitro. and ulna was confirmed by in situ hybridization using Ihh (expressed by prehypertrophic chondrocytes) and Collagen X (expressed by hypertrophic P1655.Analysis of differential gene expression during devel- chondrocytes) as markers. Expression of genes of the Ihh feedback loop, opment of cardiac hypertrophy like PTHrP and PTH/PTHrP receptor are delayed, in accordance with T. Hahn, I. Hansmann, M. Schlicker delayed Ihh expression. Additional in situ hybridizations for a limited num- Institut fr Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie; Halle/ S., Germany ber of genes, among them TGFb1, TGFb2, and several BMPs showed torsten.hahn@student.uni-halle.de either a normal temporal expression or delay. Conclusions. Reduction in The spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) is a well-known model for the size and abnormal shape of the Ulnaless zeugopod is evident as early as study of hypertension and heart failure. Diverse quantitative trait loci stage 13.5 dpc. The Ulnaless limb shows skeletal and histological evi- (QTLs) for hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy indicate that different dence of delay in development that affects more severely the ulna. Sever- chromosomal areas account for the development of the two diseases. al genetic markers confirmed this delay in development. Although our gene Within the development of the clinical symptoms the SHR passes through expression analysis has been extremely informative, none of the candidate distinct stages. Up to four weeks after birth the animals are normotensive, regulators of bone morphogenesis is expressed in an altered manner sug- and then males firstly evolve hypertension (12 weeks) and afteron hyper- gestive of being a direct Hox gene target. Additional studies are needed to trophy of the left heart ventricle (26 weeks). To identify candidate genes identify the network of Hox gene transcriptional targets involved in bone that contribute to cardiac hypertrophy we screened the hearts of these development in vertebrates. SHRs for differentially expressed genes. For having a high-resolution method we established a subtractive hybridization system based on cDNA P1653. Molecular characterization of the WT1-gene in the selection and suppression PCR. The subtractive hybridizations from the 4- pathogenesis of congenital nephrotic syndrome to 12- and to 26-weeks stages resulted in 144 different cDNAclones. The G. Pitschke, S. Sonner, B. Royer-Pokora, V. Schumacher following differential screening suggested 48 cDNAs to be candidates for Institute for human genetics, Heinrich-Heine University; Duesseldorf, Ger- differentially expressed genes. Northern blot analyses of meanwhile 18 many cDNAs identified 4 genes which are upregulated at their expression level gpitschke @gmx.de in the 26-weeks stage in comparison to the wild type Wistar-Kyoto rat. The Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1) encodes a transcription factor According to homology searches in electronic databases we identified 4 that is responsible for normal kidney and gonadal development. It is well novel genes that are differentially expressed in hypertrophic growing SHR demonstrated that mutations in the WT1 gene (11p13) are leading to hearts. Next, we will check the chromosomal localization of these genes in Denys-Drash-Syndrome (DDS). DDS is characterised by nephrotic syn- respect to known QTLs for cardiac hypertrophy by FISH analysis and ana- drome, Wilms tumor and pseudohermaphroditism masculinus. Most of the lyze the expression and integrity of these genes in other hypertrophic ani- genes known to be regulated by WT1 (e.g. IGF-II, TGF1, PAX-2 and Bcl- mal models. 2) were identified in in-vitro assays. However, little is known about the in- (Supported by BMBF) vivo situation. To identify the whole spectrum of genes that are physiolog- ically regulated by WT1 and genes that are misregulated in DDS we per- P1656. Characterization of growth and differential gene formed expression analyses from glomerular cells of 3 DDS patients and 2 expression of CNTF-expressing immortalized embryonic normal controls. The process was as followed; first we isolated mRNAfrom stem cell (ST14A) for the application in the animal model of frozen tissue by Laser-Micro-Dissection. The extracted RNAwas amplified Parkinsons disease with the SMART-Technology, labeled with 33Pand hybridized on Unigene R. Knoblich1, S. Weinelt1, P. Bauer1, T. Boettcher1, E. Mix1, S. Peters1, D. and Atlas-Arrays. Whereas the Unigene-filters set represents more than Koczan2, A. Wree3, E. Cattaneo4, A. Rolfs1 35.000 known and unknown human ESTs, the Atlas-Array human 3.6 con- 1Department of Neurology; Rostock, Germany; 2Institute of Immunology; sists of 3.600 known cDNAs. The evaluation using the AIDA software Rostock, Germany; 3Institute of Anatomy; Rostock, Germany; 4Institute of revealed some important and interesting differences in the expression pat- Pharmacology; Milano, Italy terns of the control and the DDS glomerular cells. The differences have rupert.knoblich@gmx.de now to be confirmed by RT-PCR and immunhistochemistry analysis in Embryonic stem cells (ES) are the origin of mature cells of the central cases where antibodies are available. nervous system during fetal development. They provide the ability of plas- ticity and reconstitution to the brain. There are experimental data that in neurodegenerative disorders, e.g. Parkinsons disease, the transplantation of ES may reduce the progressive loss of cells and their functional deteri- oration. Conditionally immortalized striatal ES (ST14A) of the rat werePosters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders 427 transfected with the rat ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) cDNAin order to P1659. The Role of runx2/cbfa1 in Chondrocyte Differentia- improve the functional efficiency of the grafted cells by secreting the neu- tion rotrophic factor. The extent of CNTF expression was determined on the S. Stricker, R. Fundele, S. Mundlos transcription level by using real-time PCR (FRET-technology) and on the Max Planck Institut fuer molekulare Genetik; Berlin, Germany protein level by Western blottting and flow cytometry. Cells were charac- strick_s@molgen.mpg.de terized with regard to proliferation (H3-thymidine assay, WST-1 test) and The transcription factor runx2/cbfa1 belongs to the family of runt-related apoptosis (TUNEL-assay). Differential RNA expression patterns were genes and is an essential factor for bone development. In humans, muta- investigated by using a microarray system. Transfected cell clones with tions in runx2/cbfa1 are responsible for cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD). considerably different expression levels of CNTF were isolated. They had Mice homozygous for a targeted deletion of runx2/cbfa1 die immediately an increased proliferative activity compared to the native cells. Switching after birth and exhibit a complete lack of bone formation due to an early from non-permissive (33C) to permissive (39C) culturing conditions led to block in osteoblast development. Recently it has been shown that decrease of proliferation. Proportions of apoptotic cells were not signifi- runx2/cbfa1 is also involved in chondrocyte development. To further inves- cantly different between CNTF transfected and native cells. About 250 dif- tigate this, a transgenic mouse model was created in which the transcrip- ferentially expressed genes were analyzed. Concerning the CNTF trans- tional activity of runx2/cbfa1 is downregulated specifically in chondrocytes. fected cells the microarray data suggest a tendency towards a neuronal Adominant-negative construct consisting only of the DNA-binding domain differentiation and a decreased level of pro-apoptotic factors under per- of runx2/cbfa1 under control of the Collagen2a1-promoter was used. This missive culturing conditions. Further efforts have to be done in order to promoter is active only in resting and proliferating chondrocytes. The trans- characterize the neuronal differentiation of CNTF transfected ST14Acells genic mice exhibit a markedly reduced size of the scapula and the stylo- on the protein level. The transfected cells will be characterized regarding pod while zeugoppod and autopod are less affected. This phenotype can their differentiation and migration in the in vivo transplantation be increased by crossing the mice to homozygousity. Using in-situ hybridi- sation it is shown that downregulation of runx2/cbfa1-signalling results in a P1657. Neuronal death during development in control and marked delay in chondrocyte differentiation. Thus, runx2/cbfa1 acts as a SMAspinal cords. positive regulator during chondrocyte differentiation contributing to the cor- E. F. Tizzano1, C. Soler1, I. Ferrer2, I. Gich1, M. Baiget1 rect pace of bone growth. 1Hospital Sant Pau; Barcelona, Spain; 2Hospital de Bellvitge; Barcelona, Spain P1660. Fibrillin-1 antisense affects on the developing chick etizzano@hsp.santpau.es embryo The degeneration and loss of the motor neurons of the anterior horn is the S. Plaza, S. V. Vinogradov, D. Johnson, S. Beiraghi, A. V. Kabanov, M. major neuropathological finding in childhood spinal muscular atrophy Godfrey (SMA). Neuronal death naturally occurs during development of the spinal University of Nebraska Medical Center; Omaha, NE United States cord but the mechanism and timing of motor neuron death in SMAremain mgodfrey@unmc.edu unknown. The objectives of this work were to compare the neuronal death Mutations in fibrillin-1 a microfibrillar glycoprotein with a ubiquitous distri- in control and SMAspinal cord and to determine whether the neurodegen- bution, are known to cause the Marfan syndrome (MFS). Given the patho- erative process and the loss of motor neurons in SMAspinal cord are due physiology of MFS, it has been hypothesized that fibrillin-1 plays primarily to an enhanced cell death through an apoptotic mechanism. Aquantitative a load bearing function in the extracellular matrix. However, it has been study was carried out comparing neuronal death in 57 control fetuses and shown that fibrillin-1 is expressed as early as the primitive streak in the 12 SMAfetuses with homozygous absence of the SMN1 gene. Between developing chick embryo. Since load bearing is not a critical function at 12-15 weeks of gestational age, a significant increase in nuclear DNAvul- that stage of development, we used an antisense approach to target fib- nerability was detected in SMAfetuses and was reflected by a decrease in rillin-1 during early chick development. Our initial studies were focused on the number of neurons of the anterior horn. Neurons with nuclear DNAvul- getting antisense oligonucleotides into the embryo. Using fluorescence nerability are no longer detected at the end of the fetal period and the post- tagged oligonucleotides, we observed a greater accumulation of oligonu- natal period. The study by immunohistochemistry of two proteins involved cleotide in the embryo if the oligonucleotides were bound to cationic block in apoptosis such as Bcl-2 and Bax did not show any differential expres- copolymers of polyethyleneglycol and polyethylenimine. Block copolymer sion in control and SMAspinal cords. Our findings indicate that in type I bound phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotides were inoculated into SMA, the absence or dysfunction of the SMN1 gene is reflected by an eggs starting at four hours post fertilization. Control eggs were inoculated enhanced neuronal death. This is associated with a progressive loss of with equivalent volumes of PBS, copolymer alone, antisense oligonu- motor neurons towards the neonatal period. Supported by Fundaci cleotides without copolymer, and sense oligonucleotide with copolymer. At Marat TV3 and FIS 00-481. both 3 and 6 days, all control embryos were at normal stages. Embryos inoculated with antisense to fibrillin-1 with the block copolymer showed a P1658. Molecular characterization and promoter analysis of range of abnormalities from delay in development to gross morphological the murine and human fork head genes Foxq1 and FOXQ1 abnormalities. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on fibrillin-1 B. Pasche, A. Bieller, K. Witt, A. Janssen, B. Zoll antisense targeted embryos using antibodies to chick fibrillin-1 and fibrillin- Institut fr Humangenetik; Gttingen, Germany 2. While significant immunostaining was observed in control and mock-tar- bpasche@gwdg.de geted embryos, we observed specific decrease in fibrillin-1 staining in Murine Foxq1 is a fork head transcription factor mainly expressed in kid- embryos targeted with antisense to fibrillin-1. Fibrillin-2 immunostaining ney and stomach. The 2.7 kb transcript was found in all tested embryonic was unaffected in these fibrillin-1 targeted embryos. These studies point to stages as well as in embryonic stem cells. In order to analyze the tran- the critical role fibrillin- 1 plays in early embryogenesis and the greater effi- scriptional regulation we isolated the genomic clones of the mouse Foxq1 ciency and efficacy of block copolymer bound antisense oligonucleotides. and human FOXQ1 genes including the 5 region. The DNAsequences of both genes are 80,5% identical and show high homology to the rat gene P1661. Identification of murine sex-specific genes by differ- FoxQ1 (former HFH-1). The genes contain no intron and no TATA-motif ential screening within the region of 25-35 bp 5 of the putative transcription start was P. A. Bernard, P. Dewing, S. T. Ching, E. Vilain detected by sequence analysis. The predicted proteins contain an identical UCLA; Los Angeles, CAUnited States DNAbinding domain and two putative activation domains, which are con- bernardp@ucla.edu served between the 3 species. Reporter gene assays reveal that important The molecular mechanisms of mammalian sex determination are poorly regulatory elements are located within a 200 bp sequence which is highly understood. To date, only a minority of sex-reversal phenotypes in humans conserved between mouse and man and is located around 500 bp can be explained by mutations in known sex-determining genes, suggest- upstream of ATG. Analyzing the region we identified three binding sites of ing the existence of other intermediates in the sex determination pathway. members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors, band shift assays with We hypothesize that developmentally regulated genes differentially these sites showed two specific DNA/protein complexes. Using antibodies expressed between the developing male and female gonad may control against Sp1 and the related transcription factor Sp3 both complexes dis- sex determination. The purpose of our experiments was to compare geni- appeared. Reporter gene assays with the Drosophila Schneider cell line tal ridges from males and females at E11.5, immediately prior to the differ- SL2 together with Sp1 and/or Sp3 expression vectors showed, that both entiation of seminiferous cords in the male gonad. The suppressive sub- proteins are able to activate the reporter gene. AYeast One Hybrid screen tractive hybridization (SSH) technique was used to compare cDNApopu- should help to identify other factors which could explain the tissue speci- lations between males and females at E11.5. The time point and tissues ficity of Foxq1. chosen provide the possibility of monitoring the SSH efficiency by examin- ing genes such as SRYand DAX1, known to be differentially expressed428 Posters: Therapy for Genetic Disorders between male and female gonads. We have identified 150 candidate sex- P1664.Deletions of 9p and the Quest for a Conserved Mech- determining genes that are expressed only in the male developing gonad anism of Sex Determination and 200 other candidate genes expressed only in the developing ovary. M. Fellous, C. Ottolenghi, F. Vialard, K. McElreavey The most promising candidates are being further analyzed using a virtual Institut Pasteur; Paris, France slot blot assay for their expression profile during development and by in mfellous@pasteur.fr situ hybridization to confirm their tissue specific expression. Distal chromosome 9p contains a locus that, when deleted, is a cause of 46,XYgonadal dysgenesis in the absence of extragenital anomalies. This P1662. Evidence For The Exclusion Of Dmrt1 As The Testis locus might account for the frequently observed cases of 46, XY pure Determining Factor In Ellobius Lutescens gonadal dysgenesis who do not harbor mutations in SRY, the sex master A. Baumstark1, W. Vogel1, M. Akhverdyan2, W. Just1 regulator gene found in mammalian species. The genomic organization of 1University of Ulm; Ulm, Germany; 2Uppsala University; Uppsala, Sweden 9p positional candidate genes is currently being studied and mutational annette.baumstark@medizin.uni-ulm.de screens are ongoing. Among pthers positional candidates, including two In male mammals the Y-chromosomal gene SRYis usually required to ini- additional doublesex-related genes, the evidence to support a role for the tiate testis determination. Nevertheless there are some species with a gene DMRT1 in vertebrate male sexual development is accumulating. Al testis determination that is independent of SRY. In the mole vole Ellobius though formal proof of the requirement of DMRT1 in gonadal sex fate lutescens both sexes have the same karyotype 17,X. On the cytogenetic choice has not been obtained so far, the particular interest in this gene and level there are no sex-specific differences and the absence of Sry has perhaps other doublesex-related genes identified in vertebrates lies in that been shown by molecular methods. It is now speculated that one of the sex they may provide an entry point to a conserved mechanism of sex deter- determining genes acting usually downstream of Sry is mutated and has mination across animal phyla. We discuss recent results and emerging taken over testis determining function. The only candidate gene for testis views on the genetics of sex determination, while stressing that the major- determination without SRY is SOX9. In humans and mice it has been ity of cases of 46,XYgonadal dysgenesis remain unexplained. The latter is shown that an elevated dosage of the gene can lead to XX sex reversal. likely to be efficiently addressed by positional cloning efforts, particularly by Recently we were able to exclude a testis inducing function of Sox9 in considering the wealth of sequence data provided by the Human Genome Ellobius lutescens by linkage analysis in an E. lutescens pedigree. Anoth- Project. er candidate gene that could possibly induce testis development is DMRT1. The DMRT1 gene shows a testis-specific expression during P1665. Heterochromatic der(15) in a male infertility patient; embryonic development and in the adult organism in all vertebrates tested Case report and review of the literature to date. Because of its localization on the bird Z chromosome it is consid- G. Bujdos1, G. Schwanitz2, E. Koltai1, A. Ehrbrecht2, R. Raff2 ered a candidate gene for the postulated dosage dependent sex determi- 1Institute of Forensic Medicine of Semmelweis University, Research Unit; nation in birds. We hypothesize that a comparable mechanism - based on Budapest, Hungary; 2Institute of Human Genetics; Bonn, Germany the existence of two Dmrt1 alleles differing in expression levels - could also dunay@igaz.sote.hu work in Ellobius lutescens. To test this hypothesis we started searching for Chromosome analyses have been performed in a sample of infertility polymorphic markers in the Ellobius Dmrt1 gene in order to define different patients. In the case reported, a supernumerary marker chromosome was alleles of the gene. We isolated and sequenced a phage clone including found by Q- and G-banding after lymphocyte culture. The male patient exon 3 and parts of intron 2 and 3. The intronic sequences were analyzed showed no clinical abnormalities besides abnormal by an enzymatic mutation detection system (EMD) and a polymorphism spermatogenesis/azoospermia/. The relatives in the ascending and collat- was identified in the second intron. The allele distribution of this marker eral line of the index patient were included in the cytogenetic investigation. was defined in 23 animals from an Iranian subpopulation but there was no Three of them, all females, were also carriers of the der(15). They showed association of marker alleles with the sex of the animals. Because of the neither an increased abortion rate nor decreased fertility. Molecular analy- population structure in Ellobius lutescens that is postulated to be permis- sis of the AZF gene in the index patient gave normal results. The marker sive for the establishment of an extensive linkage disequilibrium and the chromosome was identified by FISH as a heterochromatic deviate of chro- close linkage between the tested marker and the Dmrt1 gene we assume mosome 15. The role of heterochromatic marker chromosomes in male that marker alleles and Dmrt1 alleles are also associated. On the basis of sterility will be discussed. this assumption Dmrt1 is excluded from being the testis determining factor Supported by the PPP-program of DAAD/MB and the Hungarian Acade- in Ellobius lutescens. This study was supported by grant Re 413/6-1 from my of Science. the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. P1666. Germline mutations at human STR in spontaneously P1663. Hidden Gonadal SRY Mosaicism In 46,XX True Her- aborted embryos maphroditism S. A. Nazarenko, T. V. Nikitina G. Queipo1, A. Jimenez1, R. Pea2, J. Zenteno1, S. Kofman-Alfaro1 Institution of Medical Genetics; Tomsk, Russian Federation 1Genetics Department, Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina, snaz@img.tsu.ru UNAM; Mexico City, Mexico; 2Department of Pathology, Hospital Infantil F. Recently, Spandidos et al. (1998) have reported a high level of microsatel- Gomez; Mexico City, Mexico lite mutation in spontaneously aborted embryos. We have analyzed STR gqueipo99@yahoo.com mismatches at 55 families with a history of early embryonic failure (missed True hermaphroditism (TH) is a sex reversal condition characterized by abortions and anembryonic pregnancies) and normal karyotype. DNAwas development of testicular and ovarian tissue in a single individual. TH is a extracted from fetal membranes or chorionic villi and peripheral blood of genetically heterogeneous condition as 60% of the cases are 46,XX while abortuses parents. We used polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis following the remainder are 46,XYor mosaics with normal or abnormal Ychromo- PCR amplification for 21 tetranucleotide high-polymorphous loci located on some. Molecular studies have shown that 10% of 46,XX TH present SRY seven autosomes. In 1222 parent/abortus allelic transfers, 10 isolated STR sequences and the mechanisms leading to testicular development in Y mismatches in six loci were observed. The mutation rate of was 8.3 x 10- negative 46,XX TH remain unknown. We report the results of molecular 3 per locus per gamete per generation with the prevalence of the male studies performed in 4 TH patients, presenting a 46,XX karyotype. Patients germline mutations. The study of alleles segregation of other DNAmarkers 1 and 2 were SRY negative in both leukocytic and gonadal DNA. PCR permitted exclusion with high probability non-paternity and uniparental dis- analysis in DNA obtained from blood leukocytes of patients 3 and 4 omy as the possible reasons for parent/abortus mismatches. Together with demonstrated the absence of SRY, but SRYwas positive in DNAobtained two additional cases of somatic microsatellite mutations which we detect- from their gonads. In patient 3, SRYpresented a deletion at its 5 region ed in spontaneous abortuses the mean mutation rate of studied tetranu- and in patient 4, a normal SRYsequence was found. The molecular find- cleotide loci was 9.8 x 10-3 per locus per gamete per generation. This is ings in patients 3 and 4 indicate unusual mechanisms leading to 46,XX TH; about five times higher then the spontaneous mutation rate of this type in patient 3, SRYwas absent in leukocytes but it was present and partial- STR loci reported by other authors in normal families. It can be suggested ly deleted in DNAfrom gonads. in patient 4 SRYwas absent in leukocytic that genome instability detected at the level of repeated DNAsequences DNAbut present and confined to the gonad; We propose that this is an can involve not only genetically neutral loci but also active genomic regions unusual mechanism for XX TH and that the early presence of SRYwas crucial for embryonic viability. However, because the mutation rates of dif- sufficient to partially differentiate testicular tissue with subsequent loss ferent loci can differ to a marked degree an additional analysis of sponta- (vanishing mosaicism) of this genetic material in most tissues. neous mutation rate of studied loci in normal population is needed as well as the necessity of further investigation of microsatellite mutation in a larg- er sample of families with miscarriages. Posters: Comparative Genetics 429 P1667. Human intrachromosomal telomerik-like repeats; ments. To isolate the genomic regions harbouring pericentric inversion relics of ancestral double-strand break repair breakpoints we compared the FISH pattern of BAC contigs in the respec- E. Giulotto1, C. M. Azzalin1, S. G. Nergadze1, N. Archidiacono2, M. Teti2 tive regions on human chromosome 17 between chimpanzee, orangutan 1University of Pavia; Pavia, Italy; 2University of Bari; Bari, Italy and human. We identified BAC clones closely adjacent to and spanning giulotto@ipvgen.unipv.it the inversion breakpoints on the equivalents of chromosome 17 in chim- Intrachromosomal location of (T2AG3)n telomeric sequences was report- panzee and orangutan. BAC subclones were generated by PCR or restric- ed in different species and several authors proposed that interstitial telom- tion digestion and localized by FISH to further narrow the breakpoints to eres (ITs) are relics of ancestral telomeric fusions. Sequence analysis of more restricted regions. Preliminary results suggest that based on the cor- about 70 ITs allowed us to identify three classes; (i) short ITs, composed responding human sequence at 17q21.3 a gene should be affected by the by few essentially exact T2AG3 units; (ii) subtelomeric ITs, composed by inversion resulting in altered genomic organization of that locus comparing larger arrays (several hundred bp) including degenerate units within sub- human and chimpanzee. telomeric domains; (iii) fusion ITs, in which two extended telomeric stretch- es are oriented head-to-head. Surprisingly, only one IT, mapping at 2q13, P1670. Nucleotide Diversity In  Globin For Non-human Pri- belongs to the fusion class, indicating that mechanisms other than the mates telomeric fusion generated most human ITs. In particular, several short ITs D. Podpecnik1, U. Potocnik1, M. Ravnik-Glavac1, J. Wine2, A. Novak1, T. interrupt precisely repetitive elements or are flanked by direct repeats of Krasovec1, D. Glavac1 10-43 bp. This sequence organization suggested to us that these ITs were 1Medical Faculty; Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2Stanford University; Stanford, CA inserted during the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs) that occurred in United States the germ-line. We sequenced the region homologous to one short ITfrom dpodpecnik@mf.uni-lj.si different primate species. In humans, this IT extends for 67 bp and is Animal models of genetic diseases are important in order to understand flanked by a 43 bp direct repeat. The telomeric stretch and the direct etiological and pathophysiological processes also in humans. Hemoglo- repeats are conserved in humans, chimpanzee and gorilla. Interestingly, in binopathies and thalassemias are the most common single gene diseases orango and in gibbon, the ITis missing and the 43 bp repeat is present only in humans. Their distribution, which is geographically localised, overlaps in one copy. These data unambiguously confirm that the ITwas inserted the distribution of monkey populations. We therefore screened 6 monkey during evolution through the repair of a staggered DSB that produced 43 species for nucleotide diversity at the  globin locus. Adult hemoglobin A bp protruding ends. The events leading to the insertion of this IToccurred comprises two ? and two  chains. The ? chain locus has two equivalent 7-15 m.y.a., between the radiation of the genera Pongo and Gorilla. genes, and ? thalassemias typically result from large deletions. Because there are two ? genes and because our methods are optimized for detect- P1668.Evolutionary Breakpoints on Human Chromosome 21 ing point mutations, we chose to focus on the  globin locus. Results show in comparison with mouse that we can amplify  globin with human intronic primers in all 6 primate M. T. Davisson1, E. C. Akeson1, L. J. Bechtel1, D. Slavov2, K. Gardiner2 species we examined. We defined 6 different allels, including one normal, 1The Jackson Laboratory; Bar Harbor, ME United States; 2The Eleanor in each of three exons in  globin gene. There were 3 missense, 8 silent Roosevelt Institute; Denver, CO United States and 10 intronic alternations close to exon/intron boundary (Figure 1), mtd@jax.org together 21 alternations. One of the intronic alternations was frame shift Human Chromosome 21 is conserved in mouse Chromosomes 10, 16, and alternation due to T insertion. M. nemestrina is the most diverse of the 17. To facilitate the construction of appropriate mouse models of Down species we studied. For this species 12 alternations were seen across all syndrome, the evolutionary breakpoints between the three conserved seg- 3 exons. ments on human chromosome (Chr) 21 were defined. The annotation of the complete genomic sequence of Chr 21 was used to identify all genes P1671. Comparative mapping of human chromosome 20q13 in the relevant breakpoint regions, followed by database searches to iden- segment and identification of new genes as candidate for tify the homologous mouse genes. The mouse T-31 radiation hybrid (RH) imprinting panel and PCR primers were used to map these genes to mouse chromo- S. Worch, S. Kumann, A. Hehr, I. Hansmann, D. Schlote somes. This directly demonstrated the inclusion of two zinc finger genes, Institut fr Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie; Halle, Germany an ankyrin/kinase gene, and an anonymous ORF in the telomeric region of dietmar.schlote@medizin.uni-halle.de mouse Chr 16 and places the Chr 16 - Chr 17 breakpoint between genes The human chromosome 20q13 (HSA20q13) segment has been shown to ZNF295 and ABCG1. By similar means the Chr 17 - Chr 10 breakpoint was be syntenic to distal mouse chromosome 2 (MMU2) containing imprinted located between genes KIAA0179 and PDXK. These data show that the genes. In order to refine and expand the syntenic map between MMU2 and mouse Chr 17 component is ~1.5 Mb and contains possibly as few as 25 HSA20q13 we have generated a human-BAC-contig of approximately genes. These data provide additional information on the genetic content of 1000 kb in size spanning the area around the anchor markers GNAS1 and the segmental trisomy Ts65Dn model for Down syndrome. In addition, EDN3 which is the basis for the identification of novel genes within the FISH was used to show that the mouse homologue of NCAM2 (Ocam) is region of interest as candidates for imprinting. Several genes have been not contained in Ts65Dn, while the homologues of APPand GABPAare in isolated and characterized in terms of structure and expression pattern but the trisomic chromosome. their function remains unknown since they do not show homology to known genes nor proteins. Herewith we introduce two of such candidate genes P1669. Molecular definition of pericentric inversion break- which contain the human EST-markers stSG10922 and A005Z17, respec- points on the chimpanzee and orangutan equivalents of tively. Starting out from stSG10922 a complete cDNAcontaining a 921 bp human chromosome 17 ORF has been isolated consisting of 9 exons. Northern-hybridisation H. Kehrer-Sawatzki, H. Hameister revealed a transcript of approximately 1,8 kb in size expressed in all tis- University of Ulm, Department of Human Genetics; Ulm, Germany sues analyzed. In case of the second gene a 3,2 kb transcript was detect- hildegard.kehrer-sawatzki@medizin.uni-ulm.de ed in brain only. The corresponding cDNAhas been isolated containing a Sequence analysis has revealed pronounced conservation among the 1683 bp ORF and deriving from at least 13 exons. For both of these novel genomes of higher primates. For example, the genome of the chimpanzee transcripts homologous cDNAclones of the mouse have been isolated. (Ptr) is supposed to be more than 98% identical to the human genome. They will serve to verify the physical localisation using a YAC-contig of dis- However, genetic disparities are assumed to account for the reproductive tal MMU2. The characterization of homologous mouse genes will be the isolation and phenotypic separation of the species. The most conspicuous basis to investigate monoallelic expression using a translocation mouse differences between the karyotypes of members of the family of Hominidae model to identify novel candidate genes for imprinting in mouse and man. are the fusion of great ape chromosomes 12 and 13, changes in hete- Supported by DHGP. rochromatin distribution and pericentric inversions. Comparing the G-band- ed chromosomes of human and chimpanzee, nine pericentric inversions P1672.Inheritance Patterns Of Rhythm Parameters; Exposure and one insertion, but no paracentric inversions or further translocations To Exogenous Signals are observed. In the case of 5 of these chromosomes with pericentric Y. Weigl1, L. Peleg2, A. Dotan1, I. E. Ashkenazi1 inversions, the inverted regions are large enough and contain several Mb 1Unit of Chronobiology, Department of Human Genetics and Molecular of euchromatin to foster the suspicion that these pericentric inversions had Medicine, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University; Tel Aviv, Israel; an effect on reproductive isolation. The molecular definition of pericentric 2Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center; Tel inversions is necessary to address their contribution to human evolution Hashomer, Israel and to investigate whether the characterization of evolutionary breakpoints yweigl@hotmail.com provides insights into general mechanisms of chromosomal rearrange- To elucidate the inheritance patterns of rhythms patterns we used three430 Posters: Comparative Genetics month old BALB/c and C57BL/6J male mice and their F1 progenies. The scripts were detected in several different tissues, including retina. The mice were exposed to 12;12 L;D illumination for three weeks. Cis-platinum canine GRF1 maps to CFA1 close to CRX, a region synteny to human (0.04 mg/mouse) or saline was injected i.p. at (22 HALO) for 10 consecu- chromosome 19q13 and therefore has been excluded as a candidate gene tive days. On the 11th day, 3 mice of each group were sacrificed at equi- for prcd. However, recent studies have revealed the importance of gluco- distant times (during 30 hours). Plasma WBC count, and kidney Creatine corticoids in the retina, possibly to maintain a protective function. Thus, the phosphokinase(CPK), Alkaline phosphatase(AP) and Urea Nitrogen were expression pattern of GRF1in retina and its gene regulating function dis- determined. Rhythm parameters were determined and were compared played in human and rat supports its potential role in the disease patholo- among the groups. Results; Prior to injection all group exhibited the same gy. circadian pattern and phase in WBC count. After injection two of the groups exhibited a semicircadian rhythm and another group exhibited a phase P1675. Comparative genomics of the SOX9 region in human change. Pre and post injection different changes of the individual rhythm and Fugu; conservation of short sequence elements within parameters were observed in the two parental strains and their offspring large intergenic regions with regard to AP, CPK activity and Urea Nitrogen concentration. . Conclu- S. Bagheri-Fam1, D. Pfeifer1, C. Ferraz2, J. Demaille2, G. Scherer1 sions; 1. Strain dependent variations in time structure were found in two 1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology; Freiburg, Germany; 2Insti- mice strains and in the F1 progeny, albeit the identical entraining condi- tut de Gntique Humaine; Montpellier, France tions. 2. The stress induced by the drug, affected differently the rhythms of bagherifam@aol.com the examined variables in the three mice groups. 3. Rhythms parameters Campomelic dysplasia (CD), a skeletal malformation syndrome with XY were segregated independently from each other in the F1 progenies, a fact sex reversal (MIM 114290), is caused by heterozygous mutations in and that suggests the existence of an independent genetic control for each. around the SOX9 gene on distal 17q. SOX9 has an extended 5 control region as indicated by CD translocation breakpoints scattering over 1 Mb P1673. Comparative genomic sequencing of the human and proximal to SOX9, and by expression data from mice transgenic for human mouse RPGR gene identifies tissue-specific coding SOX9-spanning YACs. We have previously generated ~1 Mb of genomic sequences that are mutated in patients with X-linked retinitis sequence from the SOX9 5-flanking region that could now be extended to pigmentosa an almost uninterrupted sequence contig of ~3.7 Mb around SOX9. Seven R. Kirschner1, D. Erturk1, C. Zeitz1, S. Sahin1, J. Ramser1, T. Rosenberg2, protein-coding genes, two pseudogenes and three non-coding transcripts A. A. B. Bergen3, F. P. M. Cremers4, H. H. Ropers1, W. Berger1 were found in this region. Analysis of ~195 kb of genomic sequence from 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics; Berlin, Germany; 2National the SOX9 region in the pufferfish Fugu rubripes revealed a similar low Eye Clinic for the Visually Impaired; Hellerup, Denmark; 3The Netherlands gene content of only five genes. Four of these genes have been mapped Ophthalmic Research Institute; Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 4Depart- in human, and all reside on chromosome 17, revealing extensive intra- ment of Human Genetics of the University Medical Centre Nijmegen; chromosomal gene shuffling when compared to the gene order in Fugu. In Nijmegen, The Netherlands both species, very large intergenic distances separate SOX9 from ist flank- kirschne@molgen.mpg.de ing genes; 2 Mb and 500 kb either side of SOX9 in human, and 68 kb and X-linked retinitis pigmentosa 3 (XLRP3), a progressive retinal degenera- 94 kb either side of SOX9 in Fugu. Comparative sequence analysis of the tion, is caused by mutations in the retintis pigmentosa GTPase regulator intergenic regions revealed five conserved potential regulatory elements, (RPGR) gene residing in Xp21.1. RPGRtranscription studies in man and E1-E5, up to 290 kb 5 to human SOX9 and up to 18 kb 5 to Fugu SOX9, mouse revealed several alternatively spliced isoforms in different tissues, and three such elements, E6-E8, 3 to SOX9. From the YAC transgenic including retina. To further elucidate the genomic structure of this gene and data, elements E3-E5 are candidate enhancers for SOX9 expression in to understand the regulation of tissue-specific expression and splicing, we limb and vertebral column, and eight of ten CD translocation breakpoints performed comparative genomic sequencing of RPGR and flanking separate these elements from SOX9. Work is in progress to test the iden- regions in mouse and man. Both genes span nearly 59 kb. All previously tified elements in transgenic mice. identified exons are conserved between the 2 species. In addition, more than 25 conserved regions were found in introns. One of them is identical P1676. Human chromosome 21;genomic sequence annota- to a novel RPGRexon (ORF15), that was reported recently as mutation tion, gene expression and evolutioary conservation hotspot. 30% of all our XLRPpatients showed frameshift mutations in this K. J. Gardiner, D. Slavov, A. Fortna sequence. Northern blot analysis with an ORF15-probe revealed high Eleanor Roosevelt Institute; Denver, CO United States molecular weight RPGR transcripts (>15 kb) in retina and brain. In con- gardiner@eri.uchsc.edu trast, the ubiquitously expressed consensus cDNAis only 2.8 kb in length Analysis of the recently reported sequence of human chromosome 21 and the discrepancy can not be explained by the ORF15 sequence. Fur- identified 225 genes and gene models. To aid in studies relevant to Down ther transcription studies are underway in order to isolate additional syndrome, we have directed efforts towards refinement of the genomic expressed sequences. Our results demonstrate that comparative genomic annotation, development of gene expression patterns, and identification of sequencing enables the discovery of tissue-specific exons when ESTs are evolutionarily conserved genes. Genomic sequence annotation includes not available or in those cases where exon prediction programs fail. More- structures of genes and models, the identification of mouse, rat and over, conserved sequences in RPGRintrons represent potential regulato- zebrafish ESTs, pufferfish conservation (Exofish), promoter predictions ry elements which are important for alternative splicing or tissue-specific (PromoterInspector) and mouse genomic sequence conservation. Expres- gene expression. sion analysis uses genomic annotation followed by RT-PCR from 30 tis- sues and cell lines. This defines tissue specific and ubiquitously expressed P1674. Potential importance of the Glucocorticoid Receptor genes, and refines models, sometimes combining two gene models into Promoter Binding Protein (GRF1) in an inherited retinal dis- one or splitting a single model into two. Complexities include large genes, ease pathway. ambiguous open reading frames, and overlapping genes. Rat/mouse ESTs B. Zangerl, Q. Zhang, G. Aguirre add support to weak models and define rarely expressed genes. Search- J.A. Baker Institute, Cornell University; Ithaca, NYUnited States es of the complete databases of yeast, C.elegans and Drosophila, and the bz24@cornell.edu growing zebrafish ESTs define sets of evolutionarily conserved genes Human retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the phenotypic equivalent to canine showing strong similarities throughout entire proteins or well beyond progressive rod-cone degeneration (prcd), an autosomal recessive retinal known functional domains. For the majority of these there is as yet no disease mapped to CFA9. Synteny of the region to the human chromo- mutation information in any organism. Lastly, genes highly similar to those some 17q suggests that prcdis the canine homolog of the human RP17 on chromosome 21 are identified elsewhere in the human genome; locus, neither of which have been molecularly identified. Once the respon- expression data do not suggest divergent tissue specificities. These data sible mutations are found, knowledge of genes involved in the disease also show that thorough and complete annotation of human genomic pathway is necessary to understand the pathogenesis of these disorders. sequence remains a time consuming and gene-specific process, yet We have used a subtraction approach to detect potential novel candidate essential for understanding the basis of the Down syndrome phenotype. genes with modified expression caused by prcd which may be causally associated with the disease, or, alternatively, be involved in the molecular mechanisms leading to the disease phenotype. This resulted in identifica- tion of a 5.6 kb cDNAfor an unknown canine gene, containing 4,503 nt of coding sequence and predicted to encode a protein of 1,500 amino acids. The gene shows about 90% homology to the human GRF1 and human and rat p190genes at both the nucleotide and protein levels. Gene tran-Posters: Comparative Genetics 431 P1677.Characterization of 600 canine (Canis familiaris) cDNA obtain in human studies. Even several examples of gene therapy of canine clones diseases have already been reported. On the other hand, molecular genet- H. Murua Escobar1, L. Borrmann1, I. Nolte2, J. Bullerdiek1 ic tools allowing for a more advanced knowledge of canine molecular 1Center for Human Genetics; Bremen, Germany; 2Clinic for Small Animals, genetics are far behind of what we know for humans. We established a Veterinary School; Hannover, Germany cDNAlibrary from canine testis tissue and picked random clones for analy- escobar@uni-bremen.de sis. By sequencing and characterizing 600 clones we could show that the Kuska (1999) has recently predicted that geneticists will go to the dog in homology between man and dog is much higher as the so far estimated the next millennium and it goes almost without saying that for several rea- 80%. The characterized clones showed an homology of 85% - 100% to sons the dog provides a suitable model for novel therapies. The dog is well human genes or ESTs. In addition we compared sequence homologies of suited as a model system for a variety of human diseases as e.g. the spinal open reading frames and 3 UTRs separately. Combining these data with muscular atrophy, arthritis progressive, retinal atrophies, or von Willebrand gene mapping will be a powerful tool to analyse human diseases by using disease. Furthermore, dogs can produce a huge offspring during their life the dog as model system. providing geneticists with large well documented pedigrees impossible to